Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Philippe de Commynes, The Memoirs of Philip de Commines, Lord of Argenton, translated by Andrew R. Scoble (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1855), Vol. I. Books I-V. The first modern political memoir. Text from Internet Archive item memoirsofphilipd01commiala (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

THE MEMOIRS


or


PHILIP DE COMMINES,

LORD OF ARGENTOX:

CONTA1SIKO  THB

HISTORIES  OF  LOUIS  XI.  AND  CHARLES  VIII. KINGS  OF  FRANCE

AXD OF

CHARLES  THE  BOLD,  DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY.

TO  WHICH IS ADDED,

THE SCANDALOUS CHRONICLE,

OR

SECRET  HISTORY  OF  LOUIS  XI.,

BY  JEAN  DE  TROYES.

EDITED WITH LIFE AND NOTES,

BY  ANDREW  R. SCOBLE,  ESQ.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL.  I.

LONDOX:

HENRY  G.  BOHN,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN.

1855,


INTRODUCTION.


PHILIP  DE  COMMUTES  has  been  called  the  Father  of  Modern
History. "  His  Memoirs,"  says  Mr.  Hallam,  "  almost  make
an  epoch  in  historical  literature. He  is  the  first  modern
writer  who  in  any  degree  has  displayed  sagacity  in  reasoning
on  the  characters  of  men  and  the  consequences  of  their
actions,  or  who  has  been  able  to  generalise  his  observations
by  comparison  and  reflection." This  ability  to  discuss  motives
as  well  as  events  renders  him  far  superior  to  Froissart,  who,
on  the  other  hand,  greatly  exceeds  him  in  picturesqueness  of
style  and  fertility  of  invention. Froissart  merely  described
notable  occurrences ;  Commines  delineated  great  men. "  The
one,"  says  Sir  James  Stephen,  "  had  contemplated  the  strife
of  kings  and  kingdoms  as  a  spectator  of  the  Isthmian  Games
may  have  gazed  at  that  heart-stirring  spectacle. The  other
had  watched  the  schemes  of  statesmen  and  the  conflict  of
nations,  with  some  approach  to  that  judicial  serenity  which
we  ascribe  to  a  member  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council." If
Froissart  may  be  termed  the  Livy  of  France,  she  had  her
Tacitus  in  Commines.

The  Memoirs  of  Philip  de  Commines  relate  to  one  of  the
most  interesting  periods  of  history.  In  the  words  of  the
Preface  to  the  old  English  translation  of  1723 :  "  He  gives  us  a
prospect  of  all  the  most  memorable  occurrences  in  the  reign  s
of  Louis  XL,  his  son  Charles  VIII.,  Charles  the  last  Duke  of
Burgundy,  and  Mary  his  only  daughter  and  heir ;  as  like-

A3

204.5688


VI  INTRODUCTION.

wise  a  description  of  the  most  remarkable  passages  in
England,  Flanders,  Germany,  Italy,  Spain,  and  other  neigh-
bouring countries,  which  happened  in  the  space  of  thirty-
four  years,  from  1464  to  1498.  He  teaches  with  as  much
verity  as  plainness  and  simplicity  of  style,  such  fair  lessons
as  will  show  princes  the  way  of  governing  their  people  with
gentleness  and  order.  There  it  is  to  be  seen  how  kings  can
never  be  at  peace  with  their  subjects,  whilst  they  are  at
variance  with  the  King  of  kings,  to  whom  all  mankind,
of  what  dignity  or  qualification  soever,  must  give  an  account.
There  it  is  to  be  seen  how  justice,  equity,  moderation,  and
uprightness  in  all  things,  is  that  which  gives  them  a  quiet
and  happy  dominion  over  the  hearts  of  their  subjects,
without  employing  either  menaces  or  force.  In  short,  his
book  is  a  pleasant  and  profitable  field,  full  of  infinite  good
fruits,  useful  for  all  conditions,  in  good  fortune  as  well  as  bad,
— for  him  that  commands  as  well  as  him  that  obeys  ;  and  all
enforced  with  such  Christian-like  persuasions,  and  fortified
with  such  important  and  excellent  precepts,  that  it  is
impossible  to  read  them  without  being  affected."

On  the  peculiar  interest  attaching  to  the  Memoirs  of
Commines,  Dr.  Arnold  has  the  following  remarks :  "  The
Memoirs  of  Philip  de  Commines  terminate  about  twenty
years  before  the  Eeformation,  six  years  after  the  first
voyage  of  Columbus.  They  relate,  then,  to  a  tranquil  period
immediately  preceding  a  period  of  extraordinary  movement;
to  the  last  stage  of  an  old  state  of  things,  now  on  the  point
of  passing  away.  Such  periods,  the  lull  before  the  burst  of
the  hurricane,  the  almost  oppressive  stillness  which  announces
the  eruption,  or,  to  use  Campbell's  beautiful  image,

*  The  torrent's  smoothness  ere  it  dash  below,'

are  always,  I  think,  full  of  a  very  deep  interest.  But  it  is
not  from  the  mere  force  of  contrast  with  the  times  that  follow,


INTRODUCTION.  Vll

nor  yet  from  the  solemnity  which  all  things  wear  when
their  dissolution  is  fast  approaching —  the  interest  has  yet
another  source :  our  knowledge,  namely,  that  in  that  tranquil
period  lay  the  germs  of  the  great  changes  following,  taking
their  shape  for  good  or  for  evil,  and  sometimes  irreversibly,
while  all  wore  an  outside  of  unconsciousness.  We,  en-
lightened by  experience,  are  impatient  of  this  deadly
slumber ;  we  wish  in  vain  that  the  age  could  have  been
awakened  to  a  sense  of  its  condition,  and  taught  the  infinite
preciousness  of  the  passing  hour.  And  as,  when  a  man  has
been  cut  off  by  sudden  death,  we  are  curious  to  know
whether  his  previous  words  or  behaviour  indicated  any  sense
of  his  coming  fate,  so  we  examine  the  records  of  a  state  of
things  just  expiring,  anxious  to  observe  whether  in  any
point  there  may  be  discerned  an  anticipation  of  the  great
future,  or  whether  all  was  blindness  and  insensibility.  In
this  [respect,  Commines'  Memoirs  are  striking  from  their
perfect  unconsciousness  :  the  knell  of  the  middle  ages  had
been  already  sounded,  yet  Commines  has  no  other  notions
than  such  as  they  had  tended  to  foster ;  he  describes  their
events,  their  characters,  their  relations,  as  if  they  were
to  continue  for  centuries.  His  remarks  are  such  as  the
simplest  form  of  human  affairs  gives  birth  to ;  he  laments
the  instability  of  earthly  fortune,  as  Homer  notes  our  com-
mon mortality,  or  in  the  tone  of  that  beautiful  dialogue
between  Solon  and  Croesus,  when  the  philosopher  assured
the  king  that  to  be  rich  was  not  necessarily  to  be  happy.
But  resembling  Herodotus  in  his  simple  morality,  he  is
utterly  unlike  him  in  another  point ;  for  whilst  Herodotus
speaks  freely  and  honestly  of  all  men  without  respect  of
persons,  Philip  de  Commines  praises  his  master  Louis  the
Eleventh  as  one  of  the  best  of  princes,  although  he  witnessed
not  only  the  crimes  of  his  life,  but  the  miserable  fears  and
suspicions  of  his  latter  end,  and  has  even  faithfully  recorded
*  A  4


Vlll  INTRODUCTION.

them.  In  this  respect,  Philip  de  Commines  is  in  no  degree
superior  to  Froissart,  with  whom  the  crimes  committed  by
his  knights  and  great  lords  never  interfere  with  his  general
eulogies  of  them  :  the  habit  of  deference  and  respect  was  too
strong  to  be  broken,  and  the  facts  which  he  himself  relates  to
their  discredit,  appear  to  have  produced  on  his  mind  no
impression."*

This  tendency  on  the  part  of  Commines  to  praise  the
princes  who  successively  enjoyed  his  aid  and  allegiance,  is
thus  noticed  by  Sir  James  Stephen : — "  He  regards  Charles
the  Rash  with  that  affectionate  interest  which  the  heroism
even  of  the  unwise  will  excite  in  the  bosoms  of  the  wisest.  He
contemplates  Louis  XI.  with  that  combination  of  curiosity,
attachment,  and  awe,  which  minds  of  more  than  ordinary
power  so  often  cherish  for  each  other.  The  images  of  the
fiery  duke  and  of  the  crafty  king  were  projected  in  bold  re-
lief on  the  imagination  of  this  acute  and  vigilant  observer  ;
and  the  truth  and  distinctness  of  those' images  forms  the
great  charm  of  his  retrospect  of  his  own  eventful  life.  The
higher  charm  of  a  just  sensibility,  whether  to  moral  beauty
or  to  the  absence  of  it,  is,  however,  wanting  in  his  pages.
He  is  the  unqualified  admirer,  if  not  the  unscrupulous  apolo-
gist, of  his  royal  master,  and  seems  insensible  alike  to  the
injustice  of  the  ends  at  which  he  aimed,  and  to  the  baseness
of  the  means  by  which  he  pursued  them.  Yet  man  is  not
less  inconsistent  in  his  faults  and  errors  than  in  his  virtues,
and  thus,  even  the  utilitarian  Commines  is  unable  to  survey
the  revolutions  in  which  he  so  largely  participated  without
an  occasional,  and  apparently  heartfelt  acknowledgment  that,
in  bringing  to  pass  the  disastrous  catastrophes  of  the  world's
history,  the  will  and  agency  of  man  are  but  instruments  by
which  the  Divine  will  accomplishes  its  immutable  purposes

*  Lectures  on  Modern  History,  pp.  117—119.


INTRODUCTION.  IX

of  wisdom  and  of  justice.  In  the  subtlety  of  his  analysis  of
the  great  characters  of  his  generation —  in  the  force  and  dis-
crimination of  his  portraits  of  them  —  in  the  sagacity  with
which  he  explores.,  and  the  perspicuity  with  which  he  inter-
prets, the  hidden  causes  of  the  events  in  which  they  acted, —
and  in  the  vigorous  dispersion  of  the  mists  with  which  igno-
rance or  passion  obscures  the  true  aspect  of  human  affairs,
Commines  is  emphatically  a  Frenchman.  In  the  reverence
with  which,  on  reaching  the  impassable  limits  of  human  in-
vestigation, he  ceases  to  inquire,  and  pauses  to  adore,  he  rises
higher  still,  and  becomes  not  only  a  citizen,  but  a  teacher  of
the  great  Christian  Commonwealth."*

The  composition  of  his  Memoirs  was  the  occupation  of  the
last  years  of  the  life  of  Commines,  when  circumstances  had,
sorely  against  his  will,  condemned  him  to  retirement  and  re-
pose. He  wrote  the  first  six  books  in  the  years  1488 — 1494,
and  the  last  two,  probably,  in  1497 — 1501.  They  remained
in  manuscript  until  1524,  when  the  first  edition  was  pub-
lished by  Galliot  du  Pre.  This  contained  only  so  much  of
the  work  as  related  to  the  reign  of  Louis  XI. ;  but  as  the
book  immediately  became  popular,  the  remainder  was  put  to
press  and  published  in  1528.  In  1552,  Denys  Sauvage  re-
published  the  whole  work,  under  the  title  which  it  now  bears,
and  divided  into  books  and  chapters.  This  was  the  standard
edition  of  Commines  until  1649,  when  Denys  Godefroy,  his-
toriographer of  France,  brought  out  a  new  one,  in  which  he
corrected  numerous  errors  into  which  Sauvage  had  fallen.
This  edition  was  printed  at  the  Royal  Press  in  the  Louvre,
and  Louis  XIV.  assisted  with  his  own  hands  in  pulling  some
of  the  copies  of  the  first  sheet.  In  1747,  another  and  still
more  accurate  edition,  with  a  copious  appendix,  was  brought
out  by  the  celebrated  Lenglet  Dufresnoy.  -  This  has  recently

*  Stephen's  Lectures  on  the  History  of  France,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  221 — 223.


X  INTRODUCTION.

been  superseded  by  the  edition  published  by  Mdlle.  Dupont,
who  has  carefully  collated  the  various  manuscripts  and
editions  of  the  text,  and  added  biographical,  genealogical,
and  historical  notes,  of  great  value  and  accuracy.

The  present  translation  has  been  made  from  the  text  as
restored  by  Mdlle.  Dupont,  and  the  notes  are  mostly  taken
from  her  edition.  The  various  treaties  mentioned  in  the  Me-
moirs are  given  at  large  in  their  proper  places;  and  with  a
view  to  render  the  work  more  complete  as  a  history  of  Louis
XL,  the  "Chronique  Scandaleuse"  of  Jean  de  Troyes  is
printed  at  the  end  of  the  second  volume.

A  R.  S.


LIFE OF  PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.


THE  town  of  Commines,  on  the  confines  of  France  and
Belgium,  is  situated  on  the  River  Lys,  by  which  it  is  divided
into  two  parts ;  the  right  bank  belongs  to  France,  and  the
left  to  Belgium.  It  possesses  no  great  importance  at  the
present  day ;  but  formerly,  and  until  the  end  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  it  could  boast  of  strong  fortifications  and  a
castle,  which  were  destroyed  by  the  French  in  1672.  The
lordship  of  the  town  had  been  enjoyed  by  several  noble
families  in  succession ;  but  for  our  present  purpose  it  will  be
sufficient  to  state  that  about  the  year  1373,  Jeanne  de  Wa-
ziers,  Lady  of  Commines  and  Halewin,  brought  it  in  mar-
riage to  Nicholas,  surnamed  Colart  de  la  Clite.  The  name  of
Commines,  which  had  been  honourably  mentioned  at  the
time  of  the  first  Crusades,  was  still  so  imposing  that  the
new  lord,  or  at  least  his  descendants,  did  not  hesitate  to
substitute  it  for  that  of  their  original  race.  This  nobiliary-
lustre,  however,  would  not  have  sufficed  to  have  rescued  it
any  more  than  other  mediaeval  names,  from  the  obscurity  of
genealogical  archives,  if  a  distinction  of  a  higher  character
had  not  secured  it  immortal  renown.

In  the  Castle  of  Commines,  in  the  year  1447,  was  born
that  celebrated  historian  whose  works  have  saved  from,
oblivion  the  meaner  glories  of  his  ancestral  line.  His  father,
the  sovereign-bailiff  of  Flanders,  had  been  dubbed  a  knight
by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  on  the  day  of  the  battle  of  St.
Riquier,  the  31st  of  August,  1421,  on  which  day  that
prince  had  also  received  the  honour  of  knighthood  from  the
hands  of  John  of  Luxembourg;  and  perhaps  this  circumstance,
adroitly  called  to  mind  by  the  father,  induced  Philip  the
Good  to  do  the  new-born  babe  the  honour  of  holding  him  at
the  font,  and  presenting  his  god-son  to  baptism  under  the


Xll  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

invocation  of  his  own  patron  saint.  A  most  hopeful  future
seemed  thus  to  open  before  young  Commines,  who  was
placed,  from  his  .very  birth,  under  the  protection  of  a
most  powerful  monarch ;  but  he  was  ere  long  destined  to
suffer  cruel  losses.  His  mother,  Marguerite  d'Armuyden,
died  soon  after  giving  him  birth,  and  a  few  years  later,  the
death  of  his  father  left  him  completely  an  orphan,  with  an
estate  greatly  impoverished  by  bad  management  and  reckless
expenditure.

The  young  orphan  and  his  property  were  placed  by  the
king  under  the  guardianship  of  his  cousin-german,  Jean  de
la  Clite,  Lord  of  Commines,  who  succeeded,  not  without
great  difficulty,  in  preserving  to  his  ward  a  small  part  of  his
patrimony  —  so  small,  indeed,  that  its  value  amounted  only
to  the  sum  of  2424  livres  16  sols  6  deniers  tournois.  The
development  of  the  mind  of  young  Commines  was  almost  as
utterly  neglected  as  the  management  of  his  property ;  for
his  guardian  was  too  much  absorbed  by  more  personal  busi-
ness to  attend  to  either.  His  ward  received  the  same  edu-
cation as,  with  but  few  exceptions,  was  then  given  to  all  the
children  of  the  nobility.  Greek  and  Latin  formed  no  part
of  his  instruction,  and  bodily  exercises  were  cultivated  with
far  greater  assiduity  than  mental  discipline.  Perhaps,  how-
ever, we  ought  to  congratulate  ourselves  that  this  was  the
case.  Intellects  like  that  of  Commines  form  themselves,  and
advance  all  the  faster  and  farther  because  they  have  no  use-
less acquirements  to  forget,  and  no  false  instruction  to  un-
learn. The  sagacious  and  meditative  mind  of  the  future
historian  was  likely  to  learn  far  more  from  the  great  book  of
the  world  than  from  all  the  writings  of  the  schoolmen  ;  and
that  book  soon  opened  before  him.

The  brilliant  and  splendid  court  of  Philip  the  Good  then
rivalled  those  of  more  powerful  monarchs  in  magnificence
and  lustre.  Commines  was  summoned  to  this  sphere  of
action  by  his  godfather,  who  attached  him  to  his  person  as
one  of  his  esquires,  probably  in  the  year  1463,  and  soon
transferred  him,  in  the  same  capacity,  to  the  service  of  his  son,
the  Count  of  Charolois.  He  was  then  about  seventeen  years
of  age,  and  his  youthful  inexperience  was  easily  dazzled  by
two  dominant  qualities  of  his  new  master,  self-confidence
and  courage,  which  were  fated  so  soon  to  involve  him  in


LIFE OP PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  Xlll

acts  of  presumption  and  temerity.  Under  such  a  prince,
the  opportunity  of  winning  his  spurs  was  not  long  delayed.
Commines  accompanied  him  into  France  at  the  time  of  the
war  of  the  Public  Good  (1465),  fought  by  his  side  at  the
battle  of  Montlhery,  and  did  not  leave  him  during  the  whole
of  that  eventful  day — feeling  less  alarmed  at  his  own  danger,
than  astonished  at  the  audacity  of  the  French  in  resisting  his
master.  Two  years  later,  he  entered  Liege  with  the  vic-
torious duke,  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  at  this
period  he  was  dubbed  a  knight.

Soon  after  his  return  from  this  expedition,  and  a  short
time  before  the  marriage  of  Charles  the  Bold,  which  took
place  on  the  16th  of  February,  1468,  Coramines  was  ap-
pointed chamberlain  and  councillor  of  that  prince.  The
privileges  of  this  double  office  secured  him,  though  he  was
only  about  twenty  years  of  age,  the  right  of  entrance  into
the  Burgundian  council,  and  a  sort  of  respectful  intimacy
with  his  master.  Doubtless  the  duties  of  a  councillor  could
not  have  been  easy  to  fulfil  in  the  household  of  a  prince  of
such  unmanageable  disposition,  and  "  who  despised  all  other
advice  in  the  world,  except  only  his  own ;"  but  the  cham-
berlain, at  all  events,  might  make  himself  agreeable,  and
succeed  in  obtaining  a  considerable  degree  of  familiar
intimacy  with  his  sovereign.  Commines  soon  obtained
this,  either  from  trying  some  indirect,  but  certain  means  of
acquiring  influence  over  the  mind  of  the  duke,  or  because
daily  communications  between  two  persons  not  separated  by
any  great  diiference  of  age  naturally  led  to  this  result.  The
influence  to  which  we  refer,  and  which  we  have  no  wish  to
exaggerate,  was  ere  long  to  be  subjected  to  a  decisive  test,
under  very  memorable  circumstances.

In  the  month  of  October,  1468,  Louis  XL  came  to
Peronne,  and  imprudently  placed  himself  at  the  mercy  of
Charles  the  Bold,  against  whom  he  was  then  secretly  insti-
gating the  Liegeois  to  revolt.  This  step  involved  him  in
great  peril,  and  his  danger  was  increased  by  the  fact  that
the  duke,  irritated  at  so  audacious  a  piece  of  perfidy,  was
surrounded  by  scarcely  any  persons  who  were  not  animated
by  powerful  motives  of  hatred  against  the  king.  The  most
violent  counsels  were  given,  and  favourably  received  by
a  prince  who  was  naturally  inclined  to  extreme  courses.


XIV  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.

Commines,  aided  by  some  other  servants  of  the  duke,  few
in  number,  but  more  sensible,  more  jealous  of  the  honour  of
their  master,  and,  in  a  word,  more  politic  than  his  other
advisers,  succeeded  in  partially  allaying  the  storm  ;  but  it
soon  burst  out  afresh  with  still  greater  vehemence.  The
king  alone  could  avert  its  direful  consequences.  In  his
first  alarm  he  had  recourse  to  means  of  safety  whose  effi-
cacy was  well  known  to  him  :  now,  gold  was  of  no  further
avail ;  he  must  bow  his  royal  head.

Numerous  propositions  of  a  humiliating  character  were
about  to  be  made  to  him ;  he  would  have  to  accept  them
all,  and  that  at  once  and  unreservedly ;  otherwise  all  would
be  lost.  The  duke  had  dishonoured  himself  by  breaking  his
plighted  word ;  he  was  detaining  his  guest  in  captivity  ;
and  certain  members  of  his  council  seemed  to  hope  that  he
would  venture  still  further.  A  happy  inspiration  of  Com-
mines saved  France  and  her  king,  Burgundy  and  her  duke,
from  the  incalculable  misfortunes  which  would  have  resulted
from  so  fatal  an  event.  He  secretly  informed  Louis  XI.  of
all  that  had  been  resolved  upon  regarding  him,  and  of  the  risk
he  would  incur  by  the  slightest  resistance  to  the  demands  of
the  duke.  Two  important  results,  equally  desirable  to  every
loyal  servant  of  Charles  the  Bold,  might  be  produced  by
this  hazardous  proceeding.  It  might  compel  the  duke  to
respect  the  safe-conduct  which  he  had  given  to  Louis  XL,
and  at  the  same  time  secure  him  as  great,  if  not  greater,
advantages  than  those  which  he  might  hope  to  obtain  by
violating  his  promised  word.  The  event  proved  that  Corn-
mines  had  calculated  rightly.  Louis,  it  is  well  known,  sub-
mitted, with  the  best  grace  in  the  world,  to  all  that  the
gaoler  chose  to  exact  from  his  captive ;  so  that  the  duke,
who,  on  approaching  him  had  used  angry  gestures  and
language,  left  him  in  high  contentment.

On  leaving  Peronne,  in  order  to  perform  one  of  the  con-
ditions which  had  been  imposed  upon  him.  the  king  had  to
march  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  against  the  Liegeois.  He
had  encouraged  their  rebellion,  and  he  was  obliged  to  suffer
the  disgrace  of  contributing  to  punish  it.  Commines  accom-
panied the  two  princes  on  this  expedition,  and  had  his  share
in  the  imminent  danger  to  which  they  were  exposed.  He  was
slepning  with  three  others  in  his  master's  bed-chamber,  when


LIFE OF PHILIP DK COMMIXES.  XV

a  band  of  Liegeois,  favoured  by  the  darkness,  fell  suddenly  on
the  lodgings  of  Charles  the  Bold  and  Louis  XL  This  sortie
was  ably  conducted,  and  nearly  met  with  all  the  success
which  the  besieged  hoped  for ;  the  two  princes,  with  their
servants,  narrowly  escaped  finding  defeat  and  death  where
they  had  imagined  their  triumph  would  be  certain  and  easy.
It  was  most  fortunate  for  the  duke  that  he  had  not  followed
the  advice  of  some  of  his  councillors,  who  recommended  him
"  to  dismiss  a  part  of  his  army,  seeing  that  the  city  of  Liege
had  had  its  gates  and  walls  demolished  during  the  previous
years,  and  that  it  could  hope  for  succour  from  no  quarter."
The  king,  who  had  his  reasons  for  it,  was  inclined  to  adopt
this  suggestion  ;  but  Commines  and  other  prudent  coun-
cillors remonstrated  against  so  imprudent  a  step,  and  their
advice  was  followed,  less  perhaps  because  of  its  wisdom  than
because  the  duke  greatly  suspected  the  king.

The  alarm  was  so  sudden  and  unforeseen  that  Commines
and  his  two  fellow-chamberlains  had  scarcely  time  "  to  arm
the  duke  with  his  cuirass,  and  put  a  helmet  on  his  head."
The  enemy  were  pouring  in  on  all  sides,  and,  in  order  to
get  out  into  the  street,  it  was  necessary  to  drive  back  the
Liegeois,  who  were  resolutely  attacking  the  doors  and  win-
dows. Numbers  at  length  obtained  the  advantage  over  despe-
rate courage  ;  the  Liegeois,  hemmed  in  on  all  sides,  were  cut
to  pieces.  They  met  with  a  similar  fate  at  the  king's  quar-
ters, which  were  valiantly  defended  by  the  Scottish  archers
of  his  guard.  We  may  note,  en  passant,  that  these  brave
Scottish  archers,  renowned  above  all  others  for  their  skill,
were  on  this  occasion  so  awkward  that,  with  their  numerous
arrows,  "  they  wounded  more  Burgundians  than  Liegeois."

On  the  following  day,  the  town,  attacked  on  both  sides,
was  captured,  set  on  fire,  and  given  up  to  pillage.  The
devastation  and  massacre  lasted  for  five  or  six  days  longer,
after  which  the  king  began  to  negotiate  for  leave  to  return
home  :  and,  in  a  short  time,  he  departed,  leaving  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  to  pursue  his  work  of  destruction  alone.

To  return,  hoAvever,  to  Commines.  His  father  had  not
been  an  irreproachable  administrator  of  the  public  funds,
and  had  died,  owing  the  duke  enormous  sums,  for  the  reco-
very of  which  the  agents  of  that  prince  sold  one  of  the  estates
of  the  defaulter,  named  Kenescure.  The  proceeds  of  this


XVI  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

sale,  however,  did  not  amount  to  a  sufficient  sum  to  liquidate
the  entire  debt.  On  the  1st  of  October,  1469,  Commines
obtained,  in  reward  for  his  services,  a  receipt  in  full  for  all
that  might  still  be  due  from  his  family  to  the  ducal  treasury.
In  the  following  year,  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the
Governor  of  Calais,  which,  though  very  simple  at  first,  was
eventually  rendered  by  circumstances  very  delicate,  and  even
dangerous.  At  one  moment  the  danger  became  so  great,
that  he  thought  it  prudent  to  apply  for  a  safe-conduct,  and
inform  his  master  of  his  position.  He  soon  received  an
answer :  the  duke  sent  him  his  signet  ring,  ordering  him  to
continue  his  negotiation,  and  promising  that  if  he  were  made
prisoner,  he  would  ransom  him.  Commines  had  acted  wisely
in  obtaining  sureties,  for  the  duke  "  never  hesitated  to
expose  one  of  his  servants  to  danger,  when  he  had  need  of
his  assistance."  The  negotiation,  however,  was  ably  con-
ducted, and  brought  to  a  successful  issue,  to  the  satisfaction
of  all  the  parties  concerned.

The  skilful  agent  of  this  treaty  was  entrusted  with  a  new
mission  about  the  month  of  July  or  August,  1471.  We  are
not  acquainted  with  the  object  he  had  in  view,  but  it  is  cer-
tain that  he  had  an  interview  with  Louis  XL,  by  permission
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  It  was  a  very  great  mistake  on
the  part  of  the  duke  to  have  allowed  this ;  for,  as  Molinet
says,  the  king's  speech  "  was  so  gentle  and  virtuous,  that,
like  the  voice  of  the  siren,  it  lulled  to  sleep  all  who  listened."
To  this  remarkable  suavity  of  language  Louis  XI.  added,
according  to  the  testimony  of  Commines  himself,  another  no
less  powerful  means  of  attraction ;  of  all  contemporary
princes,  he  was  the  one  "  who  most  laboured  to  gain  any
man  who  was  able  to  serve  or  injure  him.  And  he  was
never  diverted  from  his  purpose  by  being  once  refused  by  any
man  whom  he  was  endeavouring  to  gain  ;  but  steadfastly
continued  making  him  large  promises,  and  actually  giving
him  money  and  estates  which  he  knew  would  please  him."

Commines,  who  was  moreover  allured  by  many  great  and
truly  royal  qualities  of  Louis  XL,  allowed  himself  to  be
seduced,  as  many  others  had  been,  by  promises  and  gifts.  For
we  do  not  hesitate  to  believe  that  it  was  during  this  jour-
ney into  France,  that  he  deposited  in  the  hands  of  Jean
de  Beaune,.  a  merchant  of  Tours,  a  sum  of  6000  livres


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  XVli

tournois,  to  which  we  shall  presently  have  occasion  to  refer
again,  and  which  he  had  probably  received  from  the  king.

The  interested  liberality  of  the  monarch  required  some
return,  and  Commines,  in  exchange  for  the  favours  he  ac-
cepted, doubtless  had  to  contract  one  of  those  engagements
which  are  seldom  evidenced  by  written  agreements,  but
proved  only  by  subsequent  facts.  What  was  the  nature  of
this  convention  ?  We  cannot  say  with  certainty,  but  it  ap-
pears extremely  probable  that  the  conditions  of  the  treaty
were  these:  Louis  XL  assured  to  Commines,  if  he  would
consent  to  leave  Charles  the  Bold  and  enter  his  service,  the
same  position  of  councillor  and  chamberlain  at  the  Court  of
France  that  he  had  held  at  the  Court  of  Burgundy,  together
with  numerous  estates  and  lordships,  offices  and  dignities
of  great  value,  and  an  annual  pension  of  6000  livres
tournois.  He  further  engaged  to  give  him  in  marriage  one
of  the  rich  heiresses  of  the  kingdom.  Of  a  truth  there  was
in  these  offers  enough  to  dazzle  a  young  and  ambitious  man;
the  siren  had  lulled  many  consciences  to  sleep  at  less  cost.

Commines  accepted  the  conditions  of  the  treaty ;  but  on  his
return  to  his  native  land,  a  very  natural  feeling  of  hesitation
made  him  recoil  from  the  final  accomplishment  of  the  trans-
action. Louis  XL,  however,  daily  pressed  him  more  urgently;
the  wily  monarch  could  not  consent  to  have  tried  his  powers
of  seduction  in  vain.  If  Commines  escaped  his  grasp,  he
determined  at  least  to  make  sure  of  his  money.  A  councillor
of  the  great  council,  Master  Pierre  Clutin,  was  ordered  to
proceed  to  the  residence  of  Jean  de  Braune,  and,  iu  thy
king's  name,  to  seize  the  6000  livres  which  had  been  en-
trusted to  him  by  Commines.  This  was  an  able  and  de-
cisive measure.  The  publicity  of  this  seizure  placed  Com-
mines in  the  unpleasant  alternative  of  seeing  his  practices
divulged,  without  gaining  any  profit  by  them,  or  of  securing
their  advantages  only  by  setting  aside  the  scruples  which  de-
layed him.  He  took  the  latter  and  safer  course,  and  during
the  night  of  the  7th  of  August,  14-72,  he  abandoned  Bur-
gundy for  ever.  The  king  was  then  at  Pont-de-Ce,  and
there  his  new  servant  joined  him.

Very  different  opinions  have  been  passed  on  this  act  in  the
life  of  Commines  ;  some  are  too  severe,  and  others  too  in-
dulgent, to  be  adopted  without  qualification.  Some  writers,

VOL.  I.  n


XV 111  LIFE OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.

among  whom  we  may  instance  Voltaire,  seem  to  have  for-
gotten that  in  weighing  the  actions  of  men,  regard  should  be
had  to  the  times  in  which  they  lived,  and  to  the  daily  ex-
amples which  they  had  before  their  eyes  ;  while  others  ap-
pear to  have  fallen  into  the  opposite  error  of  forgetting  that,
although  equity  requires  us  to  take  all  the  circumstances  of
the  case  into  consideration,  there  are  nevertheless  certain
acts  which  a  healthy  morality  cannot  wholly  absolve.  Let
us  award  to  Commines  all  the  blame  that  he  merits  for  his
defection,  but  let  us  neither  exaggerate  his  fault  beyond  due
measure,  nor  extenuate  it  with  blind  and  unreasoning  par-
tiality. Would  that  it  were  the  gravest  reproach  to  be
addressed  to  his  memory!

The  confiscation  of  all  the  property,  moveable  and  im-
moveable,  which  Commines  left  behind  him,  was  an  inevitable
and  expected  consequence  of  the  resolution  he  had  taken.  On
the  very  day  of  his  departure,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  bestowed  on  the  Lord  of  Quievrain  all
the  rights  and  properties  reverting  to  the  fugitive  from  the
Lord  of  Trazegnies  and  his  estate,  in  virtue  of  a  decree  of
the  Court  of  Mons.  But  whatever  Commines  lost  on  the
one  side,  he  regained  a  hundredfold  on  the  other.  No  sooner
had  he  arrived  at  the  court  of  Louis  XI.,  than  he  received  in
the  first  place,  the  title  of  councillor  and  chamberlain  of
the  king ;  soon  after,  a  pension  of  6000  livres  was  be-
stowed on  him,  "  that  he  might  have,  the  means  of  honourably
maintaining  his  rank;"  he  was  also  rewarded  with  the  office
of  captain  of  the  castle  and  donjon  of  the  town  of  Chinon  ;
and,  finally,  he  was  presented  with  the  rich  principality  of
Talmont,  the  importance  of  which  was  greatly  increased  by
its  numerous  dependencies,  Olonne,  Cur^on,  and  Chateau-
Gaultier,  and  which  was  soon  after  still  further  augmented
by  the  chastellanies,  lands,  and  lordships  of  Bran  and  Bran-
dois.  To  impart  additional  value  to  these  gifts,  the  town  of
Sables,  in  the  lordship  of  Olonne,  was  exempted  from  all
taxes,  on  condition  that  the  inhabitants  should  enclose  and
fortify  it.

Before  pursuing  our  narrative  any  further,  it  will  be  ex-
pedient at  once  to  acquaint  the  reader  with  certain  details
necessary  to  the  proper  understanding  of  our  subsequent
statements.  The  letters  of  Louis  XI.,  conferring  on  Com-


LIFE OF PHILIP  DE COMM1NES.  XIX

mines  the  principality  of  Talmont  and  its  dependencies,
although  dated  in  the  month  of  October,  1472,  were  not  regis-
tered by  the  Parliament  until  the  13th  of  December,  1473,
or  by  the  Cour  des  Comptes  until  the  2nd  of  May,  1474.
The  proverbial  slowness  of  judicial  procedure  was  not  the.
only  cause  of  this  delay.  Opposition,  which  was  only  too
well  founded,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  had  prevented
Commines  from  entering  upon  the  enjoyment  of  his  royal
master's  liberalities  at  an  earlier  period.  The  king's  title  to
the  estates  and  lordships  with  which  he  had  enriched  his  new
chamberlain,  was  very  doubtful  and  disputable.  It  was  bv
a  series  of  violent  and  arbitrary  acts  that  the  royal  domain
had  been  increased  by  these  spoils  of  the  house  of  Amboise.
The  last  male  representative  of  that  illustrious  family,  Louis
d'Amboise,  Vicomte  de  Thouars,  was  the  father  of  three
daughters,  of  whom  the  eldest,  Frances,  was  sought  in
marriage  by  George  de  la  Tremoille,  the  all-powerful
minister  of  Charles  VII.,  who  intended  her  for  his  eldest  son.
But  a  more  advantageous  match  had  previously  presented
itself,  and  Mademoiselle  d' Amboise  was  already  betrothed  to
Pierre  de  Bretagne,  second  son  of  the  reigning  duke.  The
minister  could  not  see  so  rich  an  heiress  escape  from  his
grasp  without  feeling  the  utmost  disappointment  and  dis-
pleasure. As  his  pride  had,  moreover,  been  wounded  by  the
haughty  manner  in  which  his  proposals  had  been  rejected,  he
conceived  a  project  of  revenge  which  he  carried,  ere  long,  into
execution.  Under  the  pretext  that  the  Vicomte  de  Thouars
had  made  an  attempt  to  deprive  him  of  his  liberty,  he
ordered  him  to  be  arrested  and  imprisoned  in  the  Castle  of
Poitiers.  The  parliament  was  then  sitting  in  that  town.
George  de  la  Tremoille  obtained  a  decree  from  that  assembly,
dated  May  8.  1431,  which  declared  the  Lord  of  Amboise
guilty  of  high  treason  for  having  attempted  to  seize  upon
the  person  of  the  king,  by  arresting  the  Lord  de  la  Tremoille
his  minister,  and  by  this 'means  to  obtain  the  direction  of
state  affairs;  and  condemned  him,  as  a  traitor,  to  the
punishment  of  death,  and  the  confiscation  of  all  his  property,
The  latter  part  of  this  sentence  was  alone  executed,  as  the
lung  commuted  the  punishment  of  death  into  perpetual
imprisonment.  But  e\cn  hi-  captivity  came  to  an  end  after
three  years,  in  consequence  of  the  intervention  of  the  Queen,

a  2


XX  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

Marie  of  Anjou.  "\Vith  his  liberty,  Louis'  d'Amboise  re-
covered in  September,  1434,  the  viscounty  of  Thouars,  and
his  other  estates,  with  the  exception  of  the  principality  of
Talmont,  and  the  lordships  of  Amboise,  Chateau-Gaultier,
Olonne,  Bran,  and  Brandois.  At  a  later  period,  in
January,  1438,  Charles  VII.  declared  that  malevolence
alone  had  stimulated  the  persecutors  of  the  Lord  of  Amboise,
who  had  been  condemned  without  any  form  of  trial,  and  he
therefore  restored  him  to  the  possession  of  all  his  estates  of
which  he  was  still  deprived.  This  restitution,  however,
Avas  coupled  with  this,  among  other  conditions,  that  he  should
not  marry  his  eldest  daughter  without  the  king's  permission.
Was  this  permission  ever  obtained  ?  Apparently  it  was ;
for  a  short  time  after  he  had  recovered  his  property,  the
Vicomte  de  Thouars  celebrated  the  marriage  of  his  eldest
daughter  with  Duke  Pierre  of  Bretagne.  His  third  daugh-
ter, Marguerite  d'Amboise,  married  the  rejected  suitor  of
Frances,  that  very  Louis  de  la  Tremoille,  who  had  so
recently  been  the  involuntary  cause  of  his  father-in-law's
misfortunes  ;  and  this  alliance,  as  we  shall  presently  see,
occasioned  the  transfer  of  all  the  property  of  the  house  of
Amboise  to  the  family  of  La  Tremoille.  On  ratifying  the  con-
tract of  this  second  marriage,  by  an  act  dated  August  22. 1446,
Louis  d'Amboise  assigned  to  Marguerite,  as  her  future
share  in  his  possessions,  the  estates  of  Talmont,  Bran,  Olonne,
Curzon,  Chateau-Gaultier,  La  Chaume,  Les  babies,  and
Marans ;  reserving  to  himself,  however,  the  enjoyment  of
them  during  his  lifetime.  In  his  old  age,  the  Vicomte  de
Thouars  gave  himself  up  to  the  most  foolish  prodigalities,
and  to  such  disorderly  conduct  that  his  children  were  obliged
to  sue  for  the  appointment  of  trustees  to  his  estate.

He  did  not  surrender  his  rights  without  a  contest,  but
alleged  that  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Bretagne  were  moved
solely  by  discontent  at  not  having  been  able  to  persuade  him
to  give  them  the  estate  of  Thouars,  and  that,  furthermore,
the  proceedings  instituted  against  him  were  irregular,  in-
asmuch as,  from  his  rank  and  relationship  to  the  royal
family  of  France,  he  must  be  tried  by  the  king  and  "the
duly  assembled  court  of  peers."  The  parliament,  disre-
garding his  protest,  made  a  provisional  order  that  the
vicomte  should  not  alienate  his  property,  or  make  any


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  XXI

conveyance  thereof  without  the  advice  and  consent  of  Master
Robert  Thiboust,  then  president  of  that  court.  This  decree
was  dated  on  the  16th  of  January,  1457.  The  suit  was
still  in  progress  when  Louis  XI.  ascended  the  throne ;  and
it  seemed  to  him  that  it  would  be  easy  to  take  advantage  at
once  of  the  weakness  and  irritation  of  the  vicomte.  At  a
summons  from  the  king,  the  vicomte  proceeded  to  Tours,
and  Louis  proposed  to  him  to  marry  the  Duchess  of  Bretagne,
who  had  become  a  widow,  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  and  ap-
pointed him  to  negotiate  the  alliance.  The  duchess  gave  a
distinct  and  formal  refusal  to  these  overtures  ;  and  in  order
to  destroy  all  chance  of  gaining  her  compliance,  she  pro-
nounced a  VOAV  at  the  altar  never  to  marry  again.  Louis
XI.  gave  a  very  ungracious  reception  to  the  luckless  nego-
tiator, and  frightened  him  so  by  his  threats  and  the  violence
of  his  reproaches,  that  Louis  d'Amboise,  duped  by  this
simulated  anger,  readily  listened  to  the  counsels  of  certain
courtiers,  who  advised  him  to  propitiate  the  king  by  giving
him  the  viscounty  of  Thouars.  But  in  order  that  this  donation
might  be  valid,  it  was  necessary  to  get  rid  of  the  decree
pronounced  by  the  court  in  January,  1457.  This  obstacle
did  not  long  stand  in  the  way  of  Louis  XI.  The  affair  was
referred  to  the  council,  which,  by  a  decree  of  the  5th  of
September,  1462,  reversed  the  order  of  the  parliament.  Thus
restored  to  the  uncontrolled  management  of  his  property,
Louis  d'Amboise  sold  to  the  king  the  viscounty  of  Thouars
for  100,000  crowns,  to  be  paid  within  a  week :  but  the  king
Avas  not  to  take  possession  of  the  estate  until  the  death  of
the  vicomte.  10,000  crowns  were  paid  to  him  a  few  days
after  the  signature  of  the  contract,  and  Louis  XL  received
in  return  a  general  receipt  for  the  entire  sum.  The
Duchess  of  Bretagne  hastened  to  protest  against  this  ill-
disguised  act  of  spoliation  ;  but  ere  long,  having  taken  the
veil,  she  transferred  all  her  rights  to  her  nephew,  Louis
de  la  Tremoille,  the  eldest  son  of  her  sister  Marguerite.
Louis  d'Amboise,  after  having  spent  the  last  years  of  his
life  in  disgraceful  disorders,  died  at  length  on  the  28th  of
February,  1470.  While  he  was  on  his  death-bed,  Jacques
de  Beaumont,  Lord  of  Bressuyre,  came,  in  pursuance  of  the
king's  command,  at  the  head  of  some  thirty  gentlemen,  to  in  vest
the  Castle  of  Thouars,  from  whence  he  had  orders  to  remove

a  3


XXII  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COM3IIXES.

the  children,  the  wife,  the  relatives,  and  even  the  friends  of
the  dying  man.  He  executed  these  commands  to  the  letter  ;
and  it  was  among  strangers,  and  under  the  care  of  physicians
selected  by  the  Lord  of  Bressuyre,  that  Louis  d'Amboiae
breathed  his  last.  Some  notable  inhabitants  of  the  town
attended  his  funeral,  which  was  arranged  by  Jacques  de
Beaumont,  who  caused  an  inventory  to  be  taken  immediately
of  the  furniture  and  title-deeds,  and  seized  in  the  king's
name  on  the  viscounty  of  Thouars,  and  all  the  other  pro-
perty of  the  deceased.  Such  was  the  title  of  Louis  XI.  to
the  estate  with  which  he  had  just  enriched  Commines.  The
head  of  the  despoiled  family  opposed  the  registration  of  the
king's  letters,  both  in  the  parliament  and  in  the  Cour  des
Comptes  ;  but  after  some  slight  resistance,  both  the  sovereign
courts  were  constrained  to  yield.  Commines  took  possession
of  the  gifts  of  Louis  XL,  which  were  destined  to  prove  to
him  the  source  of  great  anxiety  and  the  cause  of  painful
and  scandalous  lawsuits.

These  honours  and  emoluments  certainly  recompensed
Commines  very  amply  for  any  loss  he  had  sustained  by
leaving  his  native  country.  Louis  XL,  however,  did  not
rest  satisfied  with  these  proofs  of  his  gratitude.  An  ad-
vantageous marriage  which  he  had  long  had  in  view,  soon
secured  an  increase  of  fortune  to  the  Prince  de  Talmont,  for
that  was  the  title  assumed  by  Commines  on  the  27th  of
January,  1473,  when  he  signed  his  contract  of  marriage
with  Ilelene  de  Chambcs,  eldest  daughter  of  the  Lord  and
Lady  of  Montsoreau.  The  dowry  of  the  bride  amounted  to
20,000  golden  crowns,  as  an  equivalent  for  which  Commines
received  from  her  parents  the  castle,  town,  barony,  estate,
and  lordship  of  Argenton,  in  Poitou,  with  all  its  rich  and
numerous  dependencies.

To  all  these  benefits,  Louis  XL  added  a  gift  of  which  he  was
not  lavish  —  his  confidence.  Commines  apparently  proved
himself  worthy  of  it,  for  the  favours  of  the  king  continued
to  shower  down  upon  him.  It  would  be  tedious  to  enumerate
them  here;  we  will  only  mention  that  he  was  invested  with
the  office  of  Seneschal  of  Poitou,  in  November,  1476,  and
with  the  captaincy  of  the  Castle  of  Poitiers  in  February,  1477.
Such  continued  favour  could  not  fail  to  arouse  the  jealousy
and  even  the  hatred  of  less  fortunate  courtiers,  especially  of


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  XXlii

those  who  found  it  difficult  to  obtain  their  share  of  influence,
which  they  were  incapable  of  earning  by  services  of  so  high
an  order  as  those  rendered  by  Commutes.  Envy,  when
brooding  in  the  heart  of  such  a  man  as  Tristan  1'Ermite,
might  produce  the  most  fatal  results  ;  and  the  more  so,  as  the
new  favourite  was  not  naturally  inclined  to  pause  of  his  own
accord  in  the  career  of  honour  which  opened  before  him,
and  scarcely  attempted  to  dissemble  his  disdain  for  the
unworthy  rival  who  endeavoured  to  stand  in  his  way.  The
court  was  soon  divided,  as  it  were,  into  two  camps,  each  of
which  maintained  the  pretensions  of  its  chosen  leader;  and
the  prudence  of  Louis  XL  had  frequently  to  interfere  to
restore  peace  between  two  servants  who,  on  different  grounds,
were  equally  necessary  to  him.

The  first  person  who  brought  this  prince  any  important
news  was  sure  to  be  rewarded  by  him  with  favour  and  gifts;
skilful  courtiers  knew  this,  and  lost  no  opportunity  of  pro-
fiting by  this  means  of  pleasing  their  master.  Commines
was  one  of  the  first  to  announce  to  him  the  result  of  the
battle  of  Moral  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1476;  and  he  received
as  his  share  of  the  recompense  200  marks  of  gold.  No
message  could  have  been  more  agreeable  to  the  king,
excepting,  perhaps,  that  which  announced  to  him,  a  few
months  afterwards,  the  total  defeat  of  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, after  the  disastrous  battle  of  Nancy  on  the  oth  of
January,  1477.  The  duke  had  been  found  dead  on  the  field.
At  this  news,  even  before  it  was  known  whether  Charles
the  Bold  had  survived  his  defeat,  Louis  XL  "  felt  such  ex-
ceeding joy  that  he  almost  lost  countenance."  The  Bastard
of  Bourbon  and  Commines  were  immediately  sent  into
Picardy,  with  full  power  to  receive  and  establish  in  the
king's  allegiance  all  who  were  willing  to  surrender.  The
plan  of  Louis  XL  was  to  march  an  army  into  Burgundy,  and
to  take  possession  of  the  country  in  the  name  of  the  duke,
after  expelling  the  Germans,  who  had  occupied  it  since  their
victory.  Commines  seems  to  have  believed  in  the  sincerity
of  these  intentions,  which,  whether  real  or  feigned,  were  not
long  entertained;  for  the  positive  news  of  the  duke's  death
soon  reached  the  king's  ear,  and  altogether  changed  his  plans.

Meanwhile,  Commines  and  the  Bastard  of  Bourbon  pro-
ceeded towards  Abbeville,  whither  they  had  taken  the

a  4


XXIV  LIFE OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.

precaution  of  sending  an  emissary  before  them,  to  pave  the
way  for  an  accommodation.  But  notwithstanding  all  their
diligence,  they  had  been  anticipated,  and  when  they  reached
the  town,  the  people  had  already  delivered  up  the  gates  to
the  Seigneur  de  Torcy.  The  two  plenipotentiaries  next
went  to  Doullens,  whence  they  sent  to  summon  Arras  to
submit  to  the  authority  of  the  king.  Commines  set  out
alone  to  conduct  this  negotiation  ;  but  all  his  address  failed
to  corrupt  the  loyalty  of  the  people  of  Arras,  who  formally
refused  to  acknowledge  any  other  sovereign  than  their
young  duchess.  He  therefore  contented  himself  with  labour-
ing secretly  to  gain  the  greatest  possible  number  of  partizans
for  his  master ;  and  this  was,  after  all,  the  principal  object
of  his  mission.  He  had  acted,  moreover,  on  the  mere  an-
nouncement of  the  defeat  of  Charles  the  Bold  j  but  the
certain  news  of  the  death  of  that  prince  had,  as  we  have
already  stated,  totally  changed  the  king's  intentions.  It  was
no  longer  his  object  to  preserve  Burgundy  from  the  invasion
of  the  Germans  ;  he  wished  to  take  possession  of  the  coun-
try, and  distribute  its  lordships  among  his  servants.  This
failure  at  Arras  was  all  the  more  displeasing  to  him  because
other  negotiators  had  met  with  better  success :  Guillaume
de  Bische,  for  instance,  had  secured  Peronne.  His  valet  de
chambre,  Oliver,  boasted  that  he  would  reduce  to  his  alle-
giance the  city  of  Ghent;  and  Robinet  d'CvIenfort  answered
for  the  submission  of  St.  Omer.  The  king,  flattered  by
these  promises,  and  believing  himself  already  in  possession
of  these  places,  compared  the  meagre  result  of  the  mission
entrusted  to  Commines  with  the  happy  issue  promised  him
by  the  zeal  of  his  faithful  servants.  The  Lord  du  Lude  and
others,  on  being  questioned  by  the  king,  concurred  in  his
opinion ;  and  all  that  Commines  could  do  was  to  suggest
doubts  as  to  the  facility  with  which  such  strong  towns  would
be  induced  to  surrender.

He  was  better  acquainted  with  the  country  than  any
other  member  of  the  council ;  and  his  advice  was  to  secure
to  the  crown  of  France  the  possession  of  the  rich  domains
which  it  coveted,  rather  by  some  valid  title,  as  marriage  or
friendly  cession,  than  by  the  means  which  it  was  intended
to  adopt.  Louis  XL  doubtless  thoroughly  understood  the
wisdom  of  this  advice,  and  had  once  approved  it ;  but  the


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  XXV

facility  with  which  he  had  just  succeeded  almost  every-
where in  getting  possession  of  important  places  had  intoxi-
cated him.  Commines  persisted  in  thinking  that  the  wise
slowness  of  negotiations  and  alliances  was  preferable  to  the
dangerous  risks  which  would  otherwise  be  incurred,  because
by  maintaining  the  kingdom  in  peace,  it  would  hold  more
secure  possession  of  its  pacific  conquests.  These  prudent
suggestions,  meliciously  interpreted,  were  obnoxious  to  the
king,  who  had  made  up  his  mind  to  pursue  a  different
course.  Under  the  pretext  of  a  mission  into  Poitou,  on  the
frontiers  of  Bretagne,  he  dismissed  his  unwelcome  adviser.
This  was  a  real  disgrace.  All  the  courtiers  saw  this,  and
amused  themselves  at  Commines'  expense ;  but,  as  he  tells
us  himself,  he  had  no  mind  to  laugh  at  their  jokes,  as  he
feared  that  the  king  might  be  at  the  bottom  of  the  sport.
Another  circumstance  added  the  climax  to  his  anxieties.
He  had  written  into  Hainault  to  enlist  partizans  for  his
master  ;  and  one  of  his  relatives  came  to  him,  bearing  pro-
mises of  adherence  from  a  number  of  notable  persons,  who
undertook  to  deliver  into  his  hands  the  principal  towns  and
fortresses  in  the  country.  Before  his  departure,  Commines
communicated  these  offers  of  service  to  Louis  XL,  who  flatly
refused  them,  thinking  he  would  be  able  to  dispense  with  the
assistance  of  these  noblemen  ;  but  he  afterwards  had  reason
to  repent  his  refusal;  "for,"  says  Commines,  "I  saw  he
would  have  highly  esteemed  them,  if  he  could  have  renewed
his  dealings  with  them."

The  king's  ill-humour,  however,  was  not  of  long  duration,
and  his  liberalities  to  others  did  not  prevent  his  remember-
ing Commine?,  who  received  his  fair  share  of  the  confiscated
property  of  Jacques  d'Armagnac,  which  Louis  XL  distri-
buted among  his  favourites.

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1477,  or  perhaps  at  the
beginning  of  the  year  following,  Commines  was  sent  into
Burgundy  at  the  head  of  the  pensioners  of  the  king's  house-
hold: but  he  does  not  explain  the  object  of  his  mission.
New  annoyances  awaited  him  in  that  country,  and  his  stay
therein  was  short.  That  rich  province  was  unfortunate  in
its  governors.  The  Lord  of  Craon,  who  had  been  recalled
on  account  of  his  extortionate  rapine,  had  been  lately  suc-
ceeded by  Charles  d'Amboise,  Lord  of  Chaumont,  "  a  very


XXVI  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

valiant  and  prudent  man,"  but  no  less  avaricious  than  his
predecessor,  and  who  treated  the  province  which  he  ruled  "  as
it*  it  were  his  own  estate."  In  relating  these  facts,  Corn-
mines  registers  rather  than  censures  them.  If  he  blames
the  conduct  of  the  Lord  of  Craon,  it  is  with  prudent  reserve,
and  because  "his  pillagings,  in  truth,  were  too  excessive."
The  spirit  of  tolerance  in  which  his  narrative  is  composed
lends  some  probability  to  the  accusations  which  were,  ere
long,  brought  against  himself.  He  was  denounced  to  the
king  as  having  spared  "  certain  burghers  of  Dijon  con-
cerning the  quarters  of  men-at-arms."  This  peccadillo
alone  would  doubtless  have  been  insufficient  to  necessitate
his  recall;  but,  "with  some  other  slight  suspicion,"  about
which  the  discreet  historian  makes  no  revelation,  it  com-
bined to  induce  Louis  XI.  to  send  him  "  very  suddenly"  to
Florence.

As  soon  as  he  had  received  his  credentials,  Commines  set
out  on  his  journey,  travelling  very  rapidly,  and  halting  at
as  few  places  as  possible.  He  remained  for  two  or  three
days  only  at  Turin,  to  pay  his  respects  to  the  Duchess  of
Savoy  ;  and  about  the  same  time  at  Milan.  In  this  latter
town,  he  had  instructions  to  demand,  in  his  master's  name,
the  execution  of  a  treaty  of  offensive  and  defensive  alliance
which  pledged  the  Milanese  government  to  support  the
Florentines.  The  assistance  which  he  solicited  was  liberally
and  readily  granted.  He  then  continued  his  journey  to
Florence,  where  he  arrived  towards  the  end  of  April,  1478.
A  formidable  plot,  which  had  been  sternly  repressed,  had
just  deluged  that  city  with  blood  :  and  Commines  has  given
a  graphic  account  of  it  in  his  Memoirs.  If  the  sole  object
of  his  mission  had  reference  to  this  event,  it  also  tended  to
prove  the  interest  felt  by  France  in  the  cause  of  the  Flo-
rentines (or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  of  the  Medici  family),
who  were  then  menaced  by  a  powerful  league,  headed  by
Pope  Sixtus  V.  and  the  King  of  Naples.  The  favour  thus
openly  avowed  was  not  injurious  to  the  proteges  of  Louis
XL,  but  a  good  army  would  have  served  them  far  more
effectually.  Commines  brought  with  him  no  troops,  and
wielded  no  weapons  but  those  of  diplomacy.  Of  these,  he
made  the  best  use  he  could,  and,  as  it  would  appear,  to  the
entire  satisfaction  of  the  parties  interested.


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  XXvii

After  a  stay  of  some  months  in  Florence  and  the  towns  in
its  territory,  he  began  to  think  of  returning  to  France  ;
but,  before  his  departure,  he  renewed  with  the  ambassadors
of  the  Duke  of  Milan,  the  ancient  treaties  of  alliance  be-
tween France  and  that  duchy.  This  act  of  renewal  was
executed  at  Florence  on  the  18th  of  August,  1478,  and  was
signed  by  Commines  and  Lorenzo  de  Medici,  as  representa-
tives of  the  King  of  France.  In  the  same  capacity,  on  the
7th  of  September  following,  our  historian  received  from
Giovanni  Galeazzo-Maria,  Duke  of  Milan,  the  fealty  and
homage  due  by  that  prince  for  the  duchies  of  Genoa  and
Savona,  of  which  Louis  XL  was  suzerain  lord.

A  considerable  period  had  now  elapsed  since  Commines
had  left  the  court  in  order  to  discharge  these  various  mis-
sions. On  his  return,  he  was  struck  by  the  change  which  had
taken  place  in  the  appearance  of  his  royal  master,  whom  he
found  "  somewhat  aged,"  and  "  beginning  to  have  a  tend-
ency to  illness."  He  met  with  a  most  flattering  reception
from  the  king,  who  consulted  him  more  than  ever  about  his
affairs,  and,  as  a  mark  of  signal  favour,  allowed  him  to  sleep
with  him.  This  favour  continued  until  the  monarch's  death;
but  before  we  proceed  any  further,  we  must  go  back  a
little  to  relate  the  most  painful  part  of  Commines'  personal
history.

We  have  already  described  the  iniquitous  and  violent
proceedings  by  which  Louis  XI.  had  seized  upon  the  pro-
perty of  Louis  d'Amboise ;  and  we  have  related  how  the
Lord  de  la  Tremoille,  in  the  name  of  his  children,  gave  all
the  opposition  in  his  power  to  the  putting  Commines  into
possession  of  that  part  of  the  spoils  which  had  fallen  to  his
share.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  parliament,  after  an
honourable  resistance,  had  finally  yielded  ;  but  on  the  very
day  after  its  submission  to  the  orders  of  the  king,  it  entered
a  protest  on  its  records,  declaring  that  its  conduct  had  been
under  compulsion,  and  could  not  therefore  be  prejudicial  to  the
rights  of  the  family  of  La  Tremoille,  in  whose  favour  it  re-
newed its  reservations.  That  family  was  in  no  degree  disposed
to  abdicate  its  rights,  but  pursued  its  claims  with  courageous
perseverance.  Commines  was  in  possession,  it  is  true  ;  but,
finding  himself  disturbed  in  his  possession  by  ceaseless  law-
suits, he  requested  the  Procureur  du  Roi,  in  conformity  with


XXV111  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

the  terms  of  the  letters-patent  granting  him  the  property  in
question,  to  secure  him  from  all  future  hindrances  to  his
peaceable  enjoyment  of  the  same.  The  Procureur  du  Hoi
consequently  interfered  ;  and  thenceforward  the  parties  to
the  suit,  in  appearance  at  least,  were  Louis  XL  and  those
whom  he  had  spoiled.  The  parliament,  with  an  independ-
ence which  does  it  honour,  availed  itself  of  every  pretext  for
securing  to  the  oppressed  family  some  remnant  of  their
ancient  domains.  A  great  deal  of  the  property  had  been
sold  to  the  king  by  the  last  possessor,  but  the  conveyance
had  been  illegally  made,  and  of  this  the  La  Tremoilles
furnished  abundant  proof.  Louis  XI.  then  adduced  the
letters  of  confiscation  issued  by  his  father  against  Louis
d'Amboise :  and  if  this  property  had  been  subsequently
restoi'ed  to  that  nobleman,  it  was,  urged  the  king's  advocates,
on  conditions  which  had  not  been  accomplished  —  among
others,  on  condition  that  Jeanne  d'Amboise  should  not  marry
without  the  consent  of  Charles  VII.  That  permission,
replied  La  Tremoille,  had  been  obtained  ;  but  where  was
the  proof?  doubtless  in  the  archives  of  the  Chateau  de
Thouars.  the  ancient  residence  of  their  ancestors.

Louis  XL,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  ordered  the  Seigneur
de  Bressuyre  to  take  possession  of  this  chateau  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  last  illness  of  Louis  d'Amboise.  After  his
decease,  no  member  of  his  family,  not  even  his  widow,  was
allowed  to  enter  it.  A  very  summary  inventory  of  the
furniture  was  hastily  prepared,  and  great  care  was  taken  not
to  particularise  the  contents  of  the  charter  chests.  In  order
to  sustain  his  pretended  rights  against  the  persistent  oppo-
sition of  the  La  Tremoille  family,  and  to  cloak  the  most
revolting  iniquity  with  a  show  of  justice,  the  king  appointed
a  commission  of  inquiry  to  search  the  archives  of  Thouars
for  letters  likely  to  serve  his  case.  Two  documents  of  great  im-
portance were  found,  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  Charles  VII.  ;
one  granting  the  Vicomte  de  Thouars  the  restitution  of  all  his
confiscated  properly,  and  the  other  giving  him  permission  to
marry  his  daughter  to  the  Prince  of  Bretagne,  or  any  other
husband  he  might  select.  Commutes,  who  was  one  of  the
commissioners,  saw  at  once  that  these  papers  would  destroy
all  his  chances  of  success,  and  he  threw  them  into  the  fire.
Jean  Chambon,  another  commissioner,  took  them  out,  a<rain


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMUTES.  XXIX

immediately,  expressing  his  indignation  at  such  culpable
conduct ;  and  the  papers  were  transmitted  to  the  king,  whom
Commines  had  informed  of  their  character.  On  receiving
them  from  the  Seigneur  deBressuyre,  the  wily  monarch  threw
them  into  the  fire,  saying,  "  It  is  not  I  who  burn  them,  hut  the
fire:"  and  he  required  all  present  to  swear  never  to  divulge
what  they  had  seen.

Thus  were  destroyed  the.  only  deeds  which  could  establish
the  right  of  the  La  Tremoilles  to  protest  against  the  spolia-
tion of  which  they  were  the  victims.  This  was  done  iu
October,  1476;  but  it  was  not  until  many  months  later  that
the  king  determined  to  avail  himself  of  the  advantage  lie  had
thus  iniquitously  obtained.  On  the  21st  of  July,  1479,  a
decree  was  issued,  terminating  the  suit  in  favour  of  the
king  and  his  servant  Commines.  This  decree,  however,  as  it
often  happens  in  such  cases,  satisfied  none  of  the  parties,
and  least  of  all,  the  Lord  of  Argenton.  He  certainly  found
himself  maintained  in  the  possession  of  Talmont,  Chateau-
Gaultier,  and  Berrye  ;  but  Olonne,  Curzon,  and  La  Chaume,
which  Louis  d'Amboise  had  given  to  his  daughter  as  her
dowry,  were  adjudged  to  the  La  Tremoille  family,  as  ap-
pertaining to  their  maternal  inheritance.  By  this  sentence
of  the  parliament,  therefore,  Commines  found  all  his  plans
frustrated.  "  That  sort  of  maritime  sovereignty,"  says
M.  de  Vaudore,  "  which  he  was  anxious  to  create  lor  him-
self in  Lower  Poitou,  and  which  he  had  delighted  in  repre-
senting to  his  master  as  likely  to  prove  a  second  Flanders,
as  i'ar  as  commerce  and  productiveness  were  concerned,  was
now  greatly  diminished.  To  lose  Olonne  and  La  Chaume
was  to  be  deprived  of  a  port  to  which  he  expected  to
attract  the  ships  of  all  countries,  and  whither,  in  fact,  they
afterwards  came  by  hundreds  :  to  give  up  Bran  and  Bran-
dois  was  to  renounce  the  drainage  of  fertile  marshes :  to
restore  Curzon  was  to-  resign  a  position  which  combined
both  these  advantages."  And  yet,  how  was  he  to  avoid
compliance  with  the  orders  of  justice?  His  genius,  ever
fertile  in  expedients,  suggested  to  him  the  means  of  doing
so.  At  his  instigation,  Louis  XL  offered  to  Louis  de  la
Tremoille  certain  other  lands  and  lordships  in  exchange
for  those  of  which  the  parliament  had  acknowledged  his
children  to  be  proprietors.  This  offer  was  indignantly


XXX  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

rejected  as  an  insult  to  misfortune ;  for  of  the  estates  tlius
offered,  two  only  did  not  proceed  from  the  spoils  of  the  house
of  Amboise.  But  Commines  was  not  discouraged  by  this
refusal.  What  the  father  had  rejected  might  probably,  he
thought,  be  accepted  by  the  children.  These  young  persons,
though  still  minors,  were  drawing  near  the  age  when  the
young  nobility  usually  aspired  to  rank  among  men  of  war  ;
and  their  forced  idleness  was  irksome  to  them.  Louis  XI.
would  not  admit  them  into  his  service,  notwithstanding  the
urgent  solicitations  of  their  brother-in-law,  the  Bastard  of
Maine  ;  but  it  was  intimated  to  them  that  they  might  over-
come the  monarch's  resistance,  and  even  obtain  his  favour,
by  condescension  to  his  wishes.  This  implied  acquiescence
in  all  the  past,  as  they  well  understood ;  but  they  resigned
themselves  to  their  fate,  in  appearance  at  'least.  At  the
same  time  that  they  consented  to  the  transfer,  they  executed,
in  the  presence  of  a  notary,  a  deed  claiming  the  rights  which
they  were  about  to  renounce,  in  which  they  stated  that,
being  compelled  to  yield  to  the  moral  violence  exercised
over  them,  they  protested  beforehand  against  anything  they
might  be  forced  to  do.  A  few  days  after  the  estates  had
thus  passed  once  more  into  the  hands  of  the  king,  he
renewed  his  gift  of  them  to  Commines,  by  letters  patent,
which,  thanks  to  the  show  of  legality  by  which  the  agree-
ment between  the  two  parties  was  surrounded,  were  regis-
tered without  obstacle  by  both  the  parliament  and  the  Cour
des  Comptes.

Commines'  high  favour  had  now  reached  its  climax ;  it
seemed  impossible  for  it  to  increase.  A  terrible  accident
however,  which  threatened  to  deprive  him  of  his  royal
protector,  served  to  make  it  still  more  evident.  In  the
month  of  March,  1481,  Louis  XI.  was  attacked  by  a  fit  of
apoplexy,  which  temporarily  deprived  him  of  speech,  me-
mory, and  sense.  As  soon  as  he  came  to  himself,  he  sent
for  his  confessor  and  for  Commines,  who  was  at  the  time  at
Argenton.  Commines  hastened  to  rejoin  the  king,  and  by
his  order  (expressed  by  signs,  for  he  had  not  yet  sufficiently
recovered  his  speech),  he  slept  in  his  room,  and  served  him
at  table  and  in  other  respects,  for  fifteen  days,  as  a  valet  de
chambre.  After  two  or  three  days,  Louis  XL  recovered
sense  and  speech,  but  not  so  perfectly  as  to  render  Com-


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  XXXI

mines'  constant  attentions  unnecessary :  for  he  alone  was  able
accurately  to  understand  him.  He  was  even  obliged  to.  act
as  his  interpreter  to  the  official  of  Tours,  and  to  acquaint  him
Avith  the  state  of  mind  of  his  royal  penitent,  "  for  otherwise
they  would  not  have  understood  each  other."  Public  affairs
remained  for  a  time  in  suspense,  although  Commines  read
most  of  the  despatches  which  arrived  to  the  king,  who  either  by
word  or  sign  indicated  the  answer  he  wished  to  have  made;
but  no  one  was  willing  to  execute  these  doubtful  orders.
"We  did  little  business,''  says  Commines,  "awaiting  the
termination  of  his  illness ;  for  he  was  not  a  master  to  be
trifled  with."

Towards  the  middle  of  the  year,  the  king  became  suffi-
ciently convalescent  to  be  able  to  inspect  the  troops  which  had
been  collected  by  his  orders  near  Pont-de-1'Arche.  Thence
he  proceeded  to  Tours,  where  he  had  a  relapse;  "again  he
lost  his  speech,  and  for  two  hours  we  thought  he  was  dead  ;
he  lay  in  a  gallery,  on  a  mattrass."  The  servants  who
attended  him,  Du  Bouchage,  Commines  and  others,  vowed
him  to  St.  Claude;  "immediately  his  speech  returned  to
him,  and  within  the  hour  lie  went  about  the  house  again."
He  soon  resumed  his  old  habits,  and  made  an  excursion  to
one  of  the  estates  he  had  given  to  Commines.  He  remained
for  a  mouth  at.  the  Chateau  of  Argenton ;  a  longer  time,
probably,  than  he  had  intended,  but  he  was  detained  by
illness.  Such  royal  visits  are  usually  an  expensive  honour
to  those  who  receive  them  ;  but  the  chamberlain  of  Louis
XI.  did  not  suffer  by  his  hospitality,  for  his  master  con-
tributed handsomely  to  the  embellishment  of  his  residence.
From  Argenton  the  king  went  to  Thouars,  where  be  made
some  stay,  on  account  of  ill-health ;  and  on  leaving  that  town,
he  repaired  to  St.  Claude,  doubtless  to  perform  the  vow
made  by  his  faithful  servants.  Before  he  left  Thouars,  he
confided  to  the  Lord  of  Argenton  a  difficult  and  delicate
mission,  of  which  Commines  gives  us  only  a  confused  idea;
we  will,  therefore,  briefly  state  its  object.

Yolande  of  France,  Duchess  of  Savoy,  had  died  on  the
29th  of  August,  1478,  leaving  as  her  successor  a  son  under
thirteen  years  of  age.  The  appointment  of  a  regent  de-
volved on  Louis  XL,  the  uncle  of  the  young  duke,  who
conferred  that  office  on  the  Count  de  la  Chambre,  who.  he-


XXXH  LIFE OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

believed,  would  prove  a  pliant  instrument  in  his  hands.  In
this  expectation  he  was  deceived,  and  the  object  of  Corn-
mines'  mission  was  to  assist  the  Count  of  Bresse,  one  of  the
paternal  uncles  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  in  deposing  the
obnoxious  regent,  and  taking  possession  of  the  government.

In  the  meanwhile,  Louis  XL  daily  grew  more  infirm  ;  his
moral  energy  alone  sustained  him,  and,  as  in  past  times,  he
continued  to  travel  about  the  country.  Commines,  on  his
return  from  his  embassy,  joined  him  at  Beaujeu  :  and  he  was
struck  by  the  ravages  which  disease  had  wrought  in  the
person  of  the  prince,  whose  last  hour,  he  felt,  was  at  hand.
We  shall  not  attempt  to  describe  the  final  scene  ;  in  his
Memoirs,  Commines  has  given  a  wonderful  picture  of  the
dying  agonies  of  his  sovereign.  Louis  XL  breathed  his  last
on  the  30th  of  August,  1483,  and  from  that  moment,  a  new
era  began  in  the  life  of  Commines,  as  fatal  to  his  honour  and
fortune,  as  the  preceding  period  had  been  propitious  to  his
ambition  and  interests.

No  sooner  had  the  deceased  monarch  been  laid  in  his
grave  than,  in  virtue  of  letters  patent  granted  by  the  new
king,  at  the  solicitation  of  the  La  Tremoille  family,  Jean
Douhalle,  lieutenant-general  of  the  Governor  of  Touraine,
proceeded  to  make  inquiries  to  substantiate  the  fact  that,  in
his  last  moments,  Louis  XL,  stung  by  remorse,  had  declared
to  the  Bailiff  of  Meaux  that  he  had  wrongfully  and  illegally
seized  on  the  inheritance  of  La  Tremoille,  and  had  enjoined
the  bailiff  to  request  tlie  dauphin  to  restore  Talmont  to  its
legitimate  owners,  and  to  compensate  Commines  for  its  loss
by  the  gift  of  a  pension  of  2000  livres.  Ten  witnesses
deposed  unanimously  to  the  truth  of  this  statement :  ami  in
consequence,  on  the  29th  of  September,  1483,  Charles  VIII.
directed  his  chancellor  to  reinstate  the  family  of  La
Tremoille  in  the  possession  of  the  property  of  which  they
had  been  so  unjustly  deprived.

Commines  resisted  this  order  on  the  ground  that  there
were  no  title-deeds  to  justify  the  restitution  of  the  estates.
But  though  these  documents  had  been  destroyed,  they  had
once  existed;  and  numerous  witnesses  were  ready  to  reveal
the  manner  in  which  they  had  been  made  away  with.
Inquiries  were  instituted  as  to  the  result  of  the  examination
of  the  papers  in  the  Chateau  de  Thouars,  and  Commines


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  XXxiil

himself  was  interrogated.  At  first  he  could  remember
nothing,  but  on  being  compelled  to  speak,  he  strove  hard  to
make  no  confession  which  his  enemies  might  afterwards
turn  against  him  :  but  though  his  answers  were  carefully
weighed,  and  coupled  with  endless  restrictions  and  ex.
planations,  he  was  unable  to  invalidate  the  testimony  of  the
other  witnesses.  Fully  conscious  of  the  weakness  of  his
cause,  his  only  object  was  to  gain  time,  and  to  this  end,  he
put  in  requisition  all  the  thousand  subtleties  of  legal
chicanery.  At  length,  on  the  9th  of  March,  1486,  the
parliament  pronounced  sentence  against  him.  Commines
appealed,  but  in  vain ;  and  he  was  finally  condemned  to
restore  to  the  La  Tremoille  family  the  estates  of  which  they
had  been  unjustly  deprived,  to  disgorge  the  revenues  he  had
derived  from  them  during  his  unlawful  possession,  and  to  pay
the  expenses  of  the  suit,  amounting  altogether  to  7811  livres
4  sous  parisis.  Thus,  after  having  lasted  nineteen  years,
this  affair  was  terminated,  and  Commines  was  enabled  to
satisfy  the  demands  of  his  opponents  by  means  of  an
indemnity  of  30,000  livres  granted  him  by  Charles  VIII.

"We  must  now  take  up  our  history  at  the  death  of  Louis  XL
One  of  the  first  acts  of  Madame  de  Beaujeu,  the  eldest  sister
of  Charles  VIIL,  was  to  confirm  in  their  governments,
positions  and  offices,  sill  those  who  had  held  them  at  the
accession  of  the  new  king.  This  was  a  wise  measure,  and
Louis  XL  had  more  than  once  repented  that  he  had  acted
otherwise  towards  the  servants  of  his  lather.  Commines
was  maintained  on  the  list  of  royal  councillors,  and  continued
in  the  office  of  Seneschal  of  Poitou.  Shortly  afterwards,  he
was  sent  on  an  embassy  to  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  with  the
Lords  of  Chatillon  and  Richebourg.  Finally,  he  had  the
honour  to  be  one  of  the  fifteen  notable  persons  whom  the
princess  suggested  to  the  States-general  for  admission  into  the
council  of  the  young  king.  In  that  council,  at  which  the
most  important  affairs  of  the  realm  were  decided,  Commines
one  day  had  to  defend  the  rights  of  Charles  VIIL  over  the
county  of  Provence  against  the  pretensions  of  a  prince,  Duke
Rene  II.  of  Lorraine,  whom  all  the  courtiers  treated  with  the
greatest  consideration.  He  maintained  the  interests  of  the
crown  with  so  much  h^at  that  the  duke,  in  anger,  addressed
him  "  in  rough  and  foolish  words ;"  and  even  succeeded  in

VOL.  i.  b


XXXIV  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.

obtaining  his  banishment  from  court.  The  disgraced  courtier
easily  found  a  refuge  with  one  of  those  princes  who,  dissatis-
fied with  the  narrow  share  allotted  to  their  ambition  by  the
States-general  of  the  kingdom,  held  themselves  aloof  from
Madame  de  Beaujeu,  and  openly  fomented  rebellion  against
her  administration.  It  was  to  Moulins,  where  the  Duke  of
Bourbon  then  resided,  that  the  Lord  of  Argenton  betook
himself.  He  met  with  a  gracious  reception,  and  his  counsels
were  listened  to  with  favour:  but  the  duke  was  a  man  of
notoriously  feeble  character,  and  Commines  had  to  employ
all  his  ingenuity  to  keep  him  faithful  to  the  opposition  party.
In  this  he  so  far  succeeded  as  to  induce  the  duke  to  go  to  the
king  for  the  purpose  of  complaining  of  the  evil  administra-
tion of  his  government ;  but  one  of  the  consequences  of  this
interview  between  Charles  VIII.  and  his  uncle  was,  that
Commines  was  dismissed  from  the  Duke  of  Bourbon's  service.
Upon  this,  he  transferred  his  allegiance  to  the  Duke  of
Orleans,  whose  intrigues  were  secretly  favoured  by  the  king
himself,  who,  as  he  grew  in  years,  became  impatient  of  the
wise,  but  imperious  control  of  Madame  de  Beaujeu.  In
concert  with  some  other  nobles,  Commines  made  an  attempt
to  carry  off  the  young  king,  and  place  him  under  the  care  of
the  Duke  of  Orleans  ;  but  although  Charles  was  a  party  to
their  design,  they  failed,  and  he  punished  them  for  their
failure.  Commines  was  arrested  at  Amboise,  and  conducted
to  Loches,  where  he  was  confined  for  eight  months  in  an
iron  rage,  which  had  been  constructed  by  order  of  Louis  XL
By  decree  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  his  property  was
confiscated,  and  on  the  17th  of  July,  1487,  he  was  brought  to
Paris,  and  imprisoned  in  the  Conciergerie.  There  he  re-
mained for  twenty  months,  until,  on  the  21th  of  March,  1489,
he  was  condemned  to  be  banished  for  ten  years  to  one  of  his
e&tates,  and  to  give  bail  to  the  amount  of  10,000  golden
crowns  for  his  good  behaviour.

Long  before  the  expiration  of  this  sentence,  in  December,
1492,  Commines  had  been  recalled  to  his  seat  in  the  council
of  Charles  VIII.  He  now  gave  most  evident  proof  of  his
sagacity  and  devotedness  by  joining,  with  other  enlightened
servants  of  the  crown,  in  a  vain  attempt  to  dissuade  the
young  monarch  from  engaging  in  an  expedition  into  Italy.
Interested  advice,  however,  prevailed  over  their  wise  counsels,


-  LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  XXXV

and  the  conquest  of  Naples  was  undertaken  without  funds,
and  almost  without  an  army.  Notwithstanding  his  opposi-
tion to  the  projected  expedition,  Commines  was  one  of  the
first  on  horseback.  He  attended  his  master  as  far  as  Asti,
whence  he  was  despatched  on  a  mission  to  Venice,  for  the
purpose  of  aiding  by  diplomacy  the  progress  of  the  king's
arms.  He  remained  in  Venice  for  eight  months,  using  every
effort  to  prevent  the  formation  of  a  league  of  the  States  of
Italy  against  Charles  VIII.  In  this  he  might  have  suc-
ceeded, had  not  the  affairs  of  France  and  the  position  of  the
invading  army  been  so  unfavourable  as  to  frustrate  all  his
efforts.  The  league  was  formed,  and  when  Commines
received  orders  to  rejoin  the  king  at  Sienna,  the  French
army  was  in  retreat.  He  at  once  advised  the  king  to  hasten
his  return  to  France  ;  but  his  prudent  counsel,  far  from  being
favourably  received,  was  greeted  with  incredulous  laughter
and  boastful  jeers.  Much  precious  time  was  wasted  in
frivolous  amusements ;  and  when  at  length,  Charles  VIII.
began  his  homeward  march,  he  foolishly  left  garrisons  in
many  of  the  towns  through  which  he  passed,  thus  seriously
diminishing  his  own  army  without  opposing  any  effectual
barrier  to  the  progress  of  his  enemies.

The  presentiments  of  Commines  were  soon  realised.  On
the  5th  of  July,  1495,  the  French  king,  on  arriving  at  the
village  of  Fornova,  found  40.000  Italians  drawn  up  in  an
excellent  position,  to  bar  his  further  advance.  The  chances
of  success  were  not  on  the  side  of  the  French,  and  at  the
suggestion  of  Commines,  it  was  resolved  to  psirley  with  the
enemy.  The  negotiation  was  entrusted  to  our  historian,
but  before  it  could  be  commenced,  the  two  armies  came
to  blows.  Victory  at  first  seemed  to  incline  to  the  Italians,
but  French  impetuosity  and  discipline  eventually  carried  the
day.  Notwithstanding  this  unexpected  victory,  however,
Commines  received  orders  to  continue  his  negotiations  ;  and
mainly  by  his  exertions,  the  treaty  of  Verceil  was  signed,
which  restored  the  Duke  of  Orleans  to  liberty,  by  raising
the  siege  of  Novara,  and  enabled  Charles  VIII.  and  his
army  to  return  into  France  with  all  the  honours  of  war.

Commines  was  next  sent  to  Venice  to  obtain  the  ratifi-
cation of  this  treaty  by  the  senate  of  that  powerful  republic.
But  after  a  fortnight's  deliberation,  the  signiory  refused  to

b  2


XXXVI  LIFE OF PHILIP  DE COMMIKEP.

accede  to  the  treaty,  and  offered,  in  its  stead,  propositions
which  Commines  undertook  to  submit  to  the  king.  From
Venice,  he  proceeded  to  Milan,  to  require  the  duke  to  execute
certain  clauses  in  the  treaty  which  he  had  signed.  But
that  prince  evaded  giving  a  categorical  answer,  and  forced
the  envoy  to  take  his  leave  before  he  had  obtained  anything
more  than  a  false  promise  that  the  duke  would  speedily  fulfil
all  his  engagements.

This  was  the  end  of  Commines'  active  career.  On  his
return  to  France,  he  continued  his  attendance  on  Charles
VIIL,  but  took  no  part  in  the  management  of  affairs  beyond
speaking  and  voting  in  the  council.  During  a  temporary
visit  to  his  Chateau  of  Argenton,  he  received  the  news  of  the
king's  unhappy  death.  He  hastened  with  all  speed  to  Am-
boise,  and  passed  five  or  six  hours  in  prayer  by  the  body  of
his  deceased  sovereign.  On  the  following  day,  he  went  to
pay  his  homage  to  the  new  king,  from  whom  he  anticipated
a  i'avourable  reception.  But  on  ascending  the  throne,  the
Duke  of  Orleans  had  forgotten  past  services  as  well  as  past  in-
juries; and  Commines  merely  remained  a  member  of  the  grand
council,  as  during  the  previous  reign.  He  soon  ceased  even
to  attend  the  meetings  of  this  body,  for  his  name  appears  on
its  registers  for  the  last  time  on  the  26th  of  July,  1498.
After  this  date  he  seems  to  have  retired  into  private  life,
and  although  be  made  a  great  effort  in  1505  to  obtain  public
employment,  through  the  influence  of  the  queen,  he  was
obliged  to  remain,  for  the  rest  of  his  days,  a  mere  spectator
of  the  scenes  and  conflicts  of  political  life.

His  activity  meanwhile  displayed  itself  in  the  conduct  of
his  private  affairs.  On  the  13th  of  August,  1504,  his  daughter
Jeanne  de  Commines  was  contracted  in  marriage  to  Rene  de
Brosse,  Count  of  Penthievre,  and  heir  to  the  duchy  of  Bre-
tagne ;  by  which  union  the  blood  of  Commines  has  passed
into  the  veins  of  more  than  one  sovereign  of  the  royal  lines
of  France,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Savoy.
*•  The  last  years  of  Commines  were  occupied  and  embit-
tered by  vexatious  lawsuits  relating  to  the  property  of  his
wife,  and  to  other  matters,  into  which  it  would  be  tedious  to
enter.  He  died  at  his  Chateau  of  Argenton  on  the  18th  of
October,  1511,  at  the  age  of  about  64  years.  In  other  times,
his  death  would  have  constituted  almost  a  political  event ;


LIFE OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  XXXvii

but  times  had  changed.  It  was,  however,  sufficiently  noticed
to  induce  one  writer,  whose  name  is  unknown  to  us,  to  com-
pose a  sort  of  poem,  deploring  his  decease.

The  mortal  remains  of  Commines  were  conveyed  to  Paris,
and  interred  in  the  chapel  which  he  had  built  in  the  Convent
des  Grands  Aug'ustins.  Those  of  the  Countess  de  Penthievre
were  soon  laid  by  his  side  ;  and  ere  long  Helene  de  Chambes
joined  her  husband  and  daughter  in  their  last  resting-place.
A  splendid  monument  was  erected  by  Rene  de  Bretagne  to
the  memory  of  his  wife's  parents.  The  chapel  has  long
since  been  destroyed,  but  the  statues  of  its  founder  and  his
wife,  which  formed  part  of  their  monument,  are  still  pre-
served in  the  Gallery  of  the  Louvre.

To  conclude  this  sketch  in  the  words  of  his  old  biographer,
Sleidan :  "  Commines  was  tall,  fair,  well  shaped,  and  of  a
comely  personage.  He  spoke  Italian,  Dutch,  and  Spanish
incomparably  well ;  but  his  excellence  consisted  chiefly  in
the  French,  and  he  had  read  all  the  histories  that  were
extant  in  that  language,  especially  that  of  the  Romans.  As
he  grew  in  years,  he  extremely  lamented  his  deficiency  in
the  Latin  tongue,  and  complained  of  the  little  care  that  had
been  taken  of  his  education  in  that  respect.  He  had  a  pro-
digious memory,  and  such  a  wonderful  facility  in  expressing
his  thoughts,  that  he  would  at  the  same  time  dictate  to  four
secretaries  different  things,  all  of  them  of  great  importance,
and  with  the  same  ease  and  dexterity  as  if  there  had  been
but  one.  His  conversation  was  chiefly  among  foreigners,  as
he  was  desirous  to  inform  himself  of  all  things  and  places,
and  very  careful  of  employing  his  time  well ;  so  that  he  was
never  known  to  be  idle."


b  3


CONTENTS.


j'age

Introduction -„„-_--  v.

Life  of  Commines  -------  xi.

Table  of  Contents ..----  xxxviii.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.

CH.  I. — The  Occasion  of  the  Wars  between  Louis  XI.  and  the  Count  of
Charolois,  afterwards  Duke  of  Burgundy  *4  Page  1

CH.  IL — How  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  several  great  Lords  of  France
raised  an  Army  against  King  Louis  XL,  under  Pretence  of  the
Public  Good  -  -  -  9

CH.  IH. — How  the  Count  of  Charolois  encamped  with  his  Army  near
Montlhery,  and  of  the  Battle  fought  in  that  Place  between  him  and  the
King  of  France  -  -  -  -  -  17

CH.  IV. — Of  the  imminent  Danger  to  which  the  Count  of  Charolois  was
exposed,  and  the  Manner  of  his  being  rescued  -  26

CH,  V. — The  King's  Brother  the  Duke  of  Berry,  and  the  Duke  of
Bretagne,  join  with  the  Count  of  Charolois  against  the  King  33

CH.  VI. — The  Count  of  Charolois  and  his  Allies  with  their  Army  pass
the  Seine  upon  a  Bridge  of  Boats ;  after  which,  being  joined  by  the
Forces  of  John,  Duke  of  Calabria,  they  invest  Paris.  -  42

CH.  VII. — A  Digression  concerning  Salaries,  Offices,  and  Ambition,
.  illustrated  by  the  Example  of  the  English  -  -  47

CH.  VIII. — How  King  Louis  entered  Paris,  whilst  the  Lords  of  France
were  tampering  with  the  Citizens  -  50

CH.  IX. — How  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  the  King  cannonaded  each
other  near  Charenton ;  after  which  Action,  the  Count  of  Charolois  laid
a  second  Bridge  of  Boats  over  the  River  Seine  -  54

CH.  X. — Digression  concerning  some  of  the  Virtues  and  Vices  of  King
Louis  XI.  -  -  59

CH.  XI. — How  the  Burgundians,  being  drawn  up  near  Paris,  and  in
Expectation  of  a  Battle,  mistook  high  Thietles  for  a  Body  of
Lances  -  61


CONTEXTS.  XXxix

CH.  XII. — How  the  King  visited  the  Count  of  Charolois,and  talked  with
him  concerning  their  Quarrel ;  and  of  the  Importance  of  wise  Coun-
cillors to  a  Prince  -  ...  Page  65

CH.  XIII.  —  How  Rouen  was  delivered  into  the  Hands  of  the  Duke  of
Bourbon  to  be  kept  for  the  Duke  of  Berry  ;  and  the  Conclusion  of  the
Treaty  of  Conflans  -  -  69

CH.  XIV.— Of  the  Peace  that  was  concluded  at  Conflans  between  the
King  and  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  his  Allies  -  78

CH.  XV. — How  the  King  recovered  into  his  Hands  whatever  had  been
given  to  his  Brother,  by  the  Division  between  the  Dukes  of  Normandy
and  Brctagne  -  ...  -83

CH.  XVI. — The  new  Duke  of  Normandy  retires  into  Brctagne  very  poor
and  disconsolate,  upon  account  of  his  having  miscarried  in  his  Design  84


BOOK  THE  SECOND.

CH.  I.—  Of  the  Wars  between  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  Liegeois  ;
and  of  the  taking,  plundering,  and  razinsr  the  Town  of  Dinant  -  88

CH.  II. — How  the  Liegeois  broke  the  Peace  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
before  called  Count  of  Charolois,  upon  which  he  engages  and  defeats
them  in  a  set  Battle  -  -  92

CH.  III. — How  the  Liegeois  quarrelled  among  themselves  about  sur-
rendering their  Town,  some  agreeing,  others  refusing  to  do  it ;  while,
in  the  Meantime,  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  found  a  Way  to  enter  and
take  possession  of  it  for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  -  -  100

Cu.  IV. — Of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  triumphal  Entry  into  the  City  of
Liege  ;  and  the  Submission  of  the  Gantois,  who  not  long  before  had
treated  him  disrespectfully  -  -  -  -  105

CH.  V. — How  the  King  of  France  made  War  in  Bretagne  upon  the  Duke
of  Burgundy's  Allies  upon  Intelligence  of  what  had  happened  to  the
Liegeois  ;  and  the  Interview  and  Conference  of  these  two  Princes  at
Peronne  -  ....HO

CH.  VI. — A  Digression  concerning  the  Advantage  which  the  Knowledge
of  Letters,  and  more  especially  of  History,  is  to  Princes  and  great
Lords  -  .  -  1 1 5

CH.  VII. — The  Occasion  of  the  King  being  seized  and  secured  in  the
Castle  of  Peronne  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  -  -  -  118

CH.  VIII. — A  Digression,  demonstrating  that  when  two  great  Princes
meet  in  order  to  adjust  their  Differences,  such  Interviews  are  generally
more  prejudicial  than  profitable  -  -  -  121

CH.  IX. — How  the  King  renounced  his  League  with  the  Liegeois,  to  be
released  out  of  the  Castle  of  Peronne  ...  127

Cu.  X. — How  the  King  accompanied  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  in  his  Ex-
pedition against  the  Liegeois,  who  were  formerly  his  Allies  -  145

CH.  XI. — Of  the  King's  arrival  in  Person  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
before  the  City  of  Liege  -  -  -  -  -  1 4

b  4


x  CONTENTS.

CH.  XII. — How  the  Liegeois  made  a  desperate  Sally  upon  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  Quarters,  where  both  he  and  the  King  were  in  very  great
Danger  ------  Page  152

CH.  XIII.  —  Of  the  storming,  taking,  and  plundering  the  City  of
Liege  ;  together  with  the  Ruin  and  Debtruction  of  the  very
Churches  -----  156

CH  XIV.— How  King  Louis  returned  into  France  by  the  Consent  of
the  Duke  of  Burgundy;  and  how  the  Duke  treated  the  Liegeois
and  the  People  of  Franchemont  afterwards  -  -  159

CH.  XV. — Of  the  King  of  France's  Subtlety,  by  which  he  prevailed  with
his  Brother  Duke  Charles  to  accept  of  the  Duchy  of  Guienne,  in  lieu
of  Brie  and  Champagne,  and  contrary  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  In-
tention -  -  -  -  -  -  -  163


BOOK  THE  THIRD.

CH.  I. — How  the  King  took  an  Occasion  of  making  a  new  War  upon  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  ;  and  of  his  sending  as  far  as  Ghent  to  summon
him  to  appear  by  a  Serjeant  of  the  Parliament  -  -  167

CH.  II. — Of  the  Delivering  up  of  the  Towns  of  St.  Quentin  and  Amiens
to  the  King ;  and  upon  what  Grounds  the  Constable  and  others
fomented  the  War  between  the  King  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  171

CH.  III. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  took  Picquigny  ;  and  the  Means
he  found  out  to  make  a  Truce  with  the  King  for  a  Year,  to  the  great
Dissatisfaction  of  the  Constable  of  France  -  175

CH.  IV. — Of  the  Civil  Wars  between  the  Princes  in  England  during
the  Difference  between  Louis  XI.  and  Charles,  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy- ...  -  -  181

CH.  V. — How  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  by  the  Assistance  of  Louis.  King  of
France,  drove  King  Edward  IV.  out  of  England,  to  the  great  Dis-
pleasure of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  received  him  into  his
Countries  -  -  -  -  -  -  187

CH.  VI. — How  the  Earl  of  Warwick  released  Henry  VI.,  King  of
England,  out  of  the  Tower  -  195

CH.  VII. — How  King  Edward  returned  into  England,  where  he  defeated
the  Earl  of  Warwick  in  Battle,  and  the  Prince  of  Wales  after-
wards -  -  199

CH.  VIII. — How  the  War  was  renewed  between  King  Louis  and  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  at  the  Solicitation  of  the  Dukes  of  Guienne  and
Bretagne  .--.---  203

CH.  IX. — How  the  final  Peace  which  wns  negotiating  between  the  King
and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  broken  off  by  the  Duke  of  Guienne's
Death,  and  how  those  two  great  Princes  laboured  to  circumvent  one
another  --.-.-.  210

CH.  X. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,. having  encamped  before  Beauvais,
and  finding  he  could  not  take  it,  raised  the  Siege,  and  marched  with
his  Array  to  Rouen  -  -  -  -  -217


CONTENTS.  Xli

Cn.  XL — How  the  King  concluded  a  Peace  with  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,
and  a  Truce  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy ;  and  how  the  Count  of
St.  Paul  very  narrowly  escaped  a  Plot  that  was  laid  for  him  by  these
two  great  Princes  .....  Page  2-22

Cn.  XII — A  Digression,  not  altogether  improper  in  this  place,  con-
cerning the  Wisdom  of  the  King  and  the  Constable,  with  useful
Remarks  for  those  who  are  in  Authority  with  Princes  -  229


BOOK  THE  FOURTH.


CH.  I. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  having  seized  upon  the  Duchy  of
Guelders,  attempted  farther  Inroads  upon  the  Germans,  and  besieged
Nuz  -  -  -  232

Cn.  IL — How  the  Town  of  Nuz  was  relieved  by  the  Germans  and  the
Emperor  ;  and  of  other  Enemies  whom  the  King  of  France  stirred  up
against  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  -  -  -  239

CH.  III. — How  the  King  took  from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  the  Castle  of
Tronquoy,  with  the  Towns  of  Montdidier,  Roye,  and  Corbie,  and  the
Endeavours  he  used  to  persuade  the  Emperor  Frederick  to  seize  upon
such  Towns  as  belonged  to  the  Duke  in  the  Empire  -  -  244

CH.  IV. — How  the  Constable  fell  again  under  the  Suspicion  both  of  the
King  and  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  -  -  247

CH.  V. — How  the  King  of  England  passed  the  Sea  with  a  powerful
Army  to  assist  his  Ally,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  against  the  King  of
France,  to  whom  he  sent  a  Defiance  by  one  of  his  Heralds-at
arms  -  -  251

Cn.  VI. — Of  the  Trouble  and  Perplexity  of  the  Constable,  and  of  certain
Letters  he  wrote  to  the  King  of  England  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
which  afterwards  were  partly  the  Cause  of  his  Death  -  -  254

Cn.  VH. — How  the  King  of  France  disguised  one  of  his  menial  Servants
in  a  Herald's  Coat,  and  sent  him.  with  a  Message  to  the  King  of
England,  who  gave  him  a  favourable  Answer  -  -  258

CH.  VIII. — How  a  Truce  for  Nine  Years  was  negotiated  between  the
Kings  of  France  and  England,  notwithstanding  the  Difficulties  and
Impediments  interposed  by  the  Constable  aud  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy -  -  -  263

CH.  IX. — How  the  King  entertained  the  English  in  Amiens,  and  of  the
Place  appointed  for  the  Interview  of  the  two  Kings  -  -  268

Cn.  X. — Of  the  Interview  between  the  two  Kings,  and  of  their  swearing
to  the  Truce  which  had  been  concluded  before  ;  and  how  some  fancied
the  Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  the  King  of  England's  Tent  in  the
Shape  of  a  White  Pigeon  -  -  274

CH.  XL — How  the  Constable  endeavoured  to  excuse  himself  to  the  King
of  France  upon  the  Conclusion  of  the  Peace  with  the  English ;  and
how  a  Truce  was  likewise  made  for  Nine  Years  between  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  and  the  King  of  France  -  .  -  280


Xlii  CONTENTS.

CH.  XII. — How  the  King  of  France  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  swore
the  Death  of  the  Constable,  who,  retiring  into  the  Duke's  Country,
was,  by  his  Command,  delivered  to  the  King,  and  publicly  exe-
cuted -------  Page  291

CH.  XIIL — A  Digression  concerning  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  Error  in
delivering  up  the  Constable  to  the  King,  contrary  to  the  Safe-conduct
which  he  had  given  him,  and  what  happened  to  him  afterwards  -  297


BOOK  THE  FIFTH.


CH.  I. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  making  "War  upon  the  Swiss,- was
defeated  by  them  at  the  Foot  of  the  Mountains,  near  Granson  301

CH.  II. — How  after  the  Defeat  near  Granson,  the  Duke  of  Milan,  Kene,
King'  of  Sicily,  the  Duchess  of  Savoy,  and  others,  abandoned  their
Alliance  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  -  -  307

CH.  III. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  again  defeated  by  the  Swiss,
near  the  Town  of  Morat  -  -  -  -  313

CH.  IV. — How,  after  the  Battle  of  Morat,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  seized
upon  the  Duchess  of  Savoy,  and  how  she  was  delivered  by  our  King
and  sent  back  into  her  own  Country  -  -  -  3 1 6

CH.  V. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  lived  in  a  solitary  Manner  for
some  Weeks  at  La  Riviere,  and  how  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  retook
Nancy  in  the  meantime  -  -  320

CH.  VI. — Of  the  Count  of  Campobasso's  great  Treachery,  and  how  he
prevented  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  from  hearing  a  Gentleman  who
would  have  revealed  it  to  him  before  his  Execution,  and  how  the  Duke
also  rejected  the  Information  that  was  sent  him  by  the  King  -  325

CH.  VIL — How  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  with  a  powerful  Army  of  Germans
took  the  Field,  and  encamped  at  St.  Nicholas,  whilst  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy lay  before  Nancy  ;  and  how  the  King  of  Portugal,  who  was  in
France  at  that  Time,  paid  a  visit  to  the  Duke  in  his  Camp  before  that
Town.  -  -  .  -  -  -  -  330

CH.  VIII. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  by  rejecting  the  Counsel  of
several  of  his  Officers,  was  defeated  and  slain  in  a  Battle  between
him  and  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  not  far  from  Nancy  334

CH.  IX. — 'A  Digression  concerning  the  Virtues  of  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy and  the  Time  of  his  House's  Prosperity  -  -  339

CH.  X. — How  the  King  of  France  received  Intelligence  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  last  Defeat,  and  managed  his  Affairs  after  the  Duke's
Death  -  -  -  342

CH.  XI. — How  the  King  of  France  seized  upon  Abbeville  after  the
Death  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  the  Answer  he  received  from
the  Inhabitants  of  Arras  -  ....  345

CH.  XII. — A  Digression  (not  altogether  foreign  to  my  principal  Design)
concerning  the  King's  Joy  at  being  delivered  from  most  of  his


CONTENTS.  xliii

Enemies,  and  of  the  Error  his  Majesty  committed  in  the  Reduction
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  Countries  -  Page  348

CH.  XIII. — Of  the  Delivery  of  Han,  Bohain,  St.  Quentin,  and  Peronne
to  the  King,  and  how  he  sent  his  Barber,  Monsieur  Oliver,  to  treat
with  the  Citizens  of  Ghent  -----  350

CH.  XIV. — How  Master  Oliver,  the  King's  Barber,  not  succeeding  in
his  Designs  upon  Ghent,  finds  out  a  Way  to  secure  Tournay  for  the
King  --------  355

CH.  XV. — Of  the  Ambassadors  whom  the  Lady  of  Burgundy,  Duke
Charles's  Daughter,  sent  to  the  King,  and  of  the  Delivering  up  of
Arras,  Hesdin,  Boulogne,  and  the  City  of  Arras,  to  the  King  by  the
Assistance  of  the  Lord  des  Cordes  -  -  -  359

CH.  XVI. — How  the  Citizens  of  Ghent,  having  usurped  Authority  over
their  Princess  upon  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  her  Father,
sent  Ambassadors  to  the  King  of  France  in  the  Name  of  the  Three
Estates  of  their  Country  -----  364

CH.  XVIL— How  the  People  of  Ghent,  upon  the  Return  of  their  Am-
bassadors, put  the  Chancellor  Hugonet  and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt
to  Death,  against  their  Princess's  Consent  ;  after  which  they,  in  con-
junction with  some  other  Flemish  Troops,  were  defeated  before
Tournay,  and  the  Duke  of  Guelders,  who  commanded  them,  was  slain ;
and  the  Duchy  of  Burgundy  was  placed  in  the  Hands  of  the  King
of  France  -  ,  -  -  -  -  -  371

CH.  XVIII. — A  Digression,  sen-ing  to  demonstrate  that  Wars  and  Di-
visions are  permitted  by  God  for  the  Punishment  of  wicked  Princes
and  People,  with  various  Arguments  and  Instances  which  happened
in  the  Author's  Lifetime,  chiefly  intended  for  the  Instruction  of
Princes  -  -  -----  373

CH.  XIX. — On  the  Character  of  the  French  People,  and  the  Government
of  their  Kings,  with  Reflections  on  the  Misfortunes  which  occur  to  both
great  and  small  ------  335

CH.  XX. — Examples  of  Misfortunes  that  have  happened  to  Princes,  and
Revolutions  that  have  been  brought  to  pass  in  States  by  the  Judgment
of  God  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  393


OrtUratiom


TO


THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  VIEME,


IT  was  your  request,  my  Lord  Archbishop  of  Vienne*,  that
I  should  give  you  in  writing  an  account  of  what  I  knew
and  had  heard  of  the  transactions  of  the  late  King  Louis  XLf ,
our  master  and  benefactor  —  a  prince,  indeed,  whose  actions
well  deserve  to  be  remembered.  In  compliance  with  your
Lordship's  desire  I  have  done  it,  as  near  the  truth  as  my
memory  would  permit  me.

Of  the  occurrences  that  happened  in  his  youth  I  can  say
little  besides  what  I  have  heard  his  Majesty  state  in  conver-

*  Angelo  Cato,  born  at  Sopino,  in  the  diocese  of  Benevento,  was  "a
person  of  exemplary  life,  great  learning,  extreme  modesty,  and  wonderful
knowledge  of  mathematics."  In  his  youth,  he  entered  the  service  of  the
princes  of  Anjou;  but,  being  sent  by  them  on  a  mission  to  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  he  transferred  his  allegiance  to  that  prince,  at  whose  court  he
began  his  life-long  friendship  with  Commines.  Cato  was  a  skilful
astrologer,  and  predicted  to  Charles  the  Bold  that  he  would  lose  the
battles  of  Granson  and  Morat.  After  the  fulfilment  of  his  predictions,
he  took  leave  of  the  duke,  and  was  immediately  taken  into  the  service  of
Louis  XL,  who  appointed  him  his  physician  and  almoner,  and  made  him
Archbishop  of  Vienne  in  1482.

f  Louis  XI.,  son  of  Charles  VII.  and  Mary  of  Anjou,  was  born  on  the
3rd  of  July,  1423;  consecrated  and  crowned  on  the  15th  of  August,
1461 ;  he  was  married,  first,  to  Margaret  of  Scotland,  and,  secondly,  to
Charlotte  of  Savoy  ;  and  he  died  on  the  30th  of  August,  1483.


xlvi  DEDICATION.

sation  ;  but,  from  the  time  of  my  first  being  entertained  in
his  service  to  his  death,  at  which  I  was  present,!  was  more  con-
stantly in  attendance  on  him  than  any  one  about  the  court,
being  always  one  of  his  chamberlains,  and  employed  in  the  most
important  affairs  of  the  kingdom.  In  him,  and  in  all  the  rest  of
the  princes  that  I  have  either  served  or  known,  I  perceived
ever  a  mixture  of  good  and  bad  ;  for  they  are  but  men  like
us,  and  perfection  belongs  only  to  God  Himself.  But  when  in
a  prince  virtues  and  good  qualities  outweigh  vices,  he  is  cer-
tainly worthy  of  more  than  ordinary  commendation  and  ap-
plause ;  because  persons  of  such  rank  are  more  inclinable  to
excess  in  their  actions  than  other  people,  by  reason  that
their  education  in  their  younger  years  is  less  strict ;  and
when  they  are  grown  up  to  man's  age,  the  generality  of
those  who  are  about  them  make  it  their  endeavour  to  con-
form themselves  to  their  caprices  and  humours.

As  I  have  been  unwilling  to  dissemble  the  matter,  I  may,
perhaps,  in  several  places  have  said  something  that  seems  to
lessen  the  character  of  my  master ;  but  I  hope  the  reader
will  consider  the  reasons  that  have  induced  me  to  do  so.
This  I  dare  affirm  in  his  praise,  that  I  never  knew  any
prince  less  faulty  in  the  main,  though  I  have  been  as  con-
versant among  great  princes  as  any  man  in  my  time  in
France  ;  and  not  only  with  those  who  have  reigned  in  this
kingdom,  but  in  Bretagne,  Flanders,  Germany,  England,
Spain,  Portugal,  and  Italy,  princes  spiritual  as  well  as  tem-
poral ;  besides  several  whom  I  never  saw,  but  knew  by  their
letters  and  instructions,  and  by  my  conferences  with  their
ambassadors,  which  gave  me  a  sufficient  character  of  their
natures  and  conditions.  However,  it  is  not  my  intention
in  the  least  to  detract  from  the  honour  and  renown  of  the
rest,  by  praising  my  master.  I  send  you  only  what  has
readily  occurred  to  my  mind,  hoping  you  have  asked  for  it  in
order  to  write  it  in  some  work  which  it  is  vour  design  to


DEDICATION.  xlvii

publish  in  Latin  (a  language  which  your  Lordship  under-
stands to  perfection),  by  which  will  be  shown  the  learning
and  abilities  of  the  author,  as  well  as  the  magnificence  and
grandeur  of  the  prince  of  whom  I  speak.  Where  I  am
defective,  you  have  the  Lord  du  Bouchage  *  and  others  to
apply  to,  who  can  give  you  a  better  account,  and  in  better
language ;  though,  considering  the  honour  King  Louis  XI.
did  me,  the  possessions  he  gave  me,  the  privacies  he  admitted
me  to,  and  his  never  discontinuing  any  of  his  favours  to  me
to  his  dying  day,  no  person  ought  to  remember  him  better
than  myself ;  and  if  I  could  forget  his  good  actions,  my  mis-
fortunes and  sufferings  since  [his  decease  would  be  sufficient
to  remind  me  of  them  ;  though  it  is  not  unusual  upon  the
death  of  such  great  and  powerful  princes  to  see  confusion
among  their  officers,  some  of  them  being  advanced,  whilst
others  are  laid  aside  ;  for  honours  and  preferments  are  not
always  distributed  according  to  the  inclination  of  those  who
desire  them.

Though  your  Lordship  seems  only  to  demand  of  me  an
account  of  such  occarrences  as  happened  during  the  time
that  I  was  near  the  king's  person,  I  am  obliged  to  begin  a
little  earlier ;  and,  having  deduced  them  from  the  time  of
my  being  first  entertained  in  his  service,  I  shall  continue
them  in  a  regular  method  to  his  death.

*  Imbert  de  Batornay,  knight,  Count  du  Bouchage,  and  Lord  of
Ornacieux,  was  one  of  the  councillors  and  chamberlains  of  Louis  XI.
He  died  on  the  12th  of  May,  1523.


THE MEMOIRS

OF

PHILIP DE COMMINES

LORD  OF  ARGENTON.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.

CHAPTER  I.

The  Occasion  of  the  Wars  between  Louis  XI.  and  the  Count  of  Charolois,
afterwards  Duke  of  Burgundy.  — 1464.

As  soon  as  my  childhood  was  over,  and  I  was  old  enough*
to  mount  on  horseback,  I  was  presented  at  Lisle  to  Charles,
Duke  of  Burgundy  f,  at  that  time  called  the  Count  of
Cliarolois,  who  took  me  into  his  service :  this  was  in  the
year  1464.

About  three  days  after  my  arrival  at  Lisle,  the  Count
d'Eu  $,  the  Chancellor  of  France,  called  Morvillier§,  and  the

*  Commines  died  in  1511,  at  the  age  of  sixty-four;  so  that  he  was
about  seventeen  years  old  when  he  entered  the  service  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy.

f  Charles,  Count  of  Charolois,  and  afterwards  Duke  of  Burgundy,  was
the  son  of  Philip  the  Good  and  Isabella  of  Portugal.  He  was  born  on
the  10th  of  November,  1433,  and  married  1.  Catherine,  the  daughter  of
King  Charles  VII.  of  France  ;  2.  Isabella  of  Bourbon  ;  and  3.  Margaret
of  York,  sister  of  Edward  IV.,  King  of  England.  He  was  killed  at  the
battle  of  Nancy,  on  the  5th  of  January,  1477.

J  Charles  of  Artois,  Count  d'Eu,  was  the  son  of  Philip  of  A  rtois  and
Mary  of  Berry.  He  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Agincourt,  and
remained  for  twenty-three  years  in  captivity  in  England.  He  died  on
the  25th  of  July,  1472,  at  about  seventy-eight  years  of  age.

§  Pierre  de  Morvilliers,  knight,  Lord  of  Clary,  was  the  son  of  Philip
B


2  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1464.

Archbishop  of  Narbonne*,  as  ambassadors  from  the  King  of
France  f,  arrived  there  also  ;  and,  in  the  presence  of  Philip,
Duke  of  Burgundy  j,  the  Count  of  Charolois,  and  their
privy  council,  were  admitted  to  a  public  audience  in  open
court  §.  Morvillier's  speech  was  exceedingly  arrogant,  ac-
cusing the  Count  of  Charolois  of  having  (during  his  late
visit  to  Holland)  caused  a  small  man-of-war  belonging  to
Dieppe  to  be  seized,  in  which  was  the  Bastard  of  Rubempre  ||,
whom  he  had  also  caused  to  be  imprisoned,  upon  pretence
that  his  design  was  to  have  surprised  and  carried  him  into
France;  which  report  he  had  had  published  wherever  he
went,  and  especially  at  Bruges  (a  town  of  great  resort  for
strangers  of  all  nations),  by  Sir  Oliver  de  la  Marche  II,  a
Burgundian  knight ;  for  which  cause  the  French  king,
finding  himself,  as  he  said,  unjustly  traduced,  demanded  of
Duke  Philip  that  Sir  Oliver  de  la  Marche  might  be  sent
prisoner  to  Paris,  to  receive  such  punishment  as  his  offence
deserved.  To  which  Duke  Philip  made  answer,  that  Sir
Oliver  de  la  Marche,  being  a  native  of  Burgundy,  and  steward
of  his  household,  was  in  no  respect  subject  to  the  crown  of
France ;  but  if,  however,  it  could  be  fairly  proved  that  he

de  Morvilliers  and  Jeanne  du  Drac.  Though  created  Chancellor  of
France  on  the  3rd  of  September,  1461,  he  did  not  begin  to  discharge  the
duties  of  his  office  until  November,  1465.  He  died  on  the  loth  of
December,  1476.

*  Antoine  du  Bee  Crespin  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Laon  on  the  3rd
of  March,  1449,  and  translated  to  the  Archbishopric  of  Narbonne  on
the  18th  of  January,  1460.  He  died  at  Eouen  on  the  15th  of  October,
1472.

f  According  to  documents  discovered  by  Mdlle.  Dupont,  the  Seigneur
de  Rambures  was  also  a  member  of  this  embassy.

J  Philip  the  Good,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  son  of  John  the  Fearless  and
Margaret  of  Bavaria,  was  born  on  the  30th  of  June,  1396.  He  married
1.  Michelle,  daughter  of  Charles  VII.  of  France  ;  2.  Bona  of  Artois  ;  and
3.  Isabella  of  Portugal.  He  died  on  the  loth  of  June,  1467.

§  This  took  place  on  the  6th  of  November,  1464.

j|  The  natural  son  of  Antony,  Lord  of  Rubempre,  in  Picardy.

<f  Oliver  de  la  Marche,  councillor,  chamberlain,  and  captain  of  the
guard  of  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  chief  steward  of  the  household
of  the  Archduke  of  Austria,  was  the  son  of  Philip  de  la  ilarche  and
Jeanne  Bouton.  He  was  born  in  1426,  married  Isabeau  Machefrin,  and
made  his  will  at  Brussels,  on  the  8th  of  October,  1501.  He  is  the  author
of  some  valuable  memoirs  relating  to  the  times  in  which  he  lived,  and
also  of  several  poetical  works.


1464  ]  SPEECH OF DUKE PHILIP.  3

had  either  done  or  spoken  anything  that  reflected  on  the
king's  honour,  he  would  take  care  to  see  him  punished  ac-
cording to  the  nature  of  the  crime.  That  as  to  the  Bastard
of  Rubempre,  he  had  been  taken  prisoner  upon  information
of  intelligence  which  he  and  his  confederates  held  in  the
Hague,  where  his  son  Charles,  the  Count  of  Charolois,  had
his  residence  at  that  time.  That  if  his  son  were  more  sus-
picious than  he  ought  to  be,  he  had  not  learned  it  from  him
(for  he  never  was  of  a  jealous  temper),  but  rather  from  his
mother*,  who,  he  must  confess,  was  the  most  fearful  and
apprehensive  lady  he  had  ever  known.  But  yet,  though  he
was  not  timorous  himself,  had  he  been  in  his  son's  place,
when  the  Bastard  of  Ruberapre  was  hovering  about  that
coast,  he  should  have  caused  him  to  be  apprehended,  as  his
son  had  done.  However,  if,  upon  inquiry,  the  said  bastard
should  not  be  found  to  have  conspired  against  his  son,  as  was
reported,  he  would  cause  him  to  be  released  immediately,
and  sent  back  to  the  king,  as  the  ambassadors  demanded.

No  sooner  had  Duke  Philip  ended  his  speech,  but  Mor-
villier  began  again  with  great  and  dishonourable  complaints
against  Francis,  Duke  of  Bretagne  f;  affirming  that  the  said
Duke  of  Bretagne  and  the  Count  of  Charolois,  at  the  time
when  the  Count  of  Charolois  paid  his  majesty  a  visit  at
Tours  J,  had  interchangeably  set  their  hands  and  seals  to  an
instrument  of  amity,  whereby  they  had  become  brothers-in-
arms ;  which  instrument  was  delivered  by  Messire  Tanneguy
du  Chastel§,  who  has  since  been  made  Governor  of  Rous-

*  Isabella,  daughter  of  John  I.,  King  of  Portugal,  and  Philippa  of
Lancaster,  married  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  on  the  10th  of  January,
1430.  She  died  on  the  1 7th  of  December,  1472,  and  was  buried  in  thq
Carthusian  convent  of  Gosnay-les-Bethunes.

f  Francis,  son  of  Kichard,  Count  d'Estampes,  and  Margaret  of  Orleans,
succeeded  his  uncle  Arthur,  Duke  of  Bretagne,  in  1458.  He  married,
1.  Margaret  of  Bretagne,  and  2.  Margaret  de  Foix.  He  died  on  the  9th
of  September,  1488.

J  The  Count  of  Charolois  paid  Louis  XI.  a  visit  at  Tours  in  1461.
He  arrived  there  on  the  22nd  of  October,  and  left  the  king  on  the  llth
of  December  following.

§  Tanneguy  du  Chastel,  Viscount  de  la  Belliere,  filled  the  office  of
Grand  Ecuyer  of  France  until  the  death  of  Charles  VII.,  on  the  21st  of
July,  1461  ;  upon  which  he  withdrew  to  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  who  had
him  appointed  Governor  of  Roussillon,  in  1472.  He  afterwards  entered
the  service  of  Louis  XI.  He  was  the  sou  of  Oliver,  Seigneur  da  Chastel,

B  2


4  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1464

sillon,  and  borne  great  authority  in  this  kingdom ;  and  this
action  Morvillier  heightened  and  exaggerated  in  such  a
manner,  that  he  omitted  nothing  that  could  possibly  be  said
on  the  subject,  which  might  tend  to  the  shame  and  dishonour
of  a  prince.  The  Count  of  Charolois,  being  nettled  at  the
severe  reflections  he  had  cast  upon  his  friend  and  ally,  often
attempted  to  answer  him  ;  but  Morvillier  always  interrupted
him,  saying,  "  My  lord,  I  was  not  sent  hither  on  an  em-
bassy to  you,  but  to  the  prince  your  father."  The  count,
however,  repeatedly  entreated  his  father  to  give  him  leave  to
speak,  who  at  last  replied,  "  I  have  answered  for  you  a?,  in
my  judgment,  a  father  ought  to  answer  for  his  son.  Never-
theless, since  your  desire  is  so  great,  think  over  it  to-day,
and  to-morrow  you  shall  have  liberty  to  say  what  you
please."  Morvillier  still  urged  the  matter  farther,  and  de-
clared, that  he  could  not  imagine  what  could  have  induced
the  Count  of  Charolois  to  enter  into  that  association  with
the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  unless  it  were  a  pension  the  king  had
given  him*,  together  with  the  government  of  Normandy,  but
which,  for  some  reasons,  his  majesty  had  since  taken  from  him.
The  next  morning,  before  the  same  audience,  the  Count
of  Charolois,  kneeling  upon  a  velvet  cushion,  addressed  him-
self first  to  his  father,  and  began  his  discourse  about  the
Bastard  of  Kubempre,  alleging  that  the  causes  of  his  appre-
hension and  imprisonment  were  just  and  reasonable,  as  would
appear  upon  his  trial.  Yet  I  am  of  opinion  that  nothing  was
ever  proved  against  him,  though  the  presumptions  were
great ;  and  I  afterwards  saw  him  discharged  out  of  prison,
where  he  had  been  kept  five  years.  Having  cleared  this
point,  his  next  business  was  to  vindicate  the  Duke  of  Bre-
tagne and  himself.  He  confessed  that  the  Duke  of  Bretagne
and  he  had  entered  into  an  alliance  and  friendship  together,
and  had  sworn  to  be  brothers-in-arms ;  but  that  the  said
alliance  was  not  intended  in  any  way  to  prejudice  the  king

and  Jeanne  de  Ploeuc  ;  he  married  Jeanne  de  Eaguenal,  Viscountess  de
la  Belliere,  in  1462  ;  and  he  died  in  consequence  of  a  wound  received  at
the  siege  of  Bouchain  in  1477.

*  Chastellain  relates  that  when  the  Count  of  Charolois  visited  Louis
XI.  at  Tours,  "the  king,  after  having  treated  him  handsomely,  appointed
and  constituted  him  Governor  of  Normandy,  with  a  pension  of  thirty-six
thdusand  francs."


1464.]  THREAT OP THE COUNT OP CHAROLO1S.  5

or  his  kingdom,  but  rather  to  serve  and  support  him  when
occasion  required.  And  lastly,  as  concerning  the  pension
that  had  been  taken  from  him,  he  said,  he  had  only  enjoyed
it  for  one  quarter,  and  that  amounted  to  nine  thousand
francs  ;  and  that,  for  his  part,  he  never  was  solicitous  either
for  that  pension,  or  for  the  government  of  Normandy ;  for
as  long  as  he  was  so  happy  as  to  be  in  favour  with  his
father,  he  could  afford  to  dispense  with  the  bounty  of  other
people.  I  really  believe  that,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the
respect  he  bore  his  father,  who  was  there  present,  and  to
whom  he  directed  his  speech,  he  would  have  answered  in
much  sharper  terms  than  he  did.  However,  Duke  Philip
concluded  his  discourse*  with  great  modesty  and  wisdom,
beseeching  his  majesty  to  continue  to  regard  him  with  favour,
and  not  easily  to  entertain  an  ill  opinion  of  him  or  his  son.
After  which,  he  called  for  wine  and  sweetmeats ;  and  then
the  ambassadors  took  their  leave  of  them  both.  When  the
Count  d'Eu  and  the  Chancellor  had  taken  their  leave  of  the
Count  of  Charolois,  who  stood  at  some  distance  from  his
father,  the  Archbishop  of  Narbonne  coming  last,  the  count
said  to  him,  "  Present  my  most  humble  respects  to  the  king,
and  tell  him,  that  he  has  handled  me  very  roughly  by  his
chancellor;  but  before  the  year  is  at  an  end,  his  majesty  may
have  reason  to  repent  it."  The  archbishop  delivered  his
message  punctually  to  the  king  at  his  return,  as  you  will
find  hereafter;  and  these  words  bred  a  mortal  hatred  between
his  majesty  and  the  count,  which  was  augmented  by  the
king's  late  redemption  of  certain  towns  upon  the  Somme —
namely,  Amiens,  Abbeville,  St.  Quentin,  and  others ;  de-
livered formerly  to  Duke  Philip  by  King  Charles  VII.  f,  in
pursuance  of  the  treaty  of  Arras|,  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  said
duke  and  his  heirs  male,  till  the  sum  of  400,000  crowns
should  be  paid.§  How  this  affair  was  managed,  I  can  give

*  The  duke's  answer  is  given  in  full  by  Monstrelet,  vol.  ii.  pp.  303 —
304  (Holm's  edition.)

f  Charles  VII.,  King  of  France,  son  of  Charles  VI.  and  Isabel  of
Bavaria,  was  born  on  the  22nd  of  February,  1402,  married  Mary  of
Anjou  in  1422,  and  died  on  the  22nd  of  July,  1461.

J  The  treaty  of  Arras  was  concluded  on  the  21st  of  September,  1435.
It  is  given  in  full  in  Monstrelet,  vol.  ii.  pp.  9 — 17.

§  The  sum  was  paid  in  two  instalments  ;  the  first  receipt  of  Philip  the
B  3


6  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1464.

no  certain  account ;  only  this  I  can  say,  that  the  affairs  of
the  duke  in  his  declining  years,  were  so  entirely  governed  by
two  brothers,  the  Lords  of  Croy*  and  Chimayf ,  and  others
of  their  family,  that  he  consented  to  take  the  king's  money,
and  restore  the  towns  that  were  mortgaged  to  him,  to  the
great  concern  and  disadvantage  of  the  Count  of  Charolois  ;
for  they  were  the  frontiers  and  limits  of  their  dominions,  and
they  lost,  in  parting  with  them,  several  thousands  of  brave
soldiers  and  good  subjects.  The  count  charged  the  whole
matter  upon  the  house  of  Croy;  and  when  his  father  was
grown  decrepit  and  superannuated,  which  at  that  time  he
was  very  near,  he  drove  all  the  said  Lords  of  Croy  from  his
father's  palace,  took  away  all  their  employments,  and  confis-
cated their  estates.

A  Treaty  of  Alliance  between  Francis,  Duke  of  Bretagne,
on  the  one  part,  and  Charles,  Count  of  Charolois,  on  the
other.  Made  at  Nantes,  the  22nd  of  March,  1464.

"  FRANCIS,  by  the  Grace  of  God,  Duke  of  Bretagne,  Earl  of
Montfort,  Richemond,  Estampes,  and  Vertus,  to  all  who
shall  see  or  hear  of  these  Presents,  Greeting.

"Whereas  love,  unity,  and  agreement  between  princes,
are  a  means  to  preserve  them  and  their  dominions,  in  due
obedience  towards  God,  in  a  flourishing  state,  virtue,  magni-
ficence, and  tranquillity,  and  even  to  improve  and  augment
them;  in  order  to  which,  all  princes  and  lords  ought  to  be  very
intent  and  watchful,  so  as  to  repress  the  contentious,  and  all
such  as  would  invade  or  form  any  enterprises  against  them  :
and  seeing  there  has  been,  from  time  immemorial,  a  firm
friendship  and  alliance  made,  cultivated,  and  maintained,  as
well  in  respect  to  consanguinity,  affinity  and  natural  affection,
as  otherwise,  between  the  late  most  high  and  potent  princes

Good  is  dated  at  Hesdin,  on  the  12th  of  September,  1463,  and  the
second  on  the  8th  of  October  following.

*  Antony,  Lord  of  Croy,  Count  of  Porcean,  first  chamberlain  to
Philip  the  Good,  and  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  became  lord  steward
to  Louis  XL,  on  the  accession  of  that  prince  to  the  throne.  He  was  the
son  of  John  of  Croy  and  Margaret  of  Craon  ;  and  he  died  in  1475.

f  John  of  Croy,  Lord  of  La  Tour-sur-Marne,  Count  of  Chimay,
Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  and  High  Bailiff  of  Hainanlt,  married
Marie  de  Lallain,  Lady  of  Quievrain,  and  died  at  Valenciennes  in  1472.


1464.]  TREATY  OF  ALLIANCE.  7

the  Dukes  of  Burgundy,  and  the  late  Dukes  of  Bretngne,
our  predecessors  (may  they  rest  together  in  glory!)  —  and
seeing  we  are  and  have  for  some  time  been  assured  that
certain  people  in  authority  and  near  the  person  of  the  King
of  France,  excited  thereto  by  an  evil  and  accursed  disposition,
have,  and  do  daily  move  him  to  entertain  enmity,  indigna-
tion, displeasure,  and  ill-will  towards  several  princes  of  his
own  blood,  and  by  false  and  wicked  reports  set  him  at
division  and  variance  with  them,  to  the  detriment  of  the
whole  kingdom ;  advising  and  exciting  him  to  invade  and
divest  them  of  their  countries  and  signiories ;  and  among
others,  the  most  high  and  potent  princes,  our  most  dear  and
well-beloved  uncle  and  cousin,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and
the  Count  of  Charolois  his  son,  and  especially  us,  upon  the
account  of  them,  their  territories  and  subjects,  so  as  to  do  us
and  ours  all  the  damage  and  displeasure  they  can ;  for  the
prevention  whereof,  being  desirous  to  make  use  of  all  just
and  reasonable  means,  we  have — in  conformity  to  the  rules  of
right  reason,  and  the  most  just  and  laudable  actions  of  our
predecessors  ;  and  to  prevent  any  sudden,  unexpected,  and
injurious  enterprises,  which  the  said  king,  by  the  persuasions,
counsels,  and  earnest  solicitations  of  those  our  ill-willers,
may  form  against  us;  and  the  better  to  enable  us  to  with-
stand  and  resist  the  same,  and  to  defend  our  territories,
subjects,  and  signiories,  as  we  are  in  duty  bound  —  entered
and  do  by  these  presents  enter  into  an  alliance,  confederacy,
and  agreement  with  our  said  most  dear  and  well-beloved
cousin,  the  Count  of  Charolois,  son  and  only  heir  of  our  said
most  dear  and  well-beloved  uncle  of  Burgundy,  in  the  fol-
lowing manner  and  form,  that  is  to  say  :  —  That  we  are  and
shall  continue  a  true  friend  and  ally  to  him,  will  assist  him,
take  his  part,  advise,  comfort,  and  succour  him,  and  with  all
our  power  protect,  save,  and  defend  his  person,  and  those  of
his  children  born  or  to  be  born,  and  his  estates,  countries,
territories,  signiories,  and  subjects,  as  well  those  dominions
which  he  now  holds  and  possesses,  as  those  which  he  may
or  shall  possess,  for  the  future,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  do
our  own,  without  any  distinction,  against  all  and  every
person  and  persons  who  shall  molest,  lessen,  make  war  upon,
or  usurp  anything  from  him,  and  his  said  children,  their
countries,  territories,  signiories,  and  subjects,  in  any

B  4


8  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1464.

manner  whatsoever,  without  any  reservation  or  exception
of  the  said  lord  the  king ;  and  in  case  he  shall,  by  the
advice  and  enticements  of  our  said  enemies,  or  otherwise,
invade  or  make  war  upon  our  said  cousin  of  Charolois,  we
do  promise  our  aid  and  assistance  to  him,  our  said  cousin,
against  the  king,  and  all  others  whomsoever,  that  would
invade,  or  make  war  against  him.  And  to  this  end  we  will,
for  and  in  favour  of  him,  and  for  his  assistance,  engage  our-
selves, our  territories,  countries,  and  signiories,  in  possession
or  reversion,  our  whole  power,  in  making  war  against  such
invaders  or  assailants ;  and  we  will  signify  and  impart  to
him  whatever  shall  come  to  our  knowledge,  that  may
be  said,  done,  projected,  or  contrived  to  his  prejudice,  and
will  defend  him  to  the  utmost  of  our  power :  And  we  do
comprehend  in  this  alliance,  convention,  and  confederacy,
our  most  honoured  lord  the  Duke  of  Berry,  and  our  most
dear  and  well-beloved  cousins  the  Dukes  of  Calabria  and
Bourbon ;  and  in  regard  to  the  engagements  we  have
already  entered  into,  and  may  do  hereafter,  we  do  compre-
hend therein  our  said  cousin  of  Charolois,  his  countries,
subjects,  and  signiories,  with  his  friends  and  allies,  present
and  to  come,  and  their  countries  and  subjects,  as  much  as  we
do  ourselves  and  our  own  dominions,  so  far  forth  as  they  are
willing  to  be  received  and  comprehended  therein  ;  and  we
shall  not  enter  into  any  other  alliances  or  confederacies,  that
are  prejudicial  to  this  treaty;  and  we  do  by  these  presents
promise  and  swear  by  our  faith,  and  upon  corporal  oath,  on
the  word  of  a  prince,  and  upon  our  honour,  firmly  to  observe
these  alliances  and  confederacies,  without  doing  anything  to
the  contrary  whatsoever ;  upon  condition  and  so  far  forth  as
our  said  cousin  of  Charolois  gives  us  the  same  assurance
and  promises,  and  observes  the  same.  In  witness  whereof,
we  have  signed  these  presents  with  our  own  hand,  and  sealed
them  with  our  seal."

Done  at  Nantes,  March  the  22nd,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord
1464.  Signed  FRANCIS,  with  a  flourish.  Upon  the
fold  was  written,  "By  the  Duke's  Command,"  and
signed  MILET,  with  a  flourish.


1464'.]  WAR OP THE PUBLIC GOOD.


CHAP.  II.

How  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  several  great  Lords  of  France  raised  an
Army  against  King  Louis  XL,  under  pretence  of  the  Public  Good. — 1464.

A  VERY  few  days  after  the  departure  of  the  king's  am-
bassadors, John,  late  Duke  of  Bourbon*,  came  to  Lisle,
pretending  a  visit  to  his  uncle  Philip,  Duke  of  Burgundy,
who  loved  the  family  of  Bourbon  most  of  all  the  families  in
the  world.  This  Duke  of  Bourbon  was  the  son  of  Duke
Philip's  sisterf  :  she  was  a  widow,  and  was  at  that  time  with
him,  with  several  of  her  children  —  three  daughters  and  one
son.:j:  However,  this  was  not  the  true  cause  of  the  Duke
of  Bourbon's  visit ;  but  his  coming  thither  was  to  persuade
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  consent  to  the  raising  of  an  army
in  his  dominions,  as  the  rest  of  the  princes  of  France  had
agreed  to  do ;  in  order  to  demonstrate  to  the  king  the  in-
justice and  ill-management  of  his  kingdom,  and  to  put  them-
selves into  a  condition  to  compel  him  to  reform  the  State,
if  fair  application  could  not  prevail.  This  war  was  after-
wards called  the  Public  Good,  it  being  undertaken  upon  that
pretence.  Duke  Philip,  who  since  his  death  has  been  called
the  Good,  consented  to  the  raising  of  men ;  but  the  real
object  of  the  business  was  never  made  known  to  him,  nor
did  he  ever  think  they  would  ever  have  proceeded  to  blows.
Immediately  they  began  to  enlist  forces  in  his  countries  ;  and
the  Count  of  St.  Paul  §  (afterwards  Constable  of  France),  being

*  John  II.,  Duke  of  Bourbon  and  Auvergne,  Count  of  Clermont,  peer,
constable,  and  chamberlain  of  France,  was  the  son  of  Charles  I.,  Duke
of  Bourbon,  and  Agnes  of  Burgundy ;  he  married  Jeanne,  daughter  of
Charles  VII.  of  France,  and  died  on  the  1st  of  April,  1488.  He  arrived
at  Lisle  on  the  14th  of  October,  1464.

f  Agnes  of  Burgundy,  married  on  the  17th  of  September,  1425,  to
Charles  I.,  Duke  of  Bourbon.  She  became  a  widow  on  the  4th  of
December  1456,  and  died  on  the  1st  of  December,  1476.

J  These  princesses  were,  1.  Catherine,  who  married  Adolphus  of
Egmont,  Duke  of  Guelders,  on  the  18th  of  December,  1463  ;  2.  Marga-
ret, who  married  Philip  II.,  Duke  of  Savoy,  on  the  6th  of  April,  1472.
The  third  was  probably  Isabella,  Countess  of  Charolois.  The  son  was
John,  Duke  of  Bourbon,  named  above.

§  Louis  de  Luxembourg,  Count  of  St.  Paul,  was  created  Constable  of
France  on  the  5th  of  October,  1465,  and  took  the  oaths  on  the  12th  of
the  same  month.  He  was  the  son  of  Pierre  de  Luxembourg,  Count  of
Couversan,  and  Margaret  de  Baux.  He  married,  1.  Jeanne  de  Bar,  on


JO  TIIE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES.

come  with  the  Marshal  of  Burgundy*  (who  was  of  the  house
of  Neufchatel)  to  wait  upon  the  Count  of  Charolois  at
Cambraj,  where  Duke  Philip  then  was,  the  count  assembled
the  council,  and  others  of  his  father's  chief  subjects,  in  the
palace  of  the  Bishop  of  Cambravf,  and  there  declared  all  the
members  of  the  house  of  Croy  mortal  enemies  both  to  his
father  and  himself  J,  though  the  Count  of  St.  Paul  had  long
before  married  one  of  his  daughters  to  a  son  §  of  the  Lord  of
Croy,  and  alleged  it  would  be  much  to  his  prejudice.  In
short,  the  whole  family  were  forced  to  fly  out  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  territories,  and  lost  great  part  of  their  estates.
These  proceedings  were  highly  displeasing  to  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  whose  chief  chamberlain  was  one  of  them,  called
afterwards  Lord  of  Chimay  || ;  a  young  gentleman  of  good
parts,  and  nephew  to  the  said  Lord  of  Croy.  This  gentleman,
for  the  security  of  his  person,  went  away  without  taking
leave  of  his  master,  otherwise  (as  he  was  informed)  he
would  have  been  made  prisoner,  or  killed.  *$  The  old  age  of

the  16th  of  July,  1435  ;  and  2.  Mary  of  Savoy,  on  the  1st  of  August,
1466.  He  was  beheaded  on  the  19th  of  December,  1475.

*  Thibault  IX.,  Lord  of  Neufchatel  and  Blamont,  and  Marshal  of
Burgundy,  was  the  son  of  Thibault,  Lord  of  Neufchatel,  and  Agnes  de
Montbeliard.  In  reward  for  Ms  services,  the  king  bestowed  the  town  of
Espinal  upon  hini  in  1463.  He  died  about  1470.

f  John,  Bastard  of  Burgundy,  Bishop  ofCambray  in  L440,  was  a  natu-
ral son  of  John,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  nnd  Agnes  deCroy.  He  died  in  1479.

J  The  manifesto  of  the  Count  of  Charolois  against  the  Lords  of  Croy
will  be  found  in  M.  Gachard's  Collection  de  Documents  Inedits,  voL  i.
p.  132.  It  is  dated  Brussels,  March  12th,  1464,  (0.  S.).

§  Philip  of  Croy,  son  of  Antony,  Lord  of  Croy,  and  Margaret  of  Lor-
raine, was  first  Hereditary  Chamberlain  of  Brabant.  Having  joined  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  created  him  a  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  his
estates  were  confiscated  by  Louis  XL  in  1476.  He  married  Jacqueline
de  Luxembourg,  daughter  of  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  in  1455  ;  and  he
died  in  1511.

||  Philip  of  Croy,  Count  of  Chimay,  Baron  of  Quievrain,  and  Knight
of  the  Golden  Fleece,  was  son  of  John  of  Croy,  Lord  of  La  Tour-sur-
Marne,  and  Mary  de  Lalain,  Lady  of  Quievrain.  He  married  Walpurge
de  Moeurs;  and  died  on  the  8th  of  September,  1482.  Du  Clercq  says,
"  He  was  reputed  to  be  a  very  wise  young  man,  and  a  great  historian."

^  According  to  Dn  Clercq,  he  threw  himself  at  the  duke's  feet,
"  thanking  him  for  the  favours  he  had  besto.ved  upon  him,  and  begging
him  to  think  with  favour  of  his  services ;  beseeching  him  to  give  him
leave  to  quit  his  court,  and  in  great  terror  telling  him  that  his  life  was  in
danger.  .  .  .  When  the  duke  had  heard  this,  he  was  greatly  troubled,


1464.]  CHAROLOIS TAKES THE FIELD.  11

Duke  Philip  forced  him  to  endure  this  patiently ;  but  the
true  reason  of  this  declaration  against  his  favourites,  was  the
restitution  of  the  towns  upon  the  River  Somme,  which  the
duke  had  restored  to  King  Louis  for  400,000  crowns,  and  the
Count  of  Charolois  charged  the  house  of  Croy  with  having
persuaded  him  to  do  it.

The  Count  of  Charolois  having  made  up  this  business,  and
reconciled  himself  to  his  father  as  well  as  he  could,  im-
mediately took  the  field  with  his  army,  being  attended  by
the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  as  chief  manager  of  his  affairs,  and
general  of  his  forces  under  him.  His  troops  consisted  of
about  300  men-at-arms,  and  4000  archers,  besides  a  large
number  of  good  knights  and  squires  from  Artois,  Hainault,
and  Flanders,  all  under  his  command,  by  the  appointment  of
the  Count  of  Charolois.  There  were  other  brigades  as  great
and  considerable,  under  the  command  of  the  Lord  of  Raves-
tain*,  brother  to  the  Duke  of  Cleves  f,  and  Lord  Anthony  J,
the  Bastard  of  Burgundy ;  besides  several  other  eminent
officers,  whose  names,  for  brevity  sake,  I  shall  omit.  But
above  all  the  rest,  there  were  two  officers  in  more  than  or-
dinary reputation  with  the  Count  of  Charolois.  One  of
them  was  called  the  Lord  of  Haultbourdin§,  an  old  soldier,

and  forbade  him  to  depart,  and  very  angrily  took  a  truncheon  or  spear
in  his  hand,  and  went  out  of  his  chamber,  saying  that  he  would  see
whether  his  son  would  kill  his  servants."

*  Adolphus  of  Cleves,  Lord  of  Ravcstain,  was  the  son  of  Adolphus,
Duke  of  Cleves,  and  Mary  of  Burgundy,  sister  of  Philip  the  Good.  lie
mairicil,  1.  Beatrice  of  Portugal;  and  2.  Anne  of  Burgundy,  bastard
daughter  of  Duke  Philip.  He  died  on  the  18th  of  September,  1493.

f  John  L,  Duke  of  Cleves,  was  born  on  the  10th  of  January,  1419  ;
married  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  John  of  Burgundy,  Count  of  Nevers  ;  and
died  on  the  5th  of  September,  1481.

J  Anthony,  Bastard  of  Burgundy,  surnamed  the  Great  Bastard,  Lord
of  Beures,  in  Flanders,  Count  of  La  Roche,  in  Ardennes,  and  knight  of
the  orders  of  the  Golden  Fleece  and  of  St.  Michael,  was  the  son  of  Philip
the  Good  and  Jeanne  de  Prelle.  He  was  legitimated  in  January,  1485.
He  died  in  1 504,  at  the  age  of  eighty-three.  He  was  for  some  time  first
chamberlain  to  his  half-brother,  Duke  Charles.

§  John,  surnamed  Hennequin,  Bastard  of  St.  Paul,  Lord  of  Haut-
Bourdin,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  councillor  and  chamberlain  of
Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  was  the  son  of  Walcran  de  Luxembourg,
Count  of  St.  Paul,  and  Agnes  de  Brie.  He  was  legitimated  on  the  19th
of  February,  1436  ;  and  he  died  on  the  28th  of  July,  1466,  at  about
sixty-six  years  of  age.  He  was  the  second  cousin,  and  not  the  brother
of  Louis,  Constable  of  St.  PauL


12  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMDsES.  [1464.

bastard  brother  to  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  and  trained  up  in
the  wars  between  France  and  England,  when  Henry  V.*
King  of  England,  reigned  in  France,  and  Duke  Philip  was
joined  with  him  as  his  confederate  and  ally.  The  other  was
the  Lord  of  Contayf,  much  about  the  age  of  the  first:  both
of  them  were  wise  and  valiant  commanders,  and  of  high  rank
in  the  army.  There  were  also  abundance  of  young  gentlemen,
and  among  them  one  more  particularly  famous,  who  was
called  Philip  de  LallainJ,  of  a  family  very  remarkable  for
their  courage  and  loyalty,  most  of  them  having  lost  their
lives  in  the  service  of  their  princes.  The  whole  army  con-
sisted of  about  1400  men-at-arms,  neither  well  armed  nor
well  exercised,  by  reason  of  the  long  peace  which  these
princes  had  enjoyed ;  for  since  the  treaty  of  Arras  they  had
had  little  or  no  wars ;  only  some  small  differences  with  the
citizens  of  Ghent,  which  lasted  not  long ;  so  that  (if  I  am
not  mistaken)  they  had  been  at  peace  for  more  than  thirty-
six  years.§  However,  the  men-at-arms  were  well  mounted,
and  well  attended ;  for  few  or  none  were  to  be  seen  without
five  or  six  lusty  horses  in  his  equipage.  The  archers  might
be  about  8000  or  9000 ;  out  of  whom,  at  the  general  muster,
they  selected  the  best ;  but  more  of  them  were  disbanded
than  retained.

The  subjects  of  the  house  of  Burgundy  were  at  that  time
very  wealthy,  by  reason  of  the  long  peace  they  had  enjoyed,
and  the  goodness  of  their  prince,  who  laid  but  few  taxes
upon  them  ;  so  that  in  my  judgment,  if  any  country  might
then  be  called  the  land  of  promise,  it  was  his  country,  which
enjoyed  great  wealth  and  repose;  more  than  ever  it  has

*  Henry  V.,  son  of  Henry  IV.  and  Mary  of  Hereford,  was  born  in
1388  ;  crowned  on  the  9th  of  April,  1413  ;  married  Catherine,  daughter
of  Charles  VL,  on  the  2nd  of  June,  1420  ;  and  died  at  Vincennes  on  the
31st  of  August,  1422.

f  William  le  Jeune,  Lord  of  Contay,  Governor  of  Arras,  was  the
son  pf  Robert  le  Jeune  and  Jeanne  de  Beauvoir,  Lady  of  Laignicourt.
He  married  Margaret  de  Sully  ;  and  died  in  1468.  He  was  a  councillor,
chamberlain,  and  chief  steward  of  Duke  Philip  the  Good.

£  Philip  de  Lallain,  knight,  chamberlain  of  Philip,  Duke  of  Burgundy,
was  the  son  of  William  de  Lallain  and  Jeanne  de  Crequi.  He  was  killed
in  the  battle  of  Montlhery,  on  the  16th  of  July,  1465.

§  As  the  treaty  of  Arras  was  concluded  on  the  21st  of  September,
1435,  peace  had  lasted  only  twenty-nine  years.


1465.]  CIIAROLOIS MARCHES TO  PARIS.  13

since  ;  and  it  is  now  probably  three  and  twenty  years  since
their  miseries  began.  The  expenses  and  dresses  both  of
women  and  men  were  great  and  extravagant :  and  their  enter-
tainments and  banquets  more  profuse  and  splendid  than  in
any  other  place  that  I  ever  saw.  Their  baths  and  other
amusements  with  women,  lavish  and  disorderly,  and  many
times  immodest:  I  speak  of  women  of  inferior  degree.  In
short,  the  subjects  of  that  house  were  then  of  opinion  that
no  prince  was  able  to  cope  with  them,  at  least  to  impoverish
them  :  and  now  in  the  whole  world  I  do  not  know  any  people
so  desolate  and  miserable  as  they  are :  and  I  question  not
but  the  sins  they  committed  in  their  prosperity  are,  in  some
measure,  the  occasion  of  their  present  adversity,  and  have
brought  down  this  heavy  judgment  upon  them;  especially
since  they  did  not  own  and  acknowledge  that  all  good  things
proceed  from  God,  who  distributes  and  disposes  of  them  ac-
cording to  his  pleasure.

The  Count  of  Charolois  having  got  his  army  in  readiness
as  it  were  in  an  instant,  and  being  furnished  with  all  things
necessary  for  a  campaign,  marched  forward  with  all  his
troops,  which  were  all  on  horseback,  except  those  who  were
attached  to  the  train  of  artillery,  which  was  large  and  fine
for  those  times,  and  accompanied  by  such  a  vast  number  of
waggons,  that,  with  his  own  only,  he  could  enclose  the
greatest  part  of  his  army.  At  first  he  marched  towards
Noyon,  and  besieged  a  small  castle  called  Nesle  (in  which
there  was  a  garrison),  and  took  it  in  a  few  days.*  Joachim,  a
Marshal  of  France  f,  having  drawn  what  forces  he  could  oat
of  the  garrison  of  Peronne,  observed  his  motions,  but  was  too
weak  to  attempt  anything  against  him ;  and,  therefore,  when
the  Count  of  Charolois  drew  near  Paris,  he  threw  himself  into
that  town.  The  Count  of  Charolois,  during  the  whole  of  the
march,  would  not  suffer  the  least  act  of  hostility  to  be  com-
mitted, but  made  his  soldiers  pay  wherever  they  came  ;  so  that
the  towns  upon  the  Somme,  and  all  the  others  by  which  he
marched,  received  his  troops,  in  small  bodies,  within  their

*  The  attack  began  on  the  7th  of  June,  1465.

f  Joachim  Ilouault,  Lord  of  Boismenart,  a  councillor  and  chamberlain
of  Louis  XL,  and  created  Marshal  of  France  in  1461,  was  the  son  of
John  de  Rouault  and  Jeanne  du  Bellay.  He  died  on  the  7th  of  August,
1478.


14  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  [1465.

wall?,  and  furnished  them  with  what  they  wanted  for  their
money ;  being  desirous  (as  it  seemed)  to  watch  whether  the
king  or  the  princes  would  be  master  of  the  field.  The  count
advanced  so  far,  that  he  came  to  St.  Denis*,  about  a  league
from  Paris,  where  all  the  lords  of  that  kingdom  had  promised
to  meet  him,  but  none  of  them  came.  The  Duke  of  Bretagne,
however,  sent,  as  his  ambassador  to  the  count,  the  Vice-
chancellor  of  Bretagne  f,  who  had  blanks  with  him  signed  by
his  master,  of  which  he  made  use  to  send  news  and  letters,
as  occasion  required.  He  was  by  birth  a  Norman,  a  wise
and  clever  man  ;  and  so  it  behoved  him  to  be,  for  many  mur-
mured against  him.  The  Count  of  Charolois  presented
himself  before  Paris|,  and  had  a  smart  skirmish  with  the
Parisians  at  their  very  gates,  which  was  much  to  their
disadvantage.  In  the  town  there  were  no  men-at-arms,  but
those  under  the  command  of  Marshal  Joachim,  and  the
squadron  of  the  Lord  of  Nantouillet  §,  who  was  afterwards
grand-master  of  the  household,  and  who  did  the  king  as  much
service  in  this  war  as  any  subject  who  ever  served  King  of
France  in  his  hour  of  need.  Yet  after  all  he  was  ill-requited  ;
but  it  was  more  the  malice  of  his  enemies,  than  the  king's  fault ;
though,  to  speak  impartially,  neither  of  them  was  altogether
excusable.  The  common  people  in  the  city  (as  I  have  since
been  informed)  were  in  so  great  a  consternation  that  day
that  they  cried  out,  "The  enemy  have  entered;"  but  without
any  grounds.  However,  the  Lord  Haultbourdin  (whom  I
mentioned  before,  and  who  had  formerly  lived  in  that  town,
when  it  was  nothing  near  so  strongly  fortified  as  it  is  now)
was  entirely  for  storming  it;  and  the  soldiers,  despising  the  citi-
zens, whom  they  had  beaten  up  to  their  very  gates,  were  also
eagerfor  it.  Yet,  probably,  after  all,  it  was  found  impracticable,
and  so  the  Count  of  Charolois  marched  back  to  St.  Denis.

*  On  Friday,  the  5th  of  July :  he  remained  there  until  the  10th.

f  John  de  Rouville,  doctor  of  laws,  Vice-chancellor  of  Bretagne,  was
the  son  of  Pierre  Gougeul,  Lord  of  Rouville,  and  Aldonce  de  Braque-
mont.  He  was  still  living  in  February,  1476.

J  On  the  8th  of  July.

§  Charles  de  Melun,  knight,  Lord  of  Nantouillet  and  Normanville,
anil  Grand  Master  of  France,  was  the  son  of  Philip  de  Melun  and  Jeanne
de  Nantouillet.  After  having  for  some  time  enjoyed  the  favour  of  King
Louis  XL,  he  fell  into  disgrace,  was  accused  of  treason,  and  beheaded  on
Saturday,  the  20th  of  August,  1468.


1465.  J  THE KING  EXTERS BOURBONNOIS.  15

The  next  day,  in  the  morning,  a  council  of  war  was  held,
in  which  it  was  debated  whether  or  no  they  should  march
forward  to  meet  the  Dukes  of  Berry*  and  Bretagne,  who
were  not  far  off,  as  the  Chancellor  of  Bretagne  affirmed,  and
pi-oduced  letters  to  that  effect;  but  the  truth  is,  he  had
written  them  upon  his  master's  blanks,  and  knew  nothing  of
them  besides.  The  decision  was,  that  they  should  pass  the
River  Seine  with  their  army.  The  greatest  part  of  the  officers
opposed  this  ;  and  were  of  opinion,  it  was  best  to  return
home,  since  the  rest  of  the  princes  had  not  been  punctual  to
their  day ;  saying,  it  was  enough  for  them  to  have  passed
the  Somme  and  the  Marne,  without  endeavouring  to  pass
the  Seine  too.  Some  even  began  to  start  great  difficulties
in  this  undertaking,  upon  the  account  of  not  having  any
places  behind  us  to  retreat  to  in  case  of  necessity ;  yet,  not-
withstanding all  this,  the  Count  of  Charolois  passed  the
river  with  his  whole  army,  and  posted  himself  at  Pont
Saint  Cloud,  which  made  the  whole  army  murmur  extremely
against  the  Count  of  St.  Paul  and  the  Vice-chancellor  of
Bretagne.

The  next  day  after  his  arrival,  news  was  brought  (from  a
certain  lady  of  that  kingdom,  written  with  her  own  hand)
that  the  king  was  come  out  of  the  county  of  Bourbon,  and
advancing  against  him  with  forced  marches.  But,  before  I
proceed,  it  will  be  necessary  to  say  something  of  the  occasion
of  the  king's  march  into  Bourbonnois.

The  king,  understanding  that  all  the  great  lords  of  his
kingdom  had  declared  against  him,  or  at  least  against  his
government,  resolved  first  of  all  to  invade  the  Duke  of
Bourbon's  dominions,  who  seemed  to  have  most  openly  de-
clared himself  against  him  ;  and  because  his  country  was  in
an  ill  posture  of  defence,  he  believed  he  might  easily  conquer
it.  Accordingly  he  made  himself  master  of  several  places,
and  would  have  entirely  subdued  the  whole  province,  had  he
not  been  prevented  by  succours  from  Burgundy  under  the

*  Charles  of  France,  Duke  of  Berry,  and  brother  of  Louis  XL,  was
born  on  the  28th  of  December,  1446.  He  died  Duke  of  Guienne,  most
probably  on  the  28th  of  May,  1472  :  having  made  his  will  on  the  24th.
He  had  taken  advantage  of  the  king's  absence  to  leave  Poitiers,  and  join
the  disaffected  nobles  in  Bretagne.


16  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1465.

command  of  the  Lord  of  Coulches*,  the  Marquis  of  Rottelinf,
the  Lord  of  Montagu  f,  and  others;  with  whom  there  was
also  in  arms  William  de  Rochefort  §,  Chancellor  of  France,
a  person  at  this  day  in  very  good  esteem.  These  forces
were  raised  in  Burgundy  by  the  Count  of  Beaujeu||  and  the
Cardinal  of  Bourbon  ^[  (who  was  brother  to  John,  Duke  of
Bourbon),  and  by  them  thrown  into  Moulins.  On  the  other
side  also,  reinforcements  were  sent  to  the  Duke  of  Bourbon,
by  the  Duke  of  Nemours**,  the  Count  of  Armagnacff,  and  the
Lord  of  AlbretJ|,  with  a  strong  party  of  men,  some  of  whom
were  very  good  soldiers,  who  had  deserted  the  king's  side,
and  had  retired  to  them ;  yet  the  greatest  number  of  them

*  Claude  de  Montagu,  Lord  of  Coulches,  councillor  and  chamberlain
of  Dukes  Philip  and  Charles  of  Burgundy,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,
was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Bussy  in  1470.

f  Philip,  Marquis  of  Hochberg,  Count  of  Neufchatel,  in  Switzerland,
Lord  of  Kottelin,  and  Marshal  of  Burgundy,  was  the  son  of  Rodolph  of
Hochberg,  and  Margaret,  the  daughter  of  William  de  Vienne,  Lord  of
Saint-George.  He  married  Maiy  of  Savoy  in  1480  ;  and  died  in  1503.

J  John  de  Neufchatel,  Lord  of  Montagu  and  Resnel,  councillor  and
chamberlain  of  the  King  of  France  and  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and
Knight  of  the  Golden  Fieece,  was  the  son  of  Thibault  VIII.,  Lord  of
Neufchatel,  and  Agnes  de  Montbeliard.  He  was  still  living  in  August,
1486.

§  William,  Lord  of  Rochefort  and  Pleuvant,  knight,  chamberlain  of
Philip  the  Good,  was  created  Chancellor  of  France  on  the  12th  of  May,
1483.  He  was  the  son  of  James,  Lord  of  Rochefort,  and  Agnes  de
Cleron.  He  died  on  the  12th  of  August,  1492.

||  Pierre  II.,  Duke  of  Bourbon  and  Auvergne,  Count  of  Clermont,  and
Lord  of  Beaujeu,  was  born  in  November,  1439.  He  was  the  son  of
Charles  L,  Duke  of  Bourbon,  and  Agnes  of  Burgundy.  He  was
betrothed  on  the  22nd  of  March,  1463,  to  Mary  of  Orleans ;  but  this
alliance  was  broken  off  by  Louis  XL .  who  gave  him  his  daughter  Anne
in  marriage.  He  married  her  in  1474 ;  and  died  on  the  8th  of  October,
1503.

^f  Charles  II.,  Duke  of  Bourbon,  brother  of  the  Count  of  Beaujeu,
Cardinal  of  the  Holy  See,  Archbishop  and  Count  of  Lyons.  He  died  on
the  13th  of  September,  1488.

**  Jacques  d'Armagnac,  Duke  of  Nemours,  Count  of  LaMarche,  son  of
Bernard  dArmagnac  and  Eleanor  of  Bourbon  ;  married  Louisa,  daughter
of  Charles  of  Anjou,  Count  of  Maine ;  beheaded  on  the  4th  of  August,
1477.

ft  John  V.,  Count  of  Armagnac,  son  of  John  IV.  and  Isabella  of
Navarre;  assassinated  on  the  5th  of  March,  1473.

JJ  Charles  H.,  Lord  of  Albret,  son  of  Charles  I.,  Lord  of  Albret,  and
Marj-  de  Sully ;  died  in  1471,  at  the  age  of  seventy.


1465.] CHAROLOIS'  ENCAMPMENT NEAll  MOXTLHEEY.  17

were  very  ill  provided,  and  having  no  pay,  they  were  forced
to  live  upon  free  quarters.  But  the  king,  for  all  their  great
numbers,  found  them  employment  enough ;  so  that  by  de-
grees they  came  to  a  treaty ;  especially  the  Duke  of  Nemours,
who  swore  fealty  to  the  king*,  and  engaged  to  continue  firm
and  loyal  to  his  cause  :  however,  he  afterwards  revolted,
which  was  the  occasion  (as  the  king  often  told  me)  of  the
displeasure  he  retained  against  him  so  long.  But  when  the
king  found  he  could  not  finish  the  war  in  the  Bourbonnois
so  soon  as  he  expected,  and  that  the  Count  of  Charolois  was
advancing  on  Paris,  apprehending  lest  the  Parisians  should
give  admission  to  him,  and  to  the  Dukes  of  Berry  and  Bre-
tagne  (who  were  marching  from  Brelagne,  and  all  of  them
pretending  the  good  of  the  kingdom),  and  fearing  likewise
that  if  the  Parisians  should  receive  them,  all  the  other  towns
would  do  the  like — he  resolved  by  great  marches  to  throw
himself  and  what  forces  he  had  with  him  into  Paris,  and  (if
possible)  hinder  the  conjunction  of  those  two  mighty  armies  ;
but  he  had  no  intention  of  fighting,  as  he  has  since  told  me
many  times  in  our  discourse  about  these  affairs.


CHAP.  III.

How  the  Count  of  Charolois  encamped  with  his  Army  near  Montlhery,  and
of  the  Battle  fought  in  that  place  between  him  and  the  King  of  France.—
1465.

As  I  said  before,  as  soon  as  the  Count  of  Charolois  was  in-
formed of  the  king's  departure,  that  he  had  left  Bourbonnois,
and  (as  he  at  least  supposed)  was  marching  directly  to  fight
him,  he  resolved  also  to  advance  forward  and  meet  the  king.
Then,  communicating  the  contents  of  the  letter  he  had  re-
ceived from  the  above-mentioned  lady  (still  concealing  her
name),  he  declared  his  resolution  of  venturing  a  battle,  and
encouraged  his  soldiers  to  behave  themselves  like  men.
Upon  this,  he  immediately  advanced  with  his  army,  and  took
\ip  his  quarters  at  Longjumeau,  a  village  not  far  from  Paris ;
but  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  with  the  whole  vanguard,  marched

»  This  oath,  dated  November  5.  1465,  is  quoted  by  Lenglet,  voL  ii.,
p.  561.

C


18  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1465.

forward  to  Montlhery,  which  is  about  two  leagues  beyond ;
from  whence  several  scouts  and  spies  were  immediately
sent  out,  to  discover  which  way  the  king  took,  and  to  give
notice  of  his  approach.  After  some  deliberation,  Longju-
meau  was  chosen  for  the  place  of  battle,  in  the  presence  of
the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  the  Lord  Haultbourdin,  and  the  Lord
of  Contay;  and  thither,  by  agreement  amongst  themselves,
the  Count  of  St.  Paul  was  to  retire,  upon  the  first  notice  of
the  king's  arrival.

Now  you  must  know,  that  the  Count  of  Maine*,  with  700
or  800  men-at-arms,  was  marching  against  the  Dukes  of
Berry  and  Bretagne,  who  had  in  their  army  several  wise
and  experienced  officers,  who  had  been  cashiered  by  king
Louis  at  his  first  accession  to  the  crown,  though  they  had
done  his  father  eminent  service  in  the  recovery  and  pacifica-
tion of  his  kingdom  ;  which  treatment  the  king  afterwards
acknowledged  to  be  an  error,  and  frequently  repented.
Among  others,  there  was  the  Count  of  Dunoisf,  a  person  con-
siderable in  all  things  ;  the  Marshal  de  Loheac  I,  the  Count  of
Dammartin  §,  the  Lord  of  Bueil  |,  and  many  others,  besides
fully  five  hundred  men-at-arms,  who,  having  deserted  his
majesty's  service,  had  retired  to  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  as
they  were  all  his  subjects,  born  in  his  country,  and  at  that
time  in  his  army.  The  Count  of  Maine,  who,  as  I  said
before,  was  marching  against  them,  finding  himself  too  weak
to  engage  them,  retired  before  them  as  they  advanced,  and

*  Charles  of  Anjou,  first  of  the  name,  Count  of  Maine,  son  of  Louis  IT.,
Duke  of  Anjou,  and  Yolande  of  Arragon.  He  was  born  on  the  14th
of  October.  1414,  and  died  on  the  10th  of  April,  1472.

f  John,  Bastard  of  Orleans,  Count  of  Dunois,  and  Grand  Chamberlain  of
Prance,  was  the  son  of  Louis  of  Orleans  and  Marietta  d'Enghien,  the  wife
of  Aubert  Le  Flamenc,  Lord  of  Cany.  He  died  on  the  24th  of  Nov.,  1468.

J  Andre  de  Laval,  Lord  of  Loheac,  Admiral  and  Marshal  of  1'rance,
died  in  1486,  at  the  age  of  seventy-five.

§  Antoine  de  Chabannes,  Count  of  Dammartin,  Lord  of  Saint-Fav-
geau,  and  grand-master  of  the  king's  household,  was  born  in  141 1.  He
was  the  son  of  Kobert  de  Chabannes,  and  Alix  de  Bort.  He  married,  by
contract  signed  on  the  20th  of  September,  1439,  Margaret  de  XanteuiJ,
Countess  of  Dammartin  ;  and  he  died  on  the  25th  of  December,  14SS.

||  John,  fifth  of  the  name,  Lord  of  Bueil,  Count  of  Sancerre,  knight,
councillor  and  chamberlain  of  the  king,  and  Admiral  of  France,  was'the
son  of  John,  Lord  of  Bueil,  and  Margaret  Dauphine,  Lady  of  Mennaude.
He  commanded  ninety-five  lances  in  1474.


1465.]  ARRIVAL OF THE COUNT OF MAINE.  19

retreated  towards  the  king  ;  whilst  the  Dukes  of  Berry  and
Bretagne  were  endeavouring  to  join  with  the  Burgundians.
Some  would  have  it,  that  the  Count  of  Maine  held  intelli-
gence with  them  ;  but  I  could  never  discover  this,  and
therefore  do  not  believe  it.*

The  Count  of  Charolois  being  posted,  as  I  said  before,  at
Lon.frjumeau,  and  his  van  at  Montlhery,  was  informed  by
a  prisoner  that  was  brought  to  him,  that  the  Count  of  Maine
had  joined  with  the  kingf,  who  had  then  in  his  army  all  the
standing  forces  in  the  kingdom,  amounting  to  about  2200
men-at-arms,  besides  the  arrier-ban  of  Dauphiny,  and  about
forty  or  fifty  gentlemen  of  Savoy,  all  very  good  soldiers.

In  the  meantime  the  king  hud  called  a  council  of  war,  at
which  the  Count  of  Maine,  Monsieur  de  Br^zeyJ,  the  Grand
Seneschal  of  Normandy,  the  Admiral  of  France  §,  who  was
of  the  house  of  Montauban,  and  several  other  officers,  as-
sisted :  and  in  conclusion,  whatever  had  been  said  either  for
or  against  it,  his  majesty  resolved  not  to  fight,  but  only  to
throw  himself  into  Paris,  without  coming  near  the  place
where  the  Burgundians  were  encamped ;  and  in  my  judg-

*  Oliver  de  la  Marehe,  M'ho  is  generally  well  informecl,  mentions  the
Count  of  Maine  among  the  princes  and  lords  who  were  in  league  with  the
Count  of  Charolois.

f  "  The  Count  of  Maine  was  with  the  king,  to  whom  he  brought  about
five  hundred  lances,  and  blamed  him  for  having  determined  to  fight ;  and
as  he  could  not  divert  the  king  from  his  purpose,  he  said  to  him, 'My  lord,
I  had  come  to  you  to  serve  you  and  accompany  you,  and  endeavour  to
effect  a  friendly  arrangement  between  you  and  your  cousin  of  Charolois,
and  the  other  princes  of  your  blood,  and  not  to  fight  against  them  ;  and
as  it  pleases  you  to  do  so,  and  not  otherwise,  I  shall  depart ;  so  farewell'
And  so  he  departed  with  all  his  company,  many  of  whom  murmured
greatly  against  him  ;  for  they  thought  he  should  have  taken  leave  earlier,
and  without  coming  so  far.  And  when  the  king  heard  that  he  had  really
departed,  and  abandoned  him  in  this  peril,  he  said  that  he  was  betrayed.
Nevertheless,  he  remained  unmoved,  and  kept  his  army  together  ;  and,
having  exhorted  his  men,  determined  to  fight  Charolois  before  the  arrival
of  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Berry,  and  the  Duke  of  Bretagne." — Htnnin,
p.  430.

%  Pierre  de  Breze,  Lord  of  Varenne,  Count  of  Maulevrier,  Grand
Seneschal  of  Anjou,  Poitou,  and  Normandy,  was  the  son  of  Pierre  de
Breze  and  Clemencc  Carbonnel.  He  married  Jeanne  Crespin,  and  was
killed  in  the  battle  of  Montlhery,  on  fhe  16th  of  July,  1465.

§  John,  Lord  of  Montauban  and  Romilly,  Marshal  of  Bretagne,  and
Admiral  of  France,  was  the  son  of  William  of  Moutaubau,  and  Boua
Visconti.  He  died  in  May,  1466.


20  TIIE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COM  JONES. [1465.

ment,  his  resolution  was  good.  He  had  no  great  confidence
in  the  Grand  Seneschal  of  Normandy,  and  therefore  asked
him  one  day  very  seriously,  whether  or  no  he  had  given
anything  in  writing  under  his  hand  and  seal  to  the  princes
who  were  confederate  against  him :  to  which  the  grand
seneschal  replied  that  he  had,  and  they  might  keep  it,  but
his  body  should  be  the  king's :  and  lie  said  this  jocularly,  as
his  custom  was  to  speak.  The  king  was  satisfied,  and  gave
him  the  command  of  his  vanguard,  and  the  charge  of  his
guides,  because,  as  is  said  before,  he  wished  to  avoid  a  battle.
But  the  seneschal  being  resolved  to  have  his  own  way,  pri-
vately told  some  of  his  confidants :  "  I  will  bring  the  armies
so  close  together  this  day,  that  he  must  be  a  very  experienced
general  who  will  part  them  without  fighting :  "  and,  indeed,
he  was  as  good  as  his  word,  and  the  first  men  killed  were
himself  and  his  troops.  This  expression  of  his  the  king
afterwards  told  me  himself;  for  at  that  time  I  was  in  the
service  of  the  Count  of  Charolois.

In  short,  on  the  27th  of  July,  1465*,  the  king's  vanguard
was  advanced  near  Montlhery,  where  the  Count  of  St.  Paul
was  posted,  who  immediately  informed  the  Count  of  Charo-
lois (who  was  encamped  at  Longjumeau,  about  two  leagues
off,  at  the  place  marked  out  for  the  field  of  battle)  of  their
arrival;  desiring  him  to  send  him  a  reinforcement  with  all
speed,  for  all  his  men-at-arms  and  archers  were  dismounted
and  on  foot,  and  so  encumbered  with  their  waggons,  that
they  could  not  possibly  retreat  to  Longjumeau,  according  to
the  orders  he  had  received,  without  seeming  to  run  away,
which  would  involve  the  whole  army  in  great  danger.
Upon  receiving  this  message,  the  Count  of  Charolois  imme-
diately sent  a  large  detachment  of  troops  under  the  command
of  the  Lord  Anthony,  Bastard  of  Burgundy,  to  reinforce  the
Count  of  St.  Paul  with  all  diligence  ;  and  was  himself  in  sus-
pense whether  he  should  follow  him  or  no;  but  at  length  he
marched  after  the  rest  of  the  army,  and  arrived  about  seven
in  the  morning.  Five  or  six  of  the  king's  standards  were,
however,  already  planted  along  the  side  of  a  great  ditch,
which  separated  the  two  armies.

There  was  still  in  the  host  of  the  Count  of  Charolois  the

, *  The  battle  of  Montlhery  was  fought  on  Tuesday,  the  16th  of  July,
see  the  Clironique  Scandalcuse,  and  Lenglet,  vol.  ii.  p.  27.


1465.]  BATTLE OF MOXTLIIERY.  21

Vice-chancellor  of  Bretagne,  called  Eouville,  and  with  him
nn  old  soldier,  called  Maderey*,  who  had  surrendered  Pont
Saint  Maxence  to  the  Burgundians.  These  two  were  in  no
little  fear,  in  respect  that  the  whole  army  murmured  against
them,  seeing  the  battle  was  ready  to  begin,  and  the  forces
they  had  so  much  boasted  of  were  not  yet  arrived  to  join
the  army.  "Whereupon,  before  the  fight  began,  they  both
betook  themselves  to  their  heels,  and  fled  that  way  by  which
they  presumed  they  would  find  the  Bretons.  The  Count  of
Charolois  found  the  Count  of  St.  Paul  on  foot,  and  his
troops  ranged  themselves  in  order  of  battle  as  they  marched
up;  and  we  found  all  the  archers  dismounted,  and  every  man
with  a  stake  planted  before  him  ;  several  pipes  of  wine  had
been  broached,  and  were  set  for  them  to  drink ;  and  from
the  little  I  saw,  never  men  had  more  desire  to  fight,  which.
I  took  to  be  a  good  omen,  and  which  comforted  me  ex-
tremely. Our  first  orders  were,  that  every  man  should
alight,  without  any  exception :  but  that  was  countermanded
afterwards,  and  nearly  all  the  men-at-arms  mounted  again.
However,  several  good  knights  and  squires  were  ordered  to
remain  on  foot ;  and  among  the  rest,  the  Lord  des  Cordesf
and  his  brother.^  The  Lord  Philip  de  Lalain  was  likewise
on  foot  (for  at  that  time,  among  the  Burgundians,  it
was  most  honourable  to  fight  in  that  manner  among  the
archers),  and  there  was  always  a  large  number  of  these
volunteers  among  them,  to  encourage  the  infantry,  and  make
them  fight  the  better ;  which  custom  they  had  learnt  from
the  English,  when  Duke  Philip  made  war  upon  France,
during  his  youth,  for  two-and-thirty  years  together  without

*  The  Chronique  Scandaleuse  names  him  Madre,  and  says  that  he  was
captain  of  Pont  Saint  Maxence,  "  for  Master  Pierre  L'Orfevre,  Lord  of
Ermenonville."

f  Philip  of  Creveccenr,  Lord  des  Cordcs  or  Desquerdes,  Governor  of
Artois  and  Picardy,  and  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  passed  over  to  the
service  of  Louis  XI.  after  the  death  of  Charles  the  Rash,  and  was  named
Marshal  and  Grand  Chamberlain  of  France.  He  was  the  son  of  James
of  Crevecceur,  and  Margaret  de  la  Tremoille,  Lady  of  Desquerdes.  He
died  on  the  22nd  of  April,  1494,  at  the  age  of  seventy-six.

J  Antony,  Lord  of  Crevecoeur  and  Thiennes,  councillor  and  chamber-
lain of  Duke  Philip  the  Good,  Kr.ight  of  the  order  of  St.  Michael,  coun-
cillor and  chamberlain  of  Louis  XL,  and  Grand  Louvetier  of  France,
was  the  son  of  James  de  Crevecceur  and  Bonne  de  la  Viefville.  He  died
about  1493.

C  3


22  THE MEMOIRS OP  PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

any  truce.  But  the  greatest  part  of  the  burden  of  the  war
lay  upon  the  English,  who  were  powerful  and  rich,  and
governed  at  that  time  by  that  wise,  graceful,  and  valiant
prince,  King  Henry  V.,  who  had  many  wise  and  brave  men
under  him,  and  very  great  commanders,  such  as  the  Earl  of
Salisbury*,  Talbotf,  and  others  whom  I  pass  by,  as  being
before  my  time,  though  I  have  seen  some  few  of  them  who
survived ;  for  when  God  was,  as  it  were,  weary  of  doing
them  good,  that  wise  king  died  at  the  Bnisde  Vincennes,  and
his  son  +,  a  weak  prince,  was  crowned  King  of  France  and
England  at  Paris :  after  which  factions  began  to  stir,  and
civil  wars  arose  in  England,  which  have  almost  lasted  till
this  present  time,  by  reason  of  the  usurpation  of  the  crown
by  the  house  of  York.§  But  whether  their  title  was  good  or
not,  I  cannot  determine,  for  the  disposal  of  those  things  is
from  heaven.

But  to  return  to  my  subject.  The  dismounting  and
mounting  again  of  the  Burgundrans  took  up  a  great  deal  of
time,  and  occasioned  the  loss  of  abundance  of  men  ;  and  by
this  means,  that  valiant  gentleman,  Philip  de  Lalain,  was
slain,  being  but  slightly  armed.  The  king's  troops  defiled
through  the  forest  of  Torfou,  and  were  not,  at  their  first  ap-
pearance, above  four  hundred  men-at-arms ;  so  that,  if  they
had  been  charged  at  once,  in  all  probability  there  had  been
but  little  or  no  resistance ;  because,  as  I  have  said,  they  were

*  Thomas  Montague,  Earl  of  Salisbury,  -was  the  son  of  John  Mon-
tague, and  Maude,  the  daughter  of  Sir  Adam  Francis.  He  married
Eleanor,  daughter  of  Thomas,  Earl  of  Kent ;  and  was  killed  at  the  siege
of  Orleans,  on  the  3rd  of  November,  1428.  In  his  will  he  assumes  the
titles  of  Earl  of  Salisbury  and  Perch,  and  Lord  Monthermer.

•f  John  Talbot,  Earl  of  Shrewsbury  and  Weysford,  was  the  son  of
Richard  Talbot,  and  Ankaret,  daughter  of  John  Strange,  of  Blackmere.
He  married,  1.  Maude,  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Neville,  knight ;  and  2.
Margaret,  daughter  of  Richard  Beauchamp,  Earl  of  Warwick.  He  was
killed  at  the  siege  of  Chatillon,  on  the  20th  of  July,  1453.

J  Henry  VI.,  son  of  Henry  V.  and  Catherine  of  France,  was  born  on
the  6th  of  December,  1421  ;  crowned  at  London  on  the  6th  of  November,
1429  ;  and  consecrated  King  of  France,  at  Paris,  on  the  17th  of  December,
1431.  He  married  Margaret  of  Anjou  in  November,  1444  ;  and  died  on.
the  23rd  of  May,  1471.

§  Edward  IV  ,  Earl  of  March,  was  the  son  of  Richard,  Duke  of  York  ;
he  dispossessed  Henry  VI.  of  the  throne,  on  the  ground  of  being  de-
scended from  an  elder  sou  t>f  Edward  III.


1465.]  BATTLE OF MOXTLHERY.  23

forced  to  march  one  abreast;  but  their  numbers  still  in-
creasing, the  Lord  of  Contay,  who  was  an  experienced  officer,
rode  up  to  the  Count  of  Charolois,  and  told  him,  that  if  he
had  a  mind  to  win  the  battle,  it  was  high  time  to  charge  the
enemy;  giving  his  reasons  for  it,  and  telling  him,  that  if
he  had  attacked  them  sooner,  he  would  have  routed  them
already,  for  then  they  were  but  few,  but  now  they  increased
visibly  ;  and  indeed,  this  was  true.  Upon  which  the  whole
order  and  disposition  of  the  battle  was  altered,  every  man
throwing  in  his  advice ;  whilst,  in  the  meantime,  a  great
and  smart  skirmish  was  begun  at  the  end  of  the  village  of
Montlhery,  between  the  archers  on  both  sides.

The  king's  troops,  consisting  of  all  the  archers  of  his
guard  glittering  in  their  liveries,  and  very  well  disciplined,
were  commanded  by  Poncet  de  Riviere* ;  those  of  the
count's  party,  being  volunteers,  were  in  no  regular  order,  and
under  no  command.  However,  in  this  manner  they  began
the  engagement,  in  which  the  Lord  Philip  de  Lalain,  and
James  du  Mas  f  (an  excellent  officer,  afterwards  master  of
the  horse  to  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy),  fought  on  foot
among  the  archers.  The  Burgundians,  who  were  superior
in  numbers,  possessed  themselves  of  a  house,  and  unhinging
two  or  three  of  the  doors,  made  use  of  them,  instead  of
shields ;  after  which  they  advanced  into  the  street,  and  set
fire  to  one  of  the  houses.  The  wind  did  them  service,  driving
the  fire  upon  the  king's  forces,  who  began  to  give  ground,
retire  to  their  horses,  and  fly.  Upon  which  the  noise  and
shouting  was  so  great,  that  the  Count  of  Charolois  marched
forward,  and  abandoned  the  whole  order  which  he  had  first
adopted.

By  the  count's  first  orders,  his  troops  were  to  halt  twice
by  the  way,  because  of  the  great  distance  between  the  van-
guard and  the  main  battle.  The  king's  forces  were  drawn
up  towards  the  castle  of  Montlhery,  with  a  large  hedge  and
ditch  in  their  front ;  and  besides,  the  fields  that  lay  behind

*  He  was  then  the  captain  of  a  hundred  lances,  of  which  office  he
was  deprived  by  the  king  soon  after,  and  in  exchange  for  which  he
received  the  title  of  Bailiff  of  Montferrant.  He  subsequently  left  the
service  of  Louis  XL,  and  entered  that  of  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  who
appointed  him  one  of  his  councillors  and  chamberlains.

f  He  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Morat,  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1476.
c  4


24  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [146o.

them  were  full  of  corn  and  beans,  and  such  kind  of  grain,
the  soil  being  very  rich  and  good.  All  the  count's  archers
marched  on  foot  before  him  in  very  ill  order ;  though  I  am
of  opinion,  that  the  chiefest  strength  of  an  army  in  the  day
of  battle  consists  in  the  archers  ;  but  they  must  be  strong
and  very  numerous,  for  few  are  of  no  avail.  I  would  have
them  also  but  indifferently  mounted,  that  they  may  not  be
afraid  of  losing  their  horses,  or  rather  that  they  had  none
at  all ;  and  for  one  day  it  is  better  to  have  raw  soldiers  that
have  never  been  in  any  action,  than  those  that  have  been
trained  up  in  the  wars  ;  and  in  this  I  am  of  the  same  opinion
with  the  English,  who,  without  dispute,  are  the  best  archers
in  the  world.  It  was  said,  that  orders  had  been  given  that
the  army  should  halt  twice  by  the  way,  to  give  the  infantry
time  to  breathe,  because  it  was  a  great  distance  which  they
had  to  march,  and  the  stiffness  and  stubbornness  of  the  corn
hindered  their  progress  extremely.  However,  all  things
were  done  as  perfectly  contrary,  as  if  they  designed  to  lose
the  battle  on  purpose  ;  whereby  God  did  plainly  manifest  to
all  the  world,  that  all  battles  are  in  his  hands,  and  that  he
disposes  of  victory  as  he  pleases.  And  indeed  I  cannot  be
persuaded,  that  the  abilities  of  any  one  man  are  sufficient  to
manage  and  command  so  great  a  number,  nor  that  things
can  be  executed  in  the  field  in  the  same  manner  as  they  have
been  concerted  in  the  council ;  and  I  am  of  opinion,  that
any  man  possessed  of  natural  reason,  who  is  so  arrogant  as
to  think  himself  able  to  effect  this,  assumes  much  of  the
honour  that  is  due  only  to  God.  For  though  every  man  is
obliged  to  perform  his  duty,  and  to  endeavour  to  do  what
lies  in  his  power,  yet  at  the  same  time  he  ought  to  acknow-
ledge, that  war  is  one  of  God's  means  of  accomplishing  his  will
which  he  often  begins  upon  small  and  trivial  occasions,  and
gives  the  victory  sometimes  to  one  and  sometimes  to  another;
and  this  is  a  mystery  so  great,  that  from  it  all  the  kingdoms
and  governments  of  the  world  do  take  their  rise  and  increase
as  well  as  their  end  and  dissolution.

But  to  return  from  this  digression  ;  the  Count  of  Charolois
advanced,  without  giving  any  breath  either  to  his  archers
or  foot  soldiers.  The  king's  troops  (being  all  men-at-arms)
marched  out  at  both  ends  of  the  hedge,  and  when  they  came
near  enough  to  make  use  of  their  lances>  the  Burgundian


1465.J  BATTLE OF 3IONTLIIERY.  25

men-at-arms  broke  through  the  ranks  of  their  own  archers
(who  were  the  flower  and  hope  of  their  army),  without
giving  them  leisure  to  discharge  one  arrow.  The  whole
number  of  our  horse  was,  I  believe,  not  above  1200,  and  of
them  scarce  fifty  understood  how  to  lay  a  lance  in  rest ;  there
were  not  400  of  them  armed  with  cuirasses,  and  very  few  of
their  servants  had  any  arms  at  all  ;  and  the  reason  of  it  was,
because  of  the  long  peace,  and  because,  for  the  ease  of  their
subjects,  the  house  of  Burgundy  had  not  been  used  to  keep
any  standing  forces  in  pay  :  but  since  that  time  that  country
has  not  enjoyed  any  repose,  but  is  rather  grown  worse  than
better  at  this  very  day.  However,  though  the  strength  and
flower  of  their  army  was  thus  broken  and  thrown  into
disorder  by  themselves,  God  (who  disposes  of  these  mys-
teries as  he  pleases)  ordered  things  so,  that  on  the  right
wing  towards  the  castle,  where  the  Count  of  Charolois  com-
manded, victory  declared  on  his  side  without  any  considerable
opposition.  It  was  my  fortune  to  be  with  him  all  that  day,
during  the  whole  action,  in  less  fear  than  in  any  engagement
I  have  ever  been  in  since,  which  I  impute  to  my  youth,  as
not  having  a  just  sense  and  apprehension  of  the  danger,  but
I  rather  wondered  at  the  presumption  of  any  man  that  durst
venture  to  oppose  the  prince  I  served,  whom  I  believed  to  be,
without  comparison,  the  greatest  monarch  in  the  world.
Such  vain  notions  inexperienced  people  frame  to  themselves  ;
whence  it  arises  that  they  often  maintain  strange  and  ir-
rational arguments,  without  any  ground  or  foundation  at  all ;
for  which  reason  it  is  good  to  make  use  of  the  advice  of  him
who  says,  that  "  A  man  never  repents  of  speaking  little,  but
often  of  speaking  too  much."

The  left  wing  was  commanded  by  the  Lord  Ravestain,
the  Lord  Jacques  de  St.  Paul*,  and  several  other  men  of
quality,  who  plainly  perceived  that  their  body  of  men-at-
arms  was  too  weak  to  encounter  the  enemy  ;  but  they  were
too  near  to  alter  the  order  of  battle.  To  be  short,  this  wing
was  entirely  broken,  and  driven,  some  of  them  to  their
•waggons ;  but  the  greatest  part  of  them  made  towards  a
forest,  which  was  nearly  half  a  league  from  the  field  of

*  James  of  Luxembourg,  Lord  of  Richebourg,  councillor  and  chamber-
lain of  the  King  of  France,  and  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece.  He  was
brother  of  the  Constable  of  St.  Paul.  He  died  on  the  20th  of  Aug.,  1487.


26  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1465.

battle.  At  their  waggons  some  of  the  Burgundian  infantry
rallied  and  stood  to  their  arms.  The  chief  of  those  who
pursued  us,  were  the  nobles  of  Dauphiny  and  Savoy,  with  a
great  party  of  men-at-arms,  who  verily  believed  they  had
won  the  victory ;  and  not  without  reason,  for  the  Burgun-
dians  on  that  wing,  among  whom  were  several  persons  of
note  and  distinction*,  fled  in  great  numbers ;  and  most  of
them  fled  upon  the  spur  towards  Pont  St.  Maxence,  which
they  supposed  still  held  out  for  the  Count  of  Charolois.
However,  a  good  number  still  maintained  their  ground  in  the
forest,  amongst  whom  was  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  who  had
retreated  thither  with  a  good  body  of  forces ;  for  he  was
pretty  near  to  the  forest,  and  he  plainly  showed  afterwards
that  he  did  not  think  the  battle  utterly  lost.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  imminent  Danger  to  which  the  Count  of  Charolois  was  exposed,  and
the  manner  of  his  being  rescued.  — 1465.

THE  Count  of  Charolois  pursued  the  enemy  on  the  side
where  he  commanded,  about  half  a  league  beyond  Montlhery,
and  with  a  very  small  body  of  forces  ;  for  though  the  enemy
were  numerous,  yet  they  made  no  resistance,  and  therefore
he  concluded  the  victory  was  his  own ;  but  it  was  not  long
before  one  Monsieur  Anthony  le  Breton,  an  ancient  gentle-
man of  Luxembourg,  came  up  to  him  and  told  him  the
French  had  rallied  their  forces  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  if
he  followed  the  pursuit  any  further  he  would  certainly  be
lost ;  yet,  though  he  repeated  his  opinion  over  and  over,  the
count  would  not  stop  for  him  ;  but  presently  the  Lord  of
Contay  (whom  I  have  mentioned  before)  came  in  also,
brought  him  the  same  intelligence  as  the  old  gentleman  had
done,  and  delivered  it  with  such  eagerness,  that  he  began  to
hearken  to  his  counsel,  and  quickly  faced  about ;  and  it  was
well  he  did  ;  for  had  he  advanced  but  two  bow-shots
further,  in  my  judgment  he  had  been  taken  prisoner,  as

*  Among  them  were  the  Lords  of  Happlaincourt,  Ameries,  Inchy,  and
Eobodenghes  ;  the  last  of  whom  returned  on  learning  that  Charles  had
gained  the  victory.


1465.] DANGER  OP  THE  COUNT  OP  CHAROLOIS. 27

several  were  that  had  got  before  him.  In  his  return,  near
the  village  of  Montlhery,  he  discovered  a  flying  body  of
foot,  whom  he  pursued  (though  he  had  scarce  a  hundred
horse  with  him);  and  of  that  whole  brigade,  but  one  single
footman  made  any  opposition,  who  gave  the  count  such  a
blow  on  the  stomach  with  a  spear,  that  the  mark  of  it  was
to  be  seen  at  night.  Most  of  the  rest  saved  themselves  in
the  gardens,  but  he  who  struck  the  count  was  killed  upon
the  spot.  As  we  marched  by  the  castle,  we  discovered  the
archers  of  the  king's  guard  drawn  up  before  the  gate,  who
did  not  stir  upon  our  coming  up  to  them,  at  which  the  count
was  extremely  surprised;  as  he  imagined  there  was  not  a
man  left  to  oppose  him.  As  he  wheeled  about  to  march  into
the  field  (part  of  his  men  had  already  become  separated
from  him),  he  was  so  furiously  attacked  on  a  sudden  by
about  fifteen  or  sixteen  men-at-arms,  that  at  the  very  first
charge  they  slew  Philip  D'Oignies  *,  his  esquire-carver,  who
bore  his  guidon.  The  Count  of  Charolois  himself  was  in
imminent  danger  f  in  this  encounter,  and  received  several
wounds,  but  especially  one  in  the  neck  with  a  sword  (the
mark  of  which  remained  to  his  dying  day),  for  want  of  his
beaver,  which,  being  slightly  fastened  on  in  the  morning,
dropped  from  his  head  in  the  battle,  and  I  myself  saw  it  fall.
The  enemy  immediately  laid  hands  on  him,  crying  out,
"My  lord,  surrender  yourself;  we  know  you  well;  do  not
obstinately  throw  away  your  life."  However,  he  still  made
a  gallant  defence,  and  at  that  very  instant  one  John
Cadet  |,  a  physician's  son  of  Paris,  who  was  in  his  service  (a
tall,  stout,  lusty  person),  mounted  on  a  horse  as  large  as
himself,  broke  in,  and  parted  them  by  riding  between  them  ;
upon  which  the  French  party  wheeled,  and  marched  off  to

*  Philip  D'Oignies,  Lord  of  Bruay  and  Chaulnes,  son  of  Antony,  Lord
of  Bruay,  and  Jeanne  de  Brimcu,  Lady  of  Chaulnes.  He  was  Bailiff  of
Courtray ;  and  married  Antoinette  de  Beaufort.

f  "  The  Count  of  Charolois,"  says  the  Chronique  Scandaleuse,  "  was  so
hotly  pursued  that  he  was  twice  taken  prisoner  by  Geoffrey  de  Saint-Belin
and  Gilbert  de  Grassay,  and  afterwards  rescued  again."  See  Lengiet,
vol.  ii.  p.  28.

J  Oliver  de  la  Marche  names  him  Robert  Cotereau,  and  adds  that
"  the  Count  immediately  dubbed  the  said  Master  Robert  Cotereau  a
knight,  and  bestowed  on  him  the  office  of  lieutenant  of  the  fiefs  in  Bra-
Laut."  La  Marche,  vol.  ii.  p.  237.


28  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1465.

the  ditch,  where  they  had  been  drawn  up  in  the  morning ;
for  they  were  afraid  of  another  party  which  they  perceived
advancing  towards  them.  The  count,  covered  with  blood,
marched  out  to  them  into  the  field.  They  were  the  colours
of  the  Bastard  of  Burgundy,  which  were  so  torn  when  they
came,  there  was  scarce  a  foot  of  them  left ;  and  under  the
banner  of  the  count's  archers,  there  were  not  above  forty
left  in  all,  to  whom  we  joined  ourselves  (being  about  thirty)
in  no  little  fear.  The  Count  of  Charolois  changed  his  horse
immediately,  and  had  another  given  him  which  belonged  to
Simon  de  Quingy  *,  who  was  at  that  time  his  page,  but  has
since  been  very  well  known.  The  count,  as  I  said  before,
drew  out  into  the  field  to  rally  his  men,  but  for  the  half
hour  we  stayed  there,  we  thought  of  nothing  but  running
away,  provided  we  had  seen  a  hundred  of  the  enemy
advancing  to  attack  us.  There  came  to  us  about  ten  or
twenty  men,  both  horse  and  foot.  Most  of  our  infantry
were  either  wounded  or  extremely  fatigued  with  the  battle
and  their  long  march  in  the  morning;  and  for  an  hour  together
our  whole  body  did  not  exceed  a  hundred,  but  by  degrees
it  increased.  The  corn  was  very  high  and  thick,  and  the
dust  was  most  terrible;  the  whole  field  was  scattered  with
dead  horses  and  men,  yet  none  of  the  dead  men  could  be
recognised  on  account  of  the  dust.

Immediately  afterwards,  we  discovered  the  Count  of  St.
Paul  marching  out  of  the  forest,  at  the  head  of  about  forty
men-at-arms,  under  his  own  colours,  and  advancing  directly
towards  us,  still  increasing  in  numbers  as  he  moved  on  ;  but
they  still  seemed  very  far  from  us.  We  sent  to  him  three
or  four  times  to  pray  him  to  hasten  his  march ;  but  he  kept
his  own  pace,  marching  on  very  slowly  and  in  good  order,
and  causing  his  men  to  gather  up  the  lances  that  lay  scattered
on  the  ground,  which  sight  greatly  rejoiced  and  animated  our
troops.  With  him  a  great  number  rallied  again,  and  at  last
came  and  joined  us,  so  that  we  found  ourselves  to  be  a  com-
plete body  of  about  eight  hundred  men-at-arms  ;  but  we

*  Simon  de  Quingy  was,  in  1471,  cup-bearer,  and  in  1472  gentleman
of  the  bedchamber,  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  Molinet  speaks  of  him
as  "Lord  of  Montbaillon."  According  to  Commines,  he  became  Bailiff
of  Troyes  ;  and  perhaps  it  is  he  who  figures,  with  the  title  of  "  knight  of
the  court  of  Parliament,"  among  the  plenipotentiaries  sent  to  Saint- Jean-de
Lone,  in  the  year  1515,  by  the  Archduchess  Philiberte  of  Luxembourg.


14G5.]  RETREAT OF THE KING.  29

had  few  or  no  foot,  which  prevented  the  count  from  gaining
a  complete  victory,  for  there  was  a  ditch  and  a  thick  hedge
between  the  two  armies.

On  the  king's  side  there  fled  the  Count  of  Maine  with
several  other  persons  of  quality  *,  and  not  fewer  than
eight  hundred  men-at-arms.  Some  will  have  it,  that  the
Count  of  Maine  held  correspondence  with  the  Burgundians;
but  to  speak  truth,  I  think  there  was  no  such  thing.  Never
was  there  a  greater  rout  on  both  sides ;  but  (which  is
remarkable)  the  two  princes  themselves  kept  the  field.  On
the  king's  side  there  was  a  person  of  note  who  fled  as  far  as
Lusignan  without  stopping,  and  on  the  count's  there  was
another  ran  as  far  as  Quesnoy-le-Comte  ;  which  two  gentle-
men certainly  had  no  intention  or  desire  to  encounter  one
another.

While  both  armies  stood  thus  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle
facing  one  another,  the  cannon  began  to  play  on  both  sides,
which  killed  abundance  of  men,  but  neither  party  desired  to
venture  a  second  engagement.  Our  army  was  more
numerous  than  the  king's :  yet  so  powerful  was  his  royal
presence,  and  so  efficacious  the  obliging  language  he  used  to
his  soldiers,  that  I  verily  believe  had  it  not  been  for  him,
they  would  certainly  have  all  fled ;  as  indeed  I  have  since
learned  was  the  case.  Some  few  there  were  on  our  side
who  were  for  fighting  again,  and  particularly  the  Lord
Haultbourdin,  who  affirmed  he  saw  the  enemy  filing  off,  and
preparing  to  run :  and  doubtless  had  we  had  but  a  hundred
archers  to  have  shot  through  the  hedge,  the  victory  had
been  entirely  ours.

Whilst  both  armies  were  in  this  posture  and  suspense,
•without  offering  to  engage,  the  night  came  upon  us,  and  the
king  retired  to  Corbeilf,  though  we  supposed  he  had  en-
camped in  the  field.  A  barrel  of  their  powder  was  acci-
dentally blown  up  where  the  king  had  been,  which  set  fire
to  several  waggons  that  were  placed  along  the  hedge ;  and

*  In  addition  to  the  Count  of  Maine,  the  Chronique  Scandaleitse
mentions  "  the  Admiral  de  Montauban,  the  Lord  of  La  Barbe,  and  other
en- <tains,  who  had  fully  seven  or  eight  hundred  lances."  See  Lenglet,
vol.  ii.  p.  28.

f  The  king  arrived  at  Corbeil,  "  on  the  day  of  the  battle,  at  about
eleven  o'clock  at  night ;  and  sojourned  in  that  place  until  the  18th  of
July."  Du  Clercq,  vol.  xv.  p.  26.


30  THE 1IEJIOIKS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1465.

we  imagined  the  blaze  to  be  fires  in  their  quarters.  The
Count  of  St.  Paul,  who  seemed  to  be  a  great  man  among  us,
and  the  Lord  Haultbourdin,  who  was  a  greater,  commanded
our  carriages  to  be  brought  to  us  where  we  lay,  and  our
whole  body  to  be  enclosed  with  them,  which  was  presently
done.  As  we  stood  thus  rallied,  and  drawn  up  in  order  of
battle,  several  of  the  king's  soldiers,  who  had  been  follow-
ing the  pursuit,  returned,  believing  the  victory  was  their
own ;  and  being  obliged  to  pass  through  our  camp,  were
slain,  and  very  few  of  them  escaped.  The  men  of  note  that
fell  on  the  king's  side  were  the  Lord  Geoffroy  de  St.  Belin*,
the  Grand  Seneschal  of  Normandy,  and  one  Flocquet,  a
captain. f  On  the  Burgundian  side  there  was  slain  Philip
de  Lalain.  Of  infantry  and  common  soldiers  we  lost  more
than  the  king :  but  of  horsemen  the  greatest  loss  was  on  the
king's  side.  The  king's  forces  took  most  of  those  who  fled
prisoners.  On  both  sides  there  were  at  least  two  thousand
men  slain ;  however,  the  battle  was  well  fought,  for  both
sides  had  brave  men,  and  both  were  thoroughly  tired  of  it.
But  in  my  opinion,  it  was  an  extraordinary  action  to  rally
in  the  field,  and  to  face  one  another  for  tliree  or  four  hours
together;  and  certainly  both  princes  had  great  reason  highly
to  esteem  those  subjects  that  stood  so  firmly  by  them  in
this  pinch :  but  in  short  they  acted  like  men,  and  not  like
angels.  One  man  lost  his  places  and  estates  for  running
away,  and  they  were  given  to  others,  who  had  fled  ten
leagues  beyond  him.  One  of  our  great  men  lost  his  employ-
ment, and  was  banished  his  master's  presence,  yet  in  a
month's  time  he  was  restored  again,  and  in  greater  authority
than  ever.

\\  hen  we  had  thus  surrounded  ourselves  with  our  wag-
gons, every  man  reposed  as  well  as  he  could :  we  had  a
great  number  of  wounded  men,  and  most  of  us  were  much
dispirited  and  alarmed,  fearing  lest  the  Parisians,  under  the

*  Geoffroy  de  Saint-Bclin,  knight,  Baron  of  Saxefontaine,  was  the  son
of  Pierre  de  Saint-Belin,  Lord  of  Biaisy,  and  Simonne  de  Xogent.  He
married  Margaret  de  Baudricourt  ;  and  is  mentioned,  with  the  title  of
BaiJiff  of  Chaumont,  as  one  of  the  chamberlains  of  the  King  of  France,  in
the  years  1463  and  1464.

f  Robert  de  Flocques.  or  Flocqiiet,  son  of  Robert  and  brother  of
James,  both  of  them  Bailiffs  of  Evreux.  He  also  filled  that  office  ;  and
was  buried  in  the  Abbey  of  St.  Catherine-du-Mont,  at  Rouen.


1465.]  PLANS OF THE BUEGCNDIANS.  31

command  of  Marshal  Joachim  (who  was  the  king's  lieu-
tenant in  that  city),  should  sally  out  upon  us  with  two  hundred
men-at-arms,  who  were  there  in  garrison;  and  we  should  be
attacked  on  both  sides.  As  soon  as  it  was  quite  dark,  fifty
lances  were  commanded  out,  to  get  intelligence  where  the
king  was  quartered  ;  of  which  number  about  twenty  only
went  forth.  The  place  where  we  believed  the  king  lay,  was
not  above  three  bow-shots  from  our  camp.  In  the  meantime,
the  Count  of  Charolois  ate  and  drank  a  little,  and  all  the
rest  of  the  army  did  the  same ;  after  which  the  wound  in  his
neck  was  carefully  dressed.  To  make  room  for  him,  before  he
could  sit  down  to  eat,  four  or  five  dead  bodies  had  to  be
removed,  and  two  trusses  of  straw  were  brought  for  him  to
sit  on.  As  we  were  removing  the  dead  men,  one  of  the
poor  stark  naked  creatures  called  out  for  some  drink,  and
on  putting  a  little  of  the  ptisan  (of  which  the  count  had
drank)  into  his  mouth,  he  came  to  himself,  and  proved  to
be  one  Pierre  Savarot,  an  archer  of  the  count's  guard,  and
a  very  brave  fellow ;  upon  which  his  wounds  were  dressed,
and  he  was  cured.

It  was  then  debated  in  council  what  measures  were  best
to  be  taken.  The  Count  of  St.  Paul,  who  was  the  first  that
gave  his  opinion,  said,  that  we  were  posted  in  a  very  dan-
gerous place,  and  advised  that  we  should  retreat  towards
Burgundy  by  break  of  day  ;  that  we  should  burn  part  of  our
waggons,  preserving  only  such  as  belonged  to  the  artillery;
and  that  no  man  should  carry  off  his  waggon  unless  he  had
above  ten  lances  under  his  command ;  and  that  it  was  im-
possible for  us  to  remain  without  provisions  in  the  camp  we
were  in,  between  Paris  and  the  king's  army.  Next  to  him
the  Lord  Haultbourdin  made  a  speech  much  to  the  same
purpose,  without  waiting  to  hear  what  intelligence  the
scouts  we  had  sent  out  would  bring  us.  After  him  three  or
four  more  spoke,  and  all  of  them  concurred.  The  last  who
gave  his  opinion  was  the  Lord  of  Contay,  who  said,  that,
as  soon  as  these  resolutions  should  be  spread  abroad  in  the
army,  the  soldiers  would  immediately  prepare  for  flight,
and  would  be  taken  prisoners  before  they  could  get  twenty
leagues :  which  opinion  he  strengthened  with  several  sub-
stantial reasons  ;  and  therefore  his  advice  was  to  rest  them-
selves that  night  as  well  as  they  could,  and  that  in  the


32  TUE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1465.

morning,  by  break  of  day,  they  should  attack  the  king's  army,
with  a  full  resolution  either  to  conquer,  or  die  upon  the
spot ;  which  he  conceived  a  much  safer  way  than  to  take  to
flight.  The  result  of  all  was  that  the  Count  of  Charolois
took  the  Lord  of  Contay's  advice,  and  gave  orders  that  every
man  should  repose  himself  for  two  hours,  and  be  ready  at
sound  of  trumpet ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  desired  several
officers  that  were  about  him  to  go  and  encourage  his  men.

About  midnight  the  scouting  party  returned,  and  you
may  believe  they  went  not  far ;  for  they  brought  word  the
king  was  encamped  where  the  fires  were  seen  :  immediately,
others  were  sent  out,  and  about  an  hour  after,  every  man
put  himself  into  a  condition  to  fight,  but  the  greatest  part
had  more  inclination  to  retreat.  About  break  of  day,  the
party  that  had  been  sent  out  last  met  a  waggoner  of  ours
(whom  the  enemy  had  taken  that  morning)  as  he  was  bring-
ing a  pitcher  of  wine  from  the  village,  who  told  them  the
enemy  were  all  fled  ;  whereupon  they  sent  us  back  the  news,
and  went  on  themselves  to  the  place,  and  finding  all  true  as
he  had  said,  they  posted  back  to  acquaint  us  with  it ;  which
greatly  rejoiced  the  whole  army ;  and  abundance  of  them
were  then  very  eager  for  the  pursuit,  who  but  an  hour
before  had  been  very  doleful.  I  had  an  extremely  old  and
tired  horse,  which  drank  up  a  whole  pailful  of  wine,  into
which  he  accidentally  thrust  his  head ;  I  let  him  finish  it,
and  I  never  found  him  better  or  fresher.

As  soon  as  it  was  broad  day,  we  all  mounted  on  horse-
back, and  our  troops  made  a  rather  thin  appearance ;  how-
ever, a  great  number  of  them  that  had  lain  concealed  in  the
woods,  soon  rejoined  us.  The  Count  of  Charolois  caused  a
friar  to  come  in,  and  pretend  he  came  from  the  Duke  of
Bretagne's  army,  and  that  they  would  be  with  us  that  day ;
which  news  comforted  the  whole  army,  though  not  a  man  of
them  gave  any  credit  to  it.  However,  about  ten  o'clock  in
the  morning,  the  Vice-Chancellor  of  Bretagne,  called  Rou-
ville,  and  Maderey  with  him  (of  both  of  whom  I  have  spoken
before),  arrived  in  our  camp,  attended  by  two  of  the  Duke  of
Bretagne's  archers  of  the  guard  in  their  regimental  clothes,
which  was  a  very  welcome  sight  to  us  all.  They  were
asked  where  they  had  been,  and  were  highly  praised  for
absenting  themselves  (considering  the  murmurs  against


1465.]  EXULTATION OF CHAROLOIS.  33

them),  but  more  for  their  return,  and  every  one  entertained
and  treated  them  kindly.

All  that  day  the  Count  of  Charolois  kept  the  field*,  re-
joicing extremely,  and  imputing  the  whole  glory  of  this
action  to  himself;  which  has  cost  him  dear  since,  for  after  that
he  was  governed  by  no  counsel  but  his  own ;  and  whereas
before  he  was  altogether  unfit  for  war,  and  took  delight  in
nothing  that  belonged  to  it,  his  thoughts  became  so  strangely
altered  upon  this  point,  that  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his
life  in  wars,  in  which  he  died,  and  which  were  the  occasion,
if  not  quite  of  the  ruin  of  his  family,  at  least,  of  the  misery
and  desolation  of  it.  Three  illustrious  and  wise  princes
(his  predecessors)  had  advanced  it  to  a  great  height,  so  that
few  monarchs,  except  the  King  of  France,  were  more  power-
ful than  he,  and,  in  large  and  fair  towns,  none  exceeded
him.  No  man  ought,  but  especially  a  great  prince,  to  pre-
sume too  much  upon  himself;  but  ought  freely  to  acknow-
ledge, that  it  is  God  alone  that  grants  us  favours  and  success.
Two  things  more  I  will  say  of  him ;  the  one  is,  that  I
believe  no  man  ever  endured  more  fatigues  than  he  in  all
sorts  of  bodily  labour  and  exercise,  when  the  occasion
required  it ;  and  the  other  is,  that,  in  my  opinion,  I  never
knew  a  person  of  greater  valour  and  intrepidity ;  I  never
heard  him  complain  of  being  weary,  nor  betray  the  least
signs  of  fear,  during  the  whole  seven  years  I  was  in  his
service  in  the  wars,  though  he  was  constantly  every  summer
in  the  field,  and  sometimes  winter  and  summer.  His  designs
and  enterprises  were  great ;  but  no  man  could  ever  accom-
plish them,  unless  God  added  the  assistance  of  his  power.


CHAP.  V.

The  King's  Brother  the  Duke  of  Berry,  and  the  Dnke  of  Bretagne,  join
with  the  Count  of  Charolois  against  the  King.  — 1465.

THE  next  day,  which  was  the  third  after  the  battle,  we  took
up  our  quarters  in  the  village  of  Montlhery.  The  inhabit-
ants had  all  tied,  some  to  the  church-tower,  and  others  into

*  In  the  place  "  anciently  called  the  Champ  de  Plours." Oliver  de  la
Marehe,  vol.  il  p.  240.

D


34  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1465.

the  castle  ;  but  the  Count  of  Charolois  caused  them  all  to
return  to  their  house?,  and  they  lost  not  the  value  of  a  far-
thing, for  every  soldier  paid  his  scot  exactly  as  if  he  had
been  in  Flanders.  The  castle  held  out  for  the  king,  and  was
never  attacked.  After  we  had  refreshed  ourselves  there  for
three  days,  the  Count  of  Charolois,  by  the  Lord  of  Contay's
advice,  marched  from  thence  to  possess  himself  of  Estampes*
(which  was  good  and  convenient  quarters,  and  situated  in
a  plentiful  country),  that  he  might  be  there  before  the
Bretons  (who  were  marching  that  way),  and  lodge  his  sick
and  wounded  men  in  the  town,  and  encamp  with  the  re-
mainder of  his  forces  in  the  fields  round  about  the  town ;
and  these  good  quarters,  and  that  little  time  which  they  staid
there,  saved  the  lives  of  abundance  of  his  men.  At  Estampes
arrived  also  the  Lord  Charles  of  France,  at  that  time  Duke
of  Berry,  the  king's  only  brother ;  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,
the  Count  of  Dunois,  the  Count  of  Dammartin,  the  Marshal
of  Loheac,  the  Lord  of  Bueil,  the  Lord  of  Chaumont  j,  and
the  Lord  Charles  of  AmboiseJ  his  son  (who  since  that  time
has  been  a  great  man  in  this  kingdom) ;  all  which  lords,  the
king,  upon  his  first  accession  to  the  crown,  had  disappointed
and  dispossessed  of  their  places,  though  they  had  done  his
father  and  the  kingdom  eminent  service  in  his  conquests  in
Normandy,  and  in  several  other  of  his  wars.  The  Count  of
Charolois,  attended  by  all  the  officers  of  his  army,  went  out
to  meet  and  greet  them,  and  conducted  them  to  their  quarters
that  were  prepared  for  them  in  the  town,  but  their  army
encamped  in  the  fields.  In  their  train  were  800  men-
at-arms,  very  good  soldiers,  the  greatest  part  of  whom
were  Bretons,  who  had  lately  deserted  the  king's  service  (as
I  have  stated  elsewhere),  and  were  a  great  improvement  to
their  army ;  besides,  they  had  a  great  number  of  archers

*  "  On  Friday,  the  19th  of  July,  the  count  marched  to  Estampes,
where  the  Dukes  of  Berry  and  Bretagne,  and  the  other  princes  of  their
alliance,  arrived  soon  after  ;  and  they  remained  there  until  Wednesday,
the  31st  of  July."  Lenglet,  vol.  ii.  p.  183.

f  Peter  of  Amboisc,  Lord  of  Chaumont,  knight,  councillor  and
chamberlain  of  Kings  Charles  VII.  and  Louis  XI.,  was  the  son  of  Hugh
of  Amboise  and  Jeanne  Guenand  ;  he  died  on  the  28th  of  June,  1473.

£  Charles  of  Amboise,  Count  of  Brienne,  Lord  of  Chaumont,  Governor
of  the  Isle  of  France,  Champagne  and  Burgundy  ;  he  died  on  the  16th
of  March,  1481.


1465.]  SKIRMISHES WITH THE KING'S TROOPS.  35

and  other  soldiers,  armed  with  good  brigandines*  ;  so  that  one
might  compute  them  at  about  6000  men  on  horse-back,
all  very  well  accoutred  ;  and,  to  behold  them  drawn  up
was  enough  to  convince  a  man  that  the  Duke  of  Bretagne
was  a  very  great  lord,  for  all  of  them  were  paid  out  of  his
treasury.

The  king,  who  (as  I  have  already  said)  was  retired  to
Corbeil,  did  not  forget  what  he  had  to  do,  but  hastened  into
Noi-mandy  to  raise  men;  and,  to  secure  the  country  from
any  commotion,  put  some  of  his  guards  into  the  towns  near
Paris,  where  he  conceived  there  was  any  necessity.

The  princes  spent  the  first  night  of  their  arrival  at
Estampes  in  relating  their  several  adventures.  The  Bretons
had  taken  some  of  the  king's  party  that  fled,  and,  had  they
been  but  a  little  forwarder  in  their  march,  they  would  either
have  taken  or  cut  in  pieces  the  third  part  of  the  army.  At
first,  indeed,  they  had  thought  of  sending  a  party  out,  judging
that  the  two  armies  must  be  near,  but  those  orders  were
afterwards  countermanded;  however,  the  Lord  Charles  of  An>
boise  and  several  other  officers,  with  a  small  detachment,  ad-
vanced before  the  army,  to  see  what  they  could  meet  with,  and
they  took  several  prisoners,  and  some  pieces  of  the  king's  ar-
tillery. The  prisoners  told  them  that  for  certain  the  king  was
dead,  and  they  believed  what  they  said  ;  for  they  had  fled  as
soon  as  the  battle  began.  The  Lord  of  Amboise  and  his  party
brought  this  news  to  the  army  of  the  Bretons,  where  it  was
exceedingly  welcome ;  every  man  fancying  that  the  news
was  true,  and  hoping  for  mighty  rewards  when  the  Lord
Charles  of  Berry  should  come  to  the  crown ;  and  a  council
was  immediately  called  (as  I  have  been  told  since  by  a
person  of  honour  and  credit  that  assisted  at  it),  in  which  it
was  debated  how  they  might  rid  themselves  of  the  Bur-
gundians,  and  send  them  packing  ;  and  the  general  opinion
was,  if  nothing  else  would  do,  to  do  it  by  force.  But  their
joy  was  not  long-lived,  from  whence  it  may  naturally  be
collected  to  what  changes  and  revolutions  this  kingdom  is
exposed.

But  to  return  to  my  subject,  and  the  army  at  Estampes.
When  all  had  supped,  and  many  people  were  walking  with

*  The  brigandinc  was  a  species  of  corslet,  made  of  plates  of  iron,
riveted  to  one  another  longitudinally,  by  nails  or  hooks.


36  THE MEMOIRS OF  PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1465.

great  liberty  in  the  street,  the  Lord  Charles  of  France  and
the  Count  of  Charolois  withdrew  to  a  window  and  were  dis-
coursing of  their  affairs  in  a  very  friendly  manner.  It
happened  that  among  the  Bretons  there  was  a  poor  man  who
took  great  delight  in  throwing  squibs  into  the  air,  and  seeing
them  break  and  blaze  among  the  people  when  they  had  fallen  ;
and  he  was  called  Master  John  Boutefeu,  or  Master  John
of  the  Serpents,  I  know  not  which.  This  idle  fellow,  having
hid  himself  in  some  house  that  he  might  not  be  perceived
by  anybody,  from  a  garret  where  he  was,  cast  two  or  three
into  the  air.  one  of  which,  by  accident,  happened  to  strike
against  the  bar  of  the  window  where  the  two  princes  were
standing  with  their  heads  very  near  together.  Both  of  them
started  in  great  surprise,  and  stared  upon  one  another,
suspecting  it  a  design,  and  done  on  purpose  to  injure  them.
The  Lord  of  Contay  came  up  to  the  count,  and  having
whispered  a  word  in  his  ear,  went  down,  and  ordered  all  the
guards  of  his  household,  and  what  other  soldiers  were  at
hand,  to  stand  immediately  to  their  arms.  And  the  Count
of  Charolois  persuaded  the  Duke  of  Berry  to  do  the
same ;  so  that  in  a  moment  there  were  200  or  300  men-at-
arms  drawn  up  before  the  gate,  and  a  great  number  of
archers,  who  were  employed  to  search  everywhere,  to  find
out  from  whence  the  fire  had  come.  At  last  the  poor  i'ellow
who  had  caused  all  this  uproar  came  and  threw  himself  at
their  feet,  confessed  the  whole  matter,  and,  by  throwing  two
or  three  more  of  them  into  the  air,  entirely  took  away  the
suspicion  several  persons  had  conceived  of  one  another.
Thus  was  this  surprising  accident  turned  into  a  jest,  and  all
laid  down  their  arms  and  returned  to  their  quarters.

The  next  day,  early  in  the  morning,  the  Count  of  Charolois
called  a  great  and  splendid  council  of  war,  at  which  all  the
princes  and  their  chief  officers  assisted,  to  consult  what
measures  were  best  to  be  taken;  and  as  they  were  of  different
parties  and  not  all  obeying  the  same  lord  (which  is  very
much  to  be  desired  in  such  assemblies),  their  sentiments
were  also  different ;  but  of  all  that  was  said,  nothing  was  so
much  taken  notice  of  as  some  expressions  of  the  Duke  of
Berry,  who  was  but  young,  and  had  seen  nothing  of  the  war.
By  his  words  he  seemed  to  be  weary  already,  taking  occasion
to  mention  the  great  number  of  wounded  men  whom  he  had


1465.]  DECISION OP THE COUNCIL OP AVAR.  37

observed  in  the  count's  army,  and  by  way  of  compassion  he  de-
clared he  had  rather  the  war  had  never  been  begun,  than  that
so  much  mischief  should  be  occasioned  through  his  means  and
on  his  account.  Which  language  was  very  unpleasing  to  the
count  and  his  party,  as  I  shall  show  afterwards.  Never-
theless, the  result  of  this  council  was,  that  they  should  march
towards  Paris,  to  try  if  they  could  bring  that  city  to  join
with  them  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom,  for  which  (as  they
pretended)  they  had  taken  up  arms  ;  and  they  were  all  of
them  fully  persuaded,  that  if  the  capital  would  listen  to  them,
all  the  rest  of  the  towns  in  the  kingdom  would  follow  its
example.  As  I  said  before,  the  speech  in  council  of  the  Duke
of  Berry  so  startled  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  his  party,
that  they  asked  one  another,  "Did  you  hear  this  young
duke?  He  is  astonished  at  the  sight  of  700  or  800
wounded  men  in  the  town,  who  are  nothing  to  him,  nor
does  he  know  them  ;  he  would  certainly  be  more  troubled
where  he  was  concerned  ;  and  he  would  be  a  likely  man  to
make  his  peace  upon  small  invitation,  and  leave  us  in  the
lurch."  And  the  Count  of  Charolois  further  said,  "  that  on
account  of  the  ancient  wars  which  had  long  continued  iu
time  past  between  King  Charles  (the  Duke  of  Berry's  father)
and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  (his  own  father),  it  was  to  be
feared  they  would  easily  unite,  and  turn  all  their  forces
against  us ;  for  which  reason  it  would  be  necessary  to  look
out  for  allies  in  time."  And  it  was  purely  on  this  suspicion
that  Messire  William  of  Cluny*,  the  prothonotary  (who  died
afterwards  Bishop  of  Poictiers)  was  despatched  into  England
to  the  court  of  King  Edward  IV. t,  who  then  reigned;  and
who  had  been  always  the  mortal  enemy  of  the  Count  of
Charolois,  who  had  supported  against  him  the  house  of  Lan-
caster, from  which,  by  the  mother's  side,  he  was  descended.!

*  William  de  Cluny,  born  about  1423,  was  the  son  of  Henry  de  Cluny,
Lord  of  Conforgieu,  and  Perrette  Collot,  Lady  of  Sagy.  He  was  a  coun-
cillor of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  prothonotary  of  the  Holy  See.  He
was  appointed  to  the  bishopric  of  Poitiers  in  1479,  and  died  about  a  year
afterwards.

t  Edward  IV.,  son  of  Eichard,  Duke  of  York,  and  Cicely  Neville,
daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Westmoreland ;  he  married  Lady  Elizabeth
Woodville  in  1464,  and  died  on  the  9th  of  April,  1483.

J  Isabella  of  Portugal,  the  mother  of  the  Count  of  Charolois,  was  the
D  3


38  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES. [1465.

In  his  private  instruction,  he  had  orders  to  propose  a  mar-
riage with  Margaret*,  the  King  of  England's  sister;  but  to
treat  only  and  negotiate,  without  coming  to  any  conclusion :
for  the  Count  of  Charolois,  who  knew  how  desirous  the  King
of  England  was  of  this  match,  believed  by  this  means,  either
to  bring  him  over  to  his  side,  if  he  should  have  any  occasion
for  his  assistance,  or  at  least  to  hinder  him  from  attempting
anything  against  him.  However,  though  he  had  no  real
intention  at  first  to  consummate  the  marriage,  upon  account
of  his  inveterate  hatred  to  the  house  of  York,  yet  affairs  were
so  managed,  that  several  years  after,  the  match  was  concluded ;
and  he  moreover  accepted  the  order  of  the  garter  f,  and  wore
it  to  his  death.

Many  such  like  actions  as  this  have  happened  in  the  world
upon  suspicion  only,  especially  among  great  princes,  who
are  always  much  more  suspicious  than  other  men,  by  reason
of  the  many  false  stories  and  groundless  reports  that  are
brought  them  often  merely  by  court  flatterers,  without  any
manner  of  occasion.


A  Renewing  of  the  Treaty  of  Alliance  between  Francis,  Duke
of  Bretagne,  and  Charles,  Count  of  Charolois,  made  at
Estampes,  July  24,  1465.

1.  WE,  Francis,  Duke  of  Bretagne,  are,  and  will  be,  the
good  brother,  perfect  friend,  ally,  and  confederate  of  Charles,
Count  of  Charolois :  we  will  aid  and  assist,  counsel,  succour,
and  support,  and,  with  all  our  power,  guard  and  defend  his
person,  and  his  children  born  or'  to  be  bori.,  their  honour,
estates,  countries,  territories,  lordships,  and  subjects,  as  much

daughter  of  John,  King  of  Portugal,  by  Philippa,  daughter  of  John,  Duke
of  Lancaster.

*  Margaret  of  York  married  Charles  of  Burgundy,  in  pursuance  of  a
treaty  signed  at  Brussels  on  the  16th  of  February,  1*467  (O.  S.);  and  the
marriage  was  celebrated  at  Dan,  on  the  3rd  of  July,  1468.  She  died
on  the  28th  of  November,  1503.  Unless  Commines  is  in  error  with
regard  to  the  time  at  which  William  of  Cluny  was  despatched  on  his
mission,  the  Count  of  Charolois  contemplated  this  new  alliance  whilst
his  second  wife  was  still  living  ;  for  Isabella  of  Bourbon  did  not  die  until
the  26th  of  September,  1465,  two  months  after  the  battle  of  Montlhery.

f  In  Kymer,  voL  v.  part  ii.  p.  173.,  is  a  letter  from  Duke  Charles,
acknowledging  the  receipt  of  the  garter  from  the  English  ambassadors.


1465.]  TREATY  OF ALLIANCE RENEWED.  39

as  we  would  do  our  own,  without  any  manner  of  distinction,
against  all  and  every  person  and  persons  (without  excepting
our  lord  the  king)  whoever  they  are,  that  would  injure,
make  war  upon,  or  usurp  anything  from  our  said  cousin  and
his  children,  their  countries,  subjects,  lands,  and  territories,
in  possession  or  reversion,  in  any  manner  or  upon  any
account  whatsoever.  And  we  also  promise,  in  all  the  other
good  and  laudable  quarrels  and  enterprises  of  our  said  cousin
of  Charolois,  to  succour  and  assist  him  and  his  children,  as
well  against  our  lord  the  king,  as  all  other  persons  what-
soever ;  and  to  employ  in  their  behalf  and  in  their  favour
our  own  person,  subjects,  countries,  territories,  and  lord-
ships against  all  invaders,  or  such  as  make  war  upon  them ;
and  to  defend  them  in  person,  and  with  all  our  power,  in  such
a  way  and  manner  as  our  good  cousin  shall  require;  and,
moreover,  we  will  impart  to  him  whatever  shall  come  to  our
knowledge  to  be  done,  said,  or  intended  to  his  prejudice,
and  defend  him  to  the  best  of  our  power ;  and  we  shall  use
our  lawful  endeavours  to  have  him  comprehended  in  the
alliances  already  made,  or  to  be  made  hereafter  by  us,  so  far
as  he  has  a  mind  to  it ;  and  we  will  make  no  alliance  in  pre-
judice to  these  presents.  And,  in  regard  of  the  great  love  to,
and  sincere  confidence  we  have  in,  our  said  dear  cousin  of
Charolois,  above  all  others,  and  also  for  his  greater  assurance
that  we  shall,  on  our  part,  perform  as  aforesaid,  we  have
been  desirous  to  make,  and  we  do  actually  make  him  our
brother-in-arms  ;  and,  forasmuch  as  we  do  desire  with  all
our  heart,  that  the  said  alliances  may  be  inviolably  maintained,
kept,  and  observed,  and  to  the  end,  lest  for  want  of  a  decla-
ration and  good  understanding,  there  may  arise  any  difficulty
or  doubt,  even  in  respect  to  the  general  clause  above  written,
importing,  that  we  will  aid  and  assist  our  said  cousin  of
Charolois  in  all  his  quarrels  and  enterprises,  as  well  against
our  lord  the  king  as  all  others  as  aforesaid ;  we  do  declare.
and  our  meaning  is,  that  whatever  dispute  or  war  by  sea
shall  happen  between  the  English,  or  any  other  nation  what-
soever, and  our  subjects,  or  the  subjects  of  our  cousin  of
Charolois,  the  subjects  of  either  of  us  both,  who  are  not  en-
gaged in  a  contest  or  naval  war  against  the  English,  shall
not  be  obliged,  notwithstanding  the  said  alliances,  to  quarrel
with,  nor  make  war  upon  them,  nor  to  do  anything  upon

r>  4


40  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

that  account  against  the  truces,  treaties,  or  alliances  which,
for  the  benefit  of  trade,  have  been  made  between  the
countries  and  subjects  of  our  uncle  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
and  our  said  cousin  of  Charolois,  his  son  ;  but  they  shall,  as
to  this  particular,  remain  in  force  according  to  ancient  usage
and  custom :  and,  if  it  should  so  happen,  that  any  of  our
subjects,  under  pretence  of  their  own  war,  or  otherwise,
should  come  into  the  countries,  ports,  and  harbours  of  our
said  cousin  of  Charolois,  and,  by  sea  or  land,  rob,  pillage,  and
carry  off  any  merchandise  belonging  to  them,  or  other  people
who  have  the  freedom  of  the  said  countries,  ports,  and
havens,  or  shall  be  at  truce  and  not  in  war,  or  have  the
protection  of  our  said  cousin  of  Charolois,  or  his  officers  ;  in
that  case,  such  of  our  subjects  as  shall  do  so  may  be  taken
and  seized  in  the  said  countries,  ports,  and  havens  of  our
said  cousin  of  Charolois,  wherever  they  may  be  found,  and
such  punishment,  correction,  and  justice  inflicted  on  them,
which  in  reason  ought  to  be  done,  according  to  the  customs
and  usages  of  the  said  countries,  ports,  and  havens  where
they  shall  be  taken.  Moreover,  if  any  of  our  subjects  should
by  sea  rob  or  destroy  any  goods  and  merchandises  belonging
to  the  merchants  of  the  countries  and  territories  of  our  said
cousin  of  Charolois,  residing  or  dwelling  therein,  or  to  others
who  are  in  a  truce  or  peace  with,  or  under  the  protection  of,
our  said  cousin  or  his  officers  as  aforesaid,  and  should  after-
wards bring  the  said  goods  and  merchandises,  or  cause  them,
to  be  brought  into  any  of  the  towns,  ports,  or  havens  of  the
said  countries  belonging  to  our  cousin  of  Charolois,  in  order
to  sell  or  barter  them  there ;  those  who  bring  them  thither
may,  in  that  case,  be  taken  and  seized,  and  the  said  goods  and
merchandises  put  into  the  hands  of  our  said  cousin,  as  being
forfeited  to  him,  to  dispose  of  them  at  his  pleasure,  either  by
restoring  them  to  the  right  owners,  or  otherwise  as  he  thinks
fit ;  and,  as  for  the  offenders,  they  shall  be  punished  for  what
they  have  done,  as  he,  our  said  cousin,  or  his  officers,  shall
judge  most  convenient.

2.  Seeing  we  are  desirous  to  provide  for  the  security  of  our
dominions  and  territories  for  the  time  to  come,  and  to  pre-
serve them  for  the  future  from  the  inconveniences  which
they  have  been  liable  to  ;  if  it  should  so  happen,  that  any
of  our  successors  should  hereafter  contravene  any  of  these


1465-3 TREATY  OP  ALLIANCE  BESETTED. 41

present  alliances  (which  God  forbid),  we  do,  in  such  a  case,
give  unto  our  said  cousin  of  Charolois,  or  his  successors,  the
countries,  lands,  and  lordships  of  Montfort,  Estarapes,  and
Vertus,  with  their  appurtenances  and  dependencies ;  and
we  do  divest  and  dispossess  ourselves  of  the  said  countries,
lands,  and  lordships,  and  do  yield  and  transfer  them  from
thenceforward,  for  ourselves,  our  heirs,  successors,  &c.,  to
our  said  cousin  of  Charolois,  to  occupy  and  enjoy  them,  with
all  their  rights,  profits,  and  emoluments,  by  way  of  inherit-
ance for  ever,  for  himself,  his  heirs,  &c.,  as  fully  and  in
the  same  manner  and  form  as  we  do  now  enjoy  them,  and
as  our  predecessors  have  done  before  us,  without  reserving
any  right  to  ourselves,  our  heirs,  successors,  &c.,  of  suing
for  or  laying  claim  to  any  right  therein,  for  any  reason  or
upon  any  account  whatsoever.

3.  And  to  the  end  that  the  said  alliances  may  be  the  more
strictly  observed,  we  have  again  and  anew  chosen,  named,
and  commissioned,  and  we  do  on  our  part  choose,  name,  and
commission  for  the  conservators  of  them,  the  same  persons
formerly  chosen  and  nominated  in  our  letters  patent  mention-
ing the  same,  preceding  these  in  date,  and  also  by  these  pre-
sents :  conferring  on  them  new  authority  and  the  like  power
to  maintain,  support,  favour,  and  secure  them,  as  well  in  the
execution  of  their  commission,  or  otherwise,  as  our  said  letters
patent  of  alliance  or  conservation  do  import  or  contain.

4.  If  it  should  come  to  pass  that  the  said  conservators,  or
any  of  them,  should  hereafter  falter,  and  be  justly  accused
of  a  failure  in  the  discharge  of  the  trust  reposed  in  them,
in  that  case,  we,  and  our  said  cousin  of  Charolois,  and  our
successors, &c.,  and  every  one  of  us  in  his  own  right,  __  may
appoint  one  or  more  trustees  in  the  room  of  him  or  them,
who  shall  transgress,  or  be  justly  accused  as  aforesaid.

5.  That  the  said  alliances  between  us  and  our  said  cousin
of  Charolois  may  be  the  better  kept,  and  the  more  firmly
maintained,  we  have  been  willing,  and  we  do  actually  make
the  same  alliances  between  our  territories  and  subjects  as
we  do  between  our  own  persons ;  promising  upon  our  faith
and  corporal  oath,  on  the  word  of  a  prince,  and  upon  our
honour,  firmly  to  keep  and  maintain  the  said  alliance  and
brotherhood in all  their  circumstances  and dependencies,
without  contravening  the  same  in  any  manner  whatsoever,


42  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

and  to  make  oat  unto  our  said  cousin  of  Charolois  good  and
authentic  instruments  of  consent  and  ratification  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  Estates  of  our  said  countries  and  territories,  to
last  during  our  life  and  flie  lives  of  our  heirs,  successors,  &c.,
for  ever.  In  witness  whereof  we  have  affixed  our  seal  to
these  presents.

Done  at  Estampes,  July  the  24th,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord
1465.  Signed  FRANCIS,  with  a  flourish.  Upon  the  fold
was  written,  "  by  the  Duke's  command,"  and  signed
MILET,  with  a  flourish.


CHAP.  VI.

i

The  Count  of  Charolois  and  his  Allies  with  their  Army  pass  the  Seine  upon
a  Bridge  of  Boats;  after  which,  being  joined  by  the  Forces  of  John,  Duke
of  Calabria,  they  invest  Paris.  — 1465.

THESE  great  lords,  according  to  the  resolution  that  had  heen
taken  in  the  council  of  war,  left  Estampes,  where  they  had
remained  a  few  days,  and  marched  to  St.  Mathurin  de  Lar-
chant  and  Moret  in  Gastinois*,  in  which  two  villages  the
Duke  of  Berry  and  his  Bretons  were  quartered  :  but  the
Count  of  Charolois  and  his  men  encamped  in  a  large  meadow
on  the  batiks  of  the  Seine,  and  had  proclaimed  in  his  army
that  every  horseman  should  bring  a  hook  with  him  to  fasten
his  horse;  he  also  caused  seven  or  eight  small  boats  to  be
brought  upon  carts,  with  several  pipe-staves,  in  order  to  lay
a  bridge  over  the  Seine,  there  being  no  other  way  of  passing
it.  The  Count  of  Dunois  (who  was  unable  to  get  on  horse-
back by  reason  of  the  gout)  attended  him  in  his  litter,  and
had  his  colours  carried  after  him.  When  they  came  to  the
river,  they  placed  the  boats  which  they  had  brought  together,
and  got  over  into  a  little  island  in  the  midst  of  the  river,
and  some  of  our  archers  landed  and  attacked  a  party  of
horse  on  the  other  side,  who  were  posted  there  to  secure
that  pass,  under  the  command  of  the  Marshal  Joachim  and
Sallezardf.  They  were  posted  in  a  place  very  disadvan-

*  "  On  Thursday,  the  1st  of  August,  the  Count  of  Charolois  encamped
at  Saint- Mathurin  de  1'Archamp,  where  he  remained  till  the  5th,  when
he  transferred  his  quarters  to  Moret."  Lenglet,  vol.  ii.  p.  184.

f  John  de  Salazar,  a  native  of  Spain,  knight,  chamberlain  and  coun-


1465.]  CHAROLOIS CROSSES THE SEINE.  43

tageous  for  their  horse,  for  it  was  steep  and  thick-set  with
vines ;  and  the  Burgundians  had  a  fine  train  of  artillery,
under  the  command  of  one  Monsieur  Gerault,  a  very  famous
engineer,  who  had  been  previously  on  the  king's  side,  but
was  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Montlhery.  In  short,
the  enemy  were  obliged  to  abandon  their  post,  and  retire  to
Paris.  The  very  same  night,  a  bridge  was  laid  quite  to  the
island,  where  the  Count  of  Charolois  immediately  ordered
his  own  tent  to  be  pitched,  in  which  he  lay  that  night,  under  a
guard  of  fifty  men-at-arms  of  his  household  troops.  At
break  of  day,  a  large  number  of  coopers  were  set  to  work  to
make  pipe-staves  of  clap-boards,  which  had  been  brought
over  into  the  island ;  and  before  noon  the  bridge  from  the
island  to  the  other  side  of  the  river  being  finished,  the  count
passed  over  it  immediately,  ordered  his  tents  to  be  pitched
(of  which  he  had  abundance),  and  then  passing  over  all  his
army  and  artillery,  he  encamped  with  it  on  the  brow  of  a
hill  towards  the  river,  from  whence  his  host  made  a  fine
appearance  to  those  who  still  remained  behind.

The  passing  over  of  the  count's  forces  took  up  all  that
day ;  but  the  next  morning,  by  break  of  day,  the  Dukes  of
Bi:rry  and  Bretagne  advanced  with  their  army  to  the
bridge,  which  they  thought  very  speedily  and  commodiously
built  ;  and  having  passed  over  it,  they  encamped  also  upon
the  hill.*  As  soon  as  it  grew  dark,  we  began  to  perceive  a
number  of  fires  at  as  far  a  distance  as  we  could  well  discern.
Some  were  of  opinion  that  it  was  the  king  ;  but  before  mid-
night we  were  assured  it  was  John,  Duke  of  Calabriaf  (only
son  of  Rene,  King  of  Sicily)  with  about  900  men-at-
arms  from  the  duchy  and  county  of  Burgundy.  He  had
a  good  body  of  horse,  but  of  foot  he  had  few  or  none.  How-

cillor  of  the  king,  captain  of  a  hundred  lances  of  his  own  raising,  and
Lord  of  Montague,  Saint-Just,  Marcilly,  Laz,  Lonsac,  and  Issodun,
married  Margaret  de  la  Trcmoille,  Lady  of  Saint-Fargeau,  on  the  31st
of  October,  1441  ;  became  a  widower,  by  her  death,  on  the  18th  of
December,  1457  ;  and  died  at  Troyes  on  the  12th  of  November,  1479.

*  "  The  Dukes  of  Berry  and  Bretagne  and  most  of  the  lords  lodged
at  Nemours."  Oliver  de  la  Marche,  vol.  ii.  p.  243.

f  John  of  Anjou,  Duke  of  Calabria,  son  of  Rene,  King  of  Sicily,  and
Isabella  of  Lorraine,  was  born  on  the  2nd  of  August,  1424  ;  married
Mary,  daughter  ol  Charles  I.,  Duke  of  Bourbon  ;  died  at  Barcelona,  on
Sunday,  the  16th  of  December,  1470,  and  was  buried  in  the  cathedral
church  of  that  city.


44  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1465.

ever,  though  their  number  was  small,  I  never  saw  a  finer
company,  or  men  who  seemed  better  inured  to  the  exercises
of  war.  He  had  with  him  about  six  score  men  in  complete
armour,  Italians  and  others,  brought  up  in  the  wars  in  Italy,
among  whom  were  James  Galiot*,  the  Count  of  Campo-
bache  f,  the  Lord  of  Baudricourt  $  (now  Governor  of
Burgundy),  and  several  others.  These  men-at-arms  were
all  very  dexterous  and  ready,  and,  to  speak  impartially,  the
very  flower  of  our  army,  at  least  compared  with  an  equal
number  of  the  others.  He  had  also,  besides  these  troops,
400  cro«s-bow  men  (whom  the  Count  Palatine  §  had
furnished),  all  well  mounted,  and  brave  soldiers,  and  with
them  500  Swiss  infantry,  the  first  that  were  ever  seen
in  this  kingdom,  who  behaved  themselves  with  so  much
courage  and  bravery  in  all  the  actions  they  were  employed
in,  as  have  gained  reputation  for  all  their  countrymen  that
have  succeeded  them.  The  next  morning  this  gallant  army
drew  nearer,  and  passed  over  our  bridge  ;  so  that  one  might
venture  to  say,  the  whole  power  of  France  (except  what  was
with  the  king)  passed  over  that  bridge.  This  I  can  affirm,
the  number  of  persons  of  quality  and  officers  was  so  great,
and  the  whole  army  was  in  such  complete  order,  and  made
such  a  fine  appearance,  that  I  could  have  wished  that  both
the  friends  and  enemies  of  the  kingdom  had  been  there  to

*  Jacques  Galiot  died  on  the  28th  of  July,  1488,  at  the  battle  of  Saint-
Anbin  du  Cormier,  according  to  Molinet,  who  calls  him  "  a  Neapolitan."
Previous  editors  have  erroneously  confounded  him  with  Jacques  Ricard
de  Genouillac,  surnamed  Galiot.

f  Nicolas  de  Montfort,  Count  of  Campobasso,  leader  of  Italian  men-
of-war,  as  he  signs  himself  in  a  document  quoted  by  Godefroy.  He  wns
also  one  of  the  chamberlains  of  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy;  and  claimed
kindred  with  the  Duke  of  Bretagne.

J  John,  Lord  of  Baudricourt,  councillor  and  chamberlain  of  Louis  XL,
King  of  France,  and  Marshal  of  France  under  Charles  VIII.,  was  the
son  of  Robert,  Lord  of  Baudricourt,  and  Alearde  de  Chambley.  He
sided  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  in  the  war  of  the  Public  Good  ;  but
the  king,  having  gained  him  over  to  his  party,  made  him  Governor  of
Burgundy  by  letters  patent,  dated  the  18th  of  March,  1480  -.  he  died  on
the  llth  of  May,  1499.

§  Frederic  I.,  surnamed  the  Victorious,  Governor  of  the  Electorate
during  the  minority  of  his  nephew  Philip,  obtained  from  the  Estates  of
the  Palatinate  permission  to  retain  the  electorate  during  his  lifetime.
He  was  the  son  of  Louis  III.  and  Matilda  of  Savoy.  He  was  born  oil
the  1st  of  August,  1425  ;  and  died  on  the  12th  of  December,  1476.


1465.] THE  CONFEDERATES  MARCH  TO  PARIS. 45

have  seen  us :  for,  by  that  means,  the  former  would  have
had  a  just  value  and  esteem  for  the  kingdom,  and  the  latter
would  for  ever  after  have  more  dreaded  its  power.  The
chief  of  the  Burgundian  officers  were  the  Lord  of  Neuf-
chastel,  Marshal  of  Burgundy,  with  his  brother  the  Lord  of
Montagu,  the  Marquis  of  Rottelin,  and  a  great  number  of
knights  and  squires,  some  of  whom  had  been  in  Bour-
bonnois,  as  I  said  before  ;  and,  to  come  to  us  with  more
security,  all  had  joined  with  the  Duke  of  Calabria,  who
appeared  to  be  a  brave  prince,  and  as  great  a  commander  as
any  in  the  army,  upon  which  account  a  great  friendship
arose  between  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  him.

When  the  whole  army  had  passed  (which,  in  my  judg-
ment, was  little  less  than  100,000  horse,  one  with
another)  the  princes  resolved  to  present  themselves  before
Paris,  and  joined  all  their  vanguards  together.  The  Bur-
gundian van  was  led  by  the  Count  of  St.  Paul ;  the
Duke  of  Berry's  and  the  Duke  of  Bretagne's  by  Oudet  de
Rye*,  and  (as  I  think)  the  Marshal  of  Loheac :  in  this  order
they  marched.  The  princes  themselves  were  all  in  the
ronin  battle  ;  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  the  Duke  of  Cala-
bria rode  up  and  down  in  full  armour,  and  took  abundance
of  pains  to  keep  their  battalions  in  order,  and  showed  great
readiness  to  do  their  duties ;  but  the  Dukes  of  Berry  and
Bretagne  were  at  their  ease,  mounted  on  little  hackneys,
armed  only  with  very  light  brigandines,  or,  as  some  said,
with  gilt  nails  sewn  upon  satin,  that  they  might  weigh  the
less ;  but  I  cannot  positively  affirm  this.  In  this  order  the
whole  army  marched  to  the  bridge  of  Charenton,  within  two
short  leagues  of  Paris,  where  we  attacked  and  routed  an  in-
considerable body  of  frank-archers  that  were  posted  on  the
bridge ;  after  which  the  whole  army  marched  over  it,  and
the  Count  of  Charolois  encamped  (between  that  bridge  and

*  Odct  d'Aydie,  Lord  of  Lcscun,  was  the  son  of  John  d'Aydie,  a
gentleman  of  Gascony.  He  married  Marie  de  Beam,  daughter  of
Mathieu  de  Beam,  Lord  of  Lescun.  Louis  XI.,  having  gained  him  over
to  his  side,  made  him  his  councillor  and  chamberlain,  gave  him  the  office
of  Admiral  of  France,  and  created  him  Count  of  Comminges  in  1472.
After  the  death  of  Louis,  Odct  d'Aydie  joined  the  party  of  the  Duke  of
Orleans,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was  deprived  of  his  admiralty.  He
died  before  the  25th  of  August,  1498,  at  more  than  seventy  years  of  age.


46  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1465.

a  house  at  Conflans*)  all  along  the  river,  enclosing  a  large
compass  of  ground  with  his  waggons  and  train  of  artillery,
and  drawing  his  whole  army  into  it ;  and  with  him  the
Duke  of  Calabria  took  up  his  quarters.  The  Dukes  of
Berry  and  Bretagne  were  posted  with  a  strong  party  of
their  men  at  St.  Maur-des-Fossez  ;  the  rest  of  the  army  was
sent  to  St.  Denis,  also  about  two  leagues  from  Paris,  in
which  quarters  the  whole  army  lay  for  eleven  weeks,  during
which  time  those  things  occurred  of  which  I  shall  speak
hereafter.

The  next  morning  a  little  skirmishing  began  at  the  very
gates  of  Paris ;  in  which  place  were  the  Lord  of  Nantoillet,
High  Steward  of  France  (who,  as  I  have  elsewhere  observed,
did  good  service  to  the  king),  and  the  Marshal  Joachim.
The  people  were  in  a  great  consternation,  but  many  of  the
citizens  seemed  inclinable  to  admit  the  Burgundians  and
the  other  lords  into  Paris ;  believing  (in  their  judgments)
that  their  enterprise  was  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  the
kingdom.  There  were  others  who  declared  openly  for  the
Burgundians,  hoping,  by  advancing  their  interest,  to  arrive
at  some  good  office  or  preferment,  which,  in  that  city,  are
more  coveted  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world  besides ;
for  every  man  makes  his  employment  worth  as  much  as  he
can,  and  not  as  much  as  he  ought;  so  that  there  are  some
offices,  with  no  salary  at  all  belonging  to  them,  which  are
sold  for  800  crowns ;  and  others,  whose  wages  are  very
small,  are  sold  for  more  than  the  salary  could  amount
to  in  fifteen  years ;  from  whence  it  happens  that  seldom  any
man  is  put  out  of  his  place,  and  the  court  of  parliament  main-
tains this  privilege,  and  rightly ;  but  it  interferes  with  almost
all  things  else.  Among  the  counsellors  there  is  always  a
great  number  of  honest  and  able  persons,  as  well  as  some
very  ill-conditioned  individuals ;  but  it  is  so  in  all  conditions
of  society.

*  "  On  Tuesday,  20th  August,  he  encamped  at  Conflans,  where  he
remained  until  the  end  of  the  month  of  October."  Lenglet,  vol.  ii.
p.  184.


1465.] CONCERNING  OFFICES AND AUTHORITIES.  47

CHAP.  VII.

A  Digression  concerning  Salaries,  Offices,  and  Ambition,  illustrated  by
the  Example  of  the  English.  — 1465.

I  MENTION  these  offices  and  authorities,  because  they  lead
men  to  desire  changes  and  revolutions,  and  are  thus  the
occasion  of  them  ;  which  evidently  appears,  not  only  by
what  we  have  seen  in  our  own  days,  but  also  in  the  time  of
King  Charles  VI.  *,  in  whose  reign  the  wars,  which  lasted
till  the  peace  of  Arras,  began ;  during  which  wars,  the
English  had  conquered  so  great  a  part  of  France,  that  at  the
time  of  that  treaty  (which  lasted  two  months)  the  Duke  of
Bedford  t,  brother  to  Henry  V.,  King  of  England,  and
husband  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  sister,  was  Regent  of
France  for  the  English  there,  and  resided  at  Paris,  and
had  20,000  crowns  a  month  at  least,  to  support  the
grandeur  and  dignity  of  his  office.  At  this  treaty  of  Arras,
the  King  of  France  sent  four  or  five  dukes  and  counts,  five
or  six  prelates,  and  ten  or  twelve  councillors  of  parliament
to  take  care  of  his  interests.  On  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
side  there  were  more,  and  those  very  great  persons ;  and  no
fewer  from  the  King  of  England  | :  besides  two  cardinals  from
the  Pope§,  to  act  as  mediators.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy
being  desirous  to  acquit  himself  handsomely  towards  the
English  before  they  parted,  on  account  of  the  old  leagues
and  alliances  which  had  been  between  them,  offered  the

*  Charles  VI.,  King  of  France,  born  on  the  3rd  of  December,  1368,
was  the  son  of  Charles  V.  and  Jeanne  de  Bourbon ;  he  married  Isabel
of  Bavaria  on  the  17th  of  July,  1385  ;  and  died  on  the  22nd  of  October,
1422.

f  John  of  Lancaster,  Count  of  Kendal  and  Duke  of  Bedford,  was  the
third  son  of  King  Henry  IV.  and  Mary,  daughter  of  Humphrey  de
Bohun.  He  married  1.  Anne,  sister  of  Philip,  Duke  of  Burgundy  ;  and
2.  Jacqueline,  daughter  of  Pierre  de  Luxembourg,  Count  of  Saint  Paul.
He  was  appointed  Regent  of  the  Kingdom  of  France  on  the  death  of  his
brother  Henry  V.;  and  he  died  at  Rouen,  on  the  14th  of  Sept.,  1435.

J  The  commissioners  for  England  were  Henry  Beaufort,  Cardinal  and
Bishop  of  Winchester  ;  John  Kemp,  Archbishop  of  York  ;  William  de
la  Pole,  Earl  of  Suffolk  ;  John  Holland,  Earl  of  Huntingdon ;  the
Bishops  of  Norwich,  St.  David's,  and  Lisieux,  with  divers  knights  and
gentlemen.

§  Eugenius  IV.  (Gabriel  Condolinieri),  elected  in  1431;  he  died  on
the  23rd  of  February,  1447.


48  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE CO5IMIXE3. [1465.

duchies  of  Normandy  and  Guienne  to  the  King  of  England,
for  himself  and  his  lords,  upon  condition  that  he  would  do
homage  for  them  to  the  King  of  France,  as  his  predecessors
had  done  before  him ;  and  that  he  would  restore  whatever
else  he  held  in  that  kingdom  except  the  said  duchies.  But
the  English  absolutely  refused  to  do  any  homage,  and  they
suffered  extremely  by  it  afterwards ;  for,  being  forsaken  by
the  house  of  Burgundy,  they  soon  lost  their  time,  and  their
influence  in  that  kingdom  daily  declined,  and  dwindled
at  last  to  nothing.  Soon  afterwards  they  lost  Paris,  and  by
little  and  little  all  they  were  possessed  of  in  France.  Upon
their  return  into  England  not  one  of  the  English  lords
thought  of  lessening  his  estate ;  and  the  whole  revenue  of
the  kingdom  was  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  them  all.  Wars
arose  among  them  for  command  and  authority,  which  lasted
a  long  time,  and  in  which  Henry  VI.  (who  hud  been  crowned
King  of  England  and  France  at  Paris)  was  declared  a  traitor
and  imprisoned  in  the  Tower  of  London*,  where  he  con-
tinued the  greatest  part  of  his  life,  and  was  at  last  put  to
death.  The  Duke  of  Yorkf,  father  of  Edward  IV.,  lately
dead,  proclaimed  himself  kingj,  but  in  a  few  days  he  was
beaten  and  slain  ;  and  the  heads  of  all  that  were  killed  in  the
battle  were  cut  off  ;  and,  among  the  slain,  was  the  father  §  of
the  late  Earl  of  Warwick,  who  was  so  famous  in  England.
This  last  Earl  of  Warwick  |  conveyed  the  Earl  of  March
(since  called  King  Edward)  to  Calais  by  sea,  with  some  few

*  In  August,  1465  ;  he  was  liberated  again  in  October,  1470,  and  re-
imprisoned  in  the  following  year.

f  Richard  of  Coningsburgh,  Duke  of  York,  was  the  son  of  Richard,  Earl
of  Cambridge,  and  Anne,  daughter  of  Roger  Mortimer,  Earl  ul  March.
He  married  Cicely,  daughter  of  Ralph  Neville,  Earl  of  .Westmoreland,
and  was  killed  on  the  24th  of  December,  1460,  at  the  battle  of  Wakefield.

J  The  Duke  of  York  never  assumed  the  title  of  king,  which  was
retained  by  Henry  VI.  until  his  death,  though  the  parliament  had  declared
the  Duke  of  York  his  successor  on  the  throne.

§  The  Earl  of  Salisbury,  father  of  the  great  Earl  of  Warwick,  was  not
slain  in  the  battle  of  Wakefield,  but  taken  prisoner  to  Pontefract  Castle,
and  soon  after  beheaded.

||  Richard  Neville,  Earl  of  Warwick,  was  the  son  of  Richard  Neville,
Earl  of  Westmoreland  and  Salisbury,  and  Alice,  daughter  of  Thomas
Montague,  Earl  of  Salisbury.  He  married  Anne,  daughter  of  Richard
Beauchamp,  Earl  of  Warwick  ;  and  he  was  killed  in  the  battle  of
Barnet,  on  Easter  Day,  the  14th  of  April,  1471.


1465.] CONCERNING  OFFICES  AND AUTHORITIES.  49

forces  which  remained  of  that  battle*  :  the  Earl  of  Warwick
espoused  the  interest  of  the  House  of  York,  and  the  Duke  of
Somerset-}-  that  of  Lancaster;  but  the  civil  wars  lasted  so
long,  that  all  those  of  the  houses  of  Warwick  and  Somerset
were  either  slain  in  battle  or  lost  their  heads.  King  Edward
caused  his  brother  the  Duke  of  Clarence  J,  to  be  drowned
in  a  pipe  of  malmsey,  charging  him  with  a  design  of  endea-
vouring to  dethrone  him ;  but  after  King  Edward's  death,
his  second  brother,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  §,  caused  his  two
sons  to  be  murdered,  declared  his  daughters  to  be  illegitimate,
and  had  himself  crowned  king.

Immediately  after  this,  the  Earl  of  Richmond  ||  ,the  present
king  (who  had  been  many  years  a  prisoner  in  Bretagne)  re-
turned into  England,  and  in  a  set  battle  defeated  and  slew
this  bloody  King  Richard,  who  had  so  barbarously  murdered
his  two  nephews.  Thus  have  there  been  slain  in  these  civil
wars  of  England,  within  my  remembrance,  near  fourscore
persons  of  the  blood  royal,  some  of  whom  I  was  acquainted
with  myself,  and  the  rest  I  have  heard  of,  by  the  report  of
several  English  gentlemen  that  resided  at  the  Duke  of  Bur-

*  It  was  after  the  defeat  at  Ludlow,  in  October,  1459,  that  the  Earl
of  Warwick  retired  to  Calais  with  the  Earl  of  March,  and  not,  as  Corn-
mines'  narrative  would  lead  us  to  suppose,  after  the  battle  of  Wakefield.

f  Edmund  Beaufort,  Duke  of  Somerset,  was  the  son  of  Edmund
Beaufort,  Duke  of  Somerset,  and  Eleanor,  daughter  of  Richard  Beau-
champ,  Earl  of  Warwick.  He  was  slain  in  the  battle  of  Tewkesbury  on
the  4th  of  May,  1471.

J  George  of  York,  Duke  of  Clarence,  brother  of  King  Edward  IV.,
died  on  the  18th  of  February,  1478.  He  married  Isabel,  the  eldest
daughter  of  Richard  Neville,  Earl  of  Warwick,  by  whom  he  had  two
children  :  Edward,  Earl  of  Warwick,  who  was  three  years  old  when  his
father  died  ;  and  Margaret,  who  afterwards  married  Richard  de  la  Pole.

§  Richard  of  York,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  afterwards  King  of  England,
under  the  name  of  Richard  III.  He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Bosworth
Field  on  the  22nd  of  August,  1485.

||  Henry,  Earl  of  Richmond,  was  the  son  of  Edmund  of  Hadham,  Earl
of  Richmond,  and  Margaret,  daughter  of  John  Beaufort,  Duke  of
Somerset.  He  was  proclaimed  King  of  England  under  the  name  of
Henry  VII.,  on  the  22nd  of  August,  1485.  He  married  Elizabeth,
eldest  daughter  of  King  Edward  IV.  ;  and  he  died  on  the  21st  of  April,
1509.  When  escaping  from  England  in  1471,  he  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  who  detained  him  prisoner  for  thirteen  years,
after  which  he  escaped,  hearing  that  the  duke  was  negotiating  to  deliver
him  up  to  King  Richard  I1L

£


50  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

gundy's  court,  during  the  time  of  my  being  in  his  service.
So  that  it  is  not  at  Paris  only,  nor  in  France  alone,  that  the
riches  and  honours  of  this  world  occasion  quarrels  and  dis-
putes. Yet  all  monarchs  and  great  princes  ought  to  be  very
careful  and  circumspect,  and  not  permit  any  faction  or  party
to  spring  up  in  their  courts,  for  from  thence  the  fire  spreads,
and  runs  over  the  whole  kingdom.  However,  I  am  of  opinion
that  all  these  revolutions  happen  by  the  divine  permission
and  appointment ;  for  when  kings  and  kingdoms  have  en-
joyed a  long  series  of  riches  and  prosperity,  and  forgotten
the  fountain  from  whence  those  blessings  and  advantages
proceed,  God  raises  up  enemies  against  them,  of  whom  they
never  had  the  least  suspicion,  which  appears  evidently  by
the  history  of  the  kings  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  and  by  the
surprising  events  that  have  happened  of  late  years,  and  do
daily  happen,  both  in  England,  Burgundy,  and  other  places.


CHAP.  VIII.

How  King  Lords  entered  Paris,  whilst  the  Lords  of  France  were  tamper-
ing with  the  Citizens. — 1465.

I  HATE  dwelt  too  long  upon  this  subject,  and  therefore  it  is
now  time  to  return  to  my  history.

As  soon  as  the  princes  were  arrived  before  Paris,  they  all
began  to  tamper  with  the  citizens,  promising  them  great
places  and  rewards,  and  everything  that  might  any  ways
contribute  towards  advancing  their  design.  By  that  time
we  had  lain  three  days  before  the  town,  there  was  held  a
grand  assembly  in  the  Hotel  de  Ville  of  Paris,  in  which,
after  many  and  long  harangues,  upon  hearing  the  princes'
summons  and  propositions,  which  (as  was  pretended)  were
for  no  other  end  than  the  good  of  the  public  ;  it  was  unani-
mously resolved  to  send  commissioners  to  them  to  treat  of
a  peace.  Whereupon  a  great  number  of  substantial  citizens
went  to  wait  on  the  princes  at  St.  Maur ;  and  Maitre  Guil-
laume  Chartier*  (a  person  of  great  parts  and  eloquence,  and
at  that  time  Bishop  of  Paris)  was  their  speaker ;  and  the
lords  appointed  the  Count  of  Dunois  to  be  theirs.  The

*  Born  at  Bayeux ;  he  was  Bishop  of  Paris  from  1447  until  May  1,
1472,  when  he  died :  he  was  a  brother  of  the  celebrated  Alain  Chartier.


1465.]  THE KING RELIEVES PARIS.  51

Duke  of  Berry,  the  king's  brother,  was  president  of  the
council,  and  sat  in  a  chair  of  state,  and  all  the  rest  of  the
princes  stood  round  him  :  on  one  hand  the  Dukes  of  Bretagne
and  Calabria,  and  on  the  other  the  Count  of  Charolois,  com-
pletely armed  (all  but  his  head-piece  and  gauntlets),  with  a
very  rich  mantle  thrown  over  his  cuirass ;  for  he  had  come
from  Conflans,  and  the  Bois-de-Vincennes  had  in  it  a  strong
garrison  for  the  king,  so  that  it  was  necessary  for  him  to
come  with  a  strong  guard.  The  request  and  object  of  the
princes  were  to  be  admitted  into  Paris,  to  hold  friendly  con-
sultation with  the  citizens  about  reformation  of  the  govern-
ment, of  which  they  sadly  complained,  and  charged  the  king
with  numerous  acts  of  injustice  and  mal-administration.  The
answer  of  the  citizens  was  full  of  respect  and  modesty,  yet
not  without  some  hesitation  and  demur.  However,  not-
withstanding that,  the  king  was  afterwards  displeased  with
the  bishop,  and  with  all  that  went  with  him.  In  this
manner  the  commissioners  returned,  and  great  practices
and  intrigues  were  still  carried  on ;  for  every  one  of  the
princes  had  a  private  conference  with  the  citizens  ;  and  I
believe  it  was  secretly  agreed  by  some  of  them,  that  the  lords
in  their  own  persons  might  enter  the  town,  and  their  army
pass  through  it  in  small  bodies  at  a  time,  if  they  desired  it.
This  admission  of  the  princes  would  not  only  have  been  the
means  of  gaining  the  town,  but  of  finishing  the  whole  enter-
prise ;  for  the  whole  people  would,  for  several  reasons,  have
easily  gone  over,  in  imitation  of  their  example,  to  their  side,
and  by  consequence  the  whole  kingdom  would  have  re-
volted. But  God  gave  the  king  wise  counsel,  and  he  exe-
cuted it  vigorously :  being  informed  of  all  their  secret
practices  and  cabals,  before  the  commissioners,  who  had
been  to  wait  on  the  princes,  had  made  their  report,  the  king
arrived  in  Paris*,  in  the  condition  of  a  prince  that  came
to  relieve  and  animate  his  subjects ;  for  he  came  with  a
very  great  company,  and  brought  above  2000  men-at-
arms  into  the  city,  all  the  nobility  of  Normandy,  a  great
number  of  volunteers,  his  household  retainers,  his  pen-
sioners, and  other  persons  of  quality  that  were  accustomed
to  attend  so  great  a  king  upon  such  occasions.  Thus  was

*  August  28,  1465.
E  2


52  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

the  whole  design  quashed,  and  the  minds  of  the  people
entirely  changed ;  so  that  not  a  man,  how  active  soever  he
had  been  formerly  for  us,  durst  now  speak  one  word  in  our
behalf.  Some  of  the  commissioners,  who  had  been  with  us,
fared  but  very  ill ;  some  lost  their  places,  and  others  were
banished  ;  but  the  king  used  no  farther  cruelty  or  revenge ;
for  which  I  think  he  is  highly  to  be  commended,  considering
that,  if  this  intended  design  had  succeeded,  the  best  he  could
have  expected  had  been  to  have  escaped  out  of  the  kingdom ;
for  he  has  told  me  many  times  since,  that  if  the  town  had
revolted,  and  refused  to  admit  him,  his  resolutions  were
to  have  retired,  either  to  the  Swiss,  or  to  Francis,  Duke
of  Milan*,  whom  he  thought  his  great  friend,  and  so  in-
deed he  afterwards  showed  himself  to  be,  by  the  supplies
which  he  sent  him,  which  consisted  of  500  men-at-arms,
and  3000  foot,  under  the  command  of  his  eldest  son
Galeasf  (afterwards  duke)  ;  who  came  as  far  as  Forest,  in
Auvergne,  and  made  war  upon  the  Duke  of  Bourbon ;  but,
upon  the  death  of  Duke  Francis,  they  were  recalled.  His
affection  to  the  king  appeared,  likewise,  by  the  advice  which
he  gave  him  at  the  treaty"  of  Conflans  j,  which  was  to  make
a  peace  with  the  princes  upon  any  terms  whatsoever,  in
order  to  break  the  confederacy,  and  separate  their  forces ;
but  yet  still  to  keep  his  own  army  on  foot.

As  far  as  I  can  remember,  we  had  scarce  been  three  days
before  Paris,  when  the  king  entered  with  his  troops.  Upon
whose  arrival  the  war  began  very  briskly,  and  they  often
fell  upon  us;  especially  upon  our  foragers,  whom  \\e  were
forced  to  send  under  a  strong  guard  on  account  of  their

*  Francisco  Sforza,  Duke  of  Milan,  born  at  San  Miniato  de  Cotignola
on  the  23rd  of  July,  1401,  was  the  natural  son  of  Muzio  Attendolo,
surnamed  Sforza,  on  account  of  the  vigour  of  his  character.  This
surname  was  adopted  by  his  descendants,  in  preference  to  that  of  At-
tendolo. The  mother  of  Francisco  Sforza  was  Lucia  de  Torsciano.  He
died  at  Milan  on  the  8th  of  March,  1466.

f  Galeazzo  Maria  Sforza,  born  on  the  14th  of  January,  1444  ;  married
successively  Dorothea  de  Gonzagun,  and  Bona  of  Savoy ;  and  was
assassinated  on  the  26th  of  December,  1476.

if  The  treaty  of  Conflans  was  made  between  Louis  XI.  and  the  Count
of  Charolois  on  the  5th  of  October,  1465.  On  the  29th  of  the  same
month  the  king  made  a  separate  treaty  with  the  confederate  princes,
which  is  dated  at  St.  Maur  des  Fosses.


1465.]  SALLIES MADE BY THE PARISIANS.  53

foraging  at  a  great  distance  from  our  camp.  But  it  must
needs  be  owned,  that  the  city  of  Paris  is  admirably  well
placed  in  the  Isle  of  France,  to  be  able  to  supply  two  such
powerful  hosts  with  provisions.  As  for  our  part,  we  never
found  a  scarcity  of  anything  in  the  camp ;  neither  did  the
inhabitants  that  were  in  the  town  suffer  any  privation  on
our  account.  Nothing  grew  dearer  except  bread,  which
was  sold  for  only  a  penny  more  than  the  usual  price  ;  and
the  reason  was,  because  we  had  not  blocked  up  the  rivers
above  it,  which  were  three,  the  Marne,  the  Yonne,  and  the
Seine,  besides  several  little  rivers  which  fell  into  them.
To  say  all  in  a  word,  Paris  is  surrounded  by  the  finest  and
the  most  plentiful  country  I  ever  yet  beheld,  and  it  is  almost
incredible  what  vast  quantities  of  provisions  are  brought  to
it.  Since  that  time,  I  have  been  there  with  King  Louis,  for
six  months  together,  and  never  stirred,  lodging  in  the  Tour-
nelles,  eating  and  sleeping  with  him  very  frequently ;  and
besides,  since  his  death  (much  to  my  sorrow)  I  was  a  pri-
soner twenty  months  in  the  Louvre,  from  whence  I  could
see,  out  of  my  window,  whatever  came  out  of  Normandy  up
the  River  Seine ;  and  on  the  other  side  there  came  in  in-
comparably much  more,  which  I  could  never  have  believed,
had  I  not  been  an  eye-witness  of  it.

The  Parisians  made  frequent  sallies  every  day,  which
occasioned  warm  skirmishes  on  both  sides.  Our  guards,
consisting  of  fifty  lances,  were  posted  near  the  Grange-aux-
Merciers  * ;  but  our  scouts  went  as  near  the  town  as  they
could,  and  were  often  attacked  and  beaten  back  to  our  main
guard,  sometimes  retreating  gravely  step  by  step,  sometimes
at  full  trot,  with  the  enemy  at  their  heels,  who  sometimes
drove  them  to  our  very  waggons ;  upon  which  we  used  to  send
a  fresh  body  of  troops  to  reinforce  the  beaten  party,  who
very  often  repulsed  the  enemy,  and  drove  them  back  to  the
gates  of  Paris.  And  this  happened  daily  and  hourly,  for
there  were  in  the  town  more  than  2500  men-at-arms,  well
armed  and  in  complete  order,  besides  a  great  number  of
the  nobility  of  Normandy,  and  volunteers ;  whom  the
eight  of  the  ladies  of  Paris,  who  were  constant  spectators

*  "  Not  very  far  from  Conflans,"  says  Oliver  de  la  Marche.  It  was
on  the  site  now  occupied  by  Bercy,  where  there  still  exists  a  street  called
the  Rue  de  la  Grange-aux-Merciers.

E  3


54  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMUTES. [1465.

of  their  actions,  inspired  with  an  emulation  of  signalising
themselves.  On  our  side  we  had  a  very  great  number  of  men,
but  not  so  strong  a  body  of  horse  as  the  enemy ;  for  we
had  none  but  the  Burgundian  cavalry,  consisting  of  about
2000  lances,  good  and  bad,  who  were  not  so  well  dis-
ciplined as  those  in  Paris,  by  reason  of  the  long  peace  they
had  had,  as  I  said  before.*  Besides,  200  of  these  were
with  the  Duke  of  Calabria,  at  Laigny;  but  our  infantry
was  numerous,  and  generally  very  good.  The  Bretons  were
posted  at  St.  Denis,  and  ravaged  all  the  country  on  that  side
Paris  ;  the  rest  of  the  lords  were  dispersed,  some  here,  some
there,  for  better  convenience  of  their  provision.  At  length
the  Duke  of  Nemours,  the  Count  of  Armagnac,  and  the
Lord  of  Albret,  came  to  our  camp,  but  their  forces  were  left
at  a  good  distance  behind,  because  they  had  no  pay,  and  it
would  have  starved  our  army  if  they  had  taken  anything
without  paying.  To  my  knowledge  the  Count  of  Charolois
gave  them  money  for  their  subsistence,  to  the  amount  of
5000  or  6000  francs  ;  and  it  was  resolved  that  they  should
come  no  nearer  us ;  for  they  were  full  6000  horse,  and  did  a
marvellous  amount  of  mischief  in  the  country  where  they  lay.


3HAP.  IX.

How  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  the  King  cannonaded  each  other  near
Charenton  ;  after  which  Action,  the  Count  of  Charolois  laid  a  second
Bridge  of  Boats  over  the  River  Seine.  — 1465.

BUT  to  return  to  the  army  before  Paris.  It  will  not  be
doubted  that  scarce  a  day  passed  without  some  loss  or  gain
on  both  sides,  but  nothing  considerable  on  either.  For  the
king  would  not  suffer  his  forces  to  sally  out  in  great  bodies,
nor  would  he  bring  his  affairs  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle;  his
only  desire  being  for  peace,  in  order  to  break  and  divide  our
forces  as  wisely  as  he  could.  However,  one  day  early  in
the  morning,  4000  of  his  frank-archers  came  and  posted
themselves  along  the  bank  of  the  river,  over  against  the
Hotel  de  Conflans.  The  nobles  of  Normandy,  and  some  few
of  the  household  troops,  were  disposed  in  a  village  about  a
quarter  of  a  league  off,  with  only  a  fair  plain  between  them
and  their  infantry,  and  the  River  Seine  between  us  and  them.

*  See  p.  12.


1465.]  COUNCIL OF WAR.  55

The  king's  troops  began  to  throw  up  a  trench  over  against
Charenton,  and  made  a  bulwark  there  of  wood  and  of
earth,  all  along  the  front  of  our  army.  This  ditch  or  trench
was  thrown  up  (as  has  been  said  already)  before  Conflans,
with  the  river  between  us  and  them,  and  upon  that  trench
and  bastion  they  planted  a  great  number  of  pieces  of  cannon,
which  played  briskly  upon  the  Duke  of  Calabria's  quarters,
and  at  the  first  firing  drove  his  men  out  of  Charenton,  and
forced  them  to  retire  in  great  haste  to  our  camp,  with  the
loss  of  some  few  horses  and  men.  So  the  Duke  of  Calabria
took  up  his  quarters  in  a  little  house,  between  the  river  and
the  place  where  the  Count  of  Charolois  lay.

The  enemy  immediately  began  to  cannonade  our  camp,
which  threw  the  whole  army  into  consternation ;  for,  upon
the  first  firing,  they  killed  us  abundance  of  men,  and  two
cannon  shots  coming  through  the  room  where  the  Count  of
Charolois  was  sitting  at  dinner,  killed  a  trumpeter  on  the
stairs,  as  he  was  bringing  up  a  dish  of  meat.

After  dinner,  the  count  removed  to  the  ground-floor,  but
resolved  not  to  decamp,  and  had  it  furnished  as  best  he
could.  The  next  morning  the  princes  called  a  council  of
war,  which  was  always  held  in  the  Count  of  Charolois'
quarters,  after  which  they  always  dined  together.  The
Dukes  of  Berry  and  Bretagne  sat  next  the  wall  upon  a  bench,
and  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  the  Duke  of  Calabria  over
against  them,  the  count  giving  all  of  them  the  preference  as
to  matter  of  place ;  as  indeed  was  but  right,  as  he  was  in
his  own  quarters.  Here  they  resolved  to  make  use  of  all
the  artillery  in  the  army,  of  which  both  the  Count  of
Charolois  and  the  Dukes  of  Bretagne  and  Calabria  had  a
very  fine  and  numerous  train,  in  order  to  dislodge  the  king's
troops  and  dismount  his  cannon.  Accordingly,  we  made
great  holes  in  the  walls,  which  were  along  the  river,  behind
the  Hotel  de  Conflans,  and  mounted  all  our  best  guns,  except
the  bombards  and  other  large  pieces  which  could  not  con-
veniently be  drawn,  and  so  were  left  in  a  place  where  they
might  do  more  service ;  so  that  on  the  princes'  side  we  had
many  more  than  there  were  on  the  king's.  The  trench
which  the  king's  forces  had  thrown  up  was  of  great  length,
and  carried  a  great  way  towards  the  city  of  Paris  ;  yet  still
they  were  working  at  it,  throwing  up  the  earth  on  the  side

E 4


56  THE MEMOIRS  OP  PHILIP  DE COMMUTES. [1465.

next  us,  to  shelter  themselves  from  our  cannon,  for  they
wrought  still  in  the  ditch,  and  none  of  them  durst  venture
so  much  as  to  put  out  their  heads,  for  the  place  where  they
lay  was  in  a  large  meadow,  as  bare  as  a  man's  hand.

I  never  heard  such  terrible  cannonading  for  the  short
time  it  lasted,  for  our  design  was  to  dislodge  them  by  Jint  of
cannon  ;  and  they  daily  received  from  Paris  fresh  supplies,
both  of  cannon  and  ammunition,  neither  were  they  sparing
of  their  powder  or  pains,  but  fired  upon  us  briskly  day  and
night.  Several  of  our  soldiers  dug  pits  before  their  tents  to
cover  themselves,  others  had  them  provided  to  their  hands,
their  quarters  being  in  a  great  stone-quarry,  so  that  all  got
some  shelter  or  other ;  and  in  this  posture  we  passed  three
or  four  days ;  but  the  fright  was  much  greater  on  both
sides  than  the  loss,  for  no  officer  of  any  note  was  killed.

When  the  princes  found  they  could  not  dislodge  the
enemy,  their  failure  seemed  to  them  not  only  dangerous  and
disgraceful  to  themselves,  but  also  likely  to  give  fresh
courage  to  the  Parisians,  who  were  already  grown  so  con-
fident, that  upon  a  single  day's  truce  the  people  flocked  out
in  such  numbers  to  see  us,  that  one  would  have  thought
there  had  been  none  left  in  the  town.  It  was  therefore  con-
cluded in  council,  that  a  large  bridge  of  boats  should  be
made,  the  ends  to  be  coupled  together,  and  the  body  of  them
to  be  covered  with  planks,  with  great  anchors  behind,  to
fasten  them  into  the  ground ;  upon  which  several  flat-
bottomed  boats  were  brought  down  the  Seine  in  order  that
we  might  pass  that  river,  and  attack  the  king's  forces.

Master  Girault,  an  engineer,  had  the  management  and
direction  of  this  affair,  who  was  of  opinion,  that  the  trench
which  the  enemy  had  thrown  up  to  defend  themselves,
would  be  of  great  advantage  to  the  Burgundians  when  once
they  had  passed  the  river ;  for  the  king's  forces  would  find
themselves  as  it  were  under  us  in  their  trenches,  and
would  not  dare  to  march  out  for  fear  of  our  cannon  ;  which
opinion  greatly  encouraged  and  animated  our  soldiers,  and
made  them  impatient  to  begin  the  attack.  Thus  the  bridge
was  finished  and  made  ready,  all  but  the  last  two  boats,
which  were  there  ready  to  complete  it,  and  all  the  other
boats  for  transportation  brought  together,  and  when  it  was
ready,  one  of  the  king's  heralds  came  to  tell  us  we  had


1465.] THE  KING'S  TROOPS  QUIT  THEIR  TRENCHES. 57

broken  the  truce,  which  was  made  for  that  day  and  the  day
before,  and  that  he  was  come  to  see  the  meaning  oi'  these
preparations.  By  accident  he  met  Monsieur  de  Bueil  and
some  others  on  the  bridge,  to  whom  he  delivered  his
message.  That  night  the  truce  ended.

Our  bridge  was  so  large  that  three  of  our  men-at-arms,
with  their  lances  in  rest,  might  pass  easily  abreast ;  besides
we  had  got  six  great  vessels,  each  of  which  would  carry
over  a  thousand  men  at  a  time,  and  several  smaller  for  the
artillery,  which  we  were  to  make  use  of  in  that  expedition.
The  draught  of  such  troops  as  were  to  be  employed  in  this
enterprise  was  already  made  ;  and  the  Count  of  St.  Paul  and
the  Lord  Haultbourdin  were  appointed  to  command  them.
Those  who  were  of  the  party  began  to  prepare  themselves
about  midnight,  and  before  day  all  of  them  were  ready,  some
of  them  hearing  mass  till  day  appeared,  or  employing  them-
selves as  good  Christians  ought  to  do,  upon  such  an
occasion.  I  was  that  night  in  a  great  tent  in  the  middle  of
our  army,  where  the  guard  was  posted^  and  to  speak  truth,
I  was  one  of  the  guard  (for  nobody  was  exempted),  which
was  commanded  by  Monsieur  de  Chastel  Guyon*  (slain
afterwards  at  the  battle  of  Granson).  And  as  we  stood
there,  expecting  when  the  attack  would  begin,  on  a  sudden
we  heard  those  who  were  in  the  French  trenches,  cry  out  as
loud  as  they  could,  "Farewell,  neighbours,  farewell;"  and
immediately  they  set  fire  to  their  tents,  and  drew  off  their
artillery.  About  day-break  the  detachment  that  was  to
make  this  attack  had  already  gained  the  banks  of  the  river
on  the  other  side,  at  least  in  part,  and  they  could  descry  the
French  at  a  good  distance,  retiring  towards  Paris ;  upon
which  all  of  our  men  disarmed,  and  were  extremely  glad  of
their  retreat.  Without  dispute  the  king  had  sent  that  body  of
troops  thither,  only  to  disturb  and  cannonade  us  in  our
camp,  without  the  least  intention  of  a  battle ;  for,  as  I  said
before,  it  was  not  his  way  to  risk  anything  on  a  hazard,
though  otherwise  his  army  was  strong  enough  to  have  en-
gaged the  united  forces  of  all  the  princes  together :  but  his  pur-

*  Louis  de  Chalon,  Lord  of  Chasteauguion,  was  son  of  Louis  de
Chalon,  Prince  of  Orange,  and  Eleanor  of  Armagnac.  He  was  a  Knight
of  the  Golden  Fleece,  and  fell  at  the  battle  of  Granson  on  the  3rd  of
March,  1476i


58  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

pose,  as  he  plainly  showed,  was  still  to  make  peace,  and  divide
the  forces  of  the  confederates,  without  being  willing  to  expose
so  important  and  valuable  a  concern,  as  the  crown  of  the  great
and  obedient  realm  of  France,  to  the  uncertainty  of  a  battle.
There  was  scarce  a  day  passed,  but  some  artifice  or  other
was  made  use  of  to  bring  over  people  from  one  side  to  the
other  ;  and  several  times  there  were  truces,  and  conferences
between  both  parties  in  order  to  an  accommodation,  which
conferences  were  held  at  the  Grange-aux-Merciers,  not  far
from  our  army.  As  commissioners  from  the  king,  there  were
the  Count  of  Maine  and  several  others.  For  the  princes,
the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  and  as  many  with  him.  The  com-
missioners met  often,  but  came  to  no  conclusion.  Yet  the
cessation  of  arms  was  continued,  and  several  persons  on
both  sides,  who  were  acquainted,  saw  and  conversed  with
one  another,  but  with  a  great  ditch  between  them,  as  it
were  in  the  mid-way  between  the  two  armies,  which  ditch,  by
the  articles  of  the  truce,  no  person  was  to  pass.*  There  was
not  a  day  passed  but,  by  means  of  these  interviews,  some
ten  or  twelve  would  come  over  to  us ;  and  some  days  as
many  of  ours  went  away  to  them,  for  which  reason  that
place  was  afterwards  called  the  Market,  because  of  the
bargains  driven  there.  To  speak  truth,  such  liberty  of
communication  is,  in  my  judgment,  very  dangerous  at
such  times,  especially  for  that  party  which  is  most  visibly
declining :  for  naturally  most  people  are  intent,  if  not  upon
their  advancement,  at  least  upon  their  safety,  which  inclines
them  more  easily  to  the  strongest  side.  There  are  some,
indeed,  who  are  above  temptations  of  this  kind,  but  they
are  very  few,  and  rarely  to  be  met  with.  But  if  ever  such
communications  are  dangerous,  it  is  when  a  prince  himself
makes  it  his  business  to  oblige  and  cajole  people  ;  which  is  an
excellent  qualification  in  a  prince  who  knows  how  to  do
it  well,  and  renders  him  clear  from  that  foolish  vice  and
sin  of  pride  and  haughtiness,  which  all  persons  abhor.  For
which  reason,  when  any  treaty  of  peace  is  on  foot,  it  is
safest  to  commit  it  to  the  wisest  and  faithfulest  persons
about  the  prince,  and  those  of  competent  years ;  lest  otiier-

*  Oliver  de  la  Marche,  however,  says,  "  During  these  truces,  we  went
to  Paris  to  indulge  in  good  cheer,  paying  with  our  own  money  :  and  we
were  very  welcome."  La  Marche,  ii.  246.


1465.]  VIRTUES AND VICES OF LOUIS  XI.  59

wise,  their  want  of  experience  betray  them  to  some  dis-
honourable compact,  or  they  alarm  their  master  with
groundless  fears  at  their  return.  If  it  be  possible,  such
persons  ought  to  be  employed  who  have  received  honours
or  advantages  from  their  princes,  r.ither  than  any  others  ;  but
above  all,  they  ought  to  be  men  of  great  wisdom  and  ex-
perience, for  nothing  ever  prospered  that  was  managed  by  a
fool.  This  kind  of  treaties  ought  likewise  to  be  managed  at
a  distance,  and  not  near  his  camp;  and  when  his  plenipo-
tentiaries return,  he  ought  to  hear  them  alone,  or  in  as  little
company  as  he  can,  that  if  their  news  should  be  apt  to  dis-
hearten the  people,  he  may  instruct  and  dictate  what  account
they  shall  give  to  such  as  are  inquisitive ;  for  everybody  is
desirous  to  hear  news  from  those  that  come  from  a  treaty,
and  many  are  so  conceited  as  to  boast,  "  Such  an  one  will
hide  nothing  from  me  ;"  but  if  the  plenipotentiaries  be  such
as  I  have  described,  and  know  their  masters  to  be  wise,  they
will  discover  nothing  to  any  man.


CHAP.  X.

A  Digression  concerning  some  of  the  Virtues  and  Vices  of  King  Louis  XI.

THE  chief  reason  that  has  induced  me  to  enter  upon  this
subject,  is  because  I  have  seen  many  deceptions  in  this  world,
especially  in  servants  towards  their  masters ;  and  I  have
always  found  that  proud  and  stately  princes  who  will  hear
but  few,  are  more  liable  to  be  imposed  on  than  those  who  are
open  and  accessible :  but  of  all  the  princes  that  I  ever  knew,
the  wisest  and  most  dexterous  to  extricate  himself  out  of  any
danger  or  difficulty  in  time  of  adversity,  was  our  master
King  Louis  XL  He  was  the  humblest  in  his  conversation
and  habit,  and  the  most  painful  and  indefatigable  to  win  over
any  man  to  his  side  that  he  thought  capable  of  doing  him
either  mischief  or  service :  though  he  was  often  refused,  he
would  never  give  over  a  man  that  he  wished  to  gain,  but
still  pressed  and  continued  his  insinuations,  promising  him
largely,  and  presenting  him  with  such  sums  and  honours  as
he  knew  would  gratify  his  ambition  ;  and  for  such  as  he  had
discarded  in  time  of  peace  and  prosperity,  he  paid  dear


60  THE MEMOIRS OP  PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1465.

(when  he  had  occasion  for  them)  to  recover  them  again  ;  but
when  he  had  once  reconciled  them,  he  retained  no  enmity
towards  them  for  what  had  passed,  but  employed  them  freely
for  the  future.  He  was  naturally  kind  and  indulgent  to
persons  of  mean  estate,  and  hostile  to  all  great  men  who  had
no  need  of  him.  Never  prince  was  so  conversable,  nor  so
inquisitive  as  he,  for  his  desire  was  to  know  everybody  he
could ;  and  indeed  he  knew  all  persons  of  any  authority  or
worth  in  England,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Italy,  in  the  ter-
ritories of  the  Dukes  of  Burgundy  and  Bretagne,  and  among
his  own  subjects;  and  by  those  qualities  he  preserved  the
crown  upon  his  head,  which  was  in  much  danger  by  the
enemies  he  had  created  to  himself  upon  his  accession  to  the
throne.  But  above  all,  his  great  bounty  and  liberality  did
him  the  greatest  service :  and  yet,  as  he  behaved  himself
wisely  in  time  of  distress,  so  when  he  thought  himself  a
little  out  of  danger,  though  it  were  but  by  a  truce,  he  would
disoblige  the  servants  and  officers  of  his  court  by  mean  and
petty  ways,  which  were  little  to  his  advantage ;  and  as  for
peace,  he  could  hardly  endure  the  thoughts  of  it.  He  spoke
slightingly  of  most  people,  and  rather  before  their  faces,  than
behind  their  backs,  unless  he  was  afraid  of  them,  and  of  that
sort  there  were  a  great  many,  for  he  was  naturally  somewhat
timorous.  When  he  had  done  himself  any  prejudice  by  his
talk,  or  was  apprehensive  he  should  do  so,  and  wished  to  make
amends,  he  would  say  to  the  person  whom  he  had  disobliged,
"  I  am  sensible  my  tongue  has  done  me  a  great  deal  of  mis-
chief; but.  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  sometimes  done  me
much  good ;  however,  it  is  but  reason  I  should  make  some
reparation  for  the  injury."  And  he  never  used  this  kind
of  apologies  to  any  person,  but  he  granted  some  favour  to
the  person  to  whom  he  made  it,  and  it  was  always  of  consi-
derable amount.

It  is  certainly  a  great  blessing  from  God  upon  any  prince
to  have  experienced  adversity  as  well  as  prosperity,  good  as
well  as  evil,  and  especially  if  the  good  outweighs  the  evil,  as
it  did  in  the  king  our  master.  I  am  of  opinion  that  the
troubles  he  was  involved  in,  in  his  youth,  when  he  fled  from
his  father,  and  resided  six  years  *  together  with  Philip

*  Louis  XL,  when  Dauphin,  fled  in  1456  from  Dauphiny,  whither  he
had  retired  ten  years  previously  on  account  of  a  misunderstanding  with


1465.]  VIRTUES  AND  VICES OF LOUIS  XI.  61

Duke  of  Burgundy,  were  of  great  service  to  him  ;  for  there
he  learned  to  be  complaisant  to  such  as  he  had  occasion  to
use,  which  was  no  slight  advantage  oi'  adversity.  As  soon
as  he  found  himself  a  powerful  and  crowned  king,  his  mind
was  wholly  bent  upon  revenge ;  but  he  quickly  found  the
inconvenience  of  this,  repented  by  degrees  of  his  indiscretion,
and  made  sufficient  reparation  for  his  folly  and  error,  by  re-
gaining those  he  had  injured,  as  shall  be  related  hereafter.
Besides,  I  am  very  confident  that  if  his  education  had  not
been  different  from  the  usual  education  of  such  nobles  as  I
have  seen  in  France,  he  could  not  so  easily  have  worked
himself  out  of  his  troubles;  for  they  are  brought  up  to
nothing  but  to  make  themselves  ridiculous,  both  in  their
clothes  and  discourse  ;  they  have  no  knowledge  of  letters  ;  no
wise  man  is  suffered  to  come  near  them,  to  improve  their
understandings ;  they  have  governors  who  manage  their
business,  but  they  do  nothing  themselves :  nay,  there  are
some  nobles  who,  though  they  have  an  income  of  thirteen
livres,  will  take  pride  to  bid  you,  "  Go  to  my  servants,  and
let  them  answer  you  ; "  thinking  by  such  speeches  to  imitate
the  state  and  grandeur  of  a  prince ;  and  I  have  seen  their
servants  take  great  advantage  of  them,  giving  them  to  under-
stand they  were  fools  ;  and  if  afterwards  they  came  to  apply
their  minds  to  business,  and  attempted  to  manage  their  own
affairs,  they  began  so  late,  they  could  make  nothing  of  it.
And  it  is  certain  that  all  those  who  have  performed  any  great
or  memorable  action,  worthy  to  be  recorded  in  history,  began
always  in  their  youth;  and  this  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  me-
thod of  their  education,  or  some  particular  blessing  from  God.


CHAP.  XI.

How  the  Burgundians,  being  drawn  up  near  Paris,  and  in  Expectation
of  a  Battle,  mistook  high  Thistles  for  a  Body  of  Lances. — 1465.

I  HAVE  dwelt  long  upon  this  subject,  but  indeed  it  is  of  such
a  nature  I  could  not  easily  leave  off  when  I  would.  How-
ever, to  return  to  the  war.

his  father.  He  sought  refuge  in  Burgundy  from  the  authority  of  Charles
VIIL,  who  wished  to  force  him  to  return  to  Court,  and  remained  with  his
uncle  Philip  until  1461,  when  his  father  died.


62  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

You  have  been  informed  how  the  forces  that  the  king
had  entrenched  along  the  River  Seine  abandoned  their  post,
and  retreated  to  Paris,  the  very  hour  we  had  designed  to
attack  them.  The  truces  never  lasted  above  one  day,  or  two
at  the  most ;  at  other  times  the  war  was  pushed  on  with  all
possible  vigour,  the  skirmishes  continuing  from  morning  to
night ;  and  though  they  often  beat  our  scouts  home  to  our
guards,  yet  they  never  sallied  out  of  Paris  in  any  considerable
body.  I  do  not  remember  to  have  seen  one  day  pass  without
some  small  action  or  other ;  and  I  believe  the  king  would
have  been  contented  they  should  have  been  greater,  but  he
was  suspicious  of  many  persons,  though  without  any  cause :
he  told  me  once,  that  he  found  the  gate  of  the  Bastille  of  St.
Antoine,  towards  the  fields,  open  one  night,  which  made  him
entertain  a  great  suspicion  of  Charles  de  Melun,  whose
father  *  was  then  governor  of  that  place.  I  shall  say  no
more  than  I  have  done  of  the  said  Charles ;  but  certainly
never  prince  had  a  better  servant  than  he  showed  himself  all
that  year.

It  was  one  day  resolved  in  Paris  that  they  would  sally  out
and  venture  a  battle  with  us  (I  believe  it  was  only  a  design
of  the  great  officers,  and  that  the  king  was  not  privy  to
it).  The  project  they  had  concerted,  was  to  attack  us  in  three
several  places  at  once ;  in  one  with  a  considerable  body  of
forces  that  were  to  sally  out  of  Paris ;  the  other  by  the
bridge  of  Charenton  (but  that  party  could  have  done  us  no
great  mischief) :  and  the  third,  by  a  brigade  of  200  men-
at-arms  from  the  wood  of  Vincennes.  About  midnight  we
were  informed  of  this  design  by  a  page,  who  called  to  us
over  the  river,  by  directions  from  some  friends  of  the
princes  who  were  in  the  town,  whose  names  he  told  us,  and
immediately  returned.  Just  at  break  of  day,  the  Lord
Poncet  de  Riviere  appeared  before  the  bridge  of  Charenton ;
and  the  Lord  du  Lau  f  on  the  other  side,  towards  the  wood

*  Philip  de  Melun  held  the  office  of  Captain  of  the  Bastille  Saint'
Antoine  from  1462,  until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1466.  See  p.  14.
note  §.

f  Antoine  de  Castelnau  or  Chasteanneuf,  Lord  and  Baron  of  Lau,  in
Armagnac,  Grand  Chamberlain  and  Grand  Butler  of  France,  and  Sene-
schal of  Guienne.  Having  incurred  the  king's  displeasure,  he  was  arrested
and  taken  to  the  castle  of  Usson,  in  Auvergne,  whence  he  escaped  in


1455.] ALARM  OP  THE  CONFEDERATES.  63

of  Vincennes,  charged  up  as  far  as  our  artillery,  and  killed
one  of  our  cannoneers  :  the  alarm  was  very  great,  and  every-
body concluded  it  was  the  same  design  of  which  the  page
had  given  us  notice  in  the  night.  The  Count  of  Charolois
was  immediately  in  arms,  but  not  so  soon  as  Duke  John
of  Calabria,  who,  in  all  alarms,  was  always  the  first  mounted,
his  horse  barbed,  and  himself  completely  armed :  he  wore
such  a  dress  as  the  condottieri  usually  do  in  Italy ,  and
indeed  he  had  the  air  of  a  prince  and  a  great  general.  When-
ever he  came  forth  upon  any  alarm,  his  first  course  was  to
ride  up  to  the  barriers  of  our  camp,  to  keep  our  men  from
sallying  out  ;  and  they  obeyed  his  orders  as  readily  as  if  the
Count  of  Charolois  had  been  there  himself,  and,  to  speak
truth,  he  deserved  it.  In  a  moment  our  whole  army  was  in
arms,  and  drawn  up  within  our  waggons,  all  except  200
horse,  who  were  abroad  upon  the  guard  :  and,  unless  it
were  that  day,  I  never  knew  any  great  likelihood  of  a
battle,  but  then  everybody  expected  it.  By  this  time  the
Dukes  of  Berry  and  Bretagne  were  come  in,  whom  before
that  time  I  never  saw  in  arms :  the  Duke  of  Berry  was
armed  at  all  points,  but  neither  of  them  had  any  great  body
of  troops  with  them,  only  they  passed  through  the  camp,  and
went  to  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  the  Duke  of  Calabria,  with
whom  they  had  a  conference.  Our  scouts,  being  reinforced,
marched  up  as  near  Paris  as  they  could,  and  were  able  to  dis-
cover several  of  the  king's  party,  who  were  sent  out  to  learn
what  was  the  matter  in  our  army.  When  the  Lord  du  Laxi
approached  us,  our  cannon  played  briskly  upon  him  ;  and
the  king,  having  a  large  train  of  artillery  mounted  on  the
walls  of  Paris,  fired  as  briskly  into  our  camp,  notwithstand-
ing it  was  two  good  leagues  off;  but  I  suppose  they  mounted
their  muzzles  very  high,  and  shot  amongst  us  at  random.

This  prodigious  cannonading  made  both  sides  believe  some
great  design  was  in  agitation :  and,  to  be  sure,  we  sent  out
our  scouts,  and  the  weather  being  cloudy  and  duskish,  those
who  got  nearest  the  town  discovered  a  party  of  horse  upon

1468,  and  sought  refuge  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  under  whom  he
fought  at  the  siege  of  Liege.  He  afterwards  regained  the  favour  of
Louis  XL,  who  appointed  him  Lieutenant- General  and  Governor  of  the
county  of  Roussillon,  of  Cerdagne,  and  of  the  town  of  Perpignan.  He
was  still  living  in  1483.


64  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1465.

the  patrol,  and  beyond  them  (as  they  fancied)  they  perceived
a  great  number  of  lances  standing  upright,  which  they
imagined  to  be  the  king's  battalions  drawn  up  in  the  field,
and  all  the  people  of  Paris  with  them  :  which  fancy  pro-
ceeded merely  from  the  darkness  of  the  day ;  upon  which
they  retired  immediately  to  the  princes  (who  were  then
riding  before  our  camp),  acquainted  them  with  what  they
had  seen,  and  assured  them  of  a  battle.  The  Parisian  scouts
seeing  ours  retreat,  advanced  continually  upon  them,  which
made  their  relation  seem  more  probable.  The  Duke  of  Calabria
came  then  where  the  standard  of  the  Count  of  Charolois  was
pitched,  and  most  of  the  officers  of  his  household  stood  ready
to  accompany  it :  his  banner  was  ready  to  be  displayed  like-
wise, and  the  guidon,  with  his  arms,  which  was  the  custom
of  that  family ;  and  being  come  up  to  us,  Duke  John  said,
"  Well,  gentlemen,  we  are  now  where  we  desired  to  be  ;
the  king  and  all  his  army  (as  our  scouts  inform  us)  are  drawn
out  of  Paris,  and  marching  to  engage  us  ;  so  let  each  behave
with  courage  and  good  will,  and  as  they  march  out,  we  will
march  in,  and  measure  out  their  commodities  for  them  by
the  pike."  And  after  this  manner  he  rode  from  rank  to  rank,
encouraging  and  animating  the  soldiers.  By  this  time  our
scouts,  perceiving  the  enemy  were  weak,  began  to  assume  a
little  more  courage,  ventured  something  nearer  the  town,  but
still  found  the  battalions  in  the  same  place  and  posture  in
which  they  had  left  them,  which  put  them  into  a  new  quan-
dary :  however,  they  stole  up  to  them  as  near  as  they  could,
but  could  make  nothing  of  them  ;  till  at  length  the  day
cleared,  and  they  discovered  them  to  be  tall  thistles.  From
thence  they  marched  up  to  the  very  gates,  but  found  no
troops  posted  there,  of  which  word  was  despatched  to  the
princes,  and  they  went  immediately  to  mass,  and  from  thence
to  dinner.  Those  who  brought  the  first  news  were  much  out
of  countenance  ;  but  the  page's  intelligence  in  the  night,  and
the  duskishness  of  the  day,  did  in  some  measure  excuse
them.


1465.]  DEMANDS OF THE CONFEDERATES.  65

CHAP.  XII.

How  the  King  visited  the  Count  of  Charolois,  and  talked  with  him  con-
cerning their  Quarrel ;  arid  of  the  Importance  of  wise  Councillors  to  a
Prince. — 1465.

HOWEVER,  the  treaty  of  peace  between  the  king  and  the
Count  of  Charolois  still  went  on,  and  with  greater  vigour
than  ever ;  because  the  principal  strength  of  both  parties
consisted  in  those  two.  The  princes'  demands  ran  very  high  :
the  Duke  of  Berry  demanded  all  Normandy  for  his  share,
which  the  king  positively  refused.  The  Count  of  Charolois
would  have  all  the  towns  restored  to  him  which  were
situated  on  the  River  Somme,  and  had  been  delivered  up  by
Duke  Philip  to  the  king,  about  three  months  before*,
for  400,000  crowns ;  which  towns  had  been  surren-
dered to  him  upon  the  treaty  of  Arras,  in  the  time  of
Charles  VII.  These  towns  were  Amiens,  Abbeville,  St.
Quentin,  Peronne,  and  others.  The  Count  of  Charolois
pretended,  that  during  his  life  they  ought  not  to  have  been
ransomed,  and  put  the  king  in  mind  of  the  great  favours  and
obligations  he  had  received  from  their  family ;  how  he  had
been  entertained  and  protected  by  them  for  six  years  toge-
ther, when  he  was  in  rebellion  against  his  father  King  Charles
VII.,  supplied  with  money  for  his  subsistence,  attended  to
Rheims  to  be  inaugurated,  and  to  Paris  for  his  coronation  ;
wherefore  the  Count  of  Charolois  took  it  very  ill  that  he
should  offer  to  redeem  the  said  towns.  However,  the  nego-
tiation went  on  so  prosperously,  that  the  king  came  one
morningt,  by  water,  right  over  against  our  camp,  having
drawn  up  a  good  body  of  horse  upon  the  bank  of  the  river,
but,  in  the  boat  with  him  there  were  not  above  four  or  five
persons  besides  the  boatmen.  Among  those  in  the  boat, .
were  the  Lord  du  Lau,  the  Lord  of  Montauban  (at  that
time  Admiral  of  France),  the  Lord  of  Nantouillet,  and  others.
The  Count  of  Charolois  and  the  Count  of  St.  Paul  were  at
the  same  time  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  on  our  side,
awaiting  his  majesty.  The  king  saluted  the  Count  of
Charolois  in  these  words,  — "  Brother  [for  his  first  wife

*  This  is  a  mistake  :  two  years  had  elapsed  since  their  repurchase.
See  p.  5.,  note  §.
f  On  Monday,  September  9.  1465.

F


66  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1465.

was  the  king's  sister*],  do  you  assure  me  ? "  The  count
replied,  "  Yes,  my  lord,  as  a  brother."  I  heard  him,  and  so
did  many  others.  Then  the  king  came  on  shore,  and  the
lords  with  him.  The  Count  of  Charolois  and  the  Count  of
St.  Paul  received  him  with  great  honour  (as  reason  was
they  should),  and  he  being  not  sparing,  began  in  this
manner  :  "Brother,  I  know  now  you  are  a  gentleman,  and
cf  the  family  of  France."  "Why  so,  my  lord  ?  "  replied  the
Count  of  Charolois.  "  Because  (said  the  king)  when  I  sent
my  ambassadors  lately  to  Lisle,  to  wait  on  my  uncle  your
father,  and  yourself,  and  that  fool  Morvillier  talked  so
saucily  to  you,  you  sent  me  word,  by  the  Archbishop  of
Narbonne  (who  is  a  gentleman,  and,  indeed,  he  has  shown
himself  so,  for  every  one  is  pleased  with  him)  that  before  the
year  was  at  an  end.  I  should  repent  of  what  Morvillier  had  said
to  you.  You  have  been  as  good  as  your  word,  and  much
before  your  time  was  expired."  The  king  spoke  these  words
smilingly,  and  in  a  very  pleasant  manner,  as  knowing  the
humour  of  the  person  to  whom  he  spoke  to  be  such,  that  he
would  be  delighted  with  an  expression  of  that  nature  ;  and,
indeed,  he  was  wonderfully  pleased  with  it.  Then  the  king
proceeded,  "  It  is  with  such  persons  that  I  would  deal,  who
are  punctual  to  their  promise  ;"  and,  afterwards,  his  majesty
disavowed  whatever  Morvillier  had  said,  and  denied  that  he
had  ever  given  him  any  such  commission.  In  short,  the
king  walked  a  long  time  between  the  two  counts,  the  Count
of  Charolois's  guards  standing  by  in  great  numbers,  under
arms,  and  observing  their  motions.  At  this  interview  the
Count  of  Charolois  demanded  the  duchy  of  Normandy,  the
towns  situated  upon  the  Somme,  and  several  other  favours  for
his  friends.  Some  proposals  were  made  likewise  for  the
good  of  the  commonwealth,  but  those  were  least  insisted
upon,  for  the  common  was  now  turned  into  the  private
wealth.  The  king  would  not  consent  to  part  with  Nor-
mandy upon  any  terms ;  but,  as  for  the  towns  upon  the
Somme,  his  majesty  was  willing  to  gratify  the  Count  of
Charolois  with  tliem,  and,  for  his  sake,  to  make  the  Count
of  St.  Paul  Constable  of  France.  After  which  they  took
their  leave  of  each  other  very  kindly.  The  king  went  into

*  Catherine  of  France,  who  was  married  in  June.  1439,  and  died  in
1446.


1465.]  DISCONTENT OP THE PRINCES.  67

his  boat,  and  in  that  to  Paris,  and  the  counts  returned  to
Conflans.

After  this  manner  the  time  was  spent,  one  day  in  peace,
and  another  in  war:  but,  though  the  negotiation  between
the  commissioners,  at  the  Grange-aux-Merciers,  was  broken
off,  and  absolutely  discontinued,  yet  the  private  transaction
between  the  king  and  the  Count  of  Cbarolois  went  on  still,
and  several  persons  passed  daily  between  them  notwith-
standing the  war  ;  among  the  rest  there  was  one  William
Bische  *,  and  another  called  Guillot  Duisie  f,  both  of  them
servants  to  the  Count  of  Charolois,  and  both  persons  who
had  been  obliged  formerly  to  the  king ;  for  Duke  Philip
having  banished  them  J,  at  the  request  of  the  Count  of
Charolois,  the  king  had  entertained  them.  But  these  mes-
sages and  correspondences  were  not  pleasing  to  everybody ;
the  princes  began  to  be  jealous,  and  to  grow  weary ;  and,
had  it  not  been  for  an  accident,  which  happened  a  few  days
after,  they  would  all  have  marched  shamefully  home.  I
myself  saw  three  several  councils  held  in  one  chamber,  where
they  were  all  assembled  ;  and  I  saw  one  day,  that  the  Count
of  Charolois  was  highly  displeased  with  it,  for  it  was  done
twice  in  his  presence,  which  was  a  thing  not  fit  to  be  done,
to  consult  of  anything  when  he  was  by  in  the  chamber,  and
not  communicate  it  to  him,  as  he  had  the  greatest  force  in  the
host :  he  complained  of  it  to  the  Lord  of  Contay,  who,  being
a  person  of  great  wisdom  and  experience  (as  I  said  before),

*  Guillaume  Bische,  a  native  of  Molins  Engilbert,  in  the  Nivernois,
was,  according  to  Philip  the  Good,  "  the  worst  and  subtlest  fellow  under
the  sun."  This  subtlety  was  not  injurious  to  him  in  the  opinion  of  Louis
XL,  who  made  him  Bailiff  of  St.  Pierre-le-Moustier  and  Governor  of  Sois-
sonnois,  and  honoured  him  with  his  confidence  and  friendship.  In  1472,
he  was  Lord  of  Clery,  and  chief  steward  of  Duke  Charles  of  Burgundy :
and  in  1478,  he  received  the  additional  titles  of  "  knight,  councillor  and
chamberlain  of  the  king,  Governor  of  Peronne,  Montdidier  and  Roye."

f  Guillot  or  Guy  on  Dusye  figures,  as  an  equerry  of  the  stable,  in  a  list
of  the  household  of  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy.  He  was  afterwards
created  a  knight.

|  After  his  reconciliation  with  the  Count  of  Charolois,  in  February,
1456,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  "banished  from  his  dominions  two  of  the
principal  servants  of  his  son  ;  the  first  named  Guillaume  Visse  (Bische)
was  master  of  his  chamber,  who  not  long  before  had  come  as  a  poor  vabt
from  Champagne  to  Burgundy  ;  the  second  was  an  esquire,  named  Guyot
Daisy,  a  native  of  Burgundy."  Du  Clercq,  xiii.  205.

F  2


68  THE  MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  [1465.

advised  him  to  bear  it  patiently  for  the  present ;  for,  if  he
should  anger  them,  they  would  make  their  peace  better  than
he :  and,  as  he  was  the  strongest,  so  he  persuaded  him  to  be
the  wisest,  to  prevent  them  from  separating  and  breaking
the  confederacy,  to  keep  them  together  with  all  possible
industry,  and  smother  his  resentment,  whatever  he  thought.
However,  he  told  him  that,  indeed  it  raised  the  wonder
of  several  people  (and  of  some  even  about  his  person)  that
such  inconsiderable  persons  as  those  two  before  mentioned,
should  be  employed  in  managing  so  important  an  affair ;  and
he  said  that  it  could  not  but  be  very  dangerous,  in  respect  of
the  bounty  and  liberality  of  the  king.  It  is  true  the  Lord
of  Contay  hated  Bische;  however,  he  said  no  more  than
what  others  had  said  before  him ;  and  I  am  of  opinion  it
was  not  his  passion  so  much  as  the  necessity  of  the  matter,
that  made  him  speak  as  lie  did  ;  however,  the  Count  of
Charolois  was  well  pleased  with  his  counsel,  and  applied
himself  to  treat  and  be  more  merry  with  the  princes  than
formerly,  and  to  converse  more  freely  both  with  them  and
their  creatures,  than  he  had  been  used;  and,  in  my  judg-
ment, there  was  a  necessity  for  this,  in  respect  of  the  great
danger,  lest  they  should  have  forsaken  him,  and  the  whole
confederacy  have  been  dissolved.

In  matters  of  this  moment,  a  wise  man  is  of  great  import-
ance (but  he  must  be  believed),  and  then  he  is  not  to  be
purchased  at  too  dear  a  rate.  But  I  could  never  meet  with
any  prince  that  would  distinguish  the  difference  between
men,  till  his  necessity  instructed  him  ;  and  if  he  did,  it  was
to  no  purpose,  for  they  generally  distribute  their  authority  to
such  as  are  most  agreeable  to  them,  and  suitable  to  their
years,  or  complying  with  their  humours;  and  sometimes  they
are  managed  by  such  as  are  only  subservient  to  their  pleasures.
However,  those  princes  who  have  any  understanding,  do
quickly  recollect  themselves  when  they  are  in  distress,  and
find  their  mistake ;  and  so  I  observed  our  king  did,  as  did
also  the  Count  of  Charolois  at  that  time,  Edward  IV.,  Kino-
of  England,  and  several  other  princes ;  but  these  three
especially  I  have  seen  in  such  exigence,  that  they  have  been
glad  of  those  very  persons  whom  before  they  had  despised.
As  for  the  Count  of  Charolois,  when  he  was  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, and  fortune  had  exalted  him  to  a  greater  height  of


1465.]  NORMANDY  TRANSFERRED  TO  T  HE  DUKE  OP  BERRY.  69

glory  and  honour  than  ever  any  of  his  family  had  arrived
at,  and  made  him  so  great,  that  he  thought  no  prince  in
Christendom  equal  to  him.,  God  was  pleased  to  put  a  stop  to
his  glory,  and  to  infatuate  him  so,  that,  despising  all  counsel
but  his  own,  he  lost  his  own  life  unhappily,  sacrificed  the
lives  of  many  thousands  of  his  subjects,  and  brought  his
family  to  desolation,  as  is  now  visible  to  all  the  world.


CHAP.  XIII.

How  Rouen  was  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  Duke  of  Bourhon  to  be
kept  for  the  Duke  of  Berry  ;  and  the  Conclusion  of  the  Treaty  of
Conflans.  — 1465.

HAVING  in  the  preceding  chapters  enlarged  upon  the  dangers
which  occur  in  treaties,  and  the  necessity  that  princes  should
prudently,  and  with  circumspection,  make  choice  of  such
persons  as  are  fit  to  be  employed  in  the  negotiation  of  such
important  affairs,  especially  if  they  have  the  worst  of  the
game  ;  I  shall  now  give  an  account  of  what  it  was  that  in-
duced me  to  insist  upon  them  so  long.  Whilst  these  treaties
were  managed  by  way  of  meetings  and  conferences,  and
liberty  allowed  to  converse  freely  one  with  another,  instead
of  treating  of  a  general  peace,  it  was  proposed  privately  by
some  persons,  that  the  duchy  of  Normandy  should  be  put
into  the  hands  of  the  king's  only  brother,  the  Duke  of  Berry,
out  of  which  he  should  take  an  equivalent  for  his  patrimony,
and  deliver  up  Berry  to  the  king*;  and  so  cunningly  was
thisbargain  transacted,  that  the  widow  of  the  Grand  Seneschal
of  Norrnandyf,  with  some  of  her  relations  and  servants  who
were  about  her,  received  John,  Duke  of  Bourbon,  into  the
Castle  of  RouenJ,  from  whence  he  entered  into  the  town,  and
the  town  quickly  consented  to  the  change  (being  desirous  to
have  a  prince  who  would  keep  his  residence  in  that  pro-
vince), and  most  of  the  towns  and  places  in  Normandy
followed  the  example  § ;  for  the  Normans  have  always  thought,

*  This  treaty  is  dated  October  2.  1465. See  Lenglet,  ii.  499.

t  Jeanne  Crespin,  daughter  of  Guillaume  Crespin,  Lord  of  Mauny,  and
of  Jacqueline  d'Auvricher.  Letters  of  absolution  from  the  treason  here
recorded  were  granted  her  by  Louis  XI.  in  January,  1466.

^  He  entered  on  Friday,  September  27.  1465.

§  "  At  which  the  king  was  marvellously  vexed,  and  said  one  day  to
F  3


70  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [14G5.

and  do  still  think  it  reasonable,  that  so  great  a  duchy  as
theirs  is,  should  have  a  duke  constantly  resident  among
them  ;  and,  to  speak  truth,  it  is  very  considerable  in  respect
of  the  vast  sums  of  money  which  are  raised  in  it,  for  I  myself
have  known  it  pay  950,000  francs  in  one  year,  and  some  say
more.

As  soon  as  the  town  of  Rouen  had  revolted,  all  the  inha-
bitants swore  to  the  Duke  of  Bourbon  to  be  true  and  faith-
ful  to  the  Duke  of  Berry;  except  the  bailiif  named  Houaste*
(who  had  served  the  king  as  his  valet  de  chambre  when  he
was  in  Flanders,  and  had  been  in  great  favour  with  him),
and  one  Monsieur  William  Piquartf  (afterwards  General  of
Normandy) ;  and  also  he  that  is  at  present  Grand  Seneschal
of  NormandyJ  would  not  take  the  oath,  but  returned  to  the
king,  contrary  to  the  persuasion  of  his  mother,  who.  as  is
said  before,  had  the  greatest  hand  in  the  revolt.

The  king  no  sooner  heard  the  news  of  the  change  which
had  taken  place  in  Normandy,  but  finding  it  was  not  in  his
power  to  remedy  what  was  already  done,  he  resolved  to  con-
clude a  peace,  and  immediately  signified  to  the  Count  of
Cliarolois  (who  was  then  with  his  army)  that  he  desired  to
have  a  conference  with  him,  and  appointed  an  hour  when  he
would  meet  him  in  the  fields  near  his  camp,  which  was  then
about  Conflans.  Exactly  at  the  appointed  time§  the  king
marched  out  of  Paris  with  about  a  hundred  horse,  most  of
them  his  Scottish  guards,  and  very  few  besides.  The  Count
of  Charolois,  attended  but  by  a  very  few,  went  to  the  place

the  Count  of  St.  Pol,  half  between  jest  and  earnest :  "  Fair  cousin  of  St.
Pol,  you  have  said  and  still  say  such  fine  words  to  me  that  I  have  lost
.Rouen  and  Pontoise  by  them." — Hennin,  438.

*  Jean  de  Montespedon,  surnamed  Houaste,  Lord  of  Basoches,  Beau-
voir,  &c.,  chamberlain  to  the  king,  and  Bailiif  of  Kouen.  His  wife  was
Drouette  de  Bar.  He  was  still  alive  in  1479,  and  is  mentioned  as  bailiff
in  public  documents  of  that  year.

t  Guillaurae  Picart,  Knight,  Lord  of  Estelau,  councillor  and  chamber-
lain of  the  king.  He  was  made  Bailiff  of  Rouen,  and  chief  commander
of  all  the  artillery,  on  the  3rd  of  October,  1479.  He  was  still  living  in
April,  1484.

1  Jacques  de  Breze,  Count  de  Maulevrier,  son  of  Pierre  de  Breze  and
Jeanne  Crcspin,  became  Grand  Seneschal  of  Normandy  after  the  death
of  his  father.  He  married  Charlotte,  a  natural  daughter  of  Louis  XI. ;
and  died  on  the  4th  of  August,  1494.

§  On  Thursday,  October  3.  1465.


1455.]  MEETING OF THE KING AXD CHAROLOIS.  71

without  further  ceremony  ;  yet  so  many  followed  after  him,
that  by  degrees  their  number  was  much  superior  to  the
king's ;  but  the  count  caused  them  to  keep  at  a  distance,
while  the  king  and  he  walked  alone  together  a  while.
The  king  told  him  the  peace  was  concluded,  and  gave  him  an
account  of  what  had  happened  at  Rouen  (of  which  the  count
was  utterly  ignorant  till  then)  adding,  that  by  his  good-will
he  would  never  have  given  his  brother  so  large  a  portion :
but  since  the  Normans  of  themselves  had  made  that  change,
he  was  contented,  and  would  sign  the  treaty  *  in  the  same
form  as  had  been  insisted  upon  several  days  before ;  and  there
were  few  other  things  to  grant.  The  Count  of  Charolois
was  extremely  pleased  to  hear  it,  for  his  army  was  in  great
want  of  provisions,  but  more  so  of  money  ;  and  had  not  this
unexpected  accident  happened,  all  the  princes  would  have
been  forced  to  break  up,  and  march  away  with  dishonour.
However,  either  that  day  or  not  many  days  after  f,  the
Count  of  Charolois  was  reinforced  by  a  supply  sent  by  his
father,  Philip,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  consisting  of  sixscore
men-at-arms,  1500  archers,  and  120,000,  crowns  upon  ten
sumpter  horses,  under  the  command  of  the  Lord  de  Sa-
veusesj;  besides  a  great  quantity  of  bows  and  arrows;
which  recruited  the  Burgundian  army  pretty  well,  they
being  fearful  before,  that  the  other  princes  would  have
patched  up  a  peace,  and  deserted  them.

This  discourse  of  peace  was  so  pleasing  both  to  the  king
and  the  Count  of  Charolois,  that  (as  I  have  heard  him  say
since),  as  they  were  talking  friendly  together  how  the  re-
maining difficulties  might  be  adjusted  (not  regarding  their
way),  they  walked  on  towards  Paris ;  and  so  far  they  pro-
ceeded, that  they  were  entered  into  a  great  bulwark  of
earth  and  wood,  which  the  king  had  caused  to  be  made  at  a
good  distance  from  the  town,  at  the  further  end  of  a  trench,
whose  other  end  led  into  the  city.  The  count  was  attended

*  The  treaty  was  concluded  on  the  5th  of  October,  and  peace  pro-
claimed on  the  29th  of  the  same  month.

f  On  the  following  Thursday,  October  10th,  1465.  See  Lenglet,  ii.
49.

J  Philip  de  Saveuses,  long  Captain  of  Amiens  and  Artois,  was  deposed
in  1463  by  Louis  XI.  In  1465,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  appointed  him
Captain-general  of  Artois.  His  wife  was  Marie  de  Lully  :  and  he  died
at  Amiens,  on  the  28th  of  March,  1467,  at  the  age  of  seventy- seven.

F  4


72  .THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COM311NES.  [1465.

by  only  four  or  five  persons,  who  were  all  of  them  extremely
surprised  when  they  found  where  they  were.  However,
the  count  put  the  best  face  on  it  that  he  could;  but  it  is
probable  that  at  that  time  neither  of  those  two  princes  had
any  design  in  it,  for  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  received
any  prejudice.  When  the  news  of  the  count's  being  got
into  one  of  the  enemy's  works  was  brought  to  the  army,  there
was  a  great  murmur  in  the  camp,  and  immediately  the
Count  of  St.  Paul,  the  Marshal  of  Burgundy,  the  Lords
of  Contay  and  Haultbourdin,  and  several  other  of  the  chief
officer?,  met  together  about  it,  and  unanimously  agreed  that
both  the  Count  of  Charolois  and  those  that  were  with  him
had  been  guilty  of  a  great  piece  of  indiscretion,  especially
after  the  misfortune  which  had  happened  to  his  grandfather  *
at  Montereau-Fault-Yonne,  in  the  presence  of  Charles  VII.
Hereupon  they  commanded  the  soldiers  that  were  strolling
up  and  down  in  the  fields  to  stand  to  their  arms  ;  and  the
Marshal  of  Burgundy  (whose  surname  was  Neufchastel),
spoke  to  this  effect :  "  If  this  mad  hair-brained  young  prince
has  cast  away  himself,  let  us  not  ruin  his  family,  his  father's
interest,  or  our  own.  My  opinion  therefore  is,  that  every
man  should  retire  to  his  quarters,  and  be  ready,  without
alarming  ourselves,  for  anything  that  may  happen ;  for,
keeping  together,  we  are  enough  to  make  our  retreat  to  the
frontiers  of  Hainault,  Picardy,  or  Burgundy,  as  we  please.''

After  he  had  given  his  opinion  in  this  manner,  he  and  the
Count  of  St.  Paul  mounted  on  horseback,  and  rode  out  of
the  camp,  to  see  if  they  could  descry  anybody  coming  from
Paris.  After  they  had  waited  some  time,  they  perceived
a  body  of  forty  or  fifty  horse  marching  towards  them  ;  who
were  the  Count  of  Charolois,  and  an  escort  that  the  king
had  sent  to  guard  him  to  his  camp.  When  the  count  saw
them  coming  towards  him,  he  dismissed  his  escort,  and
addressed  himself  to  the  Marshal  de  Neufchastel,  of  whom
he  was  most  afraid ;  for,  being  a  true  old  soldier,  and  firm
to  his  interest,  he  took  the  liberty  sometimes  of  repri-

*  John,  surnamed  Sans-Peur,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  was  the  son  of
Philippe-lc-Hardi  and  Margaret  of  Flanders.  He  was  born  on  the  28th
of  May,  1371 ;  married  to  Margaret  of  Bavaria  on  the  9th  of  April,
1385  ;  and  assassinated  on  the  bridge  of  Montercau,  on  the  10th  of
September,  1419.


1465.]  TREATY  OF  COXFLANS.  73

manding  him  severely,  and  ventured  to  tell  him,  "Whilst  your
father  lives,  I  am  your  servant  only  by  loan."  The  first
thing  the  count  said  to  him  was,  "I  pray  be  not  angry,  I  am
sensible  of  my  great  folly,  but  I  perceived  it  not  till  I  was  too
near  the  bulwark  to  get  off."  The  marshal  replied,  "that  it
was  done  in  his  absence."  The  count  bowed  his  head,  and  gave
him  no  answer,  but  returned  presently  to  the  camp,  where  he
was  joyfully  received  by  the  whole  army,  and  every  one  highly
extolled  the  king's  honour  and  generosity;  but,  for  all  that,
the  count  never  afterwards  would  trust  himself  in  his  power.


The  Treaty  of  Peace,  called  the  Treaty  of  Conflans,  between
King  Louis  XL,  on  the  one  part,  and  Charles,  Count  of
Charolois,  on  the  other.  Paris,  October  5.  1465.

Louis,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  France,  &c.

We  being  desirous,  of  our  own  certain  knowledge  and  good-
will, to  reconcile  to  us  our  dearly  beloved  cousin  and  brother,
Charles,  Count  of  Charolois,  having  regard  to  the  great  and
good  services,  aids,  and  succours,  he  can  and  is  willing
to  give  unto  us  and  our  crown,  so  that  our  kingdom  may  be
guarded  and  preserved  on  all  sides  from  its  ancient  enemies
and  our  other  adversaries;  peace,  union,  and  tranquiHity  being
cultivated  between  us,  our  said  brother  and  cousin,  and  other
lords  of  our  blood ;  all  hostilities  cease,  and  justice  be  pre-
served and  administered  in  our  said  kingdom :  and  also
in  consideration,  and  for  a  recompense  of  the  great  services
and  expenses  our  uncle  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  has  borne
and  performed  for  us  in  the  lifetime  of  our  late  most  dear
lord  and  father,  whom  God  pardon,  to  whom  and  into  whose
country  we  had  withdrawn  ourselves,  in  order  to  avoid  the
dangers  that  were  likely  to  threaten  our  person  ;  and  as  well
for  the  support  of  our  own  state,  and  that  of  our  most  dear
and  well-beloved  queen,  as  also  upon  the  account  of  several
notable  embassies  to  our  said  lord  and  father,  to  the  Pope
and  to  other  potentates,  in  reference  to  our  coming  to  the
crown ;  as  well  as  other  great  charges  and  expenses  our
said  uncle  and  our  said  brother  and  cousin  have  been  at
to  accompany  us  to  our  coronation  at  Rheims,  and  at
our  public  entry  into  Paris,  with  a  great  number  of  armed


74  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  ("1465.

men,  for  fear  we  might  meet  with  any  opposition  in  our
kingdom  :  for  all  which  charges,  disbursements,  and  expenses
we  have  often  agreed  and  promised  to  satisfy  our  said  uncle,
and  our  said  cousin  and  brother ;  besides  a  pension  of
30,000  francs,  which  we  had  given  and  granted  by  way
of  recompense  to  our  said  brother  and  cousin,  the  pay-
ment of  which,  some  time  before  our  divisions,  had  been
interrupted  and  stopped ;  we  have  by  the  advice  and  deli-
beration of  our  brother  the  Duke  of  Normandy,  and  of
our  well-beloved  cousins  the  Dukes  of  Bretagne,  Calabria,
Bourbon,  and  Nemours,  the  Counts  of  Maine,  Perche,  Eu,
and  Armagnac,  of  the  members  of  our  privy-council  and
of  our  parliament,  and  other  great  men  of  our  kingdom,
given  and  transferred,  and  we  do  by  these  presents  give  and
transfer  to  our  said  cousin  the  Count  of  Charolois, — in  consi-
deration and  for  a  recompense  as  aforesaid  ;  as  also  upon  the
account  that  our  said  brother  and  cousin  has  frankly  and
freely,  so  far  as  in  him  lay,  been  very  instrumental,  with  our
said  brother  and  other  lords  of  our  blood,  in  appeasing  of  the
said  troubles  and  obtaining  the  good  of  peace, — to  himself,
his  heirs,  whether  male  or  female,  descending  from  him  in
a  direct  line,  and  the  heirs  of  his  said  heirs,  also  descending
from  them  in  a  direct  line,  for  ever,  the  cities,  towns,
territories,  fortresses,  and  signiories,  appertaining  to  us
at  and  upon  the  Sorame,  both  on  the  one  side  and  the  other —
viz.  Amiens,  St.  Quentin,  Corbin,  Abbeville,  together  with  all
the  county  of  Ponthieu,  on  both  sides  the  said  river,  Doul-
lens,  St.  Riquier,  Crevecoeur,  Arleux,  Montreuil,  Le  Crotoy,
Mortagne,  with  all  their  appurtenances  and  dependencies,
and  whatever  else  may  belong  to  us  upon  the  account
of  our  said  crown  from  the  said  River  Somme,  inclusively  on
the  side  of  Artois,  Flanders,  and  Hainault,  which  our  said
uncle  <of  Burgundy  had  and  possessed  lately,  by  virtue
of  the  treaty  of  Arras,  and  before  the  re-purchase  we  had
made  of  them ;  comprehending  also,  in  reference  to  the
towns  situate  upon  the  said  river,  the  bailiwicks  and
shrievalties  of  the  said  cities,  in  the  same  manner  as  our
said  uncle  held  and  possessed  them,  to  be  enjoyed  by  our
said  brother  and  cousin  and  his  said  heirs,  and  the  heirs
of  his  heirs,  male  or  female,  with  all  their  profits  and
revenues,  as  well  the  domain  as  the  aids  destined  for  war,


1465.]  TREATY  OF  COXFLAXS.  75

and  also  the  taillages  and  all  other  profits  whatsoever,  as  our
said  uncle  enjoyed  them,  without  any  exception  whatsoever,
save  the  fealty,  homage,  and  sovereignty;  which  transfer  we
have  made,  and  do  make,  at  the  re-purchase  of  200,000  crowns
of  gold,  current  money :  neither  can  we  nor  our  successors
buy  the  same  again  of  our  said  brother  and  cousin  during
his  life ;  but  only  we  and  our  successors  may  do  it  of  the
heirs  of  our  said  brother  and  cousin,  descending  from
him  in  a  direct  line,  and  the  heirs  of  the  said  heirs,  de-
scending also  from  them  in  a  direct  line,  who  shall  be
possessed  of  these  territories,  upon  securing  and  paying  to
them  once  the  said  sum  of  200,000  crowns  current  money;  for
the  securing  of  which  re-purchase,  our  said  brother  and  cousin
shall  grant  unto  us  his  letters  patent  in  due  form.  And  our
will  and  meaning  is,  that  our  said  brother  and  cousin  and
his  heirs  descending  from  him,  that  shall  be  possessed  of
those  territories,  may  have  such  power,  and  at  their  pleasure
constitute  and  appoint  all  such  officers,  as  shall  be  necessary
to  be  constituted  and  appointed,  in  reference  to  the  demand
of  the  said  cities,  towns,  fortresses,  lands,  and  signiories ;
and  that  the  other  officers,  which  shall  be  necessary  on
account  of  royal  privileges,  aids,  and  taxes,  be  made  by  our
successor's  appointment,  at  the  nomination  of  our  said  brother
and  cousin,  and  his  heirs,  to  impose  and  levy  those  aids  and
taxes,  as  it  was  in  the  time  that  our  said  uncle  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  held  and  possessed  them.  Moreover,  as  by
the  treaty  of  Arras,  it  was  agreed,  among  other  things,
that  the  county  of  Boulogne  should  be  and  continue  in
the  possession  of  our  uncle  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  the
heirs  male  of  his  body,  and  that  our  late  lord  and  lather  was
obliged  to  make  reparation  to  those  who  pretended  a  right  to
it ;  we,  from  the  above  said  causes  and  considerations,
and  without  derogating  from  the  treaty  of  Arras,  have
agreed  and  declared,  and  we  do  agree  and  declare  to  our
said  brother  and  cousin,  that  he  and  his  male  or  female
children,  begot  by  him  in  wedlock,  during  their  lives  only,
do  and  may  hold  and  possess  the  said  county  of  Boulogne
in  the  same  manner  and  form  as  our  said  brother  and  cousin
by  the  treaty  of  Arras  might  hold  and  possess  and  make
benefit  thereof  as  their  inheritance ;  and  we  hold  ourselves
obliged  to  make  compensation  to  those  who  pretend  a  right


76  THE MEMOIRS OF  PHILIP DE COiDIINES.  [1465.

in  the  said  county,  and  to  let  our  said  brother  and  cousin
and  his  children  enjoy  it.  And  we  have  also  promised  and
agreed,  and  we  do  agree  and  promise  to  our  said  brother  and
cousin,  that  we  will  transfer  and  make  over,  fully,  frankly,
and  freely  to  him,  and  we  do  from  henceforward  transfer
and  make  over  the  castles,  towns,  chatellanies,  and  pro-
vostships  of  Peronne,  Montdidier,  and  Roye,  with  all  their
appurtenances  and  appendages  whatsoever,  discharged  of
all  mortgages  and  re-purchases,  with  the  same  rights  as  they
were  transferred  and  made  over  to  our  said  uncle  his  father,
by  the  treaty  of  Arras,  to  hold  and  enjoy  them  in  the  same
manner  as  is  contained  and  declared  in  the  said  treaty ;  and
we  will  cause,  and  effectually  procure,  our  most  dear  and
well-beloved  cousin,  the  Count  of  Nevers,  to  transfer  and
make  over  to  our  said  cousin  and  brother,  the  Count  of
Charolois,  all  that  right  which  he  hath,  or  pretends  to  have,
to  those  castles,  towns,  provostships,  and  chatellanies,  and
he  shall  surrender  all  that  he  possesses  therein,  and  give
possession  thereof  to  our  said  brother  and  cousin  the  Count
of  Charolois,  or  those  commissioned  by  him :  and  herewith
we  have  made  over  and  transferred  to  our  said  brother  and
cousin,  for  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  in  inheritance
for  ever,  the  county  of  Guisnes,  with  all  its  appurtenances
and  dependencies,  to  be  enjoyed  by  our  said  brother  and
cousin,  and  his  heirs  and  successors,  with  all  rights,  profits,
and  emoluments  whatsoever,  as  well  of  the  domain,  as  the
aids,  taxes,  and  incomes  whatsoever,  without  retaining
or  reserving  anything  for  ourselves,  except  the  fealty,
homage,  and  sovereignty  thereof:  and  we  hold  ourselves
obliged  to  make  compensation  to  the  Sieur  de  Croy  and
others  in  respect  to  any  right  they  have,  or  pretend  to  have,
in  the  said  county,  and  to  keep  our  said  brother  and
cousin  and  his  heirs  in  the  quiet  and  peaceable  possession
of  the  said  county  against  the  said  De  Croy  and  all  others.
All  which  things  we  have  and  do  promise,  bond  Jide,  on  the
word  of  a  king,  upon  our  oath,  and  upon  the  penalty  of
all  the  estates  that  we  are  now  or  shall  be  possessed  of,
for  ourselves,  our  heirs  and  successors,  to  hold,  keep,  main-
tain, and  execute  every  particular  in  the  same  manner
and  form  aforegoing,  inviolably,  so  as  never  to  contravene
the  same,  either  by  ourselves  or  any  other  ;  neither  shall  we


1465.]  TREATY  OF  COXFLAN3.  77

suffer  any  other,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  contravene  the
same,  openly  or  covertly,  and  all  without  any  fraud,  deceit,
or  evil  design ;  and  for  the  accomplishment  and  execution
of  the  things  above  mentioned,  and  every  of  them,  we  do  and
shall  submit  to  the  coercion  and  power  of  our  holy  father
the  Pope :  and  we  do  and  will  consent,  for  ourselves
and  successors,  in  all  courts,  as  well  ecclesiastical  as  civil,
to  be  constrained  to  observe  all  and  every  of  the  things
above  mentioned,  by  renouncing  all  rights,  privileges,  ordi-
nances, royal  edicts,  exceptions,  and  all  things  whatsoever,
whereby  anything,  either  in  part  or  in  the  whole,  shall
be  done  contrary  to  the  premises,  as  fully  as  if  all  the  said
rights,  ordinances,  edicts,  exceptions,  and  other  renunciations,
were  expressly  declared  and  specified  by  these  presents.
Besides  which,  we  will  charge,  and  expressly  command
our  well-beloved  and  faithful  chancellor,  our  councillors
in  our  council  of  state,  treasurers,  superintendents  of  our
finances,  bailiffs,  seneschals,  and  other  justiciaries  and  officers,
or  their  lieutenants,  and  every  of  them,  so  far  as  it  relates
to  them,  that  they  strictly  observe,  and  in  every  particular
fulfil,  these  presents  and  the  contents  of  them  ;  and  that  they
neither  do  nor  suffer  anything  to  be  done  to  the  contrary ;
and  when  anything  shall  be  done  to  the  contrary  hereof,
they  shall  immediately  make  reparation,  and,  without  any
delay,  restore  matters  to  their  former  state  and  condition ;
and  especially  these  presents  shall  be  verified  in  parliament,
in  the  chambers  of  accounts  and  finances,  which  shall  cause
the  same  to  be  published  and  registered  everywhere  they
ought  to  be;  notwithstanding  any  edicts  made  against
alienating  and  putting  out  of  our  power  the  demesnes  of
our  said  crown,  and  all  the  restrictions,  promises,  and  oaths,
which  we  or  any  of  our  said  officers  might  have  made
in  general  or  particular,  under  any  form  of  words  whatso-
ever, whereby  they  might  or  would  prevent  the  effecting,
fulfilling  and  accomplishing  all  that  is  contained  in  these
presents ;  which  ordinances,  restrictions,  promises,  obliga-
tions and  oaths  we  will  not,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  as  to
the  present  case,  have  to  be  in  derogation  or  prejudice
of  the  transfers  and  the  other  things  above  mentioned,  and  of
the  said  promises,  oaths,  or  other  restrictions,  which  our
officers  are  subject  to,  in  contradiction  to  these  particulars;  but


78  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1465.

we  do,  by  these  presents,  and  in  fulfilling  the  contents  thereof,
hold  and  ftstepm  them  acquitted  and  fully  discharged  of  them.


CHAP.  XIV.

Of  the  Peare  thftt  was  concluded  at  Conflans  between  the  Kin^  an.l  the
Count  of  Charolois  and  his  Allies. —  1465.

AT  length  all  things  were  accommodated,  and  the  next
day*  the  Count  of  Charolois  made  a  general  muster  of  his
whole  army,  to  see  what  men  he  had  left,  and  what  he  had
lost.  On  a  sudden,  without  any  warning,  the  king  came
thither,  attended  only  by  thirty  or  forty  horse,  and  went
from  regiment  to  regiment  to  take  a  view  of  them  all,  except
the  Marshal  of  Burgundy's  squadron,  who  was  no  friend  of
the  king's ;  because,  having  given  him  the  goveriiment  of
Espinal  %  in  Lorraine,  he  took  it  from  him  afterwards,  and
gave  it  to  John,  Duke  of  Calabria,  to  the  great  disgust  and
mortification  of  the  said  marshal.  The  king  at  last  grew
sensible  of  his  error,  and  acknowledged  he  had  been  wrong  in
discarding,  upon  his  first  accession  to  the  crown,  those  worihy
and  eminent  knights  that  had  faithfully  served  his  father,
and  who,  resenting  the  injury,  had  joined  with  the  princes
against  him.  The  king  used  his  utmost  endeavours  to  re-
trieve the  false  step  he  had  made,  and  by  little  and  little  re-
conciled himself  to  them.  It  was  resolved,  that  the  next  day
all  the  lords  should  repair  to  the  Castle  of  Vincennes  to  do
homage  to  the  king,  and  for  their  security  the  Castle  of
Vincennes  should  be  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Count  of
Charolois.

The  next  day,  according  to  agreement,  the  king  came
thither,  and  not  one  of  the  princes  failed  to  attend  him:  the
porch  and  gate  were  lined  and  strongly  guarded,  by  a  good
number  of  the  Burgundian  soldiers,  in  their  arms.  The
treaty  of  peace  was  read,  and  the  Lord  Charles  of  France
did  homage  to  the  king  for  the  duchy  of  Normandy  | ;  the
Count  of  Charolois  for  the  towns  he  held  in  Picardy  §  ;

*  On  Friday,  October  11. 1465.

f  This  town  was  given  to  the  marshal  in  1463,  and  taken  from  him  by
royal  letters  dated  August  6.  1466.

t  On  the  30th  of  October. See  Lenglet,  ii.  532
§  On  the  31st  of  October. See  Lenglet,  ii.  540


1465.]  DEPARTURE OF THE PR1XCES.  79

others  for  what  they  held  in  other  places  :  and  the  Count  of
St.  Paul  took  his  oath  as  Constable  of  France.  But  there
never  was  so  plentiful  an  entertainment,  but  somebody  rose
hungry :  some  had  their  utmost  ambition  gratified,  and  others
got  nothing  at  all :  some  honest  but  inferior  persons  the  king
took  to  himself,  but  the  greatest  part  remained  with  the  Duke
of  Bretagne  and  the  new  Duke  of  Normandy,  who  took  their
leave,  and  went  to  Rouen,  to  take  possession  of  that  town.
At  their  departure  from  the  Castle  of  Vincennes,  they  all  took
leave  of  one  another,  every  man  retired  to  his  lodgings,  and
the  letters  and  pardons,  and  whatever  else  was  agreed  upon
l>y  the  peace,  were  signed  and  despatched.  All  the  princes
departed  upon  the  same  day ;  the  Dukes  of  Normandy  and
Bretagne  went  first  to  Normandy,  and  the  Duke  of  Bretagne
afterwards  into  his  own  country :  the  Count  of  Charolois
retired  towards  Flanders,  and,  as  he  was  upon  his  way,  the
king  made  him  a  visit,  and  conducted  him  to  Villiers-le-Bel  *
(a  village  some  four  leagues  from  Paris),  expressing  a  great
desire  to  maintain  a  friendship  with  him ;  and  that  night
they  lay  together  in  the  village.  The  king  had  but  a  very
small  party  with  him,  1  ut  he  had  commanded  200  men-
at-arms  to  attend  him  back  again,  which  being  told  to
the  Count  of  Charolois  as  he  was  going. to  bed,  he  immedi-
ately entertained  great  jealousy  and  suspicion,  and  ordered  all
his  guards  that  were  with  him  to  arm.  From  whence  one
may  observe,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  two  great
princes  to  agree  long,  by  reason  of  the  reports  and  suspicions
which  hourly  arise :  and  indeed  two  great  princes,  who  are
desirous  to  preserve  a  more  than  ordinary  friendship,  ought
never  to  see  one  another;  but  rather  employ  such  honest
and  wise  men  between  them,  as  may  cultivate  their  amity
and  palliate  their  faults.

The  next  morning  the  two  princes  took  their  leave  one  of
another,  and  with  very  kind  and  obliging  language  they
parted.  The  king  returned  to  Paris  under  the  guard  of
the  200  men-at-arms  that  he  had  ordered  for  that  pur-
pose ;  which  removed  the  suspicion  the  count  had  conceived
of  their  coming.  The  count  took  the  road  towards  Com-

*  The  Count  of  Charolois  left  Conflans  on  Thursday,  the  31st  of
October,  and  proceeded  to  Villiers-le-Bel,  whither  the  king  accompanied
him.  They  remained  there  together  until  the  3rd  of  November.


80  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1465.

piegne  and  Noyon,  and  as  he  went,  all  the  towns  were  opened
to  him  by  the  king's  particular  command.  From  thence  he
marched  to  Amiens,  and  received  homage  from  that  and  all
the  towns  upon  the  Somme,  and  what  formerly  belonged  to
him  in  Picardy  was  restored  to  him  by  virtue  of  the  peace ;
for  which  places  the  king  (as  I  said  before)  had  paid
400,000  crowns  of  gold  not  quite  nine  months  before.  *
Having  despatched  his  business  there,  he  marched  towards
the  country  of  Liege  f,  for  that  state  had  made  war  for
five  or  six  months  upon  his  father  (during  his  absence)  in
the  counties  of  Namur  and  Brabant,  and  had  done  some
mischief  in  those  parts;  but,  being  in  winter,  he  could  not
make  any  considerable  progress :  yet  he  burnt  several  villages,
and  made  some  small  incursions  into  the  territories  of  the
Liegeois :  but  a  peace  $  was  concluded  between  them,  and
the  Liegeois  were  obliged,  upon  the  penalty  of  a  great  sum  of
money,  to  observe  it;  after  which  the  Count  of  Charolois
returned  into  Brabant.  §

A  Treaty  of  Peace  concluded  at  St.  Maur-des-Fosses  be-
tween the  Dukes  of  Normandy,  Bretagne,  Calabria,  and
Lorraine,  Charles  of  Burgundy,  the  Count  of  Charolois,
the  Dukes  of  Bourbonnois  and  Auvergne,  the  Duke  of
Nemours,  the  Counts  of  Armagnac,  St.  Paul,  Albret,  and
Dunois,  and  Louis  XL  of  France.  October  29.  1465.

1.  All  hostilities  are  to  cease  entirely  between  the  parties,
their  subjects,  and  vassals,  and  a  firm  peace  and  tranquillity
to  be  restored.

2.  No  reparation  shall  be  required,  upon  the  account  of
these  divisions,  from  the  said  lords,  their  subjects,  vassals,
and  adherents,  or  prosecutions  made  by  law  against  them,
but  they  shall  live  peaceably  both  within  and  without  the
kingdom,  without  molestation  from  the  king  or  the  said  lords.

*  Two  years  before,  Commines  should  say.  He  has  made  the  same
mistake  already  :  see  p.  65.

f  He  encamped  at  Cleyngelm,  in  the  territory  of  Liege,  where  he
remained  until  the  22nd  of  January,  1466.

\  This  treaty  was  concluded  on  the  22nd  of  December,  1465  ;  Huy
and  Dinant  were  excluded  from  its  provisions.  It  was  ratilied  by  the
Count  of  Charolois  on  the  24th  of  January,  1466.

§  He  arrived  at  Brussels  on  the  evening  of  Friday,  the  31st  January.


1465. J  TREATY  OF  CONFLANS.  81

3.  The  said  lords  shall  not,  upon  the  account  of  what  is
past,  renew  the  war,  either  by  themselves  or  others,  but
continue  faithful  to  the  king.

4.  The  king  on  his  part  shall  be  under  the  same  obligations.

5.  The  subjects,  vassals, and  adherents  of  both  parties
shall  return  to  the  peaceable  possession  of  their  houses  and
inheritances,  whether  within  or  without  the  kingdom,  and  so
remain  without  any  cessions  or  donations  to  the  contrary.

6.  All  moveable  goods  shall  be  restored  to  those  they
belonged  to  before  the  said  troubles ;  as  also  all  such  as  have
been  taken  away  during  the  truce.

7.  The  cities  and  communities  which  took  part  with  either
side  shall  no  ways  be  molested  and  damaged  in  their  privi-
leges, or  otherwise,  on  that  account.

8.  The  places,  taken  during  the  troubles  on  either  side,
shall  be  restored.

9.  The  king  shall  not  oblige  the  said  lords  to  come  to  him
in  person,  but  yet  they  are  not  exempted  from  the services
they  owe  him,  when  there  is  occasion  for  the  defence  and
manifest  good  of  the  kingdom.

10.  And  when  the  king  shall  please  to  go  to  the  houses
and habitations of  the  said  lords,  where  they  shall  be  in
person,  he  is  to  give  them  three  days'  notice ;  neither  shall
the  said  lords  wait  on  the  king  before  they  first  send  to  know
his  pleasure.

11.  If  any  crime  shall  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  said  lords
or  their  adherents,  the  king  shall  not  proceed  against  them,
or  detain  their  persons,  without  the  utmost  deliberation,  and
very  sufficient  cause  shown  ;  neither  shall  the  said  lords  pro-
ceed against  the  king's  servants  or  adherents  for  any  crime
alleged,  without  the  niaturest  deliberation.

12.  In  order  to  redress  all  grievances  and  disorders  on  the
part  of  the  said  lords,  and  divers  of  the  king's  subjects  of  all
conditions,  in  reference  to  church  and  state,  and  for  the  public
good,  the  king  shall  give  a  commission  to  thirty-six  eminent
men  of  his  kingdom,  to  meet  at  a  place  appointed,  to  inquire
into  all  such  grievances  and  disorders,  to  hear  and  determine
all  remonstrances,  and  apply  suitable  remedies  for  the  pre-
servation of  justice,  the  rights  and  franchises  both  of  the
church  and  all  the  people.

13.  And  whatever  edicts,  ordinances,  declarations,  and  the

G


82  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES.  [1465.

like,  shall  be  made  by  the  thirty-six  persons,  or  the  major  part
of  them,  they  shall  within  fifteen  days  after  they  are  brought
before  the  king,  be  verified  in  form  in  the  courts  of  parlia-
ment and  chambers  of  accounts,  and  all  the  officers  sworn  to
observe  them;  and  no  instruments  of  the  king  from  the
chancery  or  elsewhere  shall  disannul  or  make  them  void.

14.  The  commission  of  the  said  thirty-six  persons  shall
last  two  months,  and  they  shall  have  power  to  adjourn  once
for  forty-two  days  :  and  if  any  of  their  number  shall  be  sick,
or  incapacitated  any  way  to  act,  the  rest  shall  substitute
others  in  their  room.

15.  The  king  and  the  said  lords  shall  entirely  maintain  all
the  pacts  and  agreements  made  between  them,  as  well  in
relation  to  the  appanage  of  the  Duke  of  Normandy,  as  other
things  granted  to  the  said  lords  and  their  adherents,  as  fully
as  if  expressly  set  down  in  this  treaty.

16.  And  seeing  the  king,  during  the  said  troubles,  seized
into  his  hands  the  lands  and  lordships  of  Parthenay,  Vouvent,
Mirebeau,  Secondigny,  Coudray,  Salvart,  and  Chastellerault,
and  conferred  the  same  upon  his  uncle,  the  Count  of  Maine,
in  prejudice  to,  and  to  the  dispossessing  of  the  Count  of
Dunois  of  the  said  territories ;  it  is  agreed,  for  the  public
tranquillity,  towards  which  the  Count  of  Dunois  does  much
contribute,  that  the  Count  of  Maine  shall  surrender  up  all
those  lands  to  the  king,  in  due  form,  who  shall  effectually  re-
convey  them  to  the  Count  of  Dunois,  who  shall  enjoy  them
peaceably,  and  without  any  molestation  whatsoever.

17.  And  the  king  shall,  by  way  of  compensation  to  the
Count  du  Maine,  confer  upon  him  the  land  and  signiory  of
Taillebourg.

18.  The  king  restores  Anthony  de  Chabannes,  Count  of
Dammartin,  to  all  his  honours,  castles,  territories,  &c.,  as  he
and  his  wife,  Margaret  de  Nanteuil,  enjoyed  them  in  the  time
of  the  late  king. All  his  personal  estate  shall  also  be  restored,
notwithstanding  any  decree  of  parliament  to  the  contrary.

19.  Both  parties  shall  mutually  swear  to  the  exact  obser-
vation of  all  these  articles,  and  enjoin  them  to  be  observed  by
all  their  officers,  parliaments,  prelates,  &c.;  and  if  the  king
would  contravene  any  of  them,  they  shall  no  manner  of  way
assist  him  therein.

20.  Both  parties  shall  swear  and  promise  they  will  not


1465.] THE  KING  RECOVERS  NORMANDY. 83

seek  for  a  dispensation  of  their  said  oaths  and  promises,  on
any  occasion  whatsoever.

Lastly.  If  any  of  the  said  lords  shall  attempt  anything
against  the  king,  in  prejudice  of  the  said  treaty,  the  others
shall  be  obliged  to  assist  the  king  against  them.


CHAP.  XV.

How  the  King  recovered  into  his  hands  whatever  had  been  given  to  his
Brother,  by  the  Division  between  the  Dukes  of  Normandy  and  Bre-
tagne. — 1465.

BUT  to  return  to  the  Dukes  of  Normandy  and  Bretagne,
who  had  marched  to  take  possession  of  the  Duchy  of  Nor-
mandy. It  was  not  long  after  they  had  made  their  entry  into
Rouen,  before  they  began  to  fall  out  and  differ  about  the  di-
vision of  the  spoil  ;  for  the  persons  of  quality  and  officers
whom  I  have  mentioned  were  still  with  them,  and  having
been  used  to  great  honours  and  preferments  in  the  reign  of
Charles  VII.,  perceiving  the  war  was  at  an  end,  and  the  king
was  not  to  be  depended  upon,  they  thought  it  hard  not  to  be
advanced  to  some  considerable  post,  and  every  man  expected
the  best  place  for  himself.

The  Duke  of  Bretagne  pretended  to  a  share  of  them,  and
thought  it  very  reasonable  that  part  of  them  should  be  wholly
at  his  disposal,  since  he  had  brought  the  greatest  number  of
troops  into  the  field,  and  had  been  at  the  greatest  expense  in
the  war  ;  which  the  Duke  of  Normandy  refusing,  the  dispute
grew  so  high,  that,  for  the  safety  of  his  person,  the  Duke  of
Bretagne  was  forced  to  retire  to  Mount  St.  Catherine,  near
Rouen ;  and  the  debate  continued  so  strong,  that  the  Duke  of
Normandy,  by  the  assistance  of  the  citizens  of  the  town,  had
resolved  to  have  besieged  him,  had  he  not  marched  away
directly  for  Bretagne.  As  soon  as  the  king  had  received  the
news  of  this  division,  he  drew  down  with  his  forces  towards
that  country,  and  one  may  easily  imagine  he  knew  what
he  had  to  do,  for  he  was  a  perfect  master  in  that  science,  and
knew  how  to  improve  everything  to  his  own  advantage.
Some  of  those  who  had  the  command  of  the  principal  towns
began  to  deliver  them  up,  and  make  their  peace  with  him.  I
speak  not  of  these  affairs  upon  my  own  knowledge,  for  I  was

G 2


84  THE  MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  [1465.

not  there  present,  but  as  the  king  has  since  been  pleased  to
inform  me.  He  treated  privately  with  the  Duke  of  Bretagne
(who  was  in  possession  of  some  towns  in  Lower  Normandy),
in  hopes  to  persuade  him  altogether  to  abandon  his  brother's
interest :  they  had  several  conferences  together  at  Caen,
where  they  came  to  an  accommodation  *,  by  which  the  said
town  of  Caen  and  several  others  were  to  remain  in  the
hands  of  the  Lord  de  Lescut,  with  a  certain  number  of  paid
troops ;  but  this  treaty  was  so  intricate  and  perplexed,  I
believe  neither  of  them  understood  it  very  well.  Immediately
after  this,  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  returned  into  his  own
country,  and  the  king  went  back  towards  his  brother.

The  Duke  of  Normandy,  finding  himself  unable  to  hold  out
against  the  king,  who  had  taken  Pont  de  1'Arche,  and  other
places  about  him,  resolved  to  fly,  and  take  sanctuary  in
Flanders.  The  Count  of  Charolois  was  still  at  St.  Tronf
(a  small  town  in  the  diocese  of  Liege),  but  much  troubled
and  disturbed,  his  army  having  been  defeated  and  broken,
and  part  of  it  employed  (though  in  the  winter  time)  against
the  Liegeois  ;  which  division  vexed  him  at  the  heart,  for  the
only  thing  which  he  most  ambitiously  desired,  was  to  see  a
duke  in  Normandy,  because  by  that  means  the  king  would
be  much  weakened,  and  be  deprived  of  almost  the  third
part  of  his  kingdom.  He  ordered  some  forces  immediately
to  be  raised  in  Picardy,  to  reinforce  the  garrison  of  Dieppe  ;
but  before  they  could  be  assembled,  the  governor  had  made
his  peace,  and  the  king  became  master  of  all  the  duchy  of
Normandy,  except  such  places  as  were  left  in  the  custody  of
the  Lord  de  Lescut  by  the  treaty  at  Caen.


CHAP.  XVI.

The  new  Duke  of  Normandy  retires  into  Bretagne  very  poor  and  discon-
solate, upon  account  of  his  having  miscarried  in  his  Design. — 1465.

THE  Duke  of  Normandy  (as  I  said  before)  had  once  a  design
to  have  retired  into-  Flanders,  but  on  a  sudden,  a  reconcilia-

*  This  treaty,  dated  at  Caen  on  the  22nd  of  December,  1465,  was
ratified  on  the  following  day  by  Louis  XL  The  article  mentioned  by
Com  mines  does  not  occur  in  it.

f  The  Count  of  Charolois  was  at  Saint-Tron  from  December  21.  1465,
to  January  12.  1466  ;  and  again  from  the  25th  to  the  30th  of  Jan.  1466.


1465.] ILL-CONDITION OF THE DUKE OP NORMANDY. 85

tion  was  made  between  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  and  him,*
when  it  was  too  late;  for  both  of  them  found  their  errors,
and  soon  grew  sensible  that  there  was  nothing  in  this  world
so  firm  and  stable,  but  that  division  is  able  to  destroy  it  at
last.  And,  indeed,  it  is  next  kin  to  an  impossibility,  that
many  great  lords  of  equal  quality  and  power  should  continue
long  in  a  confederacy,  unless  one  of  them  be  invested  with  a
supreme  command  and  authority  over  the  re?t ;  and  it  is
absolutely  necessary,  that  that  person  should  be  a  man  of
great  wisdom  and  highly  beloved,  to  keep  them  all  in
obedience.  With  my  own  eyes  I  have  seen  many  examples
of  this  nature,  and  therefore  I  speak  not  by  report :  besides,
we  are  all  but  too  much  inclined  to  divide  thus  to  our  own
prejudice,  without  any  regard  to  the  consequences  which
may  follow  ;  and,  in  my  opinion,  one  wise  prince  with  the
command  of  10,000  men,  and  money  to  pay  them,  is  more
to  be  feared  and  esteemed  than  ten,  who  every  one  of  them
has  6000,  and  all  of  them  allied  and  confederate  together ;
and  the  reason  is,  because  they  have  always  so  many  cere-
monies and  punctilios  of  honour  to  be  adjusted  and  accom-
modated between  them,  that  half  their  opportunity  is  lost
before  they  can  agree  or  decide  among  themselves.

In  this  manner  the  Duke  of  Normandy  retired  into
Bretagne,  poor  and  disconsolate,  being  forsaken  by  all  those
officers  that  had  served  his  father,  Charles  VII.,  who  had
made  their  peace  with  the  king,  and  were  advanced  to
places  of  higher  trust  and  honour  than  they  ever  enjoyed
under  his  father.  These  two  dukes  were  wise,  as  the  pro-
verb says  of  the  Bretons,  when  it  was  too  late,  and  kept
themselves  close  in  Bretagne  with  the  Lord  de  Lescut,  their
chief  servant ;  during  which  time,  several  ambassadors  were
still  going  and  coming,  sometimes  from  them  to  the  king,
sometimes  from  the  king  to  them ;  now  from  them  to  the
Count  of  Charolois,  then  from  the  count  to  them  ;  sometimes
from  the  king  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  then  again
from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  him :  some  for  intelligence,
and  some  to  debauch  their  respective  subjects,  and  make

*  They  made  a  treaty  of  perpetual  alliance,  which  was  signed  by  the
Duke  of  Bretagne  on  the  10th  of  August,  1467,  and  by  the  Duke  of
Normandy  on  the  22nd  of  the  same  month.

G  3


86  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1465.

what  pernicious  bargains  they  could,  and  all  under  the  specious
pretence  of  amity  and  friendship.

However,  some  were  honest,  and  went  with  a  true  zeal  to
accommodate  matters  between  them  ;  but  they  were  not  a
little  conceited,  to  presume  so  far  upon  their  own  wisdom  as
to  think  that  their  presence  could  prevail  anything  upon
such  powerful  princes  as  they,  who  were  cunning  and  pene-
trating, and  understood  their  own  interest  too  well.  I  saw
the  proposals  myself,  and  truly,  in  my  judgment,  neither  the
one  nor  the  other  were  reasonable.  But  there  is  a  sort  of
people  so  vain  and  self-conceited  as  to  believe  they  can
perform  things  which  they  do  not  understand  ;  for  very
often  their  masters  will  not  tell  them  their  secret  thoughts.
People  of  such  a  kidney  are  sent  only  in  formality,  and  to
fill  up  a  table,  and  many  times  to  their  own  cost ;  for  always
they  have  some  hanger-on  or  other  who  has  some  secret
designs,  as  I  have  observed  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,
wherever  I  have  been  concerned ;  so  that  (as  I  said  before)
great  princes  ought  to  be  very  careful  into  whose  hands
they  commit  the  management  of  their  affairs ;  and  it  also
concerns  those  who  are  employed  in  negotiations  abroad,  to
be  very  cautious  how  they  undertake  them;  and  he  that
can  excuse  himself  and  get  off  (unless  he  knows  himself
capable  of  performing  it,  and  finds  his  master  to  be  well
affected  to  the  business)  is,  in  my  judgment,  the  wisest  man  ;
for  I  have  known  many  an  honest  man  much  puzzled  and
troubled  in  managing  such  an  affair.  I  have  seen  princes
of  two  quite  contrary,  or,  at  least,  very  different,  dispositions  ;
some  are  of  so  subtle  and  jealous  a  temper,  that  no  man  knows
how  to  live  with  them,  and  they  think  everybody  betrays
them.  Others  are  as  confident  on  the  other  side,  and  commit
too  much  to  their  ministers,  but  then  they  are  so  dull  and  so
unskilful  in  state  affairs,  they  cannot  distinguish  when  a
man  does  well  or  ill ;  and  these  princes  are  very  wavering
and  inconstant,  and  their  love  changes  suddenly  into  hatred,
and  their  hatred  into  love ;  and  though  neither  with  the
one  nor  the  other,  are  there  many  good  ministers  to  be
found  (and  where  they  are,  they  do  not  continue  long  in
favour,  and  are  never  safe),  yet  I  had  rather  live  with  a
wise  than  with  a  weak  prince,  for  there  a  man  may  have
an  opportunity  of  excusing  himself  and  recovering  his  favour;


1465.]  CONCERNING GOOD AND BAD PRINCES.  87

but  with  the  ignorant,  there  is  no  reconciliation,  for  he  does
nothing  of  himself,  but  refers  all  to  his  ministers,  who  have
the  sole  administration  of  affairs,  and  then  he  changes  his
mind  upon  every  trifling  occasion.  However,  their  subjects
are  obliged  to  obey  them  in  the  countries  where  they  reign.
But  the  result  of  all  this  is,  that  we  should  place  our  confi-
dence only  in  God,  for  in  him  (and  in  none  else)  all  our
virtue,  goodness,  and  safety,  consist.  It  is  our  misery  that
few  people  understand  this,  till  it  is  too  late,  and  they  have
been  taught  by  their  misfortunes  :  yet  it  is  better  to  be  wise
late,  than  never.


G4


88  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES.  [1466.


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


CHAPTER  I.

Of  the  Wars  between  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  Liegeois  ;  and  of
the  taking,  plundering,  and  razing  the  town  of  Diuant — 1466.

SOON  after  the  pacification  of  the  troubles  of  France,  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  began  a  war  against  the  Liegeois,  which
lasted  for  several  years  ;  and  whenever  the  King  of  France
had  a  mind  to  interrupt  him,  he  attempted  some  new  action
against  the  Bretons,  and,  in  the  meantime,  supported  the
Liegeois  underhand ;  upon  which  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
turned  against  him  to  succour  his  allies,  or  else  they
came  to  some  treaty  or  truce  among  themselves.  In  the
year  1466*,  Dinant  was  taken  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
which  is  a  town  situated  in  the  territory  of  Liege,  very
strong  for  its  size,  and  very  rich  by  reason  of  the  works
which  they  make  in  copper,  commonly  called  Dinanderie  —
namely,  pots,  skillets,  and  frying-pans,  and  such  like  ware.
The  Duke  of  Burgundy  (who  died  in  June,  1467 f)  had  so
great  an  animosity  to  them,  that  he  was  carried  in  his  old
age  to  that  siege  in  a  litter.  The  reasons  of  his  displeasure
were,  the  great  cruelty  which  they  had  exercised  upon  his
subjects  in  the  county  of  Namur,  and  especially  at  a  little  town
called  Bouvines,  about  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  Dinant,
there  being  only  the  River  Maes  between  them.  Not  long
before  that,  the  inhabitants  of  Dinant  had  besieged  the  town
of  Bouvines,  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  for  the  space  of
eight  months,  committing  numerous  acts  of  hostilities,  and
bombarding  it  continually  with  two  brass  cannon  and  other
great  pieces  of  artillery,  battering  the  houses  about  their  ears,
and  forcing  the  inhabitants  to  shelter  themselves  in  their
cellars,  where  they  continued  during  the  whole  siege.  It
is  impossible  to  imagine  the  deadly  hatred  that  these  two

*  On  Monday,  August  25.  1466.
f  On  the  15th  of  June,  1467.


1466.]  CAPTUKE OF DIXANT.  89

towns  had  conceived  one  against  the  other*:  yet  their  children
married  frequently  together,  there  being  no  other  towns  of
any  consideration  in  that  neighbourhood.

The  year  before  the  destruction  of  Dinant  (which  was
the  summer  in  which  the  Count  of  Cbarolois  arrived  before
Paris,  and  joined  with  the  French  lords  who  were  in  con-
federacy with  him)  the  towrn  made  an  agreement  and  peace
with  the  count,  by  which  they  were  obliged  to  pay  to  him
a  certain  sum  of  money,  and  had  separated  from  the  city
of  Liege  and  managed  their  affairs  apart.  When  people
(whose  interest  binds  them  together  in  an  alliance)  divide
and  forsake  one  another,  it  is  a  certain  sign  of  destruction,
not  only  for  towns  and  little  states,  but  for  princes  and
great  potentates :  but  because  I  suppose  everybody  may
have  read  or  observed  examples  enough  of  this  nature,  I  for-
bear to  say  any  more  than  this,  that  King  Louis  our  master
understood  breaking  and  dividing  of  leagues  better  than
any  prince  that  I  ever  knew,  for  he  spared  neither  money  nor
pains,  and  that  as  well  with  the  servants  as  the  masters.
But  to  return  ;  by  degrees  the  Dinanters  began  to  repent
heartily  of  the  above-mentioned  treaty,  and  caused  four  of
their  chief  citizens,  who  had  been  instrumental  in  concluding
the  peace,  to  be  most  barbarously  executed,  and  began
the  war  afresh  in  the  county  of  Namur.  For  these  reasons,
and  upon  the  earnest  solicitation  of  the  inhabitants  of
Bouvines,  this  siege  was  undertaken  by  Duke  Philip ;  but
the  command  of  the  army  was  given  to  his  son,  to  whom  the
Count  of  St.  Paul,  Constable  of  France,  repaired,  but,  coming
in  a  private  capacity,  and  acting  without  any  authority
from  the  king,  he  could  not  bring  any  of  the  standing  forces
of  the  kingdom  to  the  assistance  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
but  was  forced  to  content  himself  with  what  forces  he  could
assemble  on  the  frontiers  of  Picardy.

The  Dinanters  made  a  bold  sally  one  day ;  but  it  proved
much  to  their  disadvantage,  for  they  were  beaten  so  cruelly,
that  eight  days  after  (their  friends  having  no  time  to
consider  of  their  relief)  the  town  was  taken  by  storm  and  set

*  For  the  first  causes  of  this  hostility,  see  several  documents  published
in  M.  Gachard's  Collection  de  Documents  Inedits,  vol.  ii.  pp.  205,  218,
343,  in  which  the  Dinantais  charge  the  people  of  Bouvines  with  the  same
acts  of  violence  and  cruelty  with  which  Commines  charges  the  Dinantais,


90  THE MEMOIRS OF  PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1466.

on  fire,  and  the  prisoners  (about  800)  drowned  before
Bouvines  at  the  earnest  request  of  the  men  of  Bouvines.
Whether  God  permitted  it  as  a  judgment  upon  them  for
their  malice,  I  cannot  determine,  but  certainly  it  was  a
dreadful  revenge.

The  next  day  after  the  taking  of  the  town,  the  Liegeois
(contrary  to  their  agreement  *)  arrived  in  great  numbers  to
have  relieved  it ;  for  by  that  treaty  they  also  had  obliged
themselves  not  to  meddle  with  the  affairs  of  the  Dinanters,  as
the  Dinanters  had  separated  from  them.

Duke  Philip,  on  account  of  his  great  age,  returned  homef;
but  his  son  with  the  whole  army  advanced  against  the  Liegeois,
whom  we  met  with  sooner  than  we  expected,  for,  by  accident
and  the  fault  of  our  guides,  our  vanguard  lost  their  way,
and  our  main  body  (in  which  most  of  the  chief  commanders
were)  encountered  the  enemy.  It  was  already  late  when  we
met,  and  yet  we  prepared  to  engage  them,  when  immediately
certain  deputies  arrived  from  them,  with  a  message  to  the
Count  of  Charolois,  beseeching  him,  that  in  honour  to  the
blessed  Virgin  Mary  (whose  eve  that  was  J),  he  would  commi-
serate their  condition ;  and  who  also  made  the  best  excuse  they
could  for  breaking  the  treaty  that  was  lately  concluded
between  them.  However,  the  Liegeois  did  not  seem  so
submissive  as  the  deputies  represented  them  to  be,  but
set  a  good  face  on  the  matter,  and  made  a  show  as  if
they  intended  to  venture  a  battle.  However,  after  the
deputies  had  gone,  and  returned  three  or  four  times,
the  peace  made  the  year  before  was  confirmed§,  and  a  certain
sum  of  money  was  to  be  paid  || ;  and  that  the  peace  might  be
better  observed  than  it  had  been  before,  they  promised  to
deliver  300  hostages^,  who  were  to  be  named,  and  set

*  See  p.  80,  note  J  .

f  "  On  the  first  day  of  September,  the  duke  departed  from  Bouvines,
and  lay  that  night  at  Namur."  Du  Clercq,  xv.  125.

J  It  was  Sunday,  September  7.,  the  eve  of  the  nativity  of  the  Virgin.

§  The  letters  of  the  burgomasters  are  dated  September  10.  1466.
Gachard,  ii.  402.

||  They  had  promised,  by  the  treaty  of  December  22.  1465,  to  "pay
600,000  Rhenish  florins  in  six  years,  100, 000  each  year."  Du  Clercq,  xv.
129.

^[  This  number  of  300  hostages  was  to  be  furnished  by  annuity,  AS
it  were ;  that  is  to  say,  fifty  every  year,  until  the  full  payment  of  the


1466.]  THE LIEGEOIS SEXD HOSTAGES.  91

down  in  a  roll  by  the  Bishop  of  Liege*  and  some  of  his
officers  who  were  then  in  the  army,  and  to  be  sent  to
the  Count  of  Charolois  by  eight  o'clock  the  next  morning.
During  the  whole  night  the  Burgundian  army  was  in  great
dread,  for  they  were  neither  regularly  encamped,  nor  en-
closed within  their  waggons,  but  scattered  up  and  down
in  separate  bodies,  and  in  a  place  very  advantageous  for  the
enemy,  who  were  all  foot,  and  much  better  acquainted  with
the  country  than  we.  Some  of  them  had  a  desire  to
have  attacked  us,  and  if  they  had,  in  my  opinion  we  must
have  been  defeated ;  but  those  who  transacted  the  peace,
opposed  and  hindered  that  enterprise.

As  soon  as  it  was  break  of  day,  our  army  drew  together  in
one  body  immediately  ;  our  battalions  appeared  drawn  up  in
very  good  order,  and  our  number  was  great,  consisting  of
3000  men-at-arms,  good  and  bad,  and  12,000  or  14,000
archers :  besides  a  good  body  of  foot  out  of  the  neighbour-
ing country.  We  marched  directly  towards  them,  to  receive
our  hostages,  or  fight  them  if  they  failed.  We  found
them  separated,  and  marching  off  in  small  bodies,  and  in
disorder,  as  people  wholly  ignorant  of  order  and  martial
conduct.  It  was  by  this  time  almost  twelve  o'clock,  and
no  hostages  delivered ;  the  Count  of  Charolois  asked  ad-
vice of  the  Marshal  of  Burgundy,  whether  he  should  fall
upon  them  or  not ;  the  marshal  replied,  Yes,  he  might  do  it
without  any  danger,  and  they  could  not  complain,  for  they
themselves  were  in  the  fault.  Then  he  asked  the  Lord  of
Contay  (who  has  been  often  named),  and  he  was  entirely  of
the  same  opinion,  affirming  we  should  never  have  such  an
opportunity,  showing  us  how  they  were  divided  and  in  dis-
order, and  pressed  hard  for  attacking  them.  The  next  he
asked  was  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  Constable  of  France,  who
was  absolutely  against  it,  alleging  that  it  would  be  inconsist-
ent both  with  his  honour  and  engagement  to  fall  upon  them,
and  that  it  was  impossible  for  so  many  people  to  come  to  a

600,000  florins.  The  fifty  were  to  be  made  up  "  of  thirty-two  men  for
the  city  of  Liege,  six  for  the  town  of  Tongres,  six  for  the  town  of  Saint-
Tron,  and  six  for  the  town  of  Hasselt."  Du  Clercq,  xv.  129.

*  Louis  de  Bourbon,  Bishop  of  Liege,  son  of  Charles  I.,  Duke  of
Bourbon,  and  Agnes  of  Burgundy.  He  was  assassinated  on  the  30th  of
August,  148  J.


92  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMTNES.  [1467

final  resolution  and  be  agreed  so  soon,  especially  in  a  business
of  such  a  nature  as  choosing  of  hostages  ;  and  he  advised  the
Count  of  Charolois  rather  to  send  to  them,  and  see  what  they
intended.  The  argument  between  these  three  great  officers
before  the  Count  of  Charolois  took  up  a  considerable  time,
and  he  was  much  divided  how  to  determine  the  matter.  On
the  one  hand,  he  saw  his  great  and  inveterate  enemies  de-
feated, and  in  his  power,  and  that  without  any  dangerous  re-
sistance ;  on  the  other,  he  found  his  honour  was  at  stake,  and
it  would  interfere  with  his  promise.  At  last  he  concluded  to
send  a  trumpet  towards  them,  who  met  them  bringing  the
hostages,  upon  which  all  were  hush,  and  every  man  returned
to  his  post.  But  the  soldiers  were  highly  displeased  with  the
constable's  advice ;  for  they  saw  good  plunder  before  their
eyes.  An  embassy  was  sent  immediately  to  Liege  to  ratify
and  confirm  the  treaty  of  peace  ;  but  the  people  (being  incon-
stant) said  that  the  count  was  afraid  to  engage  them,  fired
their  guns  upon  him,  and  committed  many  insolences.  The
count  after  this  returned  into  Flanders ;  and,  his  father  dying
that  summer,  he  celebrated  his  obsequies  with  great  pomp  and
solemnity  at  Bruges  ;  and  notified*  his  death  to  the  king.


CHAP.  II.

How  the  Liegeois  broke  the  Peace  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  before
called  Count  of  Charolois,  upon  which  he  engages  and  defeats  them  in
a  set  Battle 1467.

DURING  these  wars,  and  ever  since,  secret  and  fresh  in-
trigues were  carried  on  by  the  princes.  The  king  was  so
exceedingly  exasperated  against  the  Dukes  of  Bretagne  and
Burgundy  that  it  was  wonderful;  they  could  not  correspond,
or  hear  from  one  another  without  great  difficulty;  sometimes
their  couriers  were  stopped,  and,  in  time  of  war,  they  were
forced  to  send  their  letters  by  sea,  or,  at  least,  the  Duke  of
Bretagne  was  obliged  to  send  his  messengers  into  England,
who,  going  by  land  to  Dover,  embarked  there  for  Calais ;  for,
when  they  went  the  direct  way  by  land,  they  were  often  in
very  great  danger.

*  By  letter  dated  from  Bruges,  June  19.  1467. It  will  be  found  in
Lenglet,  il  620.


1467.]  THE LIEGEOIS BREAK THE PEACE.  93

During  all  these  years  of  dissension,  and  in  others  which
succeeded  for,  at  least,  twenty  years  or  more  (some  in  wars,
and  others  in  truces  and  circumventions,  every  one  of  the
princes  comprehending  his  allies  in  his  truces,)  it  pleased  God
to  favour  the  realm  of  France  so  far,  that  the  wars  and  divi-
sions in  England  were  not  ended,  though  they  had  begun
fifteen  years  before,  and  had  been  continued  with  many  me-
morable and  bloody  battles,  in  which  several  brave  men  had
been  slain.  In  those  wars  both  sides  were  accounted  traitors,
by  reason  that  there  were  two  families  which  pretended  to  the
crown  ;  one  was  the  house  of  Lancaster,  the  other  the  house
of  York :  and  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  if  England
had  been  in  the  same  condition  it  was  in  formerly,  the  king-
dom of  France  would  have  been  in  great  danger.  The  King
of  France's  aim,  in  the  meantime,  was  chiefly  to  carry  his
design  against  the  province  of  Bretagne,  and  he  looked  upon
it  as  a  more  feasible  attempt,  and  likelier  to  give  him  less
resistance  than  the  house  of  Burgundy.  Besides,  the
Bretons  were  the  people  Avho  protected  and  entertained  all
his  malcontents  ;  as  his  brother,  and  others,  whose  interest
and  intelligence  were  great  in  his  kingdom ;  for  this  cause  he
endeavoured  very  earnestly  with  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy,
by  several  advantageous  offers  and  proposals,  to  prevail  with
him  to  desert  them,  promising  that  upon  those  terms  he  also
would  abandon  the  Liegeois,  and  give  no  further  protection
to  his  malcontents.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  would  by  no
means  consent  to  it,  but  again  made  preparations  for  war
against  the  Liegeois,  who  had  broken  the  peace,  and  possessed
themselves  of  a  town  called  Huy*,  driven  out  his  garrison,
and  afterwards  plundered  it,  notwithstanding  the  hostages
which  they  had  given  the  year  before  were  to  be  put  to  death,
and  a  great  sum  of  money  to  be  paid  besides,  in  case  the
treaty  was  violated  on  their  part.  He  assembled  his  army
about  Lou  vain  j,  which  is  a  town  in  Brabant  and  on  the
marches  of  Liege.  The  Constable  of  France  (who  was  now

*  "  It  was  far  advanced  in  the  month  of  September,"  says  Chastellain,
"  when  the  town  of  Huy  was  taken  by  the  Liegeois."  Jealousy  led  the
Liegeois  to  attack  it,  for  "  it  had  always  sided  with  the  bishop  against
the  city,  and  for  that  cause,  Duke  Philip  had  granted  it  great  immu-
nities." Chastellain,  426.

f  The  duke  left  Brussels  for  Louvain  on  the  13th  of  October,  14G7.


94  THE MEMOinS OF PHILIP  DE COMHINES.  [1467.

wholly  devoted  to  the  French  interest,  and  had  his  residence
in  that  kingdom)  came  to  the  duke  with  Cardinal  Balue*
and  others,  to  let  him  know  that  the  Liegeois  being  in  an
alliance  with  the  King  of  France,  and  comprehended  in  his
truce,  he  should  be  obliged  to  relieve  them  in  case  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  thought  tit  to  invade  them.  However,  they
offered  that  in  case  the  duke  would  consent  that  their  master
might  make  war  upon  the  Bretons,  he  would  connive  at  his
designs  against  the  Liegeois.  Their  audience  was  short  and
in  public,  and  they  continued  there  but  one  day.  The  duke,
to  justify  his  proceedings  against  the  Liegeois,  replied,  "  That
they  had  invaded  him  ;  that  it  was  they  themselves,  and  not
he,  who  had  broken  the  truce,  and,  therefore,  he  was  resolved
to  be  revenged  of  his  enemies,  without  being  obliged  to
abandon  his  confederates  after  a  base  and  dishonourable
manner."  The  next  day,  as  the  duke  took  horse,  he  gave
them  their  despatch,  and  told  them  aloud,  "  That  he  desired
the  king  not  to  attempt  anything  against  the  Bretons."
The  constable  pressed  him  very  hard,  and  told  him,  "  Sir,
you  do  not  choose,  but  take  all ;  you  will  make  war  at  your
pleasure  upon  our  allies,  and  oblige  us  to  sit  still,  and  not
meddle  with  yours :  it  is  not  to  be  expected,  and  the  king
will  never  suffer  it."  The  duke  took  his  leave  of  them,  and
replied,  "  The  Liegeois  are  now  in  arms,  and  within  three
days  I  believe  we  shall  have  a  battle ;  if  I  lose  it,  I  do  not
doubt  but  you  will  do  as  you  think  fit ;  but  if  I  conquer,  you
will  leave  the  Bretons  in  peace."  And,  having  said  so,  he
mounted  on  horseback,  and  the  ambassadors  prepared  to  be
gone.  The  duke  marched  in  his  arms  from  Louvain  to  be-
siege St.  Tron  f ,  with  a  very  great  army,  for  all  the  forces
which  could  be  got  together  in  Burgundy  had  joined  him ;
and,  to  speak  truth,  his  army  was  far  more  numerous  than
any  I  had  ever  yet  seen  in  my  life.

Before  his  departure  from  Louvain,  it  was  debated  in

*  Jean  Balue  was  born  at  Poitiers  in  1422,  and  died  in  October,  1491.
He  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Evreux  in  1464,  translated  to  the  see  of
Angers  soon  afterwards,  and  raised  to  the  cardinalate  in  1467.

f  On  the  27th  of  October,  1467,  the  count  "  came  to  the  siege  of  the
town  of  Saint  Tron,  and  on  the  28th  he  gained  a  battle  over  the  Liegeois
at  the  village  of  Brusten.  On  the  2nd  of  November,  the  town  of  Saint-
Tron  surrendered  at  discretion,  and  the  duke  demolished  its  gates,  towers,
and  walls."  Lenglet,  ii.  190.


1467.]  DEBATE CONCERNING THE HOSTAGES.  95

council  what  was  to  be  done  with  the  hostages,  and  whether
or  no  they  should  be  put  to  death.  Some  were  of  opinion
that  they  should  all  of  them  die,  and  particularly  the  Lord
of  Contay  was  of  that  judgment;  and,  indeed,  I  never
heard  him  speak  so  ill  and  so  unmercifully  as  at  that  time ;
for  which  reason  it  is  necessary  that  princes  should  have  se-
veral privy  councillors  ;  since  the  wisest  men  are  sometimes,
nay,  too  often,  partial  and  prejudiced,  either  out  of  love,
hatred,  contradiction,  or  indisposition  of  their  bodies,  for  the
counsel  that  is  given  after  dinner  is  not  always  the  best.
But  some  may  object,  that  persons  guilty  of  any  of  those
faults  are  not  fit  to  be  admitted  into  council  at  all.  To
which  I  answer,  That  we  are  ail  of  us  but  men,  and  he  who
would  find  out  such  as  should  never  fail  to  speak  wisely,
nor  show  more  passion  at  one  time  than  another,  must  seek
them  in  heaven,  for  upon  earth  we  cannot  find  them :  but,
in  recompense  for  this,  sometimes  he  who  has  never  been
used  to  do  so  before,  will  speak  wisely  in  council,  which
makes  amends  for  the  others.

But  to  return  to  the  debate  :  two  or  three,  in  deference  to
the  authority  and  judgment  of  the  Lord  of  Contay,  were  also  of
his  opinion  ;  for  in  such  councils  there  are  many  present,  who
(not  well  understanding  the  affair  that  is  in  debate)  give  their
sentiments  as  they  hear  others  before  them,  being  extremely
desirous  to  please  and  ingratiate  themselves  with  some  person
or  other  of  great  power  and  authority.  After  him,  the
question  was  put  to  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  * ,  who  was
born  near  Amiens,  and  was  one  of  the  wisest  and  gravest
gentlemen  I  ever  was  acquainted  with.  His  opinion  was,  by
all  means,  to  keep  God  on  their  side,  and  to  let  the  world  see
that  he  was  neither  cruel  nor  revengeful ;  he  thought  it  the
most  prudent  way  to  release  the  300  hostages,  because
they  delivered  themselves  up  with  a  good  intention,  and
in  confidence  that  the  peace  would  have  been  inviolably
kept.  However,  he  judged  it  proper,  that  at  their  dismis-
sion they  should  be  put  in  mind  of  the  duke's  mercy  towards
them,  and  exhorted  to  employ  their  utmost  endeavour  to

*  Guy  de  Brimeu,  Count  of  Mehem,  and  Lord  of  Humbercourt.  was
created  a  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece  in  1473.  He  was  a  son  of  Jean
de  Brimeu  and  Marie  de  Mailly  :  he  married  Antoinette  de  Eambures ;
and  he  was  beheaded  at  Ghent  on  the  3rd  of  April,  1477.


96  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1467.

persuade  the  people  to  consent  to  an  honourable  peace ;  and
that  it'  they  should  not  be  able  to  prevail,  that,  at  least,  in
acknowledgment  of  the  duke's  generosity,  they  should  engage
never  to  bear  arras  against  him,  nor  against  their  bishop,  who
was  then  with  him.  This  opinion  was  followed,  and  when
the  hostages  were  dismissed,  they  consented  to  what  had  been
proposed  to  them ;  and  they  were  told,  that  if  they  engaged
(any  of  them)  actually  in  the  war,  and  were  taken  prisoners,
they  must  expect  to  suffer  death ;  and  so  they  departed.

It  will  not  be  altogether  impertinent  to  add,  that  after  the
Lord  of  Contay  had  given  his  judgment  in  so  cruel  a  manner
against  the  poor  hostages  (part  of  whom  came  in  with  the
rest  voluntarily),  a  gentleman  who  was  then  in  the  council,
whispered  me  in  the  ear,  and  said,  "Do  you  observe  that
man  ?  Though  he  be  old,  he  is  in  good  health  and  well;  yet  I
dare  lay  a  wager  he  dies  within  the  year,  in  punishment  for
the  inhumanity  of  his  advice."  And  so  it  fell  out,  for  he  lived
not  long  after ;  however,  he  did  his  master  good  service  in
one  battle  before  his  death,  of  which  I  shall  speak  hereafter.

But  to  return  to  my  history.  You  have  heard  how  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  upon  his  departure  from  Lou  vain,  laid
siege  to  St.  Tron,  and  erected  his  batteries.  In  the  town
there  was  a  garrison  of  3000  Liegeois,  commanded  by  a  very
good  officer*,  who  was  the  same  person  that  had  managed
the  treaty  of  peace,  when  we  met  them,  drawn  up  in  order
of  battle,  the  year  before.  The  third  day  after  our  investing
the  town,  the  Liegeois,  to  the  number  of  about  30,000  or
upwards  t,  one  with  another  (but  all  foot  except  500),  and  a
large  train  of  artillery,  came  to  raise  the  siege,  at  about  ten
o'clock  in  the  morning.  Our  first  discovery  of  them  was  in
a  strong  village  called  Brustan,  about  half  a  league  from
our  camp,  encompassed  partly  with  a  great  morass ;  and  in
their  army  was  Francis  Rayer  ^,  Bailiff  of  Lyons,  and  ambas-
sador from  the  king  to  the  Liegeois  at  that  time.  The

*  Renard  de  Rouvroy.

f  It  appears  from  a  letter  ^tten  on  the  29th  of  October  by  Louis
Van  den  Rive,  pensionary  of  the  town  of  Ypres,  that  the  Liegeois  numbered
17,000  or  18,000  with  400  or  500  horse ;  whilst  Jean  de  Halewyn,
writing  on  the  31st  of  the  same  month,  says  they  had  1400  men-at-arms.

J  Francois  Rayer,  Esquire,  was  Bailiff  of  Macon,  and  Seneschal  and
Captain  of  Lyons,  in  1462.


1467.] DEFEAT  OF  THE  LIEGEOIS.  97

alarm  was  brought  immediately  to  our  army ;  yet,  I  must
needs  say, our discipline  was not exact,  for  we  had no
scouts  abroad  to  bring  us  any  intelligence  of  their  approach,
and  the  first  news  we  had  of  them  was  from  our  foragers,
who  fled  from  them. I  was  never  in  any  place  with  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  where  I  observed  him  give  good  orders
of  himself, but  only  then. Immediately  he drew all  his
battalions  out  into  the  field,  except  some  few  which  were
left to carry on the  siege ; and  among the rest he left
500  English. Upon  both  sides  of  the  village he placed
1200  men-at-arms,  and  posted  himself  with  800  more  just
before  the  town,  but  at  a  little  farther  distance. With  the
archers  there  were  several  persons  of  note  and  distinction
on foot, besides  a  great  many  of  the  men-at-arms. The
Lord  of  Ravestein  commanded  the  duke's  van,  consisting
only of  foot, part men-at-arms, and part archers, who
marched  up  with  some  pieces  of  cannon  to  the  very  trenches,
which  were  broad  and  deep,  and  full  of  water ;  yet,  with
our arrows and our artillery together, we forced their
intrenchments,  and  turned  their  cannon  upon  them. How-
ever, when  our  arrows  failed  us,  the  Liegeois  took  heart  again,
and  with  their  long  pikes,  which  are  advantageous  weapons,
charging briskly upon  our archers and those who  com-
manded them,  they  killed  400  or  500  of  us  immediately ;  so
that  all  our  troops  on  that  side  began  to  give  ground,  as  if
the  battle  had  been  lost. Upon  this,  the  duke  commanded
the  archers  of  his  main  battle  to  march  under  the  command
of  Philip  de  Crevecccur,  Lord  of  Cordes  (a  wise  man),  and  se-
veral other  good  officers,  AV!IO  falling  upon  the  Liegeois  with
a  great  shout,  they  were  immediately  discomfited.* Neither
the  horse,  which  (as  I  said  before)  were  drawn  up  on  both
sides  of  the  village,  nor  the  duke  himself,  where  he  was  posted,
could  come  at  the  Liegeois  to  attack  them,  by  reason  of  the
morass,  only  they  were  posted  there  to  charge  them  in  case
our  vanguard should  have  been  repulsed,  and  the enemy
thereby  encouraged  to  march  out  into  the  plain. But  the
Liegeois,  as  soon  as  ever  they  were  broken,  fled  along1  by  the
morass,  and  were  not  pursued  by  any  but  the  foot ;  some  horse
the  duke  sent  to  follow  the  chase,  but  they  were  forced  to  go

*  On  the  28th  of  October.
H


98  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE CO3I3HNES.  [1467.

two  leagues  about  to  find  a  pass,  and  the  night  drawing  on,
several  of  the  Liegeois  made  their  escape,  who  otherwise
would  have  been  slain.  Other  troops  he  despatched  towards
the  town,  where  he  heard  a  great  noise,  and  suspected  a
sally ;  and  indeed  he  was  in  the  right,  for  they  made  three
vigorous  sallies,  but  were  always  repulsed  ;  and  the  English,
whom  the  duke  had  posted  in  a  certain  place  ready  to  charge
them,  behaved  themselves  very  bravely.  The  Liegeois,  who
were  broken,  rallied  a  little  about  their  waggons,  and  stood
their  ground  for  some  time,  but  were  at  last  entirely  defeated.
There  were  slain  in  this  battle  about  6000  men  :%  which,
to  people  that  are  unwilling  to  lie,  may  seem  very  much ;
but  in  my  time  I  have  been  in  several  actions,  where  for  one
man  that  was  really  slain,  they  have  reported  a  hundred,
thinking  by  such  an  account  to  please  their  masters  ;  and  they
sometimes  deceive  them  with  their  lies.  Yet,  if  night  had  not
come  on,  the  Liegeois  would  certainly  have  lost  near  15,000.
The  battle  being  over,  as  it  was  very  late,  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, with  his  whole  army,  marched  back  to  his  camp,
only  a  thousand  or  1200  of  his  horse  were  sent  two  leagues
about  to  a  pass  to  pursue  the  enemy,  there  being  no  other
way  of  coming  at  them,  by  reason  of  a  little  river  which  was
between  them  and  us.  But  the  night  hindered  them  from
doing  any  great  execution  ;  yet  some  they  killed,  and  others
they  took  prisoners,  though  the  greatest  part  of  them  escaped
to  the  town.  The  Lord  of  Contay  did  great  service  that  day
in  ordering  the  battle,  but  a  few  days  after,  he  died  in  the  town
of  Huy,  and  made  a  very  good  end.  He  was  a  person  of
great  courage  and  wisdom,  but  he  lived  not  many  days  after
the  cruel  sentence  which  he  had  given  against  the  hostages,
as  you  heard  before.  As  soon  as  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had
pulled  off  his  armour,  he  called  for  his  secretary,  and  wrote
a  letter  to  the  constable,  and  the  rest  of  the  ambassadors  who
had  left  him  at  Louvain  but  four  days  before,  to  give  them
an  account  of  the  victory,  and  to  desire  that  nothing  might
be  attempted  against  the  Bretons.

Two  days  after  this  defeat  (though  their  loss  was  not
very  great)  the  pride  and  insolence  of  this  silly  people  were
strangely  abated.  However  indeed,  be  it  who  it  may,  it  is

*  Jean  de  Halewyn  estimated  their  loss  at  "  4000  men  and  more."
Louis  Van  dsn  Hive  says,  2000  or  3000.


1467.] THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  DEFEAT.  99

an  act  of  imprudence  and  rashness  for  any  to  expose  their
fortunes  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle  if  they  can  possibly  avoid
it ;  for  the  loss  of  a  small  number  of  men  oftentimes  occa-
sions an  incredible  change  and  alteration  in  the  courage  of
the  army  that  has  been  defeated,  not  only  in  possessing  their
minds  with  a  dread  of  the  enemy,  but  by  infusing  a  dis-
respect and  contempt  of  their  commander  and  his  privy
councillors.  It  also  makes  them  inclinable  to  mutiny  and
rebel,  and  emboldens  them  to  demand  with  more  confidence
than  they  were  wont,  and  to  resent  with  more  insolence  when
they  are  denied ;  and  three  crowns  \yould  not  satisfy  them
so  well  as  one  would  have  done  before.  Wherefore  that
general  who  has  lost  one  battle,  if  he  be  wise,  ought  to  be
cautious'how  he  engages  suddenly  again  with  those  men  who
have  been  lately  beaten ;  but  he  should  rather  act  defensively,
or,  at  least,  enter  upon  some  trifling  action,  in  which  there  is  a
probability  of  succeeding,-  in  order  to  revive  their  courage
by  dispelling  their  fears.  In  all  cases,  the  loss  of  a  battle  is
always  attended  with  ill  consequences,  especially  to  him  that
is  beaten.  However,  those  who  are  conquerors,  and  those
whose  infantry  is  better  than  their  neighbours'  (as  may  be
said  of  the  English  and  Swiss),  may  fight  as  they  please  to
put  an  end  to  the  war.  I  name  not  those  nations  with  any
design  to  reflect  upon  the  rest,  but  only  because  they  have
gained  extraordinary  victories,  and  are  not  to  be  kept  long
in  the  field  without  action,  as  the  French  and  the  Italians,
who  are  either  more  grave  and  sober,  or  more  easily  com-
manded. On  the  other  hand,  that  prince  who  is  so  fortunate
as  to  gain  the  victory,  acquires  greater  esteem  and  reputation
in  his  army  than  he  had  before,  and  the  otedieuce  of  his
subjects  increasing  in  proportion,  they  give  him  whatever  he
desires,  and  his  soldiers  become  mt>re  daring  and  courageous.
Sometimes  also  princes  are  so  immoderately  vain-glorious,
and  puffed  up  with  their  victories,  that  they  turn  afterwards
to  their  prejudice,  as  I  have  seen;  but  moderation,  and  a
just  use  of  success,  is  a  blessing  which  proceeds  only  from
God.

The  garrison  of  Saint Tron  seeing  that  the  army,  whiclfliad
been  sent  to  their  relief,  was  routed,  and  finding  themselves
hemmed  in  on  all  sides,  supposing  the  defeat  much  greater

u  2


100  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMUTES. [1467.

than  it  really  was,  surrendered  the  town*,  went  away  with-
out their  arms,  and  left  ten  f  men  (whomever  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  should  choose)  to  be  disposed  of  at  his  pleasure ;
which  ten  were  beheaded,  and  six  of  them  were  of  the
hostages  who  had  been  released  not  many  days  before,  upon,
the  conditions  above  mentioned.  Having  taken  the  town,
he  broke  up  his  camp,  and  marched  towards  Tongres,  which
was  apprehensive  of  a  siege :  but,  being  unable  to  defend
itself,  without  putting  the  duke  to  the  trouble  of  erecting
batteries  against  it,  it  surrendered  upon  the  same  terms  },
and  left  ten  men  likewise  to  his  mercy,  five  of  whom  were
hostages  ;  but  all  ten  were  put  to  death,  as  the  others  had
been  at  Saint  Tron.


CHAP.  m.

How  the  Liegeois  quarrelled  among  themselves  about  surrendering  their
Town,  some  agreeing,  others  refusing  to  do  it ;  while,  in  the  meantime,
the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  found  a  way  to  enter  and  take  possession  of
it  for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  — 1467.

FROM  Tongres  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  marched  directly
against  the  city  of  Liege  §,  which,  at  that  time,  was  in  great
confusion,  and  strangely  divided.  Some  were  for  standing
a  siege,  positively  affirming  that  the  garrison  was  strong
enough  to  hold  out ;  and  of  this  opinion  was  a  certain  knight,
called  the  Lord  Rasse  de  Lintre.||  Others,  on  the  contrary,
who  saw  and  considered  the  inevitable  ruin  and  desolation
of  the  whole  country,  if  they  persisted  in  that  resolution,
would  needs  have  peace  upon  any  terms  ;  whereupon,  as

*  The  conditions  of  the  surrender  are  stated  in  letters  patent  of  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  dated  November  1.  1467,  and  ratified  on  the  7th  of
the  same  month  by  the  mayor  and  notable  inhabitants  of  Saint-Tron.
Gachard,  ii.  420.

f  Twelve. See  Gachard,  ii.  424.

j  On  the  6th  of  November. Lcnglet,  ii.  1 90.

§  The  duke  arrived  before  Liege  on  St.  Martin's  day,  November  11.
1467.

||  Racs  de  la  Riviere,  Lord  of  Lintre,  Heers,  &c.,  and  Knight-master
of  the  city  of  Liege  in  1463,  died  on  the  8th  of  December,  1477-  In
September,  1475,  he  appears  in  the  list  of  chamberlains  and  councillors
of  the  King  of  France.


1467.]  DIVISIONS AMONG THE LIEQEOIS.  101

soon  as  the  duke  approached  the  city,  some  few  overtures  of
peace  were  made  by  certain  mean  and  inconsiderable  persons,
such  as  fishmongers.  But  it  was  promoted  much  more  by
some  of  the  hostages,  who  acted  not  as  those  I  mentioned
before,  but  acknowledged  the  favour  they  had  received,  and
brought  along  with  them  300  of  the  chief  citizens  in
their  shirts,  bare-foot,  and  bare-headed,  who  presented  the
duke  with  the  keys  of  the  city,  and  delivered  themselves,
without  any  capitulation  * ;  only  they  begged  the  town
might  be  neither  plundered  nor  burnt.  At  this  time
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  attended  by  the  Lord  of  Mouy  f,
and  one  Monsieur  Jehan  Prevost,  one  of  the  king's  secre-
taries, who  were  the  king's  ambassadors  to  the  duke,  and
came  upon  the  same  affair,  and  with  the  same  request,  as  the
constable  had  done  not  many  days  before.  The  same  day
that  things  were  in  this  manner  accommodated,  supposing
all  things  concluded,  and  that  there  was  nothing  remaining
but  to  enter  the  city,  the  duke  sent  the  Lord  of  Humber-
court  before  him,  as  a  person  who  had  great  acquaintance  and
interest  in  that  city,  as  having  had  a  share  in  the  adminis-
tration of  their  affairs  for  several  years  together,  whilst  they
continued  in  peace.  But  the  citizens  denied  him  entrance  at
first,  and  he  was  forced  to  take  up  his  quarters  in  a  little
abbey  not  far  from  one  of  the  gates,  with  about  fifty  men-at-
arms  (of  which  number  I  myself  was  one),  and  perhaps
200  soldiers  in  all.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  sent  him
word  to  continue  in  that  post,  if  he  thought  himself  secure  :
but  if  not,  that  he  should  retire  to  him,  for  the  difficulty  of
the  way  would  not  permit  him  to  send  a  re-inforcement
easily,  because  all  that  side  of  the  country  was  full  of  rocks.
The  Lord  of  Humbercourt  resolved  not  to  abandon  the  abbey
where  he  was  posted,  it  being  sufficiently  strong,  but  he  de-
tained five  or  six  of  the  citizens  who  came  to  present  the
duke  with  the  keys,  to  assist  him,  as  you  shall  hear.
When  the  clock  struck  nine  at  night,  we  heard  their  bells

*  "  On  the  12th  of  November,  the  men  of  Liege,  ten  of  each  trade,
came  in  their  shirts  to  a  place  half  a  mile  from  the  town,  -where  my  lord
was  lodged,  and  prostrated  themselves  at  his  feet."  Gachard,  i.  1M1.

f  Collard,  Lord  of  Moy,  Knight,  Bailiff  of  Cotentin.  He  was  son  of
Nicholas  snrnamed  Colard,  Lord  of  Moy,  and  Marguerite  de  la  Hease.
He  married  Marguerite  d'Ailli.  He  was  still  living  in  1493.

u  3


102  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COM3HNES. [1467

ring,  at  which  the  people  assembled  in  the  town,  and  the
Lord  of  Humbercourt  was  afraid  it  might  be  a  signal  to  fall
upon  us;  for  he  had  certain  intelligence  that  the  Lord  Rasse
de  Lintre  and  several  others  had  openly  declared  against
the  peace  ;  and  his  apprehension  was  just  and  true,  for  they
met  to  that  purpose,  and  were  ready  to  attack  us.  The  Lord
of  Humbercourt  told  those  who  were  with  him,  "  If  we  caa
but  amuse  the  enemy  till  midnight,  we  are  safe  enough  ;  for
they  will  be  weary,  and  impatient  to  sleep,  and  then  those
who  are  our  adversaries  will  leave  the  town,  since  they  have
miscarried  in  their  design."  In  order  to  effect  that,  he
despatched  two  of  the  citizens,  whom  (as  I  said)  he  had  de-
tained, with  certain  articles  very  friendly  and  amicable,  that
he  had  caused  to  be  drawn  up  for  no  other  purpose,  but  only  to
give  them  an  occasion  of  assembling  the  people,  and  to  gain
time  ;  for  they  always  had  a  custom,  and  they  retain  it  to. this
very  day,  upon  any  news  of  importancp,  to  flock  together  to
the  bishop's  palace  upon  the  sounding  of  a  bell  that  is  within  it.
When  these  two  citizens  came  to  the  gate  (which  was  not
above  two  bow-shots  from  our  post),  they  found  the  people
in  great  bodies,  and  in  arms :  some  were  for  assaulting
them,  but  others  prevented  it.  Whereupon  they  called  out
aloud  to  the  mayor  of  the  city,  and  told  him  they  had
brought  certain  fair  and  honourable  proposals  in  writing
from  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
lieutenant  in  those  parts,  and  that  it  would  be  well  to  repair
to  the  palace  and  peruse  them.  The  people  did  so  ac-
cordingly; and  immediately  we  heard  the  palace-bell  ring
again,  by  which  we  understood  what  they  were  about.  Our
two  citizens  returned  not ;  but  about  an  hour  after  we  heard
a  greater  noise  at  the  gate  than  before,  more  of  the  people
running  down  thither,  crying  out,  and  railing  at  us  pver  the
walls  with  most  villanous  invectives.  By  this  manner  of
proceeding  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  knew  the  danger  was
worse  than  ever,  and  therefore  he  despatched  the  other  four
citizens  who  were  with  him,  with  a  letter  to  them  in
writing,  importing,  that  he  being  appointed  governor  of  that
city  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  had  treated  them  civilly,  and
would  never  consent  to  their  destruction ;  for  it  was  not
long  since  he  had  been  made  free  of  one  of  their  companies
(which  was  the  locksmiths'),  and  had  worn  their  livery,  for


1467.]  THE LIEGEOIS SUBMIT.  103

which  reason  they  might  repose  the  more  confidence  in  what
he  said.  In  short,  he  told  them,  that  if  they  would  enjoy
the  benefit  of  peace,  and  preserve  their  country  from  ruin,
they  must  admit  the  duke  into  the  town  according  to  their
promise,  and  submit  to  such  terms  as  were  contained  in
a  certain  schedule,  which  he  also  sent  them.  When  he
had  thoroughly  instructed  his  four  citizens,  they  passed  on
directly  to  the  gate  as  the  others  had  done,  and  found  it
wide  open :  some  of  the  people  threatened  them,  and  gave  them
very  ill  language  ;  others  were  willing  to  hear  what  they  had
to  say,  and  returned  to  the  palace  ;  and  the  bell  ringing  again
immediately,  we  were  extremely  pleased,  and  the  noise  at
the  gate  began  to  decrease.  In  short,  they  were  then  a  long
time  in  the  palace,  and  their  conference  lasted  till  two  in
the  morning,  and  it  was  agreed  that  their  promise  should
be  kept,  and  that  in  the  morning  one  of  the  gates  should
be  delivered  up  to  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt ;  upon  which
resolution  the  Lord  Rasse  de  Lintre  and  his  party  aban-
doned the  town.

I  should  not  have  dwelt  so  long  upon  so  inconsiderable  a
matter,  had  it  not  bedn  to  show  that  sometimes  by  such  ar-
tifices and  expedients  as  these  (which  proceed  from  great
judgment  and  penetration  in  state  affairs)  great  dangers  and
inconveniences  are  prevented.  The  next  morning  by  break
of  day,  several  of  the  hostages  came  to  wait  on  the  Lord  of
Humbercourt,  and  entreated  him  to  go  along  with  them  to  the
palace,  where  all  the  people  were  assembled,  and  swear  to
the  two  articles  against  firing  and  plundering  the  city  (of
which  the  people  could  not  be  otherwise  secure),  telling  him
that  alter  that  they  would  give  him  possession  of  one  of  the
gates.  He  sent  an  account  of  all  that  had  happened  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  went  himself  into  the  city,  and  having
taken  the  oath,  he  returned  to  the  gate,  caused  those  who
were  there  upon  the  guard  to  come  down,  and  having  put
in  a  dozen  of  his  own  men-at-arms  and  some  archers
in  their  place;  he  set  up  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  standard
upon  the  gate.  From  thence  he  went  to  another  gate  (which
was  walled  up),  and  put  it  into  the  hands  of  the  Bastard  of
Burgundy,  whose  quarters  were  close  by.  The  third  he
delivered  to  the  Marshal  of  Burgundy,  and  the  fourth  to
some  gentlemen  volunteers  that  accompanied  him.  Thus

H  4


104  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP BE COMMIXES. [1467.

were  the  four  gates  of  the  city  possessed  by  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  forces,  and  his  banners  erected  upon  them.

To  give  you  a  better  insight  into  these  affairs,  it  is  neces-
sary to  acquaint  you,  that  at  that  time  Liege  was  (excepting
only  five  or  six)  one  of  the  strongest  and  most  populous
cities  in  those  parts ;  besides  which,  great  numbers  of
people  being  retired  thither  out  of  the  adjacent  country,  the
loss  they  had  sustained  in  the  late  battle  was  not  at  all  to  be
perceived  ;  and  they  were  in  no  want  or  necessity  of  any-
thing ;  it  was  also  in  the  depth  of  winter,  and  prodigious  rains
had  fallen,  which  had  strangely  increased  the  natural
softness  and  miriness  of  the  country.  On  our  side,  we  were
in  great  want  both  of  provisions  and  money,  and  our  army
was  ready  to  break  up;  for  which  reason  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy had  no  inclination  to  have  besieged  the  town  ;  and
even  if  he  had  been  willing  to  have  undertaken  the  siege,
he  was  not  in  a  capacity  of  doing  it  ;  so  that  if  they  had
delayed  the  time  but  two  days  longer,  he  must  have  marched
away  as  he  came,  without  attempting  anything.  All  these
things  being  considered,  it  must  be  owned  that  the  Lord  of
Humbercourt  gained  great  honour  and  reputation  by  the
nice  management  of  this  important  affair,  which  proceeded
wholly  from  the  grace  of  God  towards  him ;  for  in  human
probability  such  wonderful  success  was  not  to  be  expected,
nor  could  he  ever  have  presumed  to  have  wished  for  such
a  surprising  turn  of  affairs  as  happened  ;  and  all  the  honours
that  were  conferred  on  him,  and  the  unparalleled  success  he
met  with  in  this  expedition,  the  generality  of  the  world
looked  upon  as  a  just  reward  for  his  tenderness  and  com-
passion towards  the  poor  hostages,  whom  we  have  mentioned
before  ;  and  this  I  write  the  more  willingly,  because  princes
and  others  do  many  times  complain  and  repine  at  such
mercy  and  indulgence  as  they  have  granted  to  other  people,
esteeming  themselves  unfortunate,  and  imputing  all  their
following  disasters  to  that  tenderness  of  soul,  and  resolving
for  the  future  never  to  be  guilty  of  any  such  acts  of  piety  or
generosity,  which  are  two  virtues  that  ought  to  be  insepar-
able from  their  offices.

In  my  judgment  this  is  a  wrong  way  of  arguing,  and
proceeds  from  a  base  and  degenerate  mind  wherever  it
is  found  ;  for  a  prince  or  any  man  else,  who  has  never  been


1467.]  TRIUMPHAL ENTRY INTO  LIEGE.  105

deceived,  is  no  better  than  a  beast,  nor  can  he  know  any  just
difference  between  good  and  evil.  Besides,  men  are  not
all  of  the  same  mould,  and  lor  the  wickedness  and  ingra-
titude of  one  or  two,  we  ought  not  to  forbear  doing  good
to  many,  when  time  and  opportunity  present  themselves ;
however,  at  the  same  time,  I  would  have  all  mankind  so  wise
as  to  distinguish  between  persons,  for  all  people  are  not
equally  meritorious ;  and  indeed  it  is  surprising  to  me
how  a  wise  man  can  be  ungrateful  to  any  one  that  has  done
anything  extraordinary  to  serve  him  ;  yet  in  this  princes
too  often  err,  for  he  that  advances  a  fool  never  advantages
himself  long ;  and  I  think  one  of  the  greatest  indications
of  wisdom  that  a  prince  can  show,  is  to  converse  with
and  have  about  him  virtuous  and  wise  men,  for  he  will
always  be  esteemed  of  the  same  humour  and  inclination
as  they  are  with  whom  he  most  intimately  converses.  So
that,  to  conclude  this  chapter,  methinks  the  ingratitude  of
one  person  ought  not  to  deter  us  from  doing  good  to  the  rest ;
for  perhaps  the  meanest  of  those  whom  you  have  once
obliged,  may  some  time  or  another  render  you  such  service,
and  return  you  such  thanks,  as  may  recompense  the  ingra-
titude and  unthankfulness  of  the  rest;  as  may  be  observed  in
these  hostages,  of  whom  the  greatest  number  were  base  and
ungrateful ;  for  of  the  whole  number  there  were  not  above
five  or  six  who  were  honest  and  grateful,  and  yet  those
five  or  six  managed  the  business  so  dexterously,  that  all  was
concluded  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  satisfaction.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  triumphal  Entry  into  the  City  of  Liege ;  and
the  Submission  of  the  Gautois,  who  not  long  before  had  treated  him
disrespectfully.  —  1467.

THE  next  day  after  the  delivering  up  of  the  gates  to
the  Lord  of  Hurnbercourt,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  made
his  triumphal  entry  into  Liege*,  the  citizens  having  broken
down  the  wall  for  twenty  fathoms  together,  and  filled  up
the  ditch  in  front  of  the  great  breach.  The  duke  himself

*  On  Tuesday,  November  17.  1467.


106  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1467.

made  his  entry  on  horseback,  in  the  midst  of  his  own
guards  and  chief  officers  of  the  army,  dressed  in  splendid
and  sumptuous  habits,  and  riding  in  great  pomp  and
solemnity  to  the  great  church,  where  he  alighted ;  with
him  there  also  entered  on  foot  about  2000  men-at-arms
in  complete  armour,  and  10,000  archers  ;  the  rest  of  his
forces  remained  in  the  camp  Avithout  the  town.  To  be
short,  he  staid  there  some  few  days*,  during  which  time
he  caused  five  or  six  of  those  who  had  been  his  hostages
to  be  put  to  death,  and  among  the  rest,  the  messenger
of  the  town,  for  whom  he  had  a  more  than  ordinary  hatred.
He  prescribed  new  laws  f  and  customs  ;  and  exacted  great
sums  from  them,  which  he  pretended  were  due  to  him  upon
the  breach  of  the  peace  and  agreement  with  him  some  years
before.  He  carried  away  with  him  all  their  arms  and
artillery,  and  caused  all  the  walls  and  fortifications  belonging
to  the  town  to  be  demolished.

When  he  had  seen  all  these  orders  performed,  he  returned
into  his  own  country,  where  he  was  received  with  great
honour  and  obedience,  and  particularly  by  the  citizens
of  Ghent,  who  before  his  expedition  against  the  Liegeois
were  in  a  kind  of  rebellion  against  him,  with  some  other
towns ;  but  now  they  entertained  him  as  a  conqueror,
the  chief  citizens  marching  on  foot  as  far  as  Brussels  to
meet  him,  and  carrying  all  the  town  banners  along  with
them^;  which  they  did  upon  the  account,  that  immediately
upon  the  death  of  his  father  he  chose  to  make  his  entry  into
Ghent  §  before  any  town  besides,  out  of  an  opinion  that
he  was  better  beloved  there  than  in  any  other  town  in  his
whole  dominions,  and  that  according  to  their  example
all  the  rest  would  behave  themselves  towards  him  ;  and  in
that  point  he  was  right.  The  next  day  after  his  entry,  the
citizens  put  themselves  in  arms,  and  drew  up  in  the  market-
place, whither  they  brought  the  image  of  one  of  their  saints

*  Until  the  28th  of  November,  1467.

f  In  M.  Gachard's  Collection  de  Documents  InSdits,  ii.  437,^11  be  found
a  copy  of  the  sentence  pronounced  upon  Liege  by  Duke  Charles,  on  the
18th  of  November,  1467.

J  Commincs  is  here  guilty  of  an  anachronism.  The  submission  of  the
Gantois  was  not  made  until  the  15th  of  January,  1469.  See  Gachard,
i.  204.

§  On  Sunday,  June  28th,  1467.


1467-] DEMANDS  OF  THE  GANTOIS.  107

called  Saint  Lievin  ;  and  knocking  the  image  against  a  little
house,  called  La  Maison  de  la  Cueillette  (where  they  col-
lected certain  gabels  upon  corn,  raised  for  the  payment  of
certain  debts  which  the  city  had  contracted  when  they  paid
the  sum  of  money  which  was  required  by  Duke  Philip
of  Burgundy  upon  the  peace  of  Gavre,  after  two  years'
war  with  him),  they  pretended  the  saint  had  a  mind  to
pass  through  that  house  erect,  and  without  any  distortion ;
upon  which  in  a  moment  it  was  pulled  down.  The  duke
having  notice  of  this  tumult,  repaired  immediately  to  the
market-place,  and  got  up  into  a  house  to  speak  to  them  the
better.  Several  persons  of  quality,  that  were  then  atte nding
on  him  in  arms,  offered  to  go  along  with  him,  but  he  ordered
them  to  stay  before  the  Town-Hall,  and  wait  till  he  returned ;
however,  the  mob  forced  them  by  degrees  into  the  market-
place. The  duke  being  got  thither,  commanded  the  image
to  be  taken  away,  and  carried  back  again  into  the  church  :
some  in  obedience  endeavoured  to  take  it  up,  but  others
threw  it  down  again  where  it  was.

The  next  insolence  was,  to  demand  justice  against  certain
persons  in  the  city,  who  had  embezzled  part  of  the  public
stock  ;  to  which  the  duke  answered,  that  he  would  take  care
and  see  them  satisfied  as  to  that  particular  :  but  finding  they
would  not  disperse,  he  returned  to  his  palace,  and  they
continued  in  the  market-place  for  eight  days  together.*  The
next  morning  they  brought  him  certain  articles,  by  which
they  demanded  restitution  of  whatever  Duke  Philip  had
taken  from  them  by  the  peace  of  Gavre  ;  and  among  the
rest  this  was  one,  that  every  company  might  have  its  banner
according  to  former  custom,  which  guilds  are  in  all  seventy-
two.  To  avoid  the  danger  he  was  in,  he  granted  their
demands  f,  gave  them  whatever  privileges  they  asked,  and
the  word  was  no  sooner  spoken  but  the  banners  were  set  up
and  displayed  in  the  market-place,  having  been  made  ready
for  that  purpose  ;  from  whence  one  may  probably  conjecture
they  would  have  done  the  same  thing  if  the  duke  had  denied

*  The  duke  remained  only  three  days  in  Ghent :  he  left  on  the  1st  of
July.  L'jiiLilet,  ii.  190.

f  The  letters,  dated  Brussels,  July  28th,  1467,  by  which  the  duke
granted  the  demands  of  the  Gantois,  will  be  found  in  Lenglet,  ii.  628 —
630.


108  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES.  [1467.

their  requests.*  His  opinion  was  right,  th.it,  if  he  made  his
first  entry  into  Ghent,  all  the  rest  of  the  towns  would  follow  its
example,  for  several  of  them  mutinied  as  it  had  done,  killed
their  officers,  and  committed  many  other  excesses.  If  he
had  believed  his  father's  character  of  that  people  (which
was,  "  That  the  inhabitants  of  Ghent  loved  the  son  of  their
prince  very  well,  but  for  their  prince  himself  they  never  had
any  kindness"),  he  would  not  have  been  so  much  mistaken  ;
for,  to  speak  impartially,  next  to  the  city  of  Liege,  Ghent
is  the  most  fickle  and  inconstant  town  in  the  whole  world.
But  among  so  many  ill  qualities,  they  have  one  pood,
and  that  is,  that  they  never  offer  violence  to  the  person
of  their  prince ;  and,  indeed,  the  chief  citizens  and  better
sort  of  the  town  are  generally  honest  men,  and  much
dissatisfied  with  the  folly  and  inconstancy  of  the  common
people.

The  duke  was  forced  to  wink  at  these  insolences,  lest  he
should  have  been  engaged  in  a  war  with  his  own  subjects
and  the  Liegeois  at  the  same  time ;  but  he  resolved,  if  he
succeeded  in  the  enterprise  he  had  undertaken,  to  call  them
afterwards  to  a  severe  account-]-;  and  so  it  happened,  for  (as
is  said  before)  they  brought  all  their  banners  on  foot  as  far
as  Brussels  to  meet  him,  and  all  their  privileges  and  charters
which  they  had  forced  him  to  sign  at  his  departure  from
Ghent ;  when,  in  a  grand  assembly  if  at  the  great  hall  at
Brussels,  and  in  the  presence  of  several  ambassadors,  they
presented  him  with  the  said  banners  and  privileges,  to  dis-
pose of  as  he  pleased,  he  commanded  his  heralds  to  strip  the
banners  from  the  staves  to  which  they  were  fastened,  and  to
send  them  to  Boulogne  (a  town  about  ten  leagues  from
Calais)  upon  the  sea,  where  the  rest  were  then  kept,  which
his  father  Duke  Philip  had  taken  from  them  in  his  wars,  in
which  he  had  vanquished  and  subdued  them.  The  duke's
chancellor  §  also  took  their  charter  and  all  their  privileges,

*  Chastellain  devotes  twelve  chapters  of  his  Chronique  to  details  of  this
sedition.

f  The  Gantois  did  not  receive  the  duke's  full  pardon  until  1469.

J  An  interesting  account  of  this  assembly  will  be  found  in  M.  Gachard's
Collection  de  Documents  Inedits,  i.  204.

§  Pierre  deGoux,  Lord  of  Goux,  Contrecoeur,  and  Wedargate,  knight,
chamberlain  of  Philip,  Duke  of  Bui-gundy,  was  created  Chancellor  of


1467.]  SUBMISSION OF THE GANTOIS.  109

and  cancelled  one  of  them,  relating  to  the  magistracy  of  their
city,  before  their  faces  :  for  in  all  the  other  towns  of  Flanders
the  duke  renews  the  magistrates  every  year,  and  receives
their  accounts  ;  but  at  Ghent,  by  virtue  of  this  privilege,
he  could  elect  but  four,  though  the  whole  number  was  six
and  twenty,  the  remaining  two  and  twenty  being  left  to  the
nomination  of  the  city.  When  these  magistrates  are  well
affected  to  the  Earl  of  Flanders,  that  year  they  are  at  peace,
and  they  grant  him  whatever  he  desires ;  but  when,  on  the
contrary,  they  are  disaffected,  seditions  arise,  and  all  goes  to
wreck.  Besides  this,  they  were  fined,  and  paid  30,000
florins  to  the  duke,  and  6000  to  his  courtiers,  and  some
of  their  townsmen  were  banished,  and  then  all  the  rest
of  their  privileges  were  restored.  The  rest  of  the  towns,
following  their  example,  ransomed  their  crimes,  and  made
their  peace  with  money*;  for  they  had  attempted  nothing
against  his  person.  By  all  which  it  evidently  appears  what
advantages  follow  the  conqueror,  and  what  losses  the  con-
quered ;  for  which  reason  we  ought  to  be  very  cautious  of
coming  to  a  battle  before  there  be  a  necessity  for  it,  and  if
any  such  necessity  happens,  all  things  are  to  be  seriously
weighed  and  considered  before  we  engage  ;  and  commonly
those  who  are  wary,  and  go  to  it  with  fear,  are  most  cir-
cumspect, and  by  consequence  more  frequently  successful
than  those  who  are  arrogant  and  presumptuous.  But  when
God  interposes,  man's  wisdom  signifies  nothing.

The  Liegeois,  of  whom  we  were  speaking,  were  excommu-
nicated five  years  together  f  for  some  difference  between
them  and  their  bishop ;  but  they  despised  his  excommunica-
tion, and  continued  in  their  folly  and  obstinacy,  without  any

Burgundy  by  letters  dated  October  26. 1465.  He  married  Dame  Mathie
de  Rye,  and  died  on  the  5th  of  April,  1470.

*  The  Flemings  had  to  pay  1,200,000  crowns,  within  sixteen  years j
the  Brabanters  30*0,000  lions  ;  and  Valenciennes  100,000  livres  tournois,
within  fifteen  years.

f  The  Liegeois,  in  1462,  put  themselves  under  the  protection  of  Louis
XI.  and  refused  to  obey  their  bishop,  a  nephew  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy ;
upon  which  the  duke  solicited  and  obtained  from  the  Pope  a  bull  of  ex-
communication against  them,  by  which  he  was  ordered  "  to  crusade
against  them  as  against  the  infidels,  and  against  a  people  disobedient  to
the  holy  apostolical  see."  The  sentence  of  excommunication  is  dated
December  23.  1465.


110  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMM1NES.  [1468.

other  reason  besides  their  excessive  riches  and  pride.  And
to  this  purpose  King  Louis  had  a  saying,  and  in  ray  judgment
a  wise  one,  "  That  when  pride  rode  before,  shame  and  de-
struction would  follow ;"  but  he  had  not  the  least  tincture
of  that  sin  in  him.


CHAP.  V.

How  the  King  of  France  made  War  in  Bretagnc  upon  the  Dnke  of
Burgundy's  Allies,  upon  Intelligence  of  what  had  happened  to  the
Liegeois  ;  and  the  Interview  and  Conference  of  these  two  Princes  at
Peroane.,—  1468

THESE  commotions  being  over,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
retired  to  Ghent,  where  he  was  honourably  and  magnifi-
cently received.  He  entered  the  city  in  arms,  and  the
citizens  made  a  postern  into  the  fields,  that  he  might  bring
in  or  keep  out  what  company  he  pleased.  Several  ambassadors
were  sent  to  him  from  the  king,  and  others  went  from  him  to
the  king  ;  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  also  sent  several  embassies
to  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  and  in  this  manner  all  that  winter
was  spent.  The  king  was  very  solicitous  and  pressing  with
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  abandon  the  Duke  of  Bretagne's
interest,  and  made  him  several  advantageous  proposals  to
that  purpose ;  but  the  duke  would  not  consent,  which  was
much  to  his  majesty's  dissatisfaction,  especially  when  lie
considered  what  had  happened  to  the  Liegeois,  his  allies.
As  soon  as  summer  was  come,  the  king  could  refrain  no
longer,  but  himself  or  his  forces  entered  Bretagne,  and  made
themselves  masters  of  two  small  castles,  one  of  them  called
Chantoce,  and  the  other  Ancenis.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy
Lad  notice  immediately  of  the  taking  of  these  places  ;  and  at
the  earnest  solicitation  and  importunity  of  the  Dukes  of
Normandy  and  Bretagne,  he  raised  an  army  with  all  expe-
dition, and  wrote  to  the  king,  entreating  him  to  desist  from
that  enterprise,  for  they  were  his  allies,  and  comprehended
in  his  truce*;  but  not  being  pleased  with  the  king's  answer,

*  On  the  26th  of  May,  1468,  there  had  been  a  prolongation  of  the
truce  between  thu  king  and  the  three  dukes  :  it  was  to  last  from  the  1st  of
June  to  the  15th  of  July.  Morice,  Hi.  172.


1468.]  TREATY  OF  ANCENIS.  Ill

the  duke  took  the  field,  and  rendezvoused  near  Peronne
with  a  considerable  force.  The  king  himself  was  at  Com-
piegne,  but  his  army  was  in  Bretagne.  The  duke  staid  at
Peronne  but  three  or  four  days,  during  which  time  the  Car-
dinal Balue,  who  made  but  a  short  stay,  arrived  as  ambas-
sador from  the  king.  He  made  some  overtures  to  the  duke,
and  told  him,  that  the  Bretons  could  make  their  peace  with-
out his  interposition ;  but  the  king's  design  was  to  separate
them  and  break  the  confederacy.  The  cardinal  was  received
very  honourably,  and  despatched  with  this  answer,  That  the
duke  had  not  taken  the  field  to  invade  his  majesty,  nor  to
make  war  upon  him,  but  only  to  relieve  his  allies  ;  and  so
they  parted  with  fair  words  on  both  sides.

No  sooner  was  the  cardinal  departed,  but  a  herald  arrived
from  the  Dukes  of  Normandy  and  Bretagne  with  letters,
importing  that  they  had  made  their  peace  with  the  king*,
and  renounced  all  their  alliances,  and  particularly  his ;  and
that,  in  satisfaction  of  all  his  demands,  the  Duke  of  Nor-
mandy was  to  receive  a  pension  of  60,000  livres  per
annum,  for  which  he  was  to  relinquish  the  interest  which
had  been  lately  conferred  upon  him  in  Normandy.  The  Lord
Charles  of  France  was  not  at  all  pleased  with  his  terms  ;  but
he  was  forced  to  dissemble  his  resentment.  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  was  extremely  surprised  at  the  news  ;  for  he  had
raised  this  army  on  purpose  to  relieve  them  ;  the  herald  also
was  in  no  little  danger;  for  as  he  had  passed  through  the  king's
quarters,  the  duke  had  a  suspicion  the  king  had  forged  the
letters  ;  but  it  was  not  long  before  they  were  confirmed  from
several  places.  The  king  thought  he  had  now  done  his
business,  and  that  it  would  be  no  hard  matter  to  persuade  the

*  By  the  treaty  of  Ancenis,  made  on  the  10th  of  September,  1468,  by
the  envoys  of  the  contracting  parties.  It  was  ratified  by  the  king  and
the  Duke  of  Bretagne  on  the  18th  of  September  following  ;  but  the
adhesion  of  the  Duke  of  Xormandy  was  not  obtained  to  it  until  the  21st
of  June,  1470.  No  article  in  this  treaty  stipulates  that  the  dukes  shall
renounce  their  alliance  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  This  was  probably
made  the  subject  of  a  special  treaty ;  for  the  king  alludes  to  it  in  his
instructions  to  his  envoys  to  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  on  the  1st  of  December,
1470.  "Item,  by  the  treaties  and  promises  which  the  Duke  of  Bre-
tagne has  made  with  the  king,  he  has  promised  and  sworn  to  serve  the
king  formally  against  the  said  Duke  of  Burgundy,  at  any  time  that  he
may  undertake  any  war  against  him.''  Salazard,  iv.  Preuves,  ccxcv.


112  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMUTES. [1468.

duke  to  abandon  them.  Several  messengers  passed  privately
between  them ;  and  at  length  the  king  paid  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  six  score  thousand  crowns  of  gold  in  consideration
of  the  expense  which  he  had  been  at  in  raising  his  army ;
half  of  which  sum  was  paid  down  before  he  broke  up  from
his  camp.  The  duke  sent  to  the  king  one  John  Bosuse  *,  a
gentleman  of  his  bed-chamber  (a  person  with- whom  he  was
more  than  ordinarily  intimate) ;  which  the  king  taking  very
kindly,  he  took  the  confidence  to  propose  an  interview,
hoping  he  might  gain  him  entirely  over  to  his  party,  con-
sidering how  badly  the  two  above-mentioned  dukes  had
served  him,  and  what  a  sum  of  money  he  had  paid  him  him-
self ;  of  which  he  gave  him  some  hint  and  intimation  by  the
said  Bosuse,  with  whom  he  despatched  the  Cardinal  Balue  a
second  time,  and  the  Lord  Tanneguy  du  Chastel,  Governor  of
Roussillon,  who  represented  to  the  duke  the  great  desire  his
majesty  had  to  give  him  a  meeting.  They  found  the  duke
at  Peronne  :  but  he  had  no  fancy  to  the  interview  ;  for  the
Liegeois  seemed  inclinable  to  rebel  again  at  the  instigation
of  two  ambassadors  whom  the  king  had  sent  to  them  for  that
purpose  before  the  truce,  which  was  made  for  certain  days
between  the  king,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  their  allies.f
The  cardinal  and  his  friends  replied,  that  the  Liegeois  durst
not  attempt  any  such  thing,  since  the  duke  had  not  only  dis-
mantled their  fortifications  the  year  before,  but  also  de-
molished their  walls ;  and  if  they  had  any  such  design  in
view,  the  news  of  this  accommodation  would  be  sufficient  to
prevent  it.  In  this  manner  it  was  concluded,  that  the  king
should  repair  to  Peronne  (which  was  the  place  he  had  recom-
mended) ;  and  the  duke  having  written  to  him  with  his  own
handj,  and  delivered  a  passport  (for  his  better  security)  to
the  ambassadors,  they  took  their  leave,  and  departed  towards
the  king,  who  was  at  that  time  at  oSToyon.  But  to  make  all
sure  at  Liege,  the  duke  sent  the  bishop  thither,  upon  whose

*  Jehan  de  Boschuise,  first  butler  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  Etat  de
la  Maison  du  Due  Charles.

f  On  the  21st  of  August,  1468,  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  had,  in  his  own
name  and  in  that  of  his  allies,  granted  a  trace  of  twelve  days  to  the
Marquis  du  Pont,  who  commanded  the  French  army  at  the  siege  of
Ancenis.

J  Dated  Peronne,  October  8.  1468.


1468.]  THE KING COMES TO TEKONNE.  113

score  those  tumults  had  happened,  and  with  him  the  Lord  of
Humbercourt,  his  lieutenant*  in  that  country,  with  a  con-
siderable body  of  forces.

You  have  heard  how  it  was  agreed  the  king  should  come
to  Peronne.  Thither  he  came  f ,  without  any  guard,  more  than
the  passport  and  parole  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  ;  only  he
desired  that  the  duke's  archers,  under  the  command  of  the
Lord  des  Cordes  (who  was  then  in  the  duke's  service),  might
meet  and  conduct  him  ;  and  so  it  v/as  done,  very  few  of  his
own  train  coming  along  with  him.  However,  his  majesty
was  attended  by  several  persons  of  great  quality  and  dis-
tinction, and  among  the  rest  by  the  Duke  of  Bourbon,  the
Cardinal  his  brother,  and  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  Constable  of
France,  who  had  no  hand  in  this  interview,  but  was  highly
displeased  at  it ;  for  he  was  now  grown  haughty,  and
disdained  to  pay  that  respect  to  the  duke  which  he  had
formerly  done ;  for  which  cause  there  was  no  love  between
them.  Besides  these,  there  came  the  Cardinal  Balue,  the
Governor  of  Roussillon,  and  several  others.  When  the  king
came  near,  the  duke  went  out  (very  well  attended)  to  meet
him,  conducted  him  into  the  town,  and  lodged  him  at  the
receiver's,  who  had  a  fine  house  not  far  from  the  castle ;  for
the  lodgings  in  the  castle  were  but  small,  and  no  way  con-
venient.

War  between  two  great  princes  is  easily  begun,  but  very
hard  to  be  composed,  by  reason  of  the  accidents  and  con-
sequences which  often  follow  ;  for  many  secret  practices
are  used,  and  orders  given  out  on  both  sides  to  make  the
greatest  efforts  possible  against  the  enemy,  which  cannot
be  easily  countermanded ;  as  evidently  appears  by  these
two  princes,  whose  interview  was  so  suddenly  determined,
that  neither  having  time  to  notify  it  to  their  ministers  in
remote  parts,  they  went  on  performing  the  commands
which  their  respective  masters  had  given  them  before.
The  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  sent  for  his  army  out  of  Bur-
gundy, in  which  at  that  time  there  was  abundance  of  the  no-
bility ;  and  among  the  rest  the  Count  of  Bresse  J,  the  Bishop

*  Appointed  by  letters  patent  of  November  28.  1467.
f  On  Sunday,  October  9. Lenglet,  ii.  192.

|  Philip  of  Savoy,  Count  of  Bauge,  and  Lord  of  Bresse,  was  the  son
of  Louis,  Duke  of  Savoy,  and  Anne  of  Cyprus.  He  was  bom  at

I


114  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1468.

of  Geneva*,  and  the  Count  of  Romontt,  all  three  brothers
of  the  house  of  Savoy  (for  between  the  Savoyards  and  Bur-
gundians  there  was  always  a  firm  amity),  and  some
Germans,  who  were  borderers  upon  both  their  territories.
And  you  must  know  that  the  king  had  formerly  imprisoned
the  Count  of  Bresse,  upon  the  account  of  two  gentlemen
whom  he  had  put  to  death  in  Savoy,  so  that  there  was  no
right  understanding  between  him  and  the  king.

In  this  army  there  were  likewise  one  Monsieur  du  Lau
(who  had  been  a  favourite  of  the  king's,  but  upon  some  dis-
gust had  been  kept  afterwards  a  prisoner  by  him  a  long
time,  till  at  length  he  made  his  escape,  and  fled  into  Bur-
gundy), the  Lord  d'Urfe  J,  since  master  of  the  horse  to  the
King  of  France,  and  the  Lord  Poncet  de  Riviere  ;  all  which
company  arrived  before  Peronne  as  the  king  came  into  the
town.  Bresse  and  the  three  last  entered  the  town  with  St.
Andrew's  cross  upon  their  clothes  (supposing  they  should
have  been  in  time  enough  to  have  paid  their  respects  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  to  have  attended  him  when  he  went
out  to  receive  the  king),  but  they  came  a  little  too  late :  how-
ever, they  went  directly  to  the  duke's  chamber  to  pay  their
duty,  and  in  the  name  of  the  rest,  the  Count  of  Bresse
humbly  besought  his  highness  that  himself  and  his  three  com-
panions might  have  his  protection  (notwithstanding  the
king  was  in  the  town),  according  to  the  promise  he  was
pleased  to  make  them  in  Burgundy  ;  and  at  the  same  time
assured  him  they  were  at  his  service,  when  and  against

Chambery  on  the  3rd  of  February,  1438.  At  the  request  of  his  father,
Louis  XI.  arrested  this  prince  in  April,  1463,  and  imprisoned  him  in  the
Castle  of  Loches,  where  he  remained  until  1466.  On  the  death  of  his
grand-nephew  in  1496, Philip  ascended  the  ducal  throne:  but  he  did  not
long  enjoy  his  power,  for  he  died  at  Chambery  on  the  7th  of  November,
1497.

*  Jean  Louis  of  Savoy,  Bishop  of  Geneva,- brother  of  the  preceding.
He  died  at  Turin  on  the  llth  of  June,  1482.

t  Jacques  of  Savoy,  Count  of  Eomont,  Baron  of  Vaud,  brother  of  the
preceding,  was  created  a  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece  in  1478.  He  died
at  the  Castle  of  Ham  on  the  30th  of  January,  1486.  In  1460,  lie  had
married  Marie  de  Luxembourg,  Countess  of  St.  Paul.

J  Pierre,  Lord  of  Urfe  and  La  Bastie,  councillor  and  chamberlain  of
the  king,  was  created  Grand  Ecuyer  of  France  by  Charlos  VIII.  in  1483.
He  was  the  son  of  Pierre  d'Urfe  and  Isabeau  de  Chovigny.  He  died  oa
the  10th  of  October,  1508.


1468.] KNOWLEDGE OF  HIST02T  ADVANTAGEOUS.  115

whomsoever  he  might  command  them.  The  duke  returned
them  thanks,  and  promised  them  protection.  The  rest  of
this  army,  under  the  command  of  the  Marshal  of  Burgundy,
encamped  by  the  duke's  orders  in  the  fields.  The  marshal
had  no  more  affection  for  the  king  than  the  above-men-
tioned gentlemen  had ;  for  the  king  had  given  him  the
government  of  Espinal  in  Lorraine,  and  taken  it  from  him
afterwards  to  give  it  to  John,  Duke  of  Calabria  (who  has
often  been  mentioned  before).  The  king  had  notice  pre-
sently of  all  these  persons  being  in  the  town,  and  of  the  habits
in  which  they  arrived,  which  put  him  into  a  great  conster-
nation; so  that  he  sent  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  desire
he  might  be  lodged  in  the  castle,  for  he  knew  those  gentle-
men were  his  mortal  enemies  ;  the  duke  was  extremely  glad
to  hear  it,  appointed  him  his  own  lodgings,  and  sent  to  him
to  bid  him  tear  nothing.


CHAP.  VI.

A  Digression  concerning  the  Advantage  which  the  Knowledge  of  Letters,
and  more  especially  of  History,  is  to  Princes  and  great  Lords.

IT  is  the  highest  act  of  imprudence  for  any  prince  to  put
himself  into  the  power  of  another,  especially  if  they  be  at
war  ;  and  it  is  no  less  advantageous  to  them  to  be  well  ac-
quainted in  their  youth  with  the  passages  and  surprising
accidents  of  former  times ;  for  history  shows  them  at  large
the  success  of  such  assemblies,  the  frauds,  artifices,  and
perjuries  wherewith  they  have  inveigled,  imprisoned,  and
killed  such  as,  relying  upon  the  honour  of  their  enemies,  have
put  themselves  into  their  hands.  I  do  not  say  that  everybody
has  met  with  such  treacherous  dealings,  but  one  example  *

*  History  furnishes  us  with  abundance  of  examples  of  the  treachery
and  perfidiousness  that  have  been  practised  at  such  interviews.  The
first  we  meet  with  in  Roman  history,  is  that  of  Jugurtha,  who  was
taken  by  his  father-in-  law,  Bocchus,  and  delivered  up  to  the  Romans ;
to  which  we  may  add  that  of  Sertorius,  who  was  slain  at  r.  banquet  by
Pcrpouna.  In  England,  the  treason  of  Hengist  to  Vortigeni  is  well
known  to  all  that  have  read  anything  of  history.  The  Scottish  chro-
nicles mention  the  assassination  of  one  William,  Earl  of  Douglas,  who

I  2


116  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1468.

is  sufficient  to  make  many  people  more  wise ;  and  teach  them
to  be  careful  of  themselves.  It  appears  to  me  upon  the
experience  of  eighteen  years'  business  (in  which  I  have  not
only  been  conversant  with  great  princes,  but  privy  to  all
the  greatest  affairs  which  have  been  transacted  in  France,  or
the  neighbouring  states),  that  one  of  the  greatest  means  to
make  a  man  wise  is  to  have  studied  the  histories  of  ancient
times,  and  to  have  learned  to  frame  and  proportion  our
councils  and  undertakings  according  to  the  model  and
example  of  our  ancestors  :  for  our  life  is  but  of  short  dura-
tion, and  not  sufficient  to  give  us  experience  of  so  many
things ;  besides  our  age  is  impaired,  and  the  life  of  man  is  not
so  long,  nor  his  body  so  strong  and  robust  as  formerly;  and
as  our  bodies  are  degenerated  and  grown  weaker,  so  is  our
faith  and  fidelity  one  towards  another,  especially  among
princes,  who  are  altogether  wedded  to  their  own  humours,
without  regard  to  any  reason  that  can  be  offered ;  and
(which  is  still  worse)  they  are  commonly  surrounded  by
persons  whose  only  aim  is  to  please  their  masters,  and
applaud  whatever  they  do  or  say,  whether  it  be  good  or
bad;  and  if  any  wise  man  interposes,  and  endeavours  to  set
things  in  a  better  light,  the  whole  court  is  presently  in  an
uproar.

Again,  I  cannot  forbear  blaming  and  discommending  illi-
terate princes,  who  generally  are  led  by  the  nose  by  cer-
tain lawyers  and  priests,  whom  they  keep  commonly  about
them,  and  indeed  not  without  reason  (for  as  they  are  very
serviceable  to  a  prince,  and  an  ornament  to  his  court,  when

was  killed  at  a  treaty  by  James,  King  of  Scotland.  In  Germany,  ona
Albrecht,  Earl  of  Franconia,  was  betrayed  by  Otho,  Bishop  of  iicntx.
John  of  Anjou  was  slain  by  Albertus  Bavarus,  Earl  of  Hainault  and
Flanders,  notwithstanding  he  had  given  him  a  passport,  and  engaged  his
honour  as  a  security  for  his  person.  In  France,  John,  Duke  of  Burgundy,
slain  by  Charles  VII.  William,  Duke  of  Normandy,  by  Arnulph,  Karl  of
Flanders.  Louis,  King  of  France,  taken  prisoner  by  the  Normans  and
Danes  at  Rouen.  John,  Dnke  of  Bretagne,  taken  at  a  banquet,  and  im-
prisoned by  Margaret,  Countess  of  Pontibera.  Guido,  Earl  of  Flanders,
twice  taken  prisoner,  notwithstanding  the  promise  of  safe-conduct,  by
Philip  the  Fair,  King  of  France.  Charles  the  Simple  slain  by  the  Earl
of  Vennandois.  In  short,  it  would  be  endless  to  reckon  up  all  the
•villanous  and  barbarous  murders  that  have  been  committed  at  these  inter-
views between  great  princes,  and  which  are  recorded  in  history,  as  our
author  here  very  well  observes.


1468.]  ILLITERATE  AND  NEGLIGENT PRINCES.  117

they  are  persons  of  honour  and  probity,  so  they  are  as
dangerous  if  they  prove  otherwise),  who  have  always  some
law  or  precedent  in  their  mouths,  which  they  wrest  and
pervert  as  they  please  :  but  a  wise  prince,  and  one  that  has
read  history,  will  never  be  deluded ;  nor  will  any  courtier  be  so
audacious  as  to  tell  a  lie  in  his  presence.  Believe  me,  God
never  designed  the  office  of  a  king  to  be  executed  by  beasts,
or  such  as  glory  and  pride  themselves  in  giving  such  answers
as  these,  "  I  am  no  scholar,  I  refer  business  wholly  to  my
council,  and  commit  all  things  to  their  management,"  and
then  devote  themselves  entirely  to  their  pleasures,  without
further  reason  or  expostulation.  Had  they  been  better
educated  in  their  youth,  they  would  have  been  wiser,  and
have  earnestly  desired  that  their  person  and  their  virtues
might  have  been  valued  and  esteemed  by  all  good  men.  I
do  not  say  all  princes  employ  such  ill-conditioned  people,
but  most  of  those  whom  I  had  ever  the  honour  to  converse
with,  had  always  abundance  of  them.  I  have  known  indeed,
upon  an  exigence  of  affairs,  some  wise  princes  that  under-
stood how  to  cull  and  select  their  ministers,  and  employ
them  frankly  and  without  complaint;  but  of  this  sort  I
knew  none  comparable  to  the  king  my  master,  than  whom  no
prince  better  understood  the  merit  of  brave  and  learned
persons,  nor  more  readily  advanced  such  to  the  highest  posts
of  honour  and  advantage.  He  was  not  unlearned  himself;
he  delighted  much  in  asking  questions ;  and  would  know  a
little  of  everything :  his  judgment  and  natural  parts  were
excellent,  which  is  better  and  more  preferable  than  all  that
we  can  learn  in  this  world ;  for  all  the  books  that  ever  were
written,  are  only  so  many  helps  and  assistances  to  our
memory  by  the  recapitulation  of  passages  of  old.  For  this
reason  a  man  has  a  greater  insight  into  affairs  by  reading
one  single  book  in  three  months'  time,  than  can  be  observed
or  understood  by  the  age  or  experience  of  twenty  men  living
successively  one  after  another.  So  that,  to  finish  this  digres-
sion, I  am  of  opinion  that  God  cannot  send  a  greater  curse
or  affliction  upon  any  nation  than  an  unlearned  and  incon-
siderate prince ;  for  from  hence  all  other  misfortunes  and
miseries  arise,  and  in  the  first  place  wars  and  division,  by
his  committing  to  other  persons  his  own  peculiar  authority
(of  which  he  ought  to  be  more  tender  than  of  anything

i  3


118  THE MEMOIRS OP  PHILIP  DE COJIilUfES. [1468,

besides) ;  and  from  this  division  famine  and  mortality  arise,
and  all  the  dreadful  consequences  attending  upon  war ;  by
which  one  may  perceive  how  much  all  good  subjects  have
reason  to  lament  when  they  see  the  education  of  their  young
princes  so  miserably  neglected,  and  left  wholly  in  the  power
and  management  of  persons  of  no  qualifications  nor  desert.


CHAP.  VII.

The  Occasion  of  the  King's  being  seized  and  secured  in  the  Castle  of
Peronne  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  —  146S.

I  HAVE  already  given  an  account  of  the  arrival  of  this  Bur-
gundian  army  at  Peronne,  almost  at  the  same  instant  with
the  king  ;  for  being  in  Champagne  long  before  this  in-
terview was  determined,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  no  time
to  countermand  the  orders  he  had  given  them,  and  their
coming  was  a  great  check  and  impediment,  by  reason  of
certain  jealousies  and  suspicions  which  were  entertained  on
botli  sides.  However,  these. two  princes  deputed  some  of
their  ministers  of  state  to  meet  and  negotiate  their  affairs  in
the  most  amicable  way  that  could  be  thought  on.  But  whilst
the  treaty  was  in  a  fair  way  of  accommodation,  and  three  or
four  days  had  been  already  spent  in  bringing  it  to  a  conclu-
sion, news  arrived  of  a  strange  turn  of  affairs  at  Liege,  of
which  I  shall  give  the  following  relation.

The  king  at  his  coming  to.  Peronne  had  quite- forgot  his
sending  of  two  ambassadors  to  Liege  to  stir  them  up  to  a
rebellion  against  the  duke,  and  they  had  managed  the  affair
with  such  diligence,  that  they  had  got  together  such  a  consi-
derable number,  that  the  Liegeois  went  privately  to  Tongres
(where  the  Bishop  of  Liege  and  the  Lord  of  Humber-
court  were  quartered  with  more  than  2000  men)  with  a
design  to  surprise  them.  The  bishop,  the  Lord  of  Humber-
court,  and  some  of  the  bishop's  servants,  were  taken,  but  the
rest  fled  and  left  whatever  they  had  behind  them,  as  de-
spairing to  defend  themselves.  After  which  action  the
Liegeois  marched  back  again  to  Liege,  which  is  not  far  from
Tongres ;  and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  made  an  agreement


1468.]  THE KING CONFINED BY THE DUKE.  119

for  his  ransom  with,  one  Monsieur  William  de  Ville  *,  called
by  the  French  Le  Sauvage,  a  knight,  who,  suspecting  the
Liegeois  would  kill  him  in  their  fury,  suffered  the  Lord  of
Humbercourt  to  escape,  but  was  slain  himself  not  long  after.
The  people  were  exceedingly  overjoyed  at  the  taking  of  their
bishop.  There  were  also  taken  with  him  that  day  several
canons  of  the  church,  whom  the  people  equally  hated,  and
killed  five  or  six  of  them  for  their  first  repast ;  among  the
rest  there  was  one  Monsieur  Robert  f ,  an  intimate  friend  of
the  bishop's,  and  a  person  I  have  often  seen  attending  him
armed  at  all  points,  for  in  Germany  this  is  the  custom  of  the
prelates.  They  slew  this  Robert  in  the  bishop's  presence,  cut
him  into  small  pieces,  and  in  sport  threw  them  at  one
another's  heads.  Before  they  had  marched  seven  or  eight
leagues,  which  was  their  full  journey,  they  killed  about
sixteen  canons  and  other  persons,  the  majority  of  whom
were  the  bishop's  servants ;  but  they  released  some  of  the
Burgundians,  for  they  had  been  privately  informed,  that
some  overtures  of  peace  had  already  been  made,  and  they
were  forced  to  pretend  that  what  they  had  done  was  only
against  their  bishop,  whom  they  brought  prisoner  along  with
them  into  their  city.  Those  who  fled  (as  I  said  before)  gave
the  alarm  to  the  whole  country,  and  it  was  not  long  before
the  duke  had  the  news  of  it.  Some  said  all  of  them  were
put  to  the  sword ;  others  affirmed  the  contrary  (for  in
things  of  that  nature,  one  messenger  seldom  comes  alone) ;
but  there  were  some  who  had  seen  the  habits  of  the  canons
who  were  slain,  and  supposing  the  bishop  and  the  Lord  of
Humbercourt  had  been  of  the  number,  they  positively
averred  that  all  that  had  not  escaped  were  killed,  and  that
they  had  seen  the  king's  ambassadors  among  the  Liegeois,  and
they  mentioned  their  very  names.  All  this  being  related  to
the  duke,  he  gave  credit  to  it  immediately  ;  and  falling  into
a  violent  passion  against  the  king,  he  charged  him  with  a
design  of  deluding  him  by  his  coming  thither ;  ordered  the
gates  both  of  the  town  and  castle  to  be  suddenly  shut  up,
and  gave  out,  by  way  of  pretence,  that  it  was  done  for  the

*  Or  rather,  Jehan  de  Wilde.  Oliver  de  la  Marche  says  that  he  was
killed  at  the  assault  of  Liege  by  the  Burgundians.  He  is  said  by  some
authorities  to  have  been  Provost  of  Liege  and  Lord  of  Hautpeene.

•(•  Robert  de  Morialme,  Archdeacon  of  the  Cathedral  of  Liege.
I  4


120  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1468.

discovery  of  a  certain  casket  which  was  lost,  and  in  which
there  were  money  and  jewels  to  a  very  considerable  value.
When  the  king  saw  himself  shut  up  in  the  castle,  and  guards
posted  at  the  gates,  and  especially  when  he  found  himself
lodged  near  a  certain  tower  *  in  which  a  Count  of  Ver-
mandois  f  had  caused  his  predecessor,  one  of  the  Kings  of
France,  to  be  put  to  death,  he  was  in  great  apprehension.  I
was  at  that  time  waiting  upon  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  in  the
quality  of  chamberlain,  and  (when  I  pleased)  I  lay  in  his
chamber,  as  was  the  custom  of  that  family.  When  he  saw
the  gates  were  shut,  he  ordered  the  room  to  be  cleared,  and
told  us  who  remained,  that  the  king  was  come  thither  to
circumvent  him  ;  that  he  himself  had  never  approved  of  the
interview,  but  had  complied  purely  to  gratify  the  king ;  then
he  gave  us  a  relation  of  the  passages  at  Liege,  how  the  king
had  behaved  himself  by  his  ambassadors,  and  that  all  his
forces  were  killed.  Pie  was  much  incensed,  and  threatened
his  majesty  exceedingly ;  and  I  am  of  opinion,  that  if  he  had
then  had  such  persons  about  him  as  would  have  fomented  his
passion,  and  encouraged  him  to  any  violence  upon  the  king's
person,  he  would  certainly  have  done  it,  or  at  least  committed
him  to  the  tower.  None  were  present  at  the  speaking  of
these  words  but  myself  and  two  grooms  of  his  chamber,  one
of  whom  was  called  Charles  de  Visen  J,  born  at  Dijon,  a  man
of  honour,  and  highly  esteemed  by  his  master.  We  did  not
exasperate,  but  soothed  his  temper  as  much  as  possibly
we  could.  Some  time  after  he  used  the  same  expressions  to
other  people ;  and  the  news  being  carried  about  the  town,  it
came  at  last  to  the  king's  ear,  who  was  in  great  consternation  ;
and  indeed  so  was  everybody  else,  foreseeing  a  great  deal
of  mischief,  and  reflecting  on  the  variety  of  things  which
were  to  be  managed  for  the  reconciling  of  a  difference

*  A  portion  of  this  tower  still  remains  incorporated  in  the  existing
Castle  of  Peronne.

f  Herbert  IL,  Count  of  Vermandois,  having  traitorously  seized  upon
the  person  of  Charles  the  Simple,  imprisoned  him  in  the  Castle  of  Peronne,
where  the  unfortunate  king  terminated  his  life  in  929,  after  six  years*
captivity.  Herbert  died  in  943,  and  was  buried  at  Saint-Quentin.

J  Esquire,  valet  de  chambre,  and  keeper  of  the  jewels  to  Duke
Charles  of  Burgundy.  He  was  appointed  Captain  of  the  Castle  of  Cha-
tillon,  by  letters  patent  granted  by  the  duke  at  Lille,  on  the  15th  of
April,  1470.


1468.]  DANGERS OF ROYAL  INTERVIEWS.  121

between  two  such  puissant  princes,  and  the  errors  of  which
both  of  them  were  guilty,  in  not  giving  timely  notice  to  their
ministers  employed  in  their  remote  affairs,  which  must  of
necessity  produce  some  extraordinary  and  surprising  result.


CHAP.  VIII.

A  Digression,  demonstrating  that  when  two  great  Princes  meet  in  order
to  adjust  their  Differences,  such  Interviews  are  generally  more  pre-
judicial than  profitable.

IT  is  the  highest  act  of  imprudence  for  two  great  princes,
provided  there  is  any  equality  in  their  power,  to  admit
of  an  interview,  unless  it  be  in  their  youth,  when  their
minds  are  wholly  engaged  and  taken  up  with  entertainments
of  mirth  and  pleasure  ;  but  when  they  are  come  to  years
of  emulation,  though  their  persons  should  be  in  no  danger
(which  is  almost  impossible),  yet  their  heart-burnings  and
animosities  will  certainly  augment.  It  were  better,  there-
fore, that  they  accommodated  their  differences  by  the
mediation  of  wise  and  faithful  ministers,  as  I  have  suffi-
ciently instanced  already  in  these  my  Memoirs  ;  however,  I
will  give  some  examples  of  the  like  nature,  which  I  have
seen  and  known  myself  in  my  own  time.

Not  many  years  after  the  coronation  of  our  king,  and  just
before  the  confederacy  called  the  Public  Good,  there  was  an
interview  between  the  Kings  of  France  and  Castile*,  princes
of  the  nearest  alliance  in  Christendom,  for  the  kings  are  akin,
their  kingdoms  almost  contiguous,  and  their  subjects  bound
by  oaths  and  execrations  to  preserve  it  inviolable.  To  this
interview  Henry,  King  of  Castile,  came  to  Fontarabia,  very
splendidly  attended,  and  the  King  of  France  came  to
St.  Jean  de  Luz  (about  four  leagues'  distance),  and  each
of  them  was  upon  the  very  borders  of  his  kingdom.
I  was  not  present  myself,  but  I  had  my  relation  from  the

*  Henry  IV.,  King  of  Castile,  son  of  John  II.  and  Marie  of  Arragon,
was  born  on  the  Gth  of  January,  1425,  and  died  on  the  12th  of  December,
1474.  He  married  1.  in  1440,  Blanche  of  Navarre,  from  whom  he  was
divorced  in  1453  ;  and  2.  Juana,  Infanta  of  Portugal.  The  interview
between  Louis  XL  and  Henry  took  place  at  Andaia,  near  Fuentarabia,
in  April,  1463.


122  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1468.

king,  and  from  Monsieur  du  Lau,  and  it  was  confirmed
to  me  afterwards  by  several  persons  in  Castile,  who  were
then  present  with  their  king,  and  particularly  by  the
Grand  Master  of  St.  James*,  and  the  Archbishop  of  To-
ledof,  the  two  greatest  persons  in  that  kingdom  at  that
time.  There  were  present  also  the  Count  of  Lodesmai  (that
king's  favourite)  in  great  splendour,  with  his  guards,  consist-
ing of  300  horse,  all  Moors  of  Granada,  or  Negroes.  It
is  true,  indeed,  that  King  Henry  was  a  person  of  no  great
sense,  for  he  had  either  given  away  all  his  patrimony,
or  suffered  it  to  be  taken  or  embezzled  by  anybody  that  had
a  mind  to  it.  Our  king  was  also  well  attended,  according  to
his  custom,  and  his  guards  made  a  glorious  appearance.
The  Queen  of  Arragon§  was  present  at  that  treaty,  upon
occasion  of  a  difference  between  her  and  the  King  of
Castile  about  Estella,  and  some  other  places  in  Navarre,
of  which  difference  the  King  of  France  was  made  umpire.  ||
To  continue  our  proposition,  that  interviews  of  great
princes  are  not  necessary,  you  must  know,  these  two  kings  had
never  had  any  quarrels,  neither  was  there  the  least  difference
between  them  ;  they  saw  one  another  not  above  once  or
twice,  upon  the  bank  of  a  river  ^[  (which  parts  the  two

*  The  Grand  Master  of  the  order  of  Santiago,  in  April,  1463,  was
Bertrand  de  la  Cueva,  Count  of  Lodesma,  in  whose  favour  the  Infants
Don  Alphouso,  the  king's  brother,  had  resigned  the  grand-mastership  in
1462.  The  knights  of  the  order  complained  bitterly  of  being  thus
deprived  of  their  right  to  elect  their  chief,  and  to  appease  their  murmurs,
the  king  persuaded  the  Count  of  Lodesira  to  resign  his  new  dignity  of  his
ov.-n  accord,  in  return  for  which  he  bestowed  on  him  several  estates  and
lordships,  including  the  dukedom  of  Albuquerque.  A  bull  of  Pope  Patil
II.  restored  the  Infante  Don  Alphonso  to  the  head  of  the  order.  On
the  death  of  this  prince,  on  July  5.  1468,  the  knights  elected  as  their
grand  master  Juan  Pacheco,  Marquis  de  Villena,  who  died  in  1474.
This  nobleman  was  present  at  the  interview  between  Louis  XL  and  the
King  of  Castile  :  and  it  is  to  him  that  Commines  refers  in  the  text.

f  Alonzo  Carrillo  dAcunha  was  appointed  Archbishop  of  Toledo  in
1447,  and  died  on  the  1st  of  June,  1482.

J  He  died  on  the  1st  of  November,  1492. See  the  first  note.

§  Juana,  daughter  of  Frederick  Henriquez,  Amirante  of  Castile,  and
Maria  de  Cordova,  married  John  II.,  King  of  Arragon  and  Navarre,  in
1447.  She  died  on  the  13th  of  February,  1468.

||  Sentence  was  pronounced  by  Louis  XL  on  the  23rd  of  April,  1463.
See  Lcnglet,  ii.  378.
The  Bidassoa.


1468.] MEETING  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  FRANCE  AND  CASTILE. 123

kingdoms),  near  a  little  castle  called  Heurtebise,  where  the
King  of  Castile  passed  over  to  the  other  side  ;  but  they  staid
no  longer  together  than  the  Grand  Master  of  St.  James  and
the  Archbishop  of  Toledo  thought  good ;  which  being
observed  by  the  King  of  France,  he  desired  their  acquaint-
ance, and  they  went  to  wait  on  him  at  St.  Jean  de  Luz.
His  majesty  received  them  very  honourably,  and  a  mighty
friendship  and  intelligence  was  settled  between  them  and  the
King  of  France,  who  immediately  began  to  dislike  the
King  of  Castile,  and  had  but  little  value  and  esteem  for  him.
The  greatest  part  of  their  attendants  were  quartered  at
Bayonne,  between  whom  several  quarrels  immediately  arose
(notwithstanding  the  alliance);  their  languages  also  being
different.  The  Count  of  Lodesma  passed  the  river  in  a
boat,  whose  sail  was  of  cloth  of  gold;  be  was  himself
in  a  pair  of  buskins  set  thick  with  precious  stones,  in  which
he  went  to  wait  upon  the  king  ;  though  he  was  not  really  a
count,  yet  he  was  very  rich,  and  I  saw  him  afterwards  made
Duke  of  Aibourg,  and  invested  with  great  possessions
in  Castile.  Several  jests  and  scoffs  happened  between  these
two  nations,  notwithstanding  their  alliance.  The  King
of  Castile's  person  was  homely,  and  his  dress  did  not  please
the  French,  who  laughed  at  and  derided  both.  Our  king
wore  a  short  coat,  as  ill  made  as  was  possible ;  sometimes  he
wore  very  coarse  cloth,  and  particularly  then ;  his  hat  was
old  and  differing  from  everybody's  else,  with  an  image  of  lead
upon  it.  The  Castilians  laughed  as  heartily  at  his  dress,
supposing  it  his  stinginess.  In  short,  the  convention  broke
up,  and  they  parted,  but  with  such  scorn  and  contempt
on  both  sides,  that  the  two  kings  never  loved  one  another
heartily  afterwards  ;  and  such  quarrels  and  animosities  arose
in  the  court  of  Castile  among  the  courtiers,  as  continued  to
the  king's  death,  and  a  long  time  after.  I  saw  the  king
afterwards  forsaken  by  all  his  servants,  and  the  poorest  and
most  pitiable  prince  in  the  world.  The  Queen  of  Arragon
was  also  much  dissatisfied  with  the  sentence  which  the  King
of  France  had  given  in  favour  of  the  King  of  Castile,
and  both  she  and  the  King  of  Arragon*  hated  him  for  it  ever

*  John  II.,  son  of  Ferdinand,  King  of  Arragon,  and  Leonora  of
Albuquerque.  He  died  on  the  19th  of  January,  1479.  He  was  a
Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece.


124  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES. [1468

after.  It  is  true  they  made  use  of  him  against  the  town
of  Barcelona  afterwards  in  their  extremity;  but  that  friend-
ship lasted  not  long,  for  a  war  broke  out  between  our  king
and  the  King  of  Arragon,  which  lasted  sixteen  years  and
remains  yet  undetermined*  :  but  to  give  other  examples.

Since  that  time  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  with  great
labour  and  solicitation,  obtained  an  interview  with  the  Em-
peror Frederick  f  (who  is  still  living),  and  spent  vast  sums
of  money  to  show  his  grandeur  and  magnificence  :  the  place
of  meeting  was  at  Treves  |,  where  several  things  were  dis-
coursed of,  and  among  the  rest  a  marriage  between  their
children,  which  was  afterwards  accomplished.^  After  they
had  been  several  days  together,  on  a  sudden  the  emperor  de-
parted without  so  much  as  taking  his  leave,  which  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  looked  upon  as  so  great  an  affront,  and  it  was  so
generally  resented,  that  there  was  never  afterwards  any  true
love  between  either  themselves  or  their  subjects  :  the  Duke's
pompous  and  lofty  manner  of  speaking  (which  they  imputed
to  his  pride)  offended  the  Germans  ;  and  the  Emperor's
meanness,  both  in  his  train  and  dress,  appeared  as  contemp-
tible to  the  Burgundians ;  and  so  far  was  this  accident
extended,  that  from  it  alone  the  wars  of  Nuz  ||  had  their
origin.

I  was  also  present  at  an  interview  f ,  at  the  town  of  St.  Paul
in  Artois,  between  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  Edward  IV.,
King  of  England,  whose  sister  he  had  married  ;  and,  besides,
they  were  brethren  of  the  same  order.*  *  They  were  but  two
days  together,  and  yet  in  that  small  time  there  was  great

*  It  was  terminated  by  a  peace  between  the  two  powers,  on  the  9th  of
November,  1478.

f  Frederick  III.,  son  of  Ernest,  Duke  of  Austria,  and  Zimpurgis  of
Mazovia,  was  born  on  the  23rd  of  December,  1415,  and  died  on  the  19th
of  August,  1493.  He  married  Eleanor,  daughter  of  Edward,  King  of
Portugal.

{  On  the  30th  of  September,  1473.

§  Maximilian  of  Austria  married  in  August,  1477,  Mary  of  Burgundy,
the  sole  heiress  of  Duke  Charles.

||  Neuss,  a  town  in  the  province  of  Dusseldorf,  Prussia.

^f  On  the  7th  of  January,  1471.

**  The  King  of  England  was  elected  a  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,
of  which  order  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  sovereign,  on  the  13th  of
May,  1 468,  and  notified  his  acceptance  of  the  honour  on  the  28th  of
October,  1469.


1468.] HATRED BETWEEN PRINCES AFTER  MEETING. 125

difference  between  the  king's  servants,  and  both  parties  re-
commending their  quarrel  to  the  duke,  and  he  deciding  it  for
one  of  them,  their  hatred  increased.  However,  he  assisted  the
king  in  the  recovery  of  his  kingdom  with  men,  money,  and
ships,  for  he  had  been  driven  out  by  the  Earl  of  Warwick.
Yet,  notwithstanding  that  good  office,  they  never  loved  nor
spoke  well  of  one  another  after  this  interview.

I  was  present  likewise  when  the  Count  Palatine  of  the
Rhine  made  a  visit  *  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  at  Brussels,
where  he  staid  several  days.  He  was  honourably  received,
nobly  entertained,  and  lodged  in  an  apartment  richly  fur-
nished. The  duke's  servants  upbraided  the  Germans  for  their
nastiness  and  incivility,  in  laying  their  dirty  clothes  and  their
boots  upon  those  rich  beds,  and  accused  them  of  want  of  neat-
ness and  consideration,  and  they  never  liked  them  afterwards
so  well  as  they  had  done  before.  The  Germans,  being  as  much
dissatisfied  on  the  other  side,  reproached  them  for  their  pomp
and  extravagance  ;  so  that,  in  effect,  they  never  loved  nor  did
any  good  office  for  one  another  afterwards.

I  saw  also  the  meeting  between  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
and  Sigismund,  Duke  of  Austriaf,  when  the  latter1  sold  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  the  county  of  Ferrette  (which  lies
not  far  from  the  county  of  Burgundy)  for  100,000  florins
of  gold,  as  he  was  unable  himself  to  defend  it  against  the
Swiss.  These  princes  also  were  not  well  pleased  with  one
another.  Afterwards  Sigismund  made  peace  with  the  Swiss,
possessed  himself  again  of  the  county,  but  never  returned  his
money,  from  whence  great  mischiefs  resulted  to  the  Duke  of
Burgundy.  At  the  same  time  also  the  Earl  of  Warwick  J
came  to  visit  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  ever  afterwards  a
mortal  hatred  continued  between  them.

On  Tuesday,  February  10.  1466.

f  Sigismund,  son  of  Frederick  IV.,  Duke  of  Austria,  and  Count  of
Tyrol,  by  Anne  of  Brunswick.  He  was  born  on  the  26th  of  October,
1424,  and  married  1.  Eleanor,  daughter  of  James  II.,  King  of  Scot-
land ;  and  2.  Catherine,  daughter  of  Albert  the  Courageous,  Duke  of
Saxony.  He  died  on  the  4th  of  March,  1496.  Sigismund  visited  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  at  Arras,  on  the  21st  of  March,  1468  (O.  S.),  accom-
panied him  in  several  journeys,  and  was  with  him  at  St.  Omer,  on  the
1st  of  May  following.

|  The  Earl  of  Warwick  came  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  at  St.  Omer,
the  26th  of  April,  1469.


126  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1468.

I  was  also  at  the  interview  *  at  Picquigny  (not  far  from
Amiens)  between  our  king  and  Edward  IV.,  King  of  England,
and  shall  give  a  larger  account  of  it  in  another  place;  but
must  observe  by-the-bye  that  scarce  anything  was  performed
that  was  promised  there,  but  all  their  whole  business  was  hy-
pocrisy and  dissimulation.  It  is  true,  they  had  no  wars,
because  the  sea  divided  them ;  but  there  never  was  any  real
friendship  or  good  correspondence  between  them  afterwards.
To  conclude,  if  great  princes  have  a  desire  to  continue
friends,  in  my  judgment  they  ought  never  to  meet ;  and  my
reasons  are  these :  courtiers  cannot  forbear  reflecting  upon
past  actions,  and  one  or  other  will  be  sure  to  take  ex-
ception |;  neither  is  it  possible  to  hinder  the  train  and
equipage  of  the  one  from  being  finer  and  more  magnificent
than  the  other,  which  produces  mockery,  and  nothing
touches  any  person  more  sensibly  than  to  be  laughed  at.
The  princes  being  of  different  nations,  their  language  and
habits  are  commonly  different,  and  that  which  pleases  one
will  not  please  the  other  ;  besides,  among  the  princes  them-
selves it  often  happens,  that  the  presence  of  the  one  is  more
obliging  and  acceptable,  which  gains  him  honour  and
reputation,  and  everybody  extols  him,  which  carinot  be
done  without  reflecting  on  the  other.  For  some  few  days
after  they  are  parted,  all  their  fine  stories  and  observations
•  are  whispered  and  told  privately  up  and  down,  but  after-
wards having  told  them  often,  they  become  less  cautious,
and  by  degrees  their  tales  grow  to  be  table-talk,  and  are  at
length  carried  to  both  parties ;  for  few  things  (especially
of  that  nature)  can  be  concealed  in  this  world.  And  these
are  part  of  the  reasons  which  I  have  known  and  observed
touching  this  matter.

*  On  the  29th  of  August,  1475. See  book  iv.  chap.  x.

•f  As  it  happened  at  Venice,  when  Henry  III.,  King  of  France,  made,
his  public  entry  into  that  city.  The  French  laughed  at  the  Venetians
dress,  upon  which  they  were  like  to  have  come  to  blows.


1468.] THE COUNCIL  D1FFEK  CONCERNING  THE  KING. 127


CHAP.  IX.

How  the  King  renounced  his  League  with  the  Liegeois,  to  be  released
out  of  the  Castle  of  Peronne.  — 1468.

HAVING  thus  fairly  represented  my  judgment  of  such  inter-
views, I  shall  now  return  from  my  long  digression,  to  speak
of  the  king,  who  thought  himself  (as  I  said  before)  a  prisoner
in  the  Castle  of  Peronne,  as  he  had  good  reason  to  do  ;  for  all
the  gates  were  shut  and  guarded  by  such  as  were  deputed  to
that  office,  and  continued  so  for  two  or  three  days ;  during
which  time  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  saw  not  the  king,  neither
would  he  sutfer  but  very  few  of  his  majesty's  servants  to  be
admitted  into  the  castle,  and  those  only  by  the  wicket ;  yet
none  of  them  were  forbidden  ;  but  of  the  duke's  none  were
permitted  to  speak  with  the  king,  or  come  into  his  chamber,
at  least  such  as  had  any  authority  with  their  master.  The
first  day  there  was  great  murmuring  and  consternation  all
over  the  town.  The  second,  the  duke's  passion  began  to
cool  a  little,  and  a  council  was  called,  which  sate  the  greater
part  of  that  day  and  night  too.  The  king  made  private
applications  to  all  such  as  he  thought  qualified  to  relieve
him,  making  them  large  promises,  and  ordering  15,000
crowns  to  be  distributed  among  them ;  but  the  agent  who
was  employed  in  this  affair  acquitted  himself  very  ill,  and
kept  a  good  part  of  the  money  for  his  own  use,  as  the  king
was  informed  afterwards.  The  king  was  very  fearful  of
those  who  had  been  formerly  in  his  service,  who,  as  I  said
before,  were  in  the  Burgundian  army,  and  had  openly  de-
clared themselves  for  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Normandy.
The  Duke  of  Burgundy's  council  were  strangely  divided  in
their  opinions ;  the  greatest  part  advised  that  the  passport
which  the  duke  had  given  to  the  king  should  be  kept,  pro-
vided his  majesty  consented  to  sign  the  peace  as  it  was  drawn
up  in  writing.  Some  would  have  him  prisoner  as  he  was,
without  farther  ceremony.  Others  were  for  sending  with
all  speed  to  the  Duke  of  Normandy,  and  forcing  the  king  to
make  such  a  peace  as  should  be  for  the  advantage  of  all  the
princes  of  France.  Those  who  proposed  this  advised  that
the  king  should  be  restrained,  and  a  strong  guard  set  upon


128  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1468.

him,  because  a  great  prince  is  never,  without  great  caution,
to  be  set  at  liberty  after  so  notorious  an  affront.  This
opinion  was  so  near  prevailing,  that  I  saw  a  person  booted
and  ready  to  depart,  having  already  several  packets  directed
to  the  Duke  of  Normandy  in  Bretagne,  and  he  waited  only  for
the  duke's  letters ;  and  yet  this  advice  was  not  followed.
At  last  the  king  caused  overtures  to  be  made,  and  offered  the
Duke  of  Bourbon,  the  Cardinal  his  brother,  the  Constable  of
France,  and  several  others,  as  hostages,  upon  condition,  that
after  the  peace  was  concluded,  he  might  return  to  Com-
piegne,  and  that  then  he  would  either  cause  the  Liegeois  to
make  sufficient  reparation  for  the  injury  they  had  done,  or
declare  war  against  them.  Those  whom  the  king  had  pro-
posed for  his  hostages  proffered  themselves  very  earnestly,  at
least  in  public ;  I  know  not  whether  they  said  as  much  in
private ;  I  expect  they  did  not :  and,  if  I  may  speak  my
thoughts,  I  believe  that  the  king  would  have  left  them  there,
and  that  he  would  never  have  returned.

The  third  night  after  this  had  happened,  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy did  not  pull  off  his  clothes,  but  only  threw  himself
twice  or  thrice  upon  the  bed,  and  then  got  up  again  and
walked  about,  as  his  custom  was  when  anything  vexed  him.
I  lay  that  night  in  his  chamber,  and  walked  several  turns
with  him.  The  next  morning  he  was  in  a  greater  passion
than  ever,  threatening  exceedingly,  and  ready  to  put  some
great  thing  in  execution  ;  but,  at  last,  he  recollected  himself,
and  it  came  to  this  result :  that  if  the  king  would  swear  to
the  peace,  and  accompany  him  to  Liege,  and  assist  him
to  revenge  the  injuries  which  they  had  done  him  and  the
Bishop  of  Liege,  his  kinsman,  he  would  be  contented.
Having  resolved  on  this,  he  went  immediately  to  the  king's
chamber,  to  acquaint  him  with  his  resolutions  himself.
The  king  had  some  friend*  or  other  who  had  given  him
notice  of  it  before,  and  assured  him  that  his  person  would  be
in  no  manner  of  danger,  provided  he  would  consent  to  those
points  ;  but  that  if  he  refused,  he  would  run  himself  into  so
great  danger,  that  nothing  in  the  world  could  be  greater.

When the duke came into his presence, his voice
trembled, by the violence  of his passion, so  inclinable

*  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  friend  was  Commines  himself.
See  Lenglet,  iv.  133  ;  and  Dupont,  L  173.


1468.] PEACE BETWEEN THE KING AND THE DUKE. 129

'.vas  he  to  be  angry  ngain.*  However,  lie  made  a  low  re-
verence with  his  body,  but  his  gesture  and  words  were  sharp,
demanding  of  the  king  if  he  would  sign  the  peace  -j-  as  it
was  agreed  and  written,  and  swear  to  it  when  he  had  done.
The  king  replied  he  would ;  and,  indeed,  there  was  nothing
added  to  what  had  been  granted  in  the  treaty  at  Paris  J,
which  was  to  the  advantage  of  the  Dukes  of  Bur-
gundy or  Normandy,  but  very  much  to  his  own ;  for  it  was
agreed  that  the  Lord  Charles  of  France  should  renounce  the
duchy  of  Normandy,  and  have  Champagne  and  Brie,  and
some  other  places  adjacent,  as  an  equivalent.§  Then  the
duke  asked  him  if  he  would  go  along  with  him  to  Liege,
to  revenge  the  treachery  they  had  practised  by  his  instiga-
tion, and  by  means  of  that  interview.  Then  he  put  him  in
mind  of  the  nearness  of  blood  between  the  king  and  the
Bishop  of  Liege,  who  was  of  the  house  of  Bourbon.  The
king  answered,  that  when  the  peace  was  sworn,  which
he  desired  exceedingly,  he  would  go  with  him  to  Liege,  and
carry  with  him  as  many  or  as  few  forces  as  he  pleased.  The
duke  was  extremely  pleased  at  his  answer,  and  the  articles
being  immediately  produced  and  read,  and  the  true  cross
which  St.  Charlemagne  was  wont  to  use,  called  the  Cross  of
Victory,  taken  out  of  the  king's  casket,  the  peace  was  sworn,
to  the  great  joy  and  satisfaction  of  all  people ;  and  all  the
belis  in  the  town  were  rung.  The  Duke  of*Burgundy

*  "  As  soon  as  the  king  saw  the  duke  enter  his  chamber,  he  could  not
conceal  his  fear,  and  said  to  the  duke,  '  My  brother,  am  I  not  safe  in
your  house  and  in  your  country  ? '  and  the  duke  answered,  '  Yes,  sir  ;
and  so  safe  that  if  I  saw  an  arrow  coming  towards  you,  I  would  put  my-
self in  front  to  shield  you  ? '  And  the  king  said  to  him, '  I  thank  you  for
your  good  will,  and  will  go  whither  I  have  promised  you ;  but  I  pray
you  that  peace  may  be  from  this  time  sworn  between  us.' "  Oliver  de  la
Marche,  ii.  287.

t  Concluded  at  Peronne,  on  the  14th  of  October,  1468.  See  end  of
chapter.

J  See  above,  book  i.  chap.  13.

§  As  we  have  already  seen,  by  the  treaty  of  Ancenis,  Louis  XI.
granted  his  brother  an  appanage  of  60,000  livres  a  year,  in  exchange
for  the  duchy  of  Normandy.  If  it  be  true,  as  Commines  and  Oliver  de
la  ^Lirche  both  state,  that  the  treaty  of  Peronne  secured  to  that  prince
Champagne  and  Brie,  instead  of  Normandy,  the  clause  concerning  this
new  exchange  must  have  been  contained  in  some  secret  article  ;  for  it
docs  not  occur  in  the  original  draft  of  the  treaty,  or  in  any  subsequent
edition  of  it.


130  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1468.

immediately  despatched  a  courier  with  the  news  of  this
conclusion  of  peace  into  Bretagne,  and  with  it  he  sent  a
duplicate  of  the  articles,  that  they  might  see  he  had  not
deserted  them,  nor  disengaged  himself  from  their  alliance  ;
and,  indeed,  Duke  Charles,  the  king's  brother,  had  a  good
bargain,  in  respect  of  what  he  had  made  for  himself  in
the  late  treaty  in  Bretagne,  by  which  there  was  nothing  left
him  but  a  bare  pension,  as  you  have  heard  before.  After-
wards the  king  did  me  the  honour  to  tell  me,  that  I  had  done
him  some  service  in  that  pacification.

A  Treaty  of  Peace  between  Louis  XI.,  on  the  one  part,  and
Charles,  the  last  Duke  of  Burgundy,  on  the  other.  Con-
cluded at  Peronne,  October  14.  1468.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy  having  complained  of  infractions
made  on  the  treaty  of  Conflans  between  us  and  him,  and
also  on  the  treaty  of  peace  made  at  Arras  between  our  late
lord  and  father  and  the  late  Philip,  Duke  of  Burgundy,
insomuch,  that  we  were  ready  to  have  recourse  to  arms
on  both  sides,  and  that  the  subjects  of  neither  party  durst
converse  with  those  of  the  other  ;  to  prevent,  therefore,
an  open  rupture,  we  thought  fit  to  send  our  ambassadors
first  to  them  in  Vermandois ;  and  afterwards  the  treaty
being  transferred  to  Peronne,  here,  to  prevent  all  the  mis-
chiefs and  inconveniences  that  might  ensue,  we  do,  in
the  most  solemn  manner,  make,  conclude,  and  promise  a
firm,  solemn  peace,  friendship,  and  amity,  and  we  will  always
observe  the  treaty  of  Arras,  with  the  contents  thereof,
as  also  the  said  treaty,  and  all  that  is  contained  therein
in  reference  to  our  cousin  and  brother  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, and  all  the  donations  and  transfers  we  have  then
and  since  made  to  him.  And  we  also  promise  and  swear
to  observe  all  the  provisions  and  answers  made  to  his
grievances,  complaints,  and  requests  hereafter  specified.
And  notwithstanding  this  present  treaty  of  peace,  and
the  things  contained  in  those  of  Arras  and  Conflans,  we
do  freely  consent  that  our  said  brother  and  cousin  shall
observe  all  the  alliances,  and  also  the  treaty  of  truce  and  in-
tercourse of  trade  with  Edward  our  enemy  and  the
kingdom  of  England;  but  yet  so  as  that  our  said  brother


1468.]  TREATY  OF  FERONNE.  131

shall  give  no  assistance  to  the  English  in  invading  our
kingdom  and  dominions.  And  by  this  peace  we  do  declare
that  no  satisfaction  shall  be  demanded  and  insisted  lor
any  damages,  hostilities,  &c.,  on  either  side ;  but  that  what-
ever places,  lordships,  heritages  and  possessions,  have  been
seized  and  occupied,  shall  be  fully  restored,  and  the  owners
may  re-enter  without  any  form  or  process  of  law.  More
particularly,  we  do,  at  the  request  of  our  said  brother  and
cousin,  consent  that  the  places,  castles,  towns,  and  territories
taken  by  us  in  the  counties  of  Beauge,  the  country  of  Bresse,
and  other  lands  and  signiories  appertaining  to  him  and  his
subjects,  shall  be  surrendered  to  him ;  and  his  subjects  that
are  captive  shall  be  freely  set  at  liberty ;  and  the  said  Duke
of  Savoy,  our  dear  sister  the  Duchess  of  Savoy,  the  Bishop
of  Geneva,  the  said  Philip  of  Savoy,  the  Lord  of  Romont,
and  other  allies  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  their  subjects  and
adherents,  shall  be  comprehended  in  this  treaty,  if  they  are
minded,  within  a  year's  notification  ;  and  if  they  are  not,  the
present  treaty  shall  be  valid  ;  and,  with  those  of  Arras
and  Conflans,  so  far  as  this  last  concerns  us  and  our  said
brother  of  Burgundy,  shall  neither  be  directly  nor  indirectly
contravened  by  us,  but  we  shall  put  our  said  brother  into
the  peaceable  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  things
declared  and  contained  in  the  said  treaty,  and  execute,
on  our  part,  instruments  of  the  gifts  and  transfers  specified
therein,  according  to  the  form  and  tenor  of  these  presents.
And  we  do  consent  and  agree  to  acquit  the  subjects  and
vassals  of  their  homage  and  services  to  us,  by  reason  of
the  duchy,  counties,  countries,  lands,  and  signiories  which
the  said  duke,  his  heirs,  &c.,  held  or  shall  hereafter  hold  of
us,  by  reason  of  our  crown  and  kingdom ;  and  we  shall
not  only  faithfully  and  religiously  observe  and  maintain  the
peace,  and  fulfil  it  in  every  particular,  but  we  do  consent
that  the  princes  of  our  blood  shall  promise  and  swear  to  pre-
serve it,  and  that  each  and  every  of  them  shall  assist  our  said
brother  against  us,  if  we  infringe  the  same,  &c.

Here  follow  the  grievances,  remonstrances,  and  requests
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  with  the  concessions  and
answers  of  the  king  to  them.


K 2


132  THE MEMOinS OF PHILIP DE CO1IMINES. [1468.

1.  As  to  the  fiefs  and  homages  of  the  county  of  Ponthieu,  and
others  on  both  sides  of  the  Somme,  and  of  the  three  provost-
ships  of  Vimeux,  Beauvoisis,  and  Toullois,  transferred  to  the
king  ,•  these  fiefs  and  homages  have  been  made  to  appear
to  belong  to  the  duke  for  several  reasons  ;  and,  therefore  it  is
desired  the  king  would  leave  him  in  the  peaceable  enjoyment
of  the  said  rights,  and  that  he  may  have  power  to  force  those
to  it  who  are  refractory.

"  It  is  answered  on  the  king's  part,  that  he  declares  the
said  fiefs  and  homages  to  appertain  to  the  duke,  in  the  same
manner  as  the  other  things  contained  in  the  said  transfer ;
and  that  the  vassals,  who  have  not  yet  taken  the  oath  of  al-
legiance and  done  homage,  shall  do  it  in  the  usual  manner,
pursuant  to  the  nature  of  the  fief,  still  reserving  the  king's
rights,  who  shall  grant  his  letters  patent  to  discharge  the
vassals  of  their  oaths  and  homages,  upon  the  account  of  the
said  lands  ;  and  all  his  officers  shall  be  commanded  to  do
nothing  that  may  hinder  the  same."

2.  As  to  the  taxes  and  aids  of  the  said  provostships,  wherein
some  of  the  king's  officers  have  caused  some  interruptions  ;
and  that  withal  William  Lamoureux  has  been  made  assessor-
general  of  these  provostships  by  the  king,  and  thereby  disap-
pointed the  assessor  of  Amiens,  contrary  to  the  form  of  these
transfers ;  it  is  remonstrated  to  the  king,  that  he  would  be
pleased  to  remove  those  lets  and  hindrances  occasioned  by
the  lances,  gens  d'armes,  and  free-archers  in  the  same  provost-
ships, and  that  the  said  assessor  be  restored  to  his  office.

"  The  duke  shall  enjoy  the  said  provostships  and  all  the
profits  of  them,  and  also  the  royal  rights,  in  the  same  manner
and  form  as  he  ought  to  enjoy  the  royal  provostships  upon
the  said  river  on  the  side  of  Amiens.  Those  taxes  also  for
lances,  free-archers,  and  other  soldiers,  shall  cease,  and  none
demanded  on  the  king's  part ;  and  the  assessor-general  of
Amiens  shall  be  nominated  by  the  duke,  and  approved  of  by
the  king;  and  hereafter  the  king  shall  grant  his  letters  patent
in  due  form,  that  the  said  aids  be  given  without  delay  or
difficulty."

3.  As  to  the  business  of  the  granary  of  Grand- Villiers
depending  on  the  said  transfers,  it  is  remonstrated,  that  all
violences-  impediments, and  troubles, done and given in
respect  to  them,  by  the  king's  officers,  as  well  upon  the  soli-


1468.]  TREATY  OF  PERONNE.  133

citation  of  the  people  of  Beauvais  or  otherwise,  may  be  re-
moved and  cease  for  the  future.
"  Agreed  to  on  the  king's  part."

4.  As  to  the  lands  and  signiories  of  Mortagne,  transferred
to  the  duke,  his  ambassadors  remonstrate  against  the  troubles
and  vexations  given the duke's officers  by  the Bailiff  of
Tournay,  of  the  Tournesis,  and  others,  and  desire  they  may
be  commanded  to  deport  themselves  peaceably,  according  to
the  treaty  of  Arras,  and  the  king's  letters  patent  granted  in
that  behalf.

"  The  duke  shall  enjoy  those  lands,  and  nominate  his
officers,  who  shall  be  approved  of  by  the  king  ;  and  the
Bailiff  of  Tournay,  &c.,  shall  behave  himself  according  to  the
treaty  of  Arras,  and  the  letters  patent."

5.  The  king  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  being  at  Villiers-
le-Bel,  it  was  desired  that  the  salt  of  Salins  should  be  vended
in  Maconnois,  to  which  the  king  consented,  upon  condition
the  damage  did  not  exceed  4000  francs  :  it  was  remonstrated
upon  this,  that  in  pursuance  of  the  said  gift,  and  with  regard
to  ancient  usage,  the  salt  of  Salins  had  been  always  vended
in  Maconnois,  and  that  there the  gabel  of  salt ought to
belong  to  the  duke  by  the  treaty  of  Arras,  &c. ;  therefore,  it
was  desired  that  the  king  would  allow  of  the  vending  of  the
said  salt  in  Maconnois,  and  to  prevent  that  of  the  salt  of
Pequeis,  for  which  toll  shall  be  received  at  Pont  St.  Esprit,
or  elsewhere,  to  the  king's  use  ;  and  that  reparation  might
be  made  to  the  duke  for  the  damage  he  had  sustained  since
the  treaty  of  Arras,  in  the  not  receiving  the  said  toll,  amount-
ing to  above  100,000  francs.

"  The  king  allows  the  duke  salt  granaries  in  the  county
of  Macon  and  the  country  of  Maconnois,  and  in  the  places
and  royal  towns  included  therein,  for  him,  his  heirs,  &c."

6.  As  for  the  foreign  imposition  which  ought  to  be  raised
on  the  frontiers  of  the  king,  and  by  the  treaty  of  Arras  should
appertain  to  the  duke  in  his  own  territories :  first,  the  duke»
is  disturbed  in  receiving  the  said  duty;  secondly,  they  would
have  him  levy  it  in  unusual  places,  and  the  merchants  are
obliged  to  give  securities  in  an  unusual  form ,  and  even
the  king's  officers,  which  is  very  strange,  take  upon  them  to
receive the said impositions from the goods and mer-
chandises which  are  carried  into  the  country  of  Burgundy,

K  3


134  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1468.

Bar-sur-Seine,  Auxerrois,  Artois,  and  those  territories
transferred  to  the  duke,  as  if  they  were  the  territories
of  the  empire ;  or  where  the  tolls  were  not  levied,  especially
in  Auxerrois,  upon  goods  belonging  to  those  of  the  said
county,  and  brought  thither  from  the  neighbouring  countries;
wherefore  the  said  innovation  is  desired  to  be  laid  aside,  and
that  the  duke  may  enjoy  his  right  pursuant  to  the  said
treaty,  and  that  merchants.be  not  obliged  to  give  security
any  otherwise  than  according  to  ancient  usage.

"  The  king  is  content  that  merchants  give  security,  as  to
foreign  duty,  according  to  ancient  usage  ;  that  is,  to  vend
their  goods  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom,  where  the  aids  have
their  course  on  the  king's  part.  Suppose,  then,  that
the  duke,  by  the  king's  grant,  takes  those  aids  to  his  own
use,  without  giving  security  that  the  said  goods  shall  be  sold,
and  vended  in  the  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  where  the  said
aids  have  their  course,  as  in  the  country  of  Artois,  and  also
in  others  belonging,  and  made  over  by  the  treaty  of  Arras,
or  otherwise,  to  the  said  duke,  without  any  fraud ;  yet  if
hereafter  it  should  appear,  that  that  was  not  the  ancient  way
of  giving  security,  the  whole  will  be  reduced  to  the  manner
and  form  prescribed  by  the  ancient  royal  ordinances,  or
other  usages.  In  like  manner  as  to  the  duchy  of  Burgundy,
wherein  the  duke  pretends  the  like  innovations  have  been
practised,  the  king  and  duke  shall  depute  each  a  commissioner
to  inquire  into  the  state  of  those  ordinances,  and  the  truth
of  the  fact ;  and  shall  regulate  the  differences  as  seems  most
consonant  to  reason,  and  that  within  a  year  :  upon  which  all
troubles  and  innovations  shall  cease,  and  the  duke  enjoy  his
rights  as  to  the  said  foreign  imposition  in  those  parts  of  the
kingdom  transferred  to  him  by  the  treaty  of  Arras.  And
all  demands  from  the  subjects  of  the  said  duke  in  his  towns
of  Arras,  St.  Omer,  Hesdin,  Terouenne,  Auxerre,  and
others,  in  reference  to  their  giving  the  said  security,  shall
cease,  and  be  no  manner  of  charge  to  them.  Moreover,
all  law  proceedings  shall  cease  upon  the  said  account  above
mentioned,  till  the  commissioners  have  decided  the  said
differences,  and  wholly  without  prejudice  to  the  king  and
the  duke's  right ;  and  as  to  the  rights  of  highways,  which  are
of  another  nature,  the  commissioners  hereafter  named  shall
have  power  to  order  things  in  favour  of  the  duke,  pursuant


1468.]  TREATY  OF  PERONNE.  135

to  the  treaty  of  Arras,  in  and  throughout  all  the  royal
territories,  and  also  in  the  lands  on  both  sides  the  Somme
transferred  to  the  duke  by  the  king."

7.  As  to  the  limits  of  the  duchy  of  Burgundy,  and  also
the  other  towns  and  villages  of  the  counties  of  Maconnois,
Auxerrois,  and  Bar-sur-Seine, which the duke does not
entirely  enjoy,  nor  in  the  manner  he  ought,  according  to  the
form  of  the  said  treaty,  the  said  ambassadors  insist  he  maybe
put  into  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  said  towns,  villages,
and  other  rights  conveyed  to  him  by  the  said  treaty,  that  he
may  enjoy  the  profits  of  them,  and  that  satisfaction  be  made
to  him  in  reference  to  the  profits  received  by  the  king's
officers,  since  the  time  they  were  transferred,  and  stoppage
had  been  made  of  them  ;  and  to  this  end  the  said  ambassadors
require that four commissioners  be  appointed  —  viz.,  two
on  either  side,  who  shall  be  empowered  to  go  to  such  places
on  the  duke's  account,  in  order  to  inform  themselves  fully
concerning  his  pretensions,  if  information  has  not  already
been  given,  and  thereupon  make  a  declaration  of  the  rights
of  the  said  duke,  that  he  may  really,  and  out  of  hand,  enjoy
the  same,  according  to  the  form  of  the  said  treaty  of  Arras,
without  any  farther  process  or  law-suit,  on  remitting  the
same  to  the  cognizance  of  the  king,  or  any  of  his  officers.

"  The  king  is  content,  on  his  part,  to  appoint  four  com-
missioners to  decide  the  matters  in  dispute,  with  as  many
nominated  by  the  duke ;  and  if  these  eight  cannot  do  it,
it  shall  be  left  to  three  on  each  side  ;  and  if  these  cannot
effect  the  matter,  each  party  shall  appoint  two,  who  shall
determine  the  differences,  according  to  the  form  prescribed
in  the  said  article."

8.  As  to  the  troubles  and  molestations  given  about  the
granaries  belonging  to  the  duke  by  the  said  treaty  of  Arras,
and  the  restraint  put  upon  several  of  his  subjects  in  the
country  of  Burgundy,  Maconnois,  Charolois,  Bar-sur-Seine,
and  Auxerrois,  to  take  salt  elsewhere  than  from  the  said  grana-
ries, contrary  to  the  form  of  the  said  treaty  of  Arras,  to
his  great  detriment,  the  ambassadors  desire  these  grievances
may  likewise  be  effectually  redressed.

"  The  king  fully  agrees  to  this,  and  commissioners  may  be
appointed  to  inquire  into  the  defaults,  and  redress  them  as
in  the  preceding  article."

K  4


136  TIJE MK3I01RS  OF PHILIP  DE COMM1NES. [14G8.

9.  The  ambassadors  farther  remonstrate  about  some  lands,
places,  and  villages,  situate  in  the  bailiwicks  and  jurisdic-
tions of  Maconnois  and  St.  Gengon,  and  some  others  in  the
county  of  Auxerrois,  and  others  of  Bar-sur-Seine,  belonging
to  the  said  duke  by  the  treaty  of  Arras,  the  enjoyment  of
which  has  been  denied  him.

"  The  king  from  henceforward  declares,  that  the  duke
shall  enjoy  the  villages  and  jurisdictions  in  the  bailiwicks  of
Macon  and  St.  Gengon,  and  also  the  jurisdictions  and  villages
of  Auxerre  and  Bar-sur-Seine,  according  to  the  contents  of
the  treaty  of  Arras,  notwithstanding  any  obstructions  to  the
contrary  :  and  to  this  end  the  said  eight  commissioners,  the
six,  or  the  four,  in  the  manner  above  declared,  shall  be  em-
powered by  the  king  and  duke  to  hear,  examine,  and  deter-
mine things  equitably,  according  to  the  treaty  of  Arras,  and
in  the  same  manner  and  form  as  is  set  down  in  the  eighth
article  aforegoing,  and  the  answer  made  thereunto."

10.  Item,  the  said  Duke  of  Burgundy  is  also  opposed  and
molested  in  the enjoyment  of  several fief's  and homages
belonging  to  him,  by  virtue  of  the  said  treaty,  in  the  said
counties  and  bailiwicks  of  Macon,  St.  Gengon,  and  Auxerre,
and  their  jurisdictions,  especially  of  the  counties  of  Beau-
villois,  which  ought  to  belong  to  the  bailiwick  of  Macon,  of
all  which  the  said  ambassadors  demand  redress.

"  The  king  is  willing  to  grant  it,  and  it  is  left  to  commis-
sioners to  determine  it,  pursuant  to  the  eighth  article,  aud
the  answer  to  it."

11.  And  as  to  other  points  or  articles  contained  and  declared
in  the  said  treaty  of  Arras,  the  ambassadors  demand,  in  the
duke's  name,  that  those  which  shall  be  found  unaccomplished
or  impeded,  and  such  as  the  duke  has  had  no  cognizance  o£
shall  be  decided  by  the  said  commissioners  as  aforesaid,  with-
out any  farther  contradictions  or  appeals.

"  It  is  answered,  that,  to  put  an  end,  as  soon  as  possible,
to  all  differences  concerning  the  said  treaty  of  Arras  and  its
dependencies,  the  eight,  six,  or  four  commissioners  as  afore-
said, shall  have  full  power  to  examine  strictly  into  the  same,
;;nd  by  viewing  the  places,  and  without  any  process  or  form
of  law,  to  decide,  determine,  and  execute  what  they  think
most  just,  by  putting  the  said  duke  into  the  possession  of
whatever  they  find  to  belong  to  him,  by  virtue  of  the  said


1468.]  TREATY  OF  FEROXXE.  137

treaty,  notwithstanding  any  contradictions  or  appeals  what-
soever ;  and  shall  promise  from  thenceforward  to  acquiesce
with  the  same."

12.  The  third  chief  point  concerns  things  appertaining  to
the  said  duke,  upon  the  account  of  his  lordships,  both  within
and  without  the  kingdom.

And,  in  the  first  place,  as  to  the  limits  of  the  kingdom,
the  county  of  Burgundy,  and  the  territories  under  the  juris-
diction of  St.  Laurence,  the  said  ambassadors  remonstrate
for  a  determination  of  the  same,  and  that  such  an  equal
number  of  commissioners  be  appointed  on  both  sides  to  judge
and  determine  the  said  differences  without  any  farther  re-
view of  the  same  ;  and  notwithstanding  any  contradiction  or
appeal  whatsoever.

"  The  king  agrees,  that  eight  commissioners  be  appointed —
viz.,  four  on  each  side — finally  to  adjudge  and  determine  the
said  differences."

13.  As  for  the  limits  of  the  countries  and  territories  apper-
taining to  the  duke,  which  adjoin  to  the  counties  of  Flanders
and  Artois,  and  other  territories  of  the  kingdom,  concerning
any  law-suit  that  has  been  commenced  by  any  private  persons
in  the  court  of  parliament ;  the  said  ambassadors  move,  that
the  king  would  please  to  suspend  the  same  for  the  space  of
twelve  years,  that  so  a  way  may  be  found  for  deciding  it
without  the  form  of  a  process,  and  with  the  least  expense.

"  The  king  is  content  to  suspend  such  proceedings  for
eight  years  ;  but  yet  without  prejudicing  or  derogating  from
the  right  of  jurisdiction,  which  may  or  ought  to  belong  to
him  ;  or  that  the  said  suspension  should  give  any  possession,
or  other  advantage,  contrary  to  the  rights  of  the  king  or  the
said  duke  ;  and  the  matter  shall  be  left  to  the  decision  of
commissioners."

14.  The  said  ambassadors  complain  of  the  grievances  occa-
sioned by  appeals  lodged  against  the determinations  and
judgments  of  the  four  principal  laws  of  Flanders,  against
the  laws  and  privileges  of  the  said  country,  and  thereby
manifestly  disturbing  the  said  duke  in  his  rights. Redress
is  also  required  in  matters  of  traffic,  upon  which  the  country
of  Flanders  principally  depends.

"  The  first  part  of  this  article  the  king  fully  agrees  to  —
nothing  is  said  of  the  last  clause."


138  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1468.

15.  It  is  remonstrated,  that,  pursuant  to  the  rights  of  the
country  of  Flanders,  the  court  of  parliament  ought  to  receive
no  appeals  from  other  laws  and  judges  of  Flanders,  omisso
media  ;  for  the  resort  ought  first  to  belong  to  the  duke,  and
he  ought  not  to  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  for  a  review  to
the  said  court,  as  they  do  in  other  countries  of  the  kingdom  ;
for  relief  ought  not  to  be  given  the  subjects  of  Flanders  in
case  of  an  appeal,  if  the  appeal  does  not  immediately  precede
the  sentence  of  the  count,  or  his  council  in  Flanders  ;  and  to
this  end  the  king  is  desired  to  grant  him  his  letters  patent
in  due  form.

"  The  contents  of  this  article  he  agrees  to,  pursuant  to  the
custom  of  the  country."

16.  They  farther  remonstrate  against  the  troubles  and  im-
pediments met  with  in  appeals  made  in  causes  within  the  juris-
diction, lands  and  chastellanies  of  Lille,  Douay,  and  Orchies,
in  the  council-chamber  of  Flanders,  against  all  reason,  and
of  which  the  duke  has  been  in  peaceable  possession  for  a
long  time,  except  that  short  space  wherein  any  contradiction
has  been  made ;  and  that  the  said  impediments  may  cease,
seeing  the  said  chastellanies continually  belonged to the
county  of  Flanders ;  and  since  the  king  held  them  upon  the
contract  of  the  marriage  of  the  great  Duke  Philip,  great
grandfather  of  the  present  duke,  they  were  re-united  to  the
county  of  Flanders ;  so  that  the  duke  may  hold  them  alone
in  fief  with  the  said  county.

"  Agreed  to  by  the  king."

17.  Seeing  that  neither  the  king  nor  his  court  of  parliament
have  any  right,  but  the  duke  and  his  grand  council,  to  take
cognizance  of  the  causes  of  his  subjects  within  the  kingdom
in  the  empire;  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  considering  that
appeals  are  not  thereby  hindered,  the  ambassadors  desire
there  may  be  no  trouble  given  therein,  either  by  the  king  or
his  officers  ;  and  that  the  jurisdiction,  sovereignty  and  other
rights,  both  of  the  king  and  duke,  may  be  preserved.

"  The  king  is  content,  that  the  duke  or  his  great  council
take  cognizance  of  the  causes  of  his  countries  and  subjects
within  the  kingdom,  in  the  empire ;  saving  the  exception  of
the  parties,  and  of  those  of  the  empire  or  kingdom,  and  the
whole  done  without  prejudice  to  the  sovereignty  and  juris-
diction of  the  king,  in  relation  to  the  kingdom,  and  the  right


1468.]  TREATY  OF  PERONNE.  139

and  sovereignties  belonging  to  the  duke  in  reference  to  the
empire ;  and  this  agreement  shall  last  as  lorg  as  the  king  and
duke  live."

18.  As  to  the  4000  livres  yearly  rent,  belonging  to  the  duke
upon  the  account  of  his  predecessors  the  Earls  of  Hainault
and  Ostervant,  upon  the  revenue  of  Verraandois,  appertain-
ing to  the  king,  and  of  which  there  are  great  arrears,  the
ambassadors  demand  both  the  rent  and  the  arrears.

"  The  said  commissioners  shall  settle  that  matter,  and  do
the  duke  justice. "

19.  The  ambassadors  also  complain  of  the  restraint  put  upon
the  duke's  subjects  and  servants — some  of  them  being  natives
of  his  county  of  Burgundy,  in  his  territories  without  the
kingdom  ;  others  of  the  duchy  of  Burgundy,  and  other  terri-
tories of  the  duke's  —  by  obliging  them  to  take  new  and  un-
usual oaths  to  serve  the  king  against  all  persons  whatsoever,
and  especially  against  the  said  duke,  without  any  regard  had
to  their  being  his  vassals ;  and  upon  their  delaying  to  do  it,
though  they  were  ready  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  in  the
usual  form,  and  to  serve  according  to  the  nature  and  quality
of  their  fiefs  ;  yet  Monsieur  de  Chastillon  and  other  of  the
king's  officers  have  proceeded  against  them  very  irregularly
and  unjustly,  as  well  by  seizing  their  lands  and  lordships,  and
receiving  the  profits  thereof,  and  committing  outrages  in
some  of  the  said  lands  as  in  an  enemy's  country,  as  by  con-
fiscation of  body  and  goods,  and  the  said  profits  they  have
applied  to  their  own  use  :  nay,  which  is  still  more,  the  said
Chastillon has  proceeded  against  the duke  himself, upon
account  of  the  signiory  of  Fouvants,  which  belongs  to  him.

"  The  contents  of  this  and  the  following  21st,  22nd,  23rd,
and  24th  articles,  the  king  is  willing  to  redress  fully  for  the
future ;  restitution  shall  be  made  of  the  profits  aforesaid,
and  the  king  will  appoint  a  commissioner  to  see  reparation
duly  made.  Ail  pi'isoners  shall  be  freely  released,  and  free
egress  and  ingress  given  to  the  duke's  subjects.  The  king
also  consents  that  the  vassals  and  subjects  of  the  said  duke
living  and  residing  in  his  dominions,  as  also  his  domestic
servants,  who  have  lands,  fiefs,  and  lordships  in  his  kingdom,
upon  the  account  of  which  they  are  bound  to  certain  military
services  when  the  king  issues  out  his  general  mandate  for  the
defence  of  his  person,  shall  not  be  obliged  to  serve  in  person,


110  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1468.

but  find  others,  more  or  less  in  number,  as  the  tenure  requires,
in  their  stead."

20.  Again,  M.  de  Chastillon  and  others  have  driven  some  ec-
clesiastics out  of  Langres,  that  have  livings  there,  by  reason  of
their  being  natives  of  the  duke's  dominions;  and  publicly
enjoined  them  and other  natives  not  to  reside on  those
benefices,  nor  elsewhere  in  the  kingdom.

"  The  king  agrees  fully  to  redress  this  grievance. "

21.  The  said  M.  de  Chastillon  and  others  of  the  king's
officers  have  seized  thegoodsof  the ;  inhabitants  of  Valenciennes
at  the  fairs  of  Rheims,  and  of  other  considerable  merchants,
subjects  and  servants  of  the  said  duke;  namely,  M.  de  Ternant,
William  de  Villiers,  M.  Jean  Jacqueling,  the  receiver  of
Auxerrois,  Jean  Gormont,  and  others,  who  have  had  no  repa-
ration made  them  for  their  losses. In  like  manner  with  them
the  king's  officers  without  any  cause  have  seized  M.  Jean  de
Janly,  the  duke's  envoy  to  the  Duke  of  Calabria  and  the
King  of  Arragon.

"  The  same  answer  given  to  this  as  to  the  20th  article
aforegoing."

22.  The  ambassadors  demand  that  such  novel  and  unreason-
able constraints  may  be  no  more  practised ;  that  the  seizing  of
the  lands  of  the  duke's  subjects  may  be  entirely  discontinued,
so  as  that  they  may  peaceably  enjoy  the  same  as  formerly,  and
have  restitution  made  them  for  the  profits,  and  also  that  the
ecclesiastics  of  Langres  may  be  satisfied.

"  Agreed  to  as  the  last."

23.  In  like  manner  an  entire  restitution  is  required  of  the
goods  taken  from  the  duke's  subjects  in  Holland,  Zealand,  Bra-
bant, and  Flanders,  of  which  the  said  subjects  have  lately  made
grievous  complaints  for  redress,  and  the  liberty  of  those  who
are  imprisoned  ; and  withal,  that  letters  patent  might be
granted,  that  disorders  and  hostilities  may  not  be  practised
for  the  future;  the  subjects  of  the  said  duke  having  been
interrupted  in  their  herring  fishery,  as  well  those  of  Holland,
Zealand,  and  Brabant,  as  those  of  Flanders  and  Boulogne,  to
their  great  damage;  and  therefore  they  desire  the  king's  passes
to  secure  them  for  the  future,  upon  producing  of  which  they
may  proceed  unmolested.

"Answered  as  the  last  article."

24.  The  ambassadors  set  forth,  that  the  gifts  made  the  duke


1468.]  TREATY  OP  PEROXNE.  141

by  the  king  of  the  revenue  of  Chastel-Chinon  for  six  years,
and  which  he  did  not  enjoy  above  a  year  or  two,  may  be
restored  to  him  for  that  term.
"This  the  king  fully  agrees  to."

25.  The  king,  for  very  good  causes  and  considerations,  is
desired  to  cancel  those  causes  that  are  depending  in  his  court  of
parliament  between  Jean  Boutilhac,  and  Christian  and  Jean  de
Digonne,  both  brothers,  which  were  commenced  in  the  time  of
the  troubles,  and  by  the  duke's  order,  M.  Jacques  de  la  Galee,
Messieurs  de  Lalain,  and  de  Montigny,  Gerard  le  Febvre,  and
the  people  of  Bruges,  and  the  king's  proctor,  joined  in  the  said
causes  to  bring  them  before  him  ;  and  afterwards  pursuant  to
the  abolition  made  at  Conflans,  and  the  contents  of  the  letters
patent  formerly  granted  by  the  king  thereupon,  to  maintain
the  said  letters  of  abolition.

"  The  king  is  willing  to  cancel  the  causes  above  said  before
himself  and  council,  or  the  commissioners  appointed  for  the
universal  reformation  of  justice  through  the  kingdom,  of
whom  the  Chancellor  of  France  is  one.  And  as  to  the  affair  of
Boutilhac  and  the  king's  proctor  against  the  Digonnes,  Bou-
tilhac and  the  proctor  shall  be  silenced ;  then  for  Lalain,
seeing  the  said  causes  have  a  relation  to  the  business  of  the
limits  above  mentioned,  in  respect  to  which  a  stop  had  been
made  to  the  re-delivery  of  their  goods  seized  and  detained
upon  that  occasion,  these  goods  which  are  in  the  hands  of
commissioners  or  others  deputed  by  them,  they  shall  peaceably
enjoy,  till  the  dispute  about  the  limits  shall  be  decided  by  the
said  commissioners  in  the  form  aforesaid,  provided  that  they
and  all  their  goods  shall  be  liable  to  the  making  good,  on
their  part,  the  sentence  given  by  the  said  commissioners  in
that  behalf.  And  as  for  the  interposition  of  appeals  by
Gerard  Febvre,  and  others,  from  the  judgments  and  sentences
of  the  said  court  of  Bruges,  they  shall  be  of  no  effect."

26.  The  king  is  desired  to  inhibit  De  Torcy,  his  heirs,  &c.,
for  ever  to  prosecute  a  certain  decree  obtained  by  him  against
the  late  M.  de  Saveuse,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  treaty  of
Arras  ;  which  decree  after  it  was  made,  had  a  stop  put  to  it
till  the  death  of  the  late  king,  and  by  the  king  now  being,  for
fifteen  years,  commencing  from  that  of  sixty.

"  The  said  suspension  of  fifteen  years  the  king  is  willing
shall  be  observed,  and  that  after  the  expiration  of  the  said


142  THE MEMOIRS  OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1468.

term,  the  execution  of  the  said  decree  shall  be  suspended  for
twenty  years  longer,  still  with  a  salvo  to  the  king  and  the
duke's  rights  from  thencefonvards,  and  for  the  twenty  years
past."

27.  The  ambassadors  cannot  also  but  remonstrate  against
the  denial  of  mandates  in  case  of  appeal  and  other  points  of
justice  to  the  duke's  officers  and  subjects,  and  even  when
his  officers have  appealed  and  demanded  security  for  the
preservation  of  his  right  and  signiory.

"The  king  will  command  speedy  and  strict  justice  to  be
done,  and  all  mandates  in  cases  of  appeal  or  otherwise  shall  be
granted  without  hesitation ;  so  that  it  may  be  evident  to  all
men  that  he  is  desirous  to  do  right  to  the  duke's  subjects."

28.  The  ambassadors  desire  the  king  would  let  the  duke
enjoy  the  lands,  signiories  and  rights  made  over  to  him,  and
to  let  him  have  instruments  of  ratification,  by  which  all  impedi-
ments to  the  contrary  shall  be  declared  null  and  of  no  effect.

"  This  the  king  assents  to  in  the  full  extent  of  it."

29.  The  ambassadors  demand  reparation  of  damages  for
himself  and  subjects  during  the  troubles,  which  by  a  mode-
rate computation  amount  to  above  200,000  crowns  in  gold.

"  The  king  is  willing  to  make  reparation,  but  expects  the
same  on  the  part  of  the  duke."

30.  The  king  is  desired  to  prohibit  the  Bailiff  of  Gens  for
the  future  to  receive  appeals,  and  to  grant  relief  in  cases  of
appeals  by  the  subjects  of  the  duchy  of  Burgundy ;  forasmuch
as  that  duchy  is  the  first  peerage  of  France,  and  therefore
the  duke  and  his  subjects  ought  to  appeal  nowhere  but  to
the  parliament,  if  they  think  tit.

"The  king  agrees  to  this  article."

31.  The  bailiff,  judges  and  officers  of  the  said  duke  in  that
duchy,  ought  not  for  the  future  to  be  hindered  from  taking
cognizance  of  the  subjects  of  the  said  duchy,  under  pretence
that  they  are  burghers  of  Ville-neuve-le-Roy  ;  and  the  Bailiff
of  Gens  and  all  others  should  be  forbidden  to  grant  protections
to  the  subjects  of  the  said  duke  in  his  duchy,  under  pretence
of  that  burghership.

"  The  king  agrees  also  to  this."

32.  The  king  is  desired  to  grant  letters  patent,  and  in  them
to  declare  that  all  executions  made  by  virtue  of  the  seal  of  the
said  duchy,  shall  take  place  according  and  pursuant  to  the


1468.]  TREATY  OP  PERONNE.  143

privileges  of  the  said  seal,  and  notwithstanding  any  appeals,
and  without  prejudicing  the  same.
"  The  king  agrees  to  this  article."

33.  All  complaints  made  in  respect  to  innovations,  which
shall  he  exhibited  by  the  said  duke  in  his  said  duchy  and  his
other  territories,  or  by  the  judges  of  those  countries  who  may
and  are  wont  to  offer  those  complaints,  ought  really  to  be
redressed,  notwithstanding  any  appeals,  &c.

'•  This  the  king  allows  of."

34.  Though  the  villages  of  Desgrandes,  Mallay  St.  Guillain,
Ducray,  and  other  adjacent  ones,  are  directly  in  the  duchy  of
Burgundy,  appertaining  to  the  said  duke,  and  belonging  to
the  bailiwick  of  Destun;  yet  the  king's  officers  have  attempted
to  make  them  to  belong  to  Lyons,  as  well  in  point  of  juris-
diction as  in  the  matter  of  taxes,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  said
duke,  and  also  contrary  to  the  treaty  of  Arras,  by  which  all
the  profits  and  royal  rights  in  the  bailiwicks  of  Macon  and
St.  Gengon  ought  to  belong  to  the  said  duke  ;  for  if  the  king
had  any  right  to  the  said  villages,  it  must  be  upon  the  account
of  the  said  bailiwicks  of  Macon  and  St.  Gengon  only  ;  and  for
the  late  duke,  he  complained  of  it  to  the  late  King  Charles,
and  since  to  the  present  king ;  and  was  informed  that  M.
Guichard  Bastier,  Chief-judge  of  Lyons,  should  inquire  into
the  matter  of  fact,  and  there  determine  it. Nevertheless,
the  said  ambassadors  require  that  the  said  information  may
be  reviewed  and  examined  by  the  said  commissioners,  who
shall  be  appointed  to  transact  the  other  matters  above  men-
tioned, and  so  as  to  re-instate  the  said  duke  in  the  possession  of
the  said  villages  whereof  he  has  been  deprived  wrongfully  and
without  any  just  cause  ;  in  case  that  information  be  sufficient
to  do  it,  or  otherwise  the  commissioners  shall  decide  it  in  the
manner  aforesaid.

"  The  king  agrees  to  this  article  in  all  the  parts  of  it."

35.  And  in  case  there  are  any  articles  that  cannot  presently
be  executed,  but  that  it  shall  be  necessary  that  they  should  be
examined  and  determined  by  commissioners,  whom  the  king
and  the duke shall  appoint,  and  that  in  order  to  this  a
convenient  time  be  also  assigned ;  and  that  it  may  so  happen
that  though  the  said  commissioners  have  not  full  power  from
the  king  and  the  duke  to  determine  the  things  left  to  their
cognizance:  insomuch  that  the  said  matters  may  be  delayed


144  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP  DE COHMINES. [1463.

through  the  difficulties  which  may  occur,  as  well  in  respect
to  the  knowing,  as  making  a  declaration  of  the  rights
of  the  parties ;  let  the  king  and  the  duke,  if  they  are  so
pleased,  expedite  their  powers,  by  which  both  sides  shall
agree,  that,  in  case  the  said  commissioners  cannot  accord,  they
may  choose  an  umpire,  an  able  man,  who  cannot  be  suspected
of  partiality,  to  whom  they  shall  declare  and  impart  their
difficulties  and  differences;  and  when  he  shall  be  fully
instructed  in  the  whole  affair,  he  shall  declare  his  opinion
according  to  his  conscience,  and  without  any  favour  or
affection.  And  so  the  matter  shall  be  adjudged  and  deter-
mined, according  to  the  advice  of  those  the  said  commissioners
who  shall  be  of  the  umpire's  opinion,  notwithstanding
the  opposition  of  the  rest,  with  a  salvo  always  to  the  greatest
and  soundest  part  in  number  of  persons  and  opinions  of
the  said  commissioners,  by  whose  advice  the  matter  shall
be  determined  as  effectually  as  if  all  the  commissioners  had
agreed  to  it.  And  in  case  the  said  commissioners  shall
not  be  able  to  agree  among  themselves  about  the  choice
of  an  umpire,  those  on  the  king's  side  shall  be  obliged  to
name  two  worthy  persons,  and  the  duke's  commissioners
as  many,  neither  of  whom  shall  be  natives,  or  the  subjects  of
either  of  them,  nor  suspected  of  partiality ;  out  of  which
four,  one  shall  be  chosen  by  lot,  who  shall  be  the  umpire,  to
decide  the  matter  as  aforesaid  ;  and  if  the  commissioners  who
shall  be  appointed  by  the  king  do  not  agree  in  the  choice  of
an  umpire  as  aforesaid,  in  that  case  the  duke's  commissioners
may  do  it  without  them.  And,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  said
commissioners  of  the  duke  do  not  agree  to  it,  those  of  the
king's  may  in  like  manner  do  it  without  them.  And  that
choice,  together  with  the  king's  which,  by  virtue  thereof,  shall
be  made,  shall  be  as  valid  as  if  done  by  the  commissioners
on  both  sides  by  common  consent ;  and  the  said  commis-
sioners on  one  side  may  proceed  in  the  said  affair,  by
default,  and  upon  the  refusal  of  the  commissioners  on  the
other  side,  and  act  with  the  said  umpire,  in  the  same
manner  as  if  all  the  commissioners  were  together.  And  all
that  shall  be  determined,  done,  and  executed,  in  the  things
aforesaid,  shall  remain  firm  and  valid  for  ever  ;  and  that  the
said  commissioners  and  every  of  them  shall  swear  solemnly
that  they  will  take  care  of,  attend,  and  manage  the  said


1468.] THE KING AND DUKE MARCH TO LIEGE.  145

affairs  as  aforesaid,  and  have  a  very  strict  regard  to  the  right
of  each  part,  and  proceed  therein  without  interruption
or  delay,  and  without  alleging  any  excuse,  unless  in  case
of  death  or  sickness.  And  in  case  of  an  excuse  as  aforesaid,
the  commissioner,  whose  business  it  is,  shall  appoint  one
to  act  in  his  stead,  who  shall  proceed  with  the  rest  in  the
same  form  and  manner  as  above  directed.

"  The  king  agrees  to  the  contents  of  this  article."
[The  conclusion and ratification of  this treaty being
matters  of  form,  we  omit  them.]


CHAP.  X.

How  the  King  accompanied  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  in  his  Expedition
against  the  Liegeois,  who  were  formerly  his  Allies.  —  1468.

AFTER  the  conclusion  of  the  peace,  the  King  and  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  set  out  the  next  morning  for  Cambray*,  and
from  thence  towards  the  country  of  Liege :  it  was  the
beginning  of  winter,  and  the  weather  very  bad.  The  king
had  with  him  only  his  Scotch  guards  and  a  small  body
of  his  standing  forces  ;  but  he  ordered  300  of  his  men-at-
arms  to  join  him.  The  duke's  army  marched  in  two  columns  ;
one  was  commanded  by  the  Marshal  of  Burgundy  (of  whom
I  have  spoken  before),  and  with  him  were  all  the  Burgundians,
the  above-mentioned  nobility  of  Savoy,  and  a  great  number
of  forces  out  of  Hainault,  Luxembourg,  Namur,  and  Lim-
burg;  the  other  body  was  led  by  the  duke  himself.  When
they  came  near  the  city  of  Liege,  a  council  of  war  was  held
in  the  duke's  presence,  in  which  it  was  the  opinion  of  some  of
the  officers,  that  part  of  the  army  should  march  back,  since  the
gates  and  walls  of  that  city  had  been  demolished  the  year
before,  and  no  hopes  were  left  them  of  being  relieved;  for  the
king  was  with  us  in  person,  and  had  made  some  overtures  for
them,  which  was  almost  as  much  as  was  demanded  of  them:
but  the  duke  was  not  at  all  pleased  with  this  proposition,  and

*  They  left  Peronne  on  the  loth  of  October,  and  slept  at  Cam^ray  on
the  17th. Lenglet,  ii.  192.


146  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMM1NES. [1468.

it  was  well  he  was  not,  for  never  prince  was  nearer  his  ruin,
and  it  was  only  his  suspicion  of  the  king  which  was  the  occa-
sion of  his  rejecting  it.  Certainly  they  who  proposed  it,  out  of
an  opinion  of  their  too  great  strength,  were  very  ill-advised  ;
it  was  a  great  instance  of  their  folly  or  pride,  and  I  have
often  heard  of  such  counsel  having  been  given,  but  it
was  always  by  such  officers  as  were  either  ignorant  of
what  was  fit  to  be  done,  or  such  as  had  a  mind  to  be
esteemed  for  their  courage ;  but  our  king  (whom  God
pardon  !)  understood  an  affair  of  this  nature  excellently  well.
He  was  slow  and  timorous  in  undertaking  any  action  of
importance,  but  when  once  he  had  begun,  he  provided  so
well,  that  it  was  hardly  possible  for  his  designs  to  miscarry.
The  Marshal  of  Burgundy  was  ordered  with  the  brigade
under  his  command,  to  advance  before  us,  and  possess  himself
cf  the  city  ;  if  he  was  refused  entrance,  he  was  ordered
to  force  it  if  he  could,  for  there  were  already  several  deputies
from  the  city  coming  and  going  about  an  accommodation.
The  marshal  advanced  as  far  as  Namur,  and  the  king
and  duke  arriving  the  next  day  *,  he  removed  and  marched  on.
As  soon  as  he  approached  the  city,  the  poor  inconsiderate
citizens  made  a  sally,  but  were  easily  defeated  (at  least
a  good  part  of  them),  and  the  rest  retired.  During  this  con-
fusion in  the  town,  the  bishop  made  his  escape,  and  came  to
our  army.  There  was  at  that  time  a  legate  f  sent  from  the
PopeJ  to  pacify  their  disputes,  and  to  inquire  into  the
difference  between  the  bishop  and  the  people ;  for  they  re-
mained still  under  excommunication  for  the  above-mentioned
reasons  and  offences.  This  legate  exceeding  his  commission,
and  hoping  to  make  himself  bishop  of  that  city,  favoured  the
people,  advised  them  to  take  arms,  and  to  stand  upon  their
defence,  and  other  foolish  counsels  he  gave  them  besides :
but  finding  what  danger  the  town  was  in,  he  endeavoured  to
make  his  escape,  and  got  away  with  his  whole  train  (con-

*  They  arrived  at  Namur  in  the  morning  of  the  21st  of  October,  and
remained  there  until  the  24th.  Lenglet,  ii.  192.

f  Onofrio  de  Santa  Croce,  Bishop  of  Tricaria,  in  the  kingdom  of
Naples.  He  was  a  native  of  Home,  where  he  died  on  October  20.  1471.

J  'Pietro  Barbo,  a  Venetian,  Cardinal  of  San  Marco,  was  elected  Pope
under  the  name  of  Paul  II.,  on  the  31st  of  August,  1464.  He  died  on
the  28th  of  July,  1471.


1468.]  SALLY OP THE LIEGEOIS.  147

sisting  of  five  and  twenty  persons  very  well  mounted)  ;  but
they  were  all  retaken.  The  duke  having  notice  of  it,  sent
word  to  those  who  had  taken  him,  that  they  should  carry
him  somewhere  out  of  the  way  (without  acquainting  him  with
it),  and  make  him  pay  as  great  a  ransom  for  his  liberty
as  they  could  get ;  because  if  it  came  publicly  to  his  know-
ledge, the  honour  he  was  obliged  to  pay  to  the  apostolic
see  would  not  suffer  him  to  detain  him  a  prisoner.  They
could  not  take  his  advice,  but  fell  out  among  themselves,
and  some  who  pretended  to  a  share,  coming  to  the  duke  with
their  complaints,  as  he  was  sitting  publicly  at  dinner,  he
sent  to  have  the  legate  delivered  into  his  hands,  took
him  from  them,  showed  him  abundance  of  respect,  and  treated
him  very  honourably.  The  great  body  of  forces  which,
were  in  the  vanguard,  under  the  command  of  the  Marshal
of  Burgundy  and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt,  presuming
they  should  carry  their  point,  marched  directly  to  the  city,
and  (moved  by  their  avarice),  they  thought  it  better  to
plunder  it,  than  to  accept  of  a  treaty  which  was  offered:
supposing  there  was  no  necessity  of  staying  for  the  king
(who  was  seven  or  eight  leagues  behind),  they  advanced  until
just  about  night  they  arrived  at  the  suburbs,  into  which  they
entered  in  a  part  that  led  directly  to  one  of  the  gates  which
had  been  lately  repaired  by  the  citizens;  some  parley
there  passed  between  them,  but  nothing  was  concluded  on.
Night  came  upon  them,  and  it  grew  very  dark  before  they
had  taken  up  their  quarters;  so  that  not  knowing  where
to  dispose  themselves,  they  were  in  great  disorder;  some
walked  up  and  down,  others  called  out  for  their  masters,
their  comrades,  and  their  captains.  Monsieur  Jehan  de  Vilde
and  other  officers  in  the  town,  perceiving  their  folly  and
confusion,  took  courage,  and  (the  inconvenience  of  having
had  their  walls  thrown  down  being  now  of  great  advantage  to
them),  they  sallied  through  the  ruins  and  out  of  the  breaches
in  the  walls  as  they  pleased  upon  those  who  were  in  the  front ;
but  they  attacked  the  pages  and  servants  (who  were  left
with  the  horses  at  the  farther  end  of  the  suburbs,  where
they  entered)  by  the  way  of  the  vineyards  and  hillocks,  and
slew  many  of  them,  but  a  greater  number  fled  (for  the
night  knows  no  shame) :  in  short,  they  attacked  us  so
vigorously,  that  in  this  action  they  slew  above  800  men,

L  2


148  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1468.

of  whom  100  were  men-at-arms.  But  the  wiser  and  more
courageous  of  that  vanguard  kept  themselves  together  in  a
body  (the  greatest  part  of  them  being  men-at-arms  and
persons  of  good  family),  and  marched  up  with  their  colours
directly  to  the  gate,  imagining  if  there  was  a  sally,  it  would
be  that  way.  A  continued  rain  had  made  the  ways  pro-
digiously miry,  and  the  men-at-arais  being  dismounted,  stood
up  to  their  ancles  in  mud  and  dirt.  All  the  inhabitants
that  remained  in  the  town  resolved  to  make  a  general
sally  at  once,  and  with  great  shouts  and  a  vast  number
of  torches,  they  were  marching  through  the  gate,  when
our  men  (who  were  not  far  off,  and  had  four  good
pieces  of  cannon  with  them),  fired  up  the  street  among
them  two  or  three  times,  and  made  such  a  slaughter
that  they  retired  out  of  the  suburbs,  and  shut  up  their  gates.
Whilst  this  dispute  lasted  in  the  suburbs,  those  who  had
sallied  by  the  walls,  being  near  the  town,  had  got  together
some  few  carts  and  waggons,  with  which  they  fortified  them-
selves, and  reposed  (though  but  indifferently,  for  they  con-
tinued out  of  the  town  from  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  till
six)  :  but  as  soon  as  the  day  began  to  break,  and  we  were  able
to  discover  where  they  lay,  we  immediately  repulsed  them.
In  this  action,  Monsieur  Jehan  de  Vilde  was  wounded,  and
died  in  the  town  two  days  after,  and  two  or  three  officers  of
note  besides.


CHAP.  XL

Of  the  King's  Arrival  in  person  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  before  the
City  of  Liege. —  1468.

THOUGH  sallies  out  of  a  town  are  sometimes  necessary,  yet
they  are  very  dangerous,  and  of  ill  consequence  to  the  besieged;
since  ten  men  are  a  greater  loss  to  them  than  a  hundred  to  the
besiegers,  because  their  number  is  less,  and  they  cannot  be
recruited  as  they  please ;  besides  they  may  happen  to  lose
their  governor,  or  some  other  considerable  officer,  for  want  of
whose  conduct,  not  being  able  to  make  any  longer  defence,
they  may  be  forced  to  surrender  the  town  immediately.  The
news  of  this  action  was  presently  brought  to  the  duke,  who


1468.]  DISTRESS OF THE DUKE'S VANGUARD.  149

was  in  his  quarters  about  four  or  five  leagues  from  the  city.
At  first  the  whole  body  was  reported  to  be  cut  off;  however,
the  duke  mounted,  and  ordered  all  the  forces  that  were  with
him  to  march  immediately,  commanding  that  the  news  of  this
action  should  be  kept  secret  from  the  king.  In  our  approach
to  another  part  of  the  town,  we  had  intelligence  that  all  was
well,  that  there  were  not  so  many  slain  as  was  at  first  supposed,
and  that  among  them  there  was  not  any  person  of  note  but
one  Monsieur  de  Sergine,  a  Flemish  knight.  At  the  same
time  we  were  informed,  that  the  gentlemen  and  officers  that
were  left  of  the  vanguard  were  in  great  distress  and  want  of
provisions,  having  been  upon  very  hard  duty  all  night  long
and  upon  their  feet  in  the  dirt  and  mire  at  the  very  gates  of
the  town ;  that  some  of  the  infantry  who  had  fled,  and  were
returned,  were  so  dispirited  and  out  of  heart,  that  no  great
exploit  could  be  expected  from  them ;  and  therefore  they  de-
sired the  duke,  for  God's  sake,  to  march  up  with  all  diligence
to  their  post,  which  would  oblige  the  enemy  to  divide  their
forces,  and  not  lie  with  their  whole  garrison  upon  them.  They
pressed  in  like  manner  for  supplies  of  provisions,  for  they
had  not  one  morsel  left  to  subsist  on.  The  duke  immediately
sent  them  what  provisions  could  be  got,  under  a  convoy  of
300  horse,  to  comfort  and  encourage  them  ;  and  it  was  time,
for  none  of  them,  except  a  few  that  had  brought  some  wine
with  them,  had  either  eaten  or  drunk  anything  for  two  or
three  days  and  a  night,  and  to  mend  the  matter,  they  had  the
hardest  weather  in  the  world.  On  their  side  it  was  impos-
sible to  enter,  unless  the  duke  gave  the  garrison  a  diversion.
They  had  abundance  of  men  wounded,  and  among  the  rest
the  Prince  of  Orange*  (whom  I  had  forgotten  to  name),
who  gave  signal  proofs  of  his  courage  and  conduct,  and  would
not  stir  from  his  post  during  the  whole  time.  The  Lords  du
Lau  and  d'Urfe  behaved  themselves  very  gallantly  also,
though  above  2000  men  deserted  and  ran  away  from  them
in  the  night.

It  was  almost  night  when  the  duke  received  this  last  intel-
ligence, and  having  despatched  the  above-mentiosed  supplies,
he  returned  to  his  standard  to  give  a  full  relation  to  the  king,

*  William  VII.,  son  of  Louis  the  Good,  Prince  of  Orange,  by  Jeanne
de  Montbeliiard.  succeeded  his  father  in  December,  1463.  He  died  on
the  2 7 tli  October,  1475.

L  3


150  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1468.

who  seemed  to  be  extremely  pleased,  for  the  contrary  would
have  proved  much  to  his  prejudice.  It  was  not  long  before
we  arrived  at  the  suburbs,  and  then  a  strong  party  of  volunteers
(men-at-arms  and  archers)  were  detached  to  possess  the
suburbs,  which  was  easily  done ;  and  the  Bastard  of  Bur-
gundy (who  had  a  great  command  under  the  duke  at  that
time),  the  Lord  of  Ravestein,  the  Count  of  Roucy  *  (the  con-
stable's son),  and  several  other  persons  of  quality,  took  up  their
quarters  in  the  suburb,  and  some  of  them  just  by  the  gate
which  the  townsmen  had  repaired,  as  they  had  done  the  other.
The  duke  had  his  quarters  in  the  middle  of  the  suburbs,  but
for  that  night  the  king  remained  in  a  good,  large  and  well-
furnished  farm  about  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  the  town,  with
a  strong  party  both  of  our  and  his  own  men  for  his  guard.

The  city  of  Liege  is  seated  in  a  very  fruitful  country,  full
of  mountains  and  valleys,  with  the  River  Maes  running  through
the  middle  of  it,  and  is  much  about  the  same  size  as  Rouen,
and  was  at  that  time  very  populous.  It  was  no  great  distance
from  that  gate  where  we  had  our  quarter,  to  the  other,  where
our  vanguard  were  posted,  provided  we  could  have  gone
straight  through  the  town  ;  but  being  obliged  to  go  round  on
the  outside  of  it,  it  was  full  three  leagues  about  by  reason  of
the  holes  and  little  sloughs  which  (it  being  mid-winter,  and
very  foul)  the  weather  had  filled  up.  The  walls  likewise  were
all  demolished,  and  the  citizens  might  attack  our  men  in  what
quarter  they  pleased  :  besides  the  foundation  being  stony  and
a  hard  rock,  they  could  never  make  a  ditch,  and  at  that  time
had  nothing  but  a  small  trench,  which  they  had  thrown  up

*  Antoine  de  Luxembourg,  Count  of  Brienne,  Ligny  and  Koussy,
councillor  and  chamberlain  of  the  king,  was  the  son  of  the  Constable  of
St.  Paul  and  Jeanne  de  Bar.  He  was  originally  attached  to  the  house-
hold of  Charles  the  Bold,  and  on  the  18th  of  February,  1472,  received
the  provisions  of  Lieutenant-general  of  Burgundy.  He  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  king's  troops  at  the  battle  of  Guipy,  near  Chateau  Chinon,
on  the  20th  of  June,  1475,  and  confined  in  the  great  tower  of  Bourges,
whence  he  was  transferred  to  the  Plessis-du-Parc.  Louis  XI.  bitterly
reproached  him  with  his  perfidy  and  treason,  and  would  only  consent  to
grant  him  his  life  on  condition  of  his  paying  a  ransom  of  40,000  golden
crowns  within  two  months.  This  was  probably  done,  for  Antoine  de
Luxembourg,  Count  of  Brienne,  figured  on  the  12th  of  June,  1493,
among  the  nobles  whom  the  King  of  France  appointed  to  take  back
Margaret  of  Austria  to  her  father,  the  Emperor  Maximilian.  The  count
died  in  1515.


1468.]  A  FALSE  ALARM.  151

not  long  before  to  defend  them.  Our  vanguard  were  ex-
tremely overjoyed  and  animated  at  our  approach  on  the  first
night  of  our  coming ;  for  already  the  force  of  the  garrison
was  divided  into  two  parts.  About  midnight  we  had  a  ter-
rible alarm,  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  immediately  in
the  street;  not  long  after  the  king  and  constable  came  to  him,
and  had  made  great  haste  to  get  thither  so  soon.  The  dark-
ness and  horror  of  the  night  contributed  much  to  the  terror
of  our  soldiers,  some  of  them  crying  out,  "  They  sally  out  of
this  gate,  and  some  of  them  out  of  the  other."  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  never  wanted  courage,  but  his  conduct  often  failed
him ;  and  to  speak  impartially,  he  did  not  behave  himself  at
this  very  time  so  prudently  as  he  ought  to  have  done,  con-
sidering the  king  was  there  present.  In  this  confusion,  the
king  took  upon  him  to  command,  and  said  to  the  constable,
"  March  you  with  your  men  to  such  a  place,  for  if  the  enemy
falls  upon  us  anywhere,  it  must  necessarily  be  there."  He
who  had  seen  his  countenance,  and  heard  him  speak,  would
have  acknowledged  him  to  be  a  prince  of  great  courage  and
prudence  ;  but  this  was  not  the  first  action  in  which  he  had
given  demonstration  of  it ;  however  this  was  only  a  false  alarm,
and  the  king  and  the  duke  returned  both  to  their  quarters.

The  next  morning  the  king  removed  into  the  suburbs,  and
took  up  his  quarters  in  a  little  house  next  door  to  the  duke's ;
his  guards  consisted  of  100  Scots,  and  his  household  troops
were  posted  in  a  village  near  him.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy
was  extremely  jealous,  lest  either  the  king  should  find  means
to  get  into  the  city,  or  return  home  before  he  could  take  it ;
or  else  (being  so  near),  make  some  attempt  upon  his  person.
To  prevent  the  worst,  he  made  a  draught  out  of  his  guards
of  300  of  the  stoutest  men-at-arms  that  he  could  depend  on,
and  posted  them  in  a  great  barn  that  lay  between  their  two
quarters.  The  walls  of  the  barn  were  broken  down,  to
render  their  sallies  the  more  easy,  if  there  should  be  occasion,
and  these  troops  were  placed  there  to  watch  and  observe  the
king's  motions,  who  was  quartered  just  by  them.  In  this
manner  we  spent  eight  days  ;  during  which  (for  on  the  last
day  the  town  was  taken)  neither  the  duke  nor  anybody  else
pulled  oft"  their  arms.  The  night  before  the  surrender,  at
u  council  of  war,  it  was  concluded  to  storm  the  town  the  next
morning,  which  was  Sunday,  the  30th  of  October,  1468;  and

L  4


152  THE MEJIOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1468.

accordingly  orders  were  given  out  that  at  a  certain  signal
(which  was  the  firing  of  one  great  gun  alone,  then  of  two  serpen-
tinespresently  after,  and  then  discontinuing),  without  farther
orders  they  should  begin  the  assault  on  one  side,  as  the  duke
designed  to  attack  them  on  the  other  by  eight  in  the  morning.
That  night  (as  was  concluded)  the  duke  disarmed  himself,
and  ordered  all  his  army  to  do  the  same,  and  to  refresh  them-
selves, especially  those  in  the  barn.  At  that  instant  (having
been  informed  of  our  design)  the  Liegeois  resolved  to  make
a  sally  upon  our  quarters,  as  they  had  done  before  upon  the
other  side.


CHAP.  XII.

How  the  Liegeois  made  a  desperate  Sally  upon  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
Quarter,  where  both  he  and  the  King  were  in  very  great  Danger. —
1468.

IN  this  chapter  I  shall  show  you  an  example,  by  which  you
may  observe,  that  the  greatest  prince  or  potentate  may  sud-
denly fall  into  dangerous  inconveniences,  occasioned  by
a  small  number  of  their  enemies ;  from  whence  it  may
reasonably  be  inferred  that  all  enterprises  ought  to  be  well
weighed  and  considered,  before  they  are  put  in  execution.
This  city  had  not  one  soldier  in  their  garrison,  but  men  of  their
own  territories,  nor  one  man  of  quality  or  good  officer  among
them;  for  those  few  whom  they  had  were  all  killed  and
wounded  two  or  three  days  before.  They  had  neither  gate,
nor  wall,  nor  fortification,  nor  one  piece  of  cannon,  which
was  good  for  anything.  Their  garrison  consisted  only  of
their  own  townsmen,  and  700  or  800  foot  from  a  small
mountain  at  the  back  of  the  town  called  the  country
of  Franchemont,  but  they  had  always  had  the  reputation  of
being  valiant  and  stout  soldiers.  They  were  now  arrived
at  the  height  of  desperation,  and  having  no  hopes  of
relief,  since  the  king  had  come  in  person  against  them,
they  resolved  to  make  a  general  sally,  and  put  all  to  u
venture,  for  they  looked  upon  themselves  as  lost.  It


1468.]  SALLY OP THE LIEGEOIS.  153

was  concluded,  that  by  the  ruins  of  the  walls  which  were
behind  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  quarters,  all  their  choicest
troops  should  sally,  which  were  600  of  those  from  the
country  of  Franchemont,  led  and  conducted  by  the  masters
of  the  two  houses  where  the  King  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
were  quartered ;  near  to  which  houses,  by  a  crack  in  a  great
rock,  they  might  march  securely  before  they  were  perceived,
unless  they  discovered  themselves  by  any  noise.  Though
there  were  several  scouts  by  the  way,  they  were  not  dis-
couraged, imagining  they  should  either  kill  them,  or  be
at  the  king's  or  duke's  quarters  as  soon  as  they  should
give  the  alarm.  Besides,  they  presumed  their  two  guides
would  conduct  them  directly  to  their  own  houses,  where  (as
is  said  before)  the  king  and  the  duke  were  quartered ;  and
not  halting  anywhere  by  the  way,  they  hoped  they  might  be
able  to  surprise  them,  and  either  kill  or  take  them,  before
their  guards  could  come  in  to  their  assistance.  Having  not
far  to  march,  they  supposed  they  should  be  able  to  make
their  retreat,  or  if  the  worst  came  to  the  worst,  they  could
but  die,  and  they  were  contented  to  lose  their  lives  in  such  an
undertaking ;  for  without  it,  as  is  said  before,  they  found
themselves  utterly  ruined.  It  was  also  ordered  that  all  the
people  of  the  city  should  sally  out  of  the  gate  which  opened
into  the  great  street  of  our  suburbs,  with  loud  shouts
and  cries,  hoping  by  that  means  to  defeat  that  body  of  forces
that  were  posted  in  the  suburbs,  and  to  obtain  a  complete
victory,  or  a  glorious  death.  Had  they  had  1000  men-
at-arms,  all  regular  forces,  their  attempt  would  have  been
great,  and  I  question  not  but  they  would  have  succeeded  in  it,
since  with  those  few  which  they  had,  they  were  very  near
effecting  their  designs.

According  to  the  resolution  that  had  been  taken,  at  about
ten  o'clock  at  night,  the  600  men  from  Franchemont  sal-
lied forth  by  the  breaches  of  the  walls,  seized  upon  the
most  of  our  outguards  and  put  them  to  the  sword  (among
whom  there  were  three  gentlemen  of  the  household  of
the  Duke  of  Burgundy),  and  certainly  if  they  had  marched
on  directly,  and  made  no  noise  till  they  had  arrived  at  the
place  where  they  designed,  they  had  slain  both  those  princes
in  their  beds,  without  any  great  opposition.  Behind  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  quarters  there  was  a  tent  in  which  the


154  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1468.

present Duke of  Alenc.on*  lay,  and  with  him  the Lord
of  Craonf ;  they  stopped  there  for  some  time,  thrust  their
pikes through  the  tent,  and  killed  some of  the servants.
This  giving  an  alarm  to  the  whole  army,  some  few  ran
to  their  arms,  several  got  up,  and  leaving  their  tents,  ran
immediately  to  the  two  houses,  where  the  king  and  the  duke
were quartered. The barn I  mentioned before, where
the duke  had posted 300 men-at-arms, being close  to
both  houses,  they  gave  them  some  thrusts  with  their  pikes
out  of  the  holes  which  had  been  made  for  the  convenience
of  their  sallies. Not  full  two hours before this attack,
these  gentlemen  had  pulled  off  their  arms  to  refresh  and
prepare  themselves  for  the  assault  the  next  day,  so  that  most
of  them  were  unarmed,  though  some  few  had  clapped  on  their
cuirasses  upon  the  uproar  at  the  Duke  of  Alengon's  tent,  and
attacked  the  invaders  through  the  doors  and  the  holes  which
they  had  made,  and  were  the  only  body  of  troops  that  pre-
served those  two  great  princes ;  for  by  this  delay,  several
others  had  time  enough  to  arm,  and  make  head  against  them.
I  and  two  gentlemen  more  of  his  bed-chamber  lay  that  night
in  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  chamber  (which  was  very  small),
and  above  us  there  were  twelve  archers  upon  the  guard,  all
of  them  in  their  clothes,  and  playing  at  dice. His  main
guard  was  at  a  good  distance,  and  towards  the  gate  of  the
town. In  short,  the  master  of  the  house  where  the  duke
was quartered, having drawn out  a good party of  the
Liegeois,  came  so  suddenly  upon  the  duke,  that  we  had  scarce
time  to  put  on  his  cuirass  and  breast-plate  and  clap  a  steel
cap  upon  his  head  :  as  soon  as  we  had  done  it,  we  ran  down
the  stairs  into  the  street,  but  we  found  our  archers  engaged
with  the  enemy,  and  much  ado  they  had  to  defend  the  doors
and  the  windows  against  them. In  the  street  there  was
a  terrible  noise  and  uproar,  some  crying  out,  "  Vive  le  Roi! "
others, "Vive  Bourgogne!"  and  others, "Vive  le  Roi,  et
tuez!" It  was  some  time  before  our  archers  and  we  could

*  Eene,  Count  da  Perche,  son  of  Jean -le- Beau  and  Marie  d'Ar-
magnac,  succeeded  his  father  in  the  dukedom  of  Alengon  in  1476  :  and
died  on  the  1st  of  November,  1492.

t  George  de  la  Tremoille,  Lord  of  Craon,  Lieutenant- General  of
Champagne  and  Brie,  was  the  son  of  George,  Lord  of  La  Tremoille,  and
Catheriue,  Lady  of  L'Isle  Bouchard,  He  died  in  1481.


1468.] DANGER  OF THE KING  AND  THE DUKE.  155

beat  the  enemy  from  the  doors,  and  get  out  of  the  house :
we  knew  not  in  what  condition  the  king  was,  nor  whether  he
was  for  or  against  us,  which  put  us  into  a  great  consternation.
As  soon  as  we  were  got  into  the  street,  by  the  help  of  two  or
three  torches  we  discovered  some  few  of  our  men,  and
could  perceive  people  fighting  round  about  us,  but  the  action
there  lasted  not  long,  for  the  soldiers  from  all  parts  came  in
thronging  to  the  duke's  quarter :  the  duke's  landlord  was
the  first  man  of  the  enemy's  side  that  was  killed  (who  died
not  presently,  for  I  heard  him  speak),  and  with  him  his
whole  party  (at  least  the  greatest  part  of  them)  were  cut  in
pieces.

The  king  was  also  assaulted  after  the  same  manner  by
his  landlord,  who  entered  his  house,  but  was  slain  by  the
Scotch  guards.  These  Scotch  troops  behaved  themselves
valiantly,  maintained  their  ground,  would  not  stir  one  step
from  the  king,  and  were  very  nimble  with  their  bows  and
arrows,  with  which  it  is  said  they  wounded  and  killed  more
of  the  Burgundians  than  of  the  enemy.  Those  who  were
appointed,  made  their  sally  at  the  gate,  but  they  found
a  strong  guard  to  oppose  them,  who  gave  them  a  warm
reception,  and  presently  repulsed  them ;  they  not  being  so  good
soldiers  as  the  others.  As  soon  as  these  people  were  repulsed,
the  king  and  duke  met,  and  had  a  conference  together;
seeing  several  lie  dead  about  them,  they  were  afraid  their
loss  had  been  greater  than  really  it  proved  to  be ;  for  upon
examination,  they  found  they  had  not  lost  many  men,  though
several  were  wounded  ;  and  without  dispute,  if  they  had  not
stopped  at  those  two  places,  and  especially  at  the  barn
(where  they  met  with  considerable  opposition),  but  had
followed  their  guides,  they  had  killed  both  the  king  and  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  in  all  probability  would  have  defeated
the  rest  of  the  army.  Each  of  these  princes  retired  to
his  quarters  greatly  astonished  at  the  boldness  of  the  attempt;
and  immediately  a  council  of  war  was  called,  to  consult
what  measures  were  to  be  taken  the  next  morning  in
relation  to  the  assault,  which  had  been  resolved  upon  before.
The  king  was  in  great  perplexity,  as  fearing  that  if  the  duke
took  not  the  town  by  storm,  the  inconvenience  would  fall
upon  him,  and  he  would  either  be  kept  still  in  restraint,
or  made  an  absolute  prisoner;  for  the  duke  could  not  think


156  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1468.

himself  secure  against  a  war  with  France,  if  he  should  suffer
him  to  depart.  By  this  mutual  distrust  of  each  other,  one
may  clearly  observe  the  miserable  condition  of  these  two
princes,  who  could  not  by  any  means  confide  in  one  another,
though  they  had  made  a  firm  peace,  not  a  fortnight  before,  and
had  sworn  solemnly  to  preserve  it.


CHAP.  XIII.

Of  the  storming,  taking,  and  plundering  the  City  of  Liege ;  together
with  the  Ruin  and  Destruction  of  the  very  Churches 1468.

THE  king,  to  free  himself  from  these  doubts,  about  an  hour
after  his  return  from  the  sally  (which  I  mentioned  before)
to  his  quarters,  sent  for  some  of  the  duke's  officers  that  had
assisted  at  the  council  of  war,  to  know  the  result  of  it ;  they
told  him  it  was  resolved  that  the  town  should  be  stormed  next
morning  in  the  manner  that  was  concerted  before.  The
king  made  several  grave  and  judicious  objections,  and  such
as  the  duke's  officers  approved  of  very  well ;  for  they  were  all
apprehensive  of  the  assault,  in  respect  of  the  great  numbers
of  people  in  the  town,  and  the  signal  proofs  they  had  given
of  their  courage  not  two  hours  before  ;  so  that  the  oificers
seemed  inclinable  rather  to  defer  it  for  some  days  longer,
and  to  endeavour  to  have  taken  it  by  composition.  They
came  immediately  to  the  duke's  quarters,  and  made  a  report
of  all  the  king-  had  said  unto  them,  and  it  was  my  fortune  to
be  present.  They  represented  all  the  king's  fears,  and  their
own  too,  but  supposing  the  duke  would  not  take  it  so  well
from  them,  they  fathered  it  all  upon  his  majesty.  The  duke
took  it  extremely  ill,  and  replied,  that  the  king  raised  those
difficulties  only  to  preserve  the  town  :  besides,  he  told  them,
that  it  was  impossible  his  design  should  miscarry,  because
they  had  no  artillery  within,  nor  walls  without,  to  defend
them;  that  their  fortifications  and  their  gates  were  demolished,
and  therefore  he  was  resolved  to  delay  no  longer,  but  to
storm  the  town,  as  had  been  concluded  before.  However,  if
the  king  pleased,  he  might  retire  to  Namur,  and  stay  there
till  the  town  was  taken ;  but  for  his  own  part  he  would  not


1468.]  CAPTURE OF LTEGE.  157

stir  till  he  saw  what  would  be  tlie  event  of  this  enterprise.
The  whole  army  dreaded  this  assault,  and  therefore  none  of
the  officers  were  pleased  with  this  resolution,  which  was
communicated  to  the  king,  not  bluntly  but  in  the  mildest
terms  imaginable.  The  king  knew  what  the  duke  would  be
at,  but  dissembled  it,  and  declared  he  would  not  go  to
Namur,  but  take  his  fortune  the  next  morning  with  the  rest.
My  opinion  is,  that  if  he  had  been  willing  to  make  his
escape,  he  might  have  done  it  that  night,  for  he  had  with
him  100  archers  of  his  guards,  several  gentlemen  of  his
retinue,  and  not  much  fewer  than  300  men-at-arms ;  but
when  his  honour  lay  at  stake,  he  scorned  to  do  it,  lest  the
world  should  have  upbraided  him  with  want  of  courage.

In  expectation  of  day,  the  whole  army  reposed  themselves
in  their  ai»ms  for  some  time,  and  several  went  to  their
devotions,  for  it  was  looked  upon  as  a  very  dangerous  enter-
prise. As  soon  as  it  was  broad  day,  and  the.  hour  had  come  for
the  assault  (which  as  I  said  before  was  eight  in  the
morning),  the  duke  ordered  the  signal  to  be  given,  and  the
great  guns  to  be  fired  successively  as  was  agreed  on,  to  give
them  notice  who  were  in  our  vanguard  on  the  other  side  of
the  town  (at  a  great  distance  to  go  about,  though  through
the  town  it  was  but  a  little  way).  The  vanguard  heard  the
signal,  and  immediately  prepared  to  storm  the  town ;  the
duke's  trumpets  began  to  sound,  the  colours  advanced  to  the
walls,  and  the  soldiers  marched  after  in  very  good  order.
The  king  was  at  that' time  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  well
attended  with  his  300  men-at-arms,  his  guards,  and  some
lords  and  officers  of  his  household.  When  we  came  so
near  that  we  expected  to  be  immediately  at  push  of  pike,
we  found  no  resistance  at  all,  and  not  above  two  or  three  men
upon  the  guard  ;  for  supposing,  because  it  was  Sunday,  that
we  would  not  have  attacked  them,  they  were  all  gone  to
dinner,  and  we  found  the  cloth  laid  in  every  house  that  we
entered.  A  multitude  is  seldom  formidable,  unless  com-
manded by  some  officer  whom  they  hold  in  reverence  and
fear ;  yet  there  are  certain  hours  and  seasons  in  which  their
fury  is  terrible.

Before  this  assault  the  Liegeois  were  much  fatigued  and
dispirited,  as  well  for  the  loss  they  had  sustained  in  their  two
sallies  (in  which  all  their  chief  officers  were  slain),  as  i'or  the


158  THE  MEMOIRS OF  PHILIP DE COMMINEg. [1468.

great  pains  and  hard  service  which  they  had  endured  for  eight
days  successively  ;  for  nobody  was  exempted  from  being  upon
the  guard.  They  being  blocked  up  on  both  sides  (as  I  stated
before),  I  suppose  they  thought  that  Sunday  might  have  been
a  day  of  rest  to  them  (but  they  were  mightily  mistaken),
for  they  did  not  make  the  least  defence,  either  on  our  side,
or  on  the  other,  where  the  Burgundians  of  our  vanguard
made  their  attack,  and  entered  before  us*;  they  killed  but
fe\v,  for  the  people  fled  over  the  Maes  into  the  forest  of  Ar-
dennes, and  from  thence  into  such  places  of  refuge  as  they
thought  most  proper  to  secure  themselves  in.  On  that  side
of  the  town  where  I  was,  I  saw  but  three  men  and  one  woman
dead;  and  I  believe  there  were  not  above  200  killed
altogether,  the  rest  having  all  fled,  and  got  into  the  houses
or  churches  for  sanctuary.  The  king  marched  at  his  own
leisure  (for  he  saw  there  was  no  opposition),  and  the  army
(consisting  by  my  computation  of  about  40,000  men),  entered
at  both  ends  of  the  town.  The  duke,  having  advanced
a  good  way  into  the  city,  turned  back  to  meet  the  king,  con-
ducting him  as  far  as  the  palace,  and  then  returned  to  the
great  church  of  St.  Lambert,  into  which  his  soldiers  were
forcing  their  way  for  the  sake  both  of  the  prisoners  and  the
plunder ;  for  though  he  had  posted  a  battalion  of  his  guards
there  to  secure  the  church,  yet  the  soldiers  could  not  be
restrained,  but  fell  upon  them,  and  attempted  to  break  open
the  doors.  I  saw  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  kill  one  man  himself
at  his  arrival,  upon  which  the  soldiers  retreated,  and  the  church
was  preserved  for  that  time ;  but  at  length  all  the  men  that
had  fled  thither  for  sanctuary  were  made  prisoners,  and  all
the  furniture  was  taken  away.  The  rest  of  the  churches,  which
were  very  numerous  (for  I  have  h$ard  the  Lord  of  Humber-
court,  who  knew  the  town  very  well,  say,  that  there  were  as
many  masses  said  in  it  every  day  as  in  Rome),  were  most  of
them  plundered  under  pretence  of  searching  for  prisoners.  I
myself  was  in  none  but  the  great  church,  but  I  was  told  so,
and  saw  the  marks  of  it,  for  which  a  long  time  after  the  Pope
excommunicated  all  such  as  had  any  goods  belonging  to  the
churches  in  that  city,  unless  they  restored  them  ;  and  the
duke  appointed  certain  oificers  to  go  up  and  down  hia  country,

*  On  Sunday,  October  30.  1468.


1468.]  MISERIES OP THE LIEGEOIS.  159

to  see  the  Pope's  sentence  put  in  execution.  After  the  taking
and  plundering  the  city,  about  noon  the  duke  returned  to  the
palace;  the  king  had  dined  before  he  came,  but  expressed
much  joy  at  his  good  fortune,  and  highly  applauded  his  mag-
nanimity and  conduct ;  for  he  knew  well  enough  it  would
be  carried  to  the  duke,  and  he  had  in  his  heart  a  longing  de-
sire to  be  at  home  in  his  own  kingdom.  After  dinner  the
king  and  the  duke  were  very  merry  together,  and  if  the  king
had  been  lavish  in  his  commendations  behind  his  back,  he
extolled  his  actions  much  more  to  his  face,  and  the  duke  was
not  a  little  pleased  to  hear  it.

But  I  am  obliged  to  make  a  small  digression,  and  give  an
account  of  the  calamities  of  those  miserable  people  who  fled
out  of  the  town,  that  I  may  confirm  what  I  said  in  the
beginning  of  these  Memoirs,  when  I  spoke  of  the  misfortunes
and  dreadful  consequences  which  I  have  observed  to  follow
those  who  are  defeated  in  battle,  whether  king  or  prince,  or
any  other  potentate  whatever.

These  miserable  creatures  fled  through  the  country  of
Ardennes  with  their  wives  and  children.  A  gentleman  in
those  parts  (who  till  that  time  had  been  of  their  side),  fell
upon,  and  cut  off  a  great  party  of  them ;  and  to  ingratiate
himself  with  the  duke,  he  wrote  him  an  account  of  what  he
had  done,  and  represented  the  number  both  of  the  prisoners
and  slain  to  be  much  greater  than  in  reality  it  was,  though
indeed  it  was  very  great ;  but,  however,  he  made  his  own
peace  with  the  duke  by  that  action.  Others  fled  to  Mezieres,
which  is  a  French  town  upon  the  Maes.  Two  or  three  of
their  ringleaders  were  taken  and  presented  to  the  duke  (one
of  whom  was  named  Madoulet),  whom  he  ordered  immediately
to  be  put  to  death  ;  and  several  of  the  rest  died  with  hunger,
or  cold,  or  watching.


CHAP.  XIV.

How  King  Louis  returned  into  France  by  the  Consent  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy ;  and  how  the  Duke  treated  the  Ldegeois  and  the  People
of  Franchemont  afterwards.  —  1468.

ABOUT  four  or  five  days  after  the  taking  of  the  town,  the
king  began  to  employ  his  friends  about  the  duke,  to  propose


160  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1468.

his  return  into  France ;  and  he  himself  broke  the  matter  to
him  very  discreetly,  telling  him,  that  if  he  had  still  any  occa-
sion of  his  assistance,  he  should  freely  let  him  know  it  and  he
would  willingly  stay  longer,  but  that  if  his  presence  could  be
of  no  farther  importance,  he  desired  to  be  dismissed,  that  he
might  return  to  Paris,  and  see  the  peace  published  in  the
court  of  parliament.  *  (For  in  France  it  is  a  custom  that
all  treaties  of  peace  should  be  published  in  that  court,  or
otherwise  they  are  void,  though  indeed  the  king's  power  is
very  great.)  Besides,  he  desired  of  the  duke  that  they  might
have  another  interview  next  summer  in  Burgundy,  and  enjoy
the  conversation  of  one  another  for  a  month  together.  At
length  the  duke  consented  he  should  go,  yet  not  without
murmuring  a  little.  The  duke  ordered  the  articles  of  peace
to  be  read  to  the  king,  that,  if  he  repented  of  anything,
it  might  be  altered.  He  offered  it  likewise  to  his  choice,
whether  he  would  stand  to  it  or  not,  and  some  little  apology
he  made  for  his  bringing  him  thither.  He  desired  one  thing
more,  which  was,  that  the  king  would  permit  a  new  article  to
be  added  in  favour  of  the  Lord  du  Lau,  the  Lord  d'Urfe,  and
Poncet  de  Riviere  f»  ar>d  that  he  would  promise  that  the
lands  and  preferments,  which  they  had  enjoyed  before  the
war,  should  be  restored  to  them  again.  This  proposition  did
not  please  the  king  at  all,  for  he  thought  it  very  unreasonable
that  those  who  were  not  of  his  party  should  be  comprehended
in  the  peace.  Besides,  they  were  servants  to  the  Lord  Charles,
the  king's  brother,  and  not  to  the  king.  However,  the  king  re-
plied that  he  would  consent  to  it,  upon  condition  that  the  duke
would  do  the  same  for  the  Count  of  Nevers  }  and  the  Lord

*  The  treaty  of  Peronne  was  registered  by  the  Parliament  of  Paris  on
the  18th  of  May,  14691*.

f  The  Duke  of  Burgundy,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  did  not  insist  on
this  demand,  which  the  king  craftily  induced  him  to  abandon.  Two
years  later,  by  letters  granted  at  Angers  in  August,  1470,  Louis  granted
forgiveness  to  Pierre  d'Urfe  and  Poncet  de  Riviere  "  of  all  the  charges,
crime?,  offences,  and  malet'actions "  of  which  they  had  been  guilty  iu
contravention  of  his  authority.

J  John  of  Burgundy,  Count  of  Nevers,  Baron  of  Douzy,  Peer  of
France,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  and  Gorernor  of  Picardy,  was
born  on  the  25th  of  October,  1415.  He  was  the  son  of  Philip  II.,  Count
of  Nevers,  and  Bona  of  Artois.  He  died  on  the  25th  of  September,
1491.  Having  abandoned  the  house  of  Burgundy  to  enter  the  service


1468.]  THE  KING'S  DEPARTURE.  161

of  Croy ;  upon  which  answer  the  duke  pressed  it  no  farther.
This  answer  of  the  king's  was  looked  upon  to  be  a  very  wise
one,  for  the  duke  hated  those  two  gentlemen,  so  that  he  would
never  consent  to  their  restoration.  In  all  the  rest,  the  king
told  the  duke  he  would  alter  nothing,  but  confirm  whatever
had  been  sworn  at  Peronne.  In  this  manner  his  departure
was  agreed  on,  and  the  king  took  his  leave  of  the  duke  *,  who
conducted  him  about  half  a  league,  but  at  their  last  departure
the  king  said  to  him,  "If  my  brother,  who  is  in  Bretagne,
should  not  be  satisfied  with  the  appanage,  which  for  your  sake
I  have  given  him,  what  would  you  have  me  do  ?  "  The  duke
hastily  replied,  without  considering  what  he  said,  "  If  he
should  not,  it  is  your  part  to  see  him  satisfied,  but  I  shall
leave  that  to  yourselves."  From  which  question  and  answer
important  actions  did  afterwards  proceed,  as  you  shall  hear
in  the  proper  place.

The  king  departed  extremely  well  pleased,  and  was  con-
ducted by  the  Lords  des  Cordes,  and  d'Aimeries  f  (Grand
Bailiff  of  Hainault)  out  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  territories,
who  himself  continued  at  Liege.  $  That  city  indeed  was
barbarously  treated,  but  they  had  used  his  subjects  with  the
same  cruelty  ever  since  his  grandfather's  time,  never  keeping
any  promise,  nor  observing  any  peace  that  they  made ;  and
it  was  now  the  fifth  year  that  the  duke  had  been  there  in
person,  and  made  peace  with  them  every  time,  and  the  next
year  they  would  be  sure  to  break  it.  Besides  they  had  stood
excommunicated  a  long  time  for  their  insolence  to  their  bishop;
yet  they  could  never  be  restrained,  nor  brought  to  receive
the  commands  of  the  Church  with  either  reverence  or
obedience.

As  soon  as  the  king  was  gone,  the  duke  resolved  (with  a
small  detachment  of  his  forces),  to  march  into  the  country  of

of  Louis  XL,  he  obtained  pardon  from  his  uncle  Duke  Philip,  after  the
peace  of  Conflans,  by  the  cession  of  various  estates  and  lordships  which
he  held  in  his  dominions.

*  On  Wednesday,  November  2.  1468.

f  Antoine  Rolin,  Lord  of  Emeris,  and  Governor  of  Hainault,  was  the
son  of  Nicholas,  Lord  of  Emeris,  and  Marie  de  Landes.  His  wife  was  a
sister  of  the  Count  d'Estampes.  He  was  one  of  the  conservators  of  the
peace  of  Senlis  for  the  marches  of  Hainault.

t  Until  the  9th  of  November.

M


162  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES. [1468.

Franchemont,  which  is  steep,  hilly,  full  of  woods,  and  lies  a
little  beyond  Liege,  from  whence  the  best  soldiers  which  they
had,  came,  and  particularly  those  who  made  that  desperate
sally  which  I  mentioned  before.  Before  the  duke  left  the  city,
a  great  number  of  those  poor  creatures,  who  had  hid  themselves
in  the  houses  when  the  town  was  taken,  and  were  afterwards
made  prisoners,  were  drowned.  He  also  resolved  to  burn  the
city,  which  had  always  been  very  populous  ;  and  orders  were
given  for  firing  it  in  three  different  places,  and  3000  or
4000  foot  of  the  country  of  Limbourg  (who  were  their
neighbours,  and  used  the  same  habit  and  language),  were
commanded  to  effect  this  desolation,  but  to  secure  the  churches.
The  first  thing  they  did  was  to  demolish  a  great  bridge  over
the  River  Maes ;  then  a  strong  body  was  appointed  to  protect
such  houses  of  the  canons  as  were  near  the  great  church,  that
they  might  have  lodging  and  convenience  for  the  performing
of  divine  service.  Other  parties  were  likewise  ordered  for
the  preservation  of  the  rest  of  the  churches.  All  things  being
thus  ordered,  the  duke  began  his  march  into  the  country  of
Franchemont :  he  was  no  sooner  out  of  the  town,  but  imme-
diately we  saw  a  great  number  of  houses  on  fire  beyond  the
river  ;  the  duke  lay  that  night  four  leagues  from  the  city,  yet
we  could  hear  the  noise  as  distinctly  as  if  we  had  been  upon
the  spot ;  but  whether  it  was  the  wind  which  lay  that  way,
or  our  quartering  upon  the  river  that  was  the  cause  of  it,  I
know  not.  The  next  day  the  duke  marched  on,  and  those
who  were  left  in  the  town  continued  the  conflagration  ac-
cording to  their  orders*:  but  all  the  churches  (except  some
few)  were  preserved,  and  above  300  houses  belonging  to
the  priests  and  officers  of  the  churches,  which  was  the  reason
it  was  so  soon  re-inhabited,  for  many  flocked  thither  to  live
with  the  priests.

The  cold  and  frost  were  so  violent,  that  the  greatest  part  of
the  duke's  detachment  was  forced  to  march  on  foot  into  the  coun-
try of  Franchemont,  which  has  no  walled  towns,  but  consists
wholly  in  villages.  The  duke  lay  still  five  or  six  days  in  a

*  "When  the  duke  left  Liege,  "  he  established  there  a  captain  named
Messire  Frederic  de  Withem,  who  remained  there  about  fourteen  days,
and  destroyed  the  city  entirely  by  fire,  after  it  had  been  pillaged."
Gachard,  i.  203.


1468.] DESTRUCTION  AND  PLUNDER  OF  FRANCHEMONT. 163

little  village  called  Polleur*( which  stands  in  a  small  valley)  ;
he  divided  his  forces  into  two  bodies  for  the  speedier  de-
struction of  the  country :  his  orders  were  to  burn  all  the  houses,
break  down  all  their  iron  mills  (which  were  the  greatest  part
of  their  livelihood),  and  search  about  among  the  woods  for
such  of  the  poor  people  as  had  with  their  goods  run  thither  to
hide  themselves,  of  whom  many  were  killed,  and  made  pri-
soners ;  and  the  soldiers  got  good  store  of  plunder.  In  this
march  I  saw  incredible  effects  of  the  severity  of  the  cold  :  one
gentleman  lost  the  use  of  his  foot,  and  never  recovered  it  again.
A  page  had  two  of  his  fingers  drop  off  with  extremity  of
cold.  I  saw  a  woman  and  her  new-born  child  starved  to
death  with  it.  For  three  days  together  the  duke's  attendants
could  get  no  wine  but  what  they  cut  out  with  a  hatchet;  for
it  was  frozen  in  the  pipes,  and  the  ice  being  thick  and  entire,
they  were  forced  to  cut  it  out  in  pieces,  which  they  carried
away  in  their  hats  and  baskets  as  they  thought  fit.  I  could
tell  other  strange  stories  of  this  nature,  which  would  be  tedious
to  write  ;  but  we,  in  short,  were  starved  out  of  that  country,
and  forced  (after  we  had  been  there  eight  days)  to  march
back  with  all  expedition  to  Namur,  and  from  thence  into
Brabant  f,  where  the  duke  was  received  with  joy.


CHAP.  XV.

Of  the  King  of  France's  Subtilty,  by  which  he  prevailed  with  his
Brother  Duke  Charles,  to  accept  of  the  Duchy  of  Guienne,  in  lieu  of
Brie  and  Champagne,  and  contrary  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  Inten-
tion.— 1468-69.

THE  king,  having  taken  his  leave  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  re-
turned with  great  joy  into  his  own  kingdom,  not  in  the  least
complaining  of  his  usage  either  at  Peronne  or  Liege,  but  bear-
ing all  things  patiently,  at  least,  in  appearance ;  yet,  for  all  that,

*  He  arrived  there  on  the  14th  of  October,  and  resumed  his  journey
on  the  17th.

f  On  the  20th  of  November,  he  slept  at  Landen,  in  Brabant. Lenglet,
ii.  193.

si  2


164  THE MEMOIRS  OF  PHILIP  DE COM  JUNES. [1468.

great  wars  arose  afterwards  between  them,  but  not  presently,
nor  was  that  the  cause  which  I  mentioned  before  (though  it
might  "have  contributed  towards  it);  for  the  conditions  of  peace
•were  much  the  same  as  if  the  king  had  freely  signed  it  at
Paris.  But,  by  the  advice  of  his  officers,  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy was  encouraged  to  extend  the  bounds  of  his  dominions,
and  great  artifice  was  used  to  have  it  done  secretly  —  of
which  I  shall  speak  in  due  time.

Lord  Charles  of  France,  the  king's  only  brother,  and  lately
Duke  of  Normandy,  being  informed  of  the  treaty  of  Peronne,
and  of  the  proportion  which  he  was  to  have  thereby,  sent  pre-
sently to  the  king  to  desire  his  majesty  would  accomplish  the
treaty,  and  grant  him  the  investiture  of  those  countries  he  had
promised  to  give  him.  The  king  sent  to  him  again,  and
several  messages  passed  between  them.  The  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy sent  also  an  ambassador  to  the  Lord  Charles,  to  desire
him  not  to  accept  of  any  other  appanage  but  Champagne  and
Brie,  since  they  were  granted  upon  his  interposition.  He  also
reminded  him  of  the  friendship  which  he  had  always  shown
him,  and  that  even  when  he  had  deserted  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, the  duke  could  not  be  tempted  to  retaliate  as  he  had
observed  others  had  done,  but  had  comprehended  the  Duke
of  Bretagne  in  the  treaty  of  peace  as  his  ally* ;  besides,  he
ordered  his  agents  to  acquaint  him,  that  the  situation  of
Champagne  and  Brie  was  very  commodious  for  them  both,  arid
if  the  king  should  ever  attempt  to  resume  his  gift,  in  a  day's
time  he  might  have  succours  out  of  Burgundy,  for  those  coun-
tries were  contiguous ;  besides,  all  the  taxes,  subsidies,  and
revenues,  would  accrue  wholly  to  him,  and  nothing  to  the
king,  but  the  bare  homage  and  sovereignty.

This  Lord  Charles  of  France  was  a  person  who  did  little
or  nothing  of  himself,  but  in  all  things  was  governed  and
managed  by  other  people,  though  he  was  then  above  twenty-
five  years  of  age.  In  this  manner  that  winter  passed,  being
half  spent  before  the  king  left  us.  Messengers  were  passing
continually  about  this  appanage.  The  king  resolved  upon  no
terms  to  suffer  his  brother  to  enjoy  what  he  had  promised,

*  The  Duke  of  Bretagne  is  not  mentioned  by  name  in  any  of  the
articles  of  the  treaty  of  Peronne  ;  but  perhaps  he  must  be  considered  as
implicitly  included  in  the  clause  which  concerns  the  allies  of  the  Duke
of  Burgundy.


1469.]  LORD CHARLES  ACCEPTS GUIENNE.  165

for  he  did  not  like  that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  he  should
be  such  near  neighbours.  Whereupon  the  king  proposed  to
the  Lord  Charles  to  accept  of  Guienne  and  La  Rochelle
(which  is  almost  all  Aquitaine,  and  more  valuable  than  Brie
and  Champagne).  Charles  was  afraid  of  disobliging  the  Duke
of  Burgundy ;  he  feared  also  that  if  he  should  comply,  and
the  king  afterwards  not  stand  to  his  word,  he  should  lose
friend  and  fortune  both,  and  leave  himself  nothing  to  depend
upon.

The  king  (  who  in  such  affairs  was  the  wisest  prince  of
that  age),  perceiving  that  he  would  lose  time,  unless  he  could
make  interest  with  some  of  those  who  were  in  credit  with
his  brother,  addressed  himself  to  Odet  de  Rye,  Lord  of  Lescut,
and  since  *  Count  of  Comminges  (who  was  born  and  mar-
ried in  the  country  of  Guienne),  desiring  him  that  he  would
be  pleased  to  use  his  interest  with  his  master  to  persuade  him
to  accept  of  that  for  his  appanage  ;  it  being  much  larger  and
of  a  greater  revenue  than  what  he  demanded ;  which  would
be  the  only  means  to  make  them  live  in  perfect  peace  and
harmony  together  like  good  friends  and  brothers,  and  for
which  all  his  servants  would  reap  no  inconsiderable  advantage,
but  more  particularly  himself ;  and,  as  to  the  investiture,  he
was  ready  to  grant  it  him  presently.  The  Lord  Charles
being  wheedled  and  cajoled  in  this  way,  was  easily  persuaded
to  accept  of  Guienne  f,  to  the  great  dissatisfaction  of  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  and  his  ambassadors  in  France.  Car-
dinal Balue,  Bishop  of  Angers,  and  the  Bishop  of  Verdun  J,
were  arrested  and  imprisoned,  because  the  cardinal  had  writ-
ten to  the  Duke  of  Guienne  not  to  accept  of  any  other  share

*  In  1472. See  note,  book  i.  chap.  6.

f  The  treaty  of  exchange  is  dated  in  April,  1469.

j  Guillaume  de  Haraucourt,  son  of  Gerard  de  Haraucourt,  Seneschal
of  Barrois,  was  elected  Bishop  of  Verdun  on  the  14th  of  October,  1456,
and  took  possession  of  his  see  on  the  10th  of  August  following.  Possessed
of  the  most  brilliant  qualities,  and  supported  by  the  credit  of  Cardinal
Balue,  he  met  with  a  favourable  reception  from  Louis  XL,  to  whom  he
rendered  important  services.  Subsequently  becoming  involved  in  the
cardinal's  disgrace,  Guillaume  de  Haraucourt  was  arrested,  and  confined
in  that  iron  cage,  the  invention  of  which  is  ascribed  to  him  by  Commines,
book  vi.  chap.  12.  He  was  kept  a  prisoner  for  fifteen  years,  and  died  on
February  20.  1500.

H  3


166  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1469.

than  that  which  was  assigned  to  him  by  the  treaty  at  Peronne,
which  the  king  had  promised  and  sworn  to  observe.  Besides,
he  added  several  other  arguments  to  induce  him  to  it,  which
were  directly  contrary  to  the  king's  designs.  So  the  Lord
Charles  of  France  was  created  Duke  of  Guienne  in  the  year
1469,  and  put  into  peaceable  possession  of  that  country,  with
the  government  of  La  Rochelle ;  after  which  the  king  and  he
had  a  meeting*,  and  conversed  together  a  long  time.

*  On  the  8th  of  September,  1469.


1470.] THE  KING'S  INTRIGUES  AGAINST  THE  DUKE. 107


BOOK  THE  THIRD.


CH.  I. — How  the  King  took  an  occasion  of  making  a  new  "War  upon  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  ;  and  of  his  sending  as  far  as  Ghent  to  summon
him  to  appear,  by  a  Serjeant  of  the  Parliament.  — 1470.

IN  the  year  1470,  the  king,  having  a  fair  opportunity,  as  he
thought,  resolved  to  be  revenged  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
and  secretly  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  towns  upon  the
River  Somme,  as  Amiens,  St.  Quentin,  and  Abbeville,  to
forsake  the  duke,  and  admit  some  of  his  troops  into  their  gar-
risons; for  it  is  always  the  custom  of  great  princes  (especially
if  they  be  wise),  to  seek  out  some  fair  pretence  or  other  to
cover  their  designs.  In  order  to  your  better  understanding
the  intrigues  and  artifices  of  the  French  court  in  this  kind
of  transactions,  I  will  give  a  relation  of  the  whole  ma-
nagement of  this  affair;  for  the  king  and  duke  were  both  of
them  deceived,  and  a  very  bloody  and  cruel  war  commenced
upon  it,  which  lasted  thirteen  or  fourteen  years.  The  king
indeed  had  a  great  desire  to  excite  those  towns  to  rebel,  and
set  up  his  standard,  upon  pretence  that  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy had  extended  the  bounds  of  his  dominions  farther  than
the  treaty  would  bear.  Upon  this  account  several  envoys
and  ambassadors  were  sent  from  one  court  to  the  other,  back-
ward and  forward,  who  passed  and  re-passed  through  these
towns,  and  proposed  and  drove  on  their  several  bargains  very
securely,  there  being  no  garrisons  in  these  towns  ;  for  the
whole  kingdom  of  France,  as  well  on  that  side  towards  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  dominions,  as  on  the  other  towards  the
Duke  of  Bretagne's,  was  in  perfect  peace,  and  the  Duke  of  Gui-
enne  was  to  all  appearance  in  great  friendship  with  the  king.

51 4


168  THE MEMO  IKS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1470.

However,  the  king  had  no  design  to  commence  a  war  purely
to  repossess  himself  of  one  or  two  of  those  towns,  and  no
more ;  but  his  intention  was  to  raise  a  universal  rebellion  in
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  dominions,  hoping,  by  that  means,
to  make  himself  master  of  all  his  country.

Many  persons,  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the  king,
undertook  the  management  of  these  secret  negotiations,  and
reported  them  much  forwarder  than  he  really  found  them ;
one  promised  him  one  town,  and  another  another  town,  and
that  they  had  bargained  for  them  all;  but  had  the  king's
designs  reached  no  farther  than  the  events  which  succeeded
(though  indeed  he  had  cause  to  complain  of  his  treatment  at
Peronne),  he  would  not  have  violated  the  peace,  nor  involved
himself  in  a  new  war;  for  he  had  published  the  peace  at
Paris*  three  months  after  his  return  into  his  kingdom;  and
he  began  his  enterprise  not  without  some  fear  and  caution  ;
but  the  violent  desires  he  had  to  it,  at  last  prevailed  over  his
timorousness,  and  he  was  spurred  on  to  it  by  some  of  his
courtiers.

The  Count  of  St.  Paul,  a  very  wise  man,  and  Constable  of
France,  with  several  of  the  Duke  of  Guienne's  servants  and
others,  earnestly  desired  a  war  between  those  two  great
princes,  rather  than  peace,  and  that  for  two  reasons : — The
first  was,  that  they  were  afraid  their  great  revenues  would  be
lessened,  if  the  peace  should  continue ;  for  the  constable  had
400  men-at-arms  or  lances,  paid  every  muster,  without  any
comptroller,  and  above  30,000  francs  a-year,  besides  the
salary  of  his  office,  and  the  profits  of  several  good  places
which  he  had  in  his  possession.  The  other  was,  because  they
had  observed  and  talked  among  themselves,  that  the  nature
of  the  king  was  such,  that  unless  he  was  at  war  with  some
foreign  prince,  he  would  certainly  find  some  quarrel  or  other
at  home  with  his  servants,  domestics,  and  officers ;  for  his
mind  must  always  be  working.  Prompted  by  these  specious
arguments,  they  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  king  to  com-
mence the  war;  and  the  constable  promised  to  take  St.  Quentin
whenever  he  pleased,  for  his  lands  lay  near  it ;  and  he  boasted
much  of  his  great  intelligence  in  Brabant  and  Flanders,  and

"  The  peace  was  published  at  Paris  on  Saturday,  November  19.  1468.
See  Lenglet,  ii.  78.


1470.]  THE ESTATES ASSEMBLE AT TOURS.  169

that  he  could  induce  several  of  those  towns  to  revolt  against
the  Duke  of  Burgundy.

The  Duke  of  Guienne  being  of  the  same  opinion,  all  his
principal  governors  otfered  the  king  their  services,  and
promised  him  to  bring  along  with  them  400  or  500  men-at-
arms,  whom  the  Duke  of  Guienne  kept  constantly  in  pay  ;  but
their  design  was  not  as  the  king  took  it,  but  quite  contrary,
as  you  will  see  hereafter.

The  king  was  always  wont  to  proceed  gravely  and  solemnly
in  all  actions  of  importance,  and  therefore  he  convoked  the
three  Estates  at  Tours  in  the  months  of  March  and  April,
1470*  (a  thing  which  he  had  never  done  beforef ,  nor  ever
did  afterwards),  but  he  summoned  only  such  persons  as  he
thought  would  not  oppose  his  designs.  In  this  assembly  he
complained  of  several  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  enterprises
and  practices  against  his  crown ;  he  ordered  the  Count  d'Eu
to  bring  in  a  complaint  against  the  duke  for  detaining  from
him  St.  Vallery  and  other  towns  belonging  to  the  jurisdiction
of  Abbeville  and  the  county  of  Ponthieu,  without  giving  the
Count  d'Eu  any  reason  or  satisfaction;  pretending  only  he
did  it  by  way  of  reprisals  for  a  merchant-man  of  Flanders,
which  had  been  taken  by  a  small  man-of-war  belonging  to
Eu ;  for  which  the  Count  d'Eu  offered  to  make  reparation.
Besides,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  wished  to  oblige  the  Count
d'Eu  to  do  him  homage,  and  swear  fealty  to  him  against  all
persons  whatever ;  which  he  would  never  consent  to  do,  it  being
against  the  honour  and  authority  of  the  king.  In  this
assembly  there  were  present  several  lawyers,  as  well  of  the
parliament  as  elsewhere ;  by  all  of  whom  it  was  concluded,  ac-

*  The  declaration  of  Louis  XL  against  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  dated
December  3.  1470,  was  the  result  of  all  the  deliberations  of  this  assembly.
After  enumerating  all  his  grievances  against  the  duke,  and  declaring
that  he  would  no  longer  tolerate  his  outrageous  conduct,  "  we  have,"  he
says,  •'  in  order  to  proceed  in  so  great,  a  matter  with  mature  and  due
deliberation,  assembled  in  our  city  of  Tours,  certain  of  the  princes  and
lords  of  our  blood,  prelates,  counts,  barons,  and  other  nobles,  and  notable
members  of  our  council."  The  opinion  of  this  assembly  was,  that  the
king  was  free  and  discharged  from  the  promises  he  had  made  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  by  the  treaty  of  Peronne  and  other  treaties,  and  that
the  lands  and  lordships  of  the  duke  should  be  confiscated  to  him.
Lenglet,  iii.  68.

f  Commines  is  in  error  on  this  point.  The  Estates  had  met  at
Tours  in  1467,  from  the  6th  to  the  14th  of  April.  See  Lenglet,  ii.  71.


170  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1470.

cording  to  the  intention  of  the  king,  that  a  day  should  be
appointed,  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  summoned  to  appear
in  person  before  the  Parliament  at  Paris.  The  king  knew
very  well  his  answer  would  be  insolent,  or  that  he  would  do
something  or  other  against  the  authority  of  that  court,  which
would  give  him  a  more  plausible  pretence  of  declaring  war
against  him.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy  received  his  summons  in  Ghent
from  the  hands  of  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Parliament,  as  he
was  going  to  mass  ;  he  was  much  surprised,  and  highly
offended  at  it,  and  ordered  the  officer  to  be  taken  into  cus-
tody, where  he  remained  several  days,  but  at  length  he  was
dismissed.

You  see  the  measures  that  were  concerted  for  the  invasion
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  territories  ;  who,  having  intel-
ligence of  it,  immediately  enlisted  great  numbers  of  men,
but  at  half-pay  (as  they  called  it),  who  were  to  be  ready  in
arms  at  their  houses  upon  the  first  summons.  However,
they  were  mustered  constantly  once  a  month,  and  received
their  pay.

In  this  posture  affairs  continued  for  three  or  four  months  ;
but  the  duke  growing  weary  of  the  expense,  disbanded  his
soldiers  ;  for  the  king  having  sent  several  embassies  to  him,
he  began  to  think  the  storm  was  blown  over,  and  retired  into
Holland.  He  had  now  no  soldiers  in  pay,  ready  to  be
employed  upon  any  occasion,  nor  garrisons  in  his  frontier
towns,  which  was  greatly  to  his  disadvantage,  by  reason  of
the  designs  on  foot  for  bringing  over  Amiens,  Abbeville,  and
St.  Quentin  to  the  king.  While  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was
in  Holland,  John,  late  Duke  of  Bourbon*,  gave  him  notice,
that  in  a  short  time  a  war  would  break  out  against  him,  as
well  in  Burgundy  as  Picardy,  for  the  king  had  great  intelli-
gence both  in  those  provinces  and  in  his  household.  The
Duke  of  Burgundy  being  wholly  unprovided  with  troops
(having  disbanded  his  army,  as  I  said  before),  was  much
alarmed  at  this  news ;  upon  which  he  passed  immediately
into  Artois  by  sea,  and  went  straight  to  Hesdin.f  There
he  began  to  find  out  the  secret  intrigues  of  some  of  his

*  He  died  in  1488. See  note,  book  i.  chap.  2.
•f  The  duke  arrived  at  Hesdin  on  the  2nd  of  August, 1470,  and
remained  there  five  months  and  a  half.


1471.] INVASION OF THE DUKE'S TERRITORIES.  171

officers,  and  the  transactions  which  were  being  managed
privately  in  the  above-mentioned  towns.  At  first  he  could
not  be  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  it,  so  that  it  was  some  time
before  he  would  be  convinced  of  their  treachery  ;  but  at
length  he  sent  for  two  of  the  principal  citizens  of  Amiens,
whom  he  suspected  to  have  a  hand  in  those  secret  negoti-
ations ;  yet  they  excused  themselves  so  handsomely,  that  he
suffered  them  to  depart.  Not  long  after  this  some  of  the
duke's  household  revolted  from  him,  and  went  over  to  the
king,  as  the  Bastard  Baudouin*,  and  several  others  f;  which
made  him  fearful  lest  more  should  follow  their  example.
To  prevent  the  worst,  he  issued  a  proclamation,  requiring
all  his  people  to  be  immediately  in  arms  ;  but  few  obeyed  it,
for  winter  was  approaching,  and  the  duke  had  not  been
many  days  arrived  from  Holland.


CH.  IT. — Of  the  Delivering  up  the  Towns  of  St.  Quentin  and  Amiens  to
the  King  ;  and  upon  what  grounds  the  Constable  and  others  fomented
the  War  between  the  King  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy. — 1471.

Two  days  after  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  servants  had
deserted  him  (which  was  in  December,  1470),  the  Constable
of  France  entered  St.  Quentin  :f,  and  forced  the  inhabitants
to  take  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  king.  Then  the  duke  began
to  discern  the  ill  posture  of  his  affairs;  for  he  had  sent  all
his  officers  to  raise  men  in  his  own  countries.  However,
with  those  few  he  could  get  together,  and  about  400  or  500
horse,  he  marched  to  Dourlans  §,  intending  to  secure  Amiens,

*  Baudoin,  Bastard  of  Burgundy,  knight,  councillor  and  chamber-
lain of  Duke  Philip,  was  Lord  of  Falais,  Bredain  and  Sommerdyk.  He
was  a  natural  son  of  Philip  the  Good,  by  Catherine  de  Tiesferies.  He
died  in  1508.

•f  The  others  were,  Jean  Darsson,  pantler  to  Duke  Charles,  and  Jean
de  Chassa,  his  chamberlain  ;  who,  with  the  Bastard  Baudoin,  were
accused  of  entertaining  designs  against  the  duke's  life.

|  On  the  10th  of  December,  1470. Lenglet,  ii.  88.

§  He  arrived  at  Doullens  on  the  17th  of  January,  1471,  and  remained
there  until  the  3rd  of  February.


172  THE MEMOIRS  OF  PHILIP  DE  COMMIXES.  [H7l.

and  keep  it  from  revolting  ;  but  he  had  not  been  there  many
days  before  Amiens  began  to  tre'at,  for  the.  king's  army  being
not  far  off,  invested  the  town,  but  was  refused  entrance  for
some  time,  because  there  was  still  a  small  party  left  in  it  for
the  duke,  who  had  sent  his  quarter-master  thither,  and  if  he
had  had  a  sufficient  number  of  troops  with  him  to  have
entered  in  person,  that  town  had  never  been  lost ;  but  with
the  small  brigade  he  had,  he  durst  not  venture  himself  in  it,
though  he  was  much  pressed  by  several  of  the  townsmen.

As  soon  as  those  of  the  king's  party  perceived  he  was
afraid,  and  not  strong  enough  to  trust  himself  in  the  town,
they  put  their  plans  in  execution,  and  received  a  garrison  of
the  king's  troops.*  Those  of  Abbeville  intended  to  have
done  the  same,  but  the  Lord  des  Cordes  got  in  for  the  duke,
and  prevented  their  design.  From  Amiens  to  Dourlans  is
but  live  short  leagues  f  ;  so  that  upon  the  news  that  Amiens
had  declared  for  the  king,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  forced
to  retire  with  great  precipitation  and  alarm  to  Arras  J,  fear-
ing lest  other  places  should  do  the  like,  and  seeing  himself
surrounded  by  the  friends  and  relations  of  the  constable.
Besides,  the  revolt  of  the  Bastard  Baudouin  made  him  enter-
tain a  jealousy  of  the  great  Bastard  of  Burgundy,  his
natural  brother.  However,  by  degrees,  troops  came  in  to  him ;
and  the  king  now  thought  himself  master  of  his  designs,  for
he  believed  whatever  the  constable  and  the  rest  had  told  him
of  their  intelligences  all  over  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  domi-
nions ;  and  had  it  not  been  in  hopes  it  would  have  proved  true,
that  enterprise  had  never  been  undertaken.

But  it  is  now  high  time  for  me  to  declare  what  it  was  that
moved  the  constable,  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  and  their  prin-
cipal ministers  (notwithstanding  the  many  good  offices,  the
supplies,  and  honourable  dealing  which  the  Duke  of  Guienne
had  received  from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy),  and  what  ad-
vantage they  proposed  to  themselves  by  fomenting  the  war

*  The  town  of  Amiens  surrendered  to  the  Count  of  Commartin,
Grand  Master  of  France,  and  lieutenant  of  the  king,  on  the  31st  of
January,  1471.

f  The  distance  between  Amiens  and  Doullens  is  33  kilometers,  about
24  miles.

|  He  arrived  at  Arras  on  the  5th  of  February,  and  remained  there
until  the  10th.  Lenglet,  ii.  197.


1471.]  DESIGNS  OF THE DUKE OF GUIENNE.  173

between  these  two  great  princes,  who  were  then  in  peace  in
their  several  provinces.  I  have  said  something  of  it  before,
that  it  was  to  secure  their  pensions  and  employments,  lest
the  king,  having  no  wars  abroad,  should  either  take  them
away,  or  retrench  them.  But  this  was  not  the  chief  cause.
The  Duke  of  Guienne  and  his  party  had  passionately  desired
a  match  between  him  and  the  sole  daughter*  and  heiress  of
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  (for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  no
sons.)  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  been  often  solicited  in
this  business,  and  always  gave  them  hopes,  but  would  never
suffer  it  to  be  concluded,  and  indeed  entertained  propositions
from  other  persons,  f  It  is  worth  our  observation  to  consider
what  artifices  these  persons  used  to  arrive  at  their  designs,
and  force  the  duke  to  give  his  daughter  to  the  Duke  of
Guienne.  As  soon  as  those  two  towns  had  revolted,  and  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  was  returned  to  Arras  (where  he  was
raising  what  forces  he  could),  the  Duke  of  Guienne  sent  an
envoy  privately  to  him,  with  only  three  lines  under  his  own
hand  (folded  as  close  as  was  possible,  and  made  up  in  a  piece
of  soft  wax)  containing  these  words,  "  Endeavour  what  you
can  to  reconcile  yourself  to  your  subjects  ;  for  other  things
take  no  care ;  for  you  will  be  sure  to  find  friends  enough."

The  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  at  first  was  extremely
alarmed,  immediately  despatched  a  messenger  to  the  con-
stable, to  entreat  him  that  he  would  not  pursue  his  ad-
vantages, and  do  him  so  much  mischief  as  he  knew  was  in
his  power,  since  the  war  was  begun  without  any  proclama-
tion. The  constable  was  not  a  little  pleased  with  this
message,  supposing  he  had  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  now  at
his  beck,  and  could  manage  him  as  he  pleased :  he  returned
him  this  answer,  that  he  was  sensible  his  affairs  were  in
very  great  danger,  and  that  he  knew  but  one  remedy  left,
which  was  to  marry  his  daughter  to  the  Duke  of  Guienne  ;


*  Mary  of  Burgundy,  daughter  of  Charles  the  Bold  and  Isabel  of
Bourbon,  was  born  on  the  13th  of  February,  1457,  married  the  Archduke
Maximilian  on  the  20th  of  August,  1477,  and  died  on  the  27th  of  March,
1482.

f  Mary  was  successively  promised  by  her  father :  1.  to  Nicholas,
Duke  of  "Calabria  ;  2.  to  Philibert,  Duke  of  Savoy  ;  3.  to  the  Arch-
duke Maximilian  ;  4.  to  the  Duke  of  Berry  ;  and  5.  to  the  Dauphin
Charles.


174  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1471.

for  by  so  doing  he  would  be  abundantly  supplied  with  men,
and  the  Duke  of  Guienne  and  several  other  great  lorda
would  declare  for  him,  and  he  himself  would  deliver  up  St.
Quentin,  and  become  of  their  party ;  but  without  the  con-
summation of  that  marriage,  nothing  was  to  be  expected ;  for
the  king  was  very  powerful,  had  his  affairs  well  managed,
and  held  great  intelligence  in  the  whole  territory  of  Burgundy.
He  also  made  use  of  several  other  expressions  to  augment  the
duke's  fears.  I  never  knew  any  man  come  to  a  good  end
that  took  pleasure  in  frightening  his  master,  or  keeping  him
in  subjection,  or  indeed  any  other  great  prince  whom  he  had
occasion  to  treat  with,  as  you  shall  see  afterwards  in  the  ex-
ample of  the  constable ;  for  though  the  king  was  his  master
at  that  time,  yet  his  children,  and  the  greatest  part  of  his
estate,  lay  in  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  dominions.  However,
it  was  always  his  method,  by  making  them  afraid  of  one
another,  to  keep  both  of  them  in  awe ;  which  at  last  fell
heavy  upon  himself.  And  as  it  is  natural  for  all  people
to  endeavour  to  free  themselves  from  fear  and  subjection,
and  often  hate  those  that  keep  them  in  that  bondage,  so
none  do  it  with  more  eagerness  and  revenge  than  princes,
of  whom  I  never  knew  any  that  did  not  pursue,  with  a
mortal  and  implacable  hatred,  all  who  attempted  to  use  them
so.

After  the  delivery  of  the  constable's  answer  to  the  Duke
of  Burgundy,  he  found  nothing  of  friendship  was  to  be  ex-
pected from  him,  but  that  he  was  the  contriver  and  principal
manager  of  the  war ;  upon  which  he  conceived  a  mortal
hatred  for  him,  which  could  never  after  be  extinguished,
especially  when  he  reflected  that  his  remonstrances  of  danger
tended  to  no  other  end,  but  to  constrain  him  to  the  marriage
of  his  daughter.  In  the  meantime  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
had  recollected  himself  in  some  measure,  and  assembled  a
considerable  army.  By  the  messages  which  were  sent,  first
from  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  and  afterwards  from  the  con-
stable, it  is  plain  the  whole  business  was  premeditated ;  for,
not  long  after,  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  wrote  to  him  in  the
same,  or  more  terrible  language ;  and  suffered  the  Lord  of
Lescut  to  put  himself  into  the  king's  service,  with  100
of  his  Breton  men-at-arms ;  so  that  it  may  be  easily  con-
cluded this  war  was  undertaken  to  force  the  Duke  of  Bur-


1471.]  THE DUKE TAKES THE FIELD.  175

gundy  to  consent  to  that  match.  The  king  was  deceived  when
he  was  put  upon  it;  and  the  story  of  their  intelligence  in  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  country  was  utterly,  or  to  a  great  extent,
false.  However,  during  this  whole  expedition,  the  king  was
served  faithfully  by  the  constable,  who  mortally  hated  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  because  he  knew  that  the  duke  had  no
affection  for  him.  The  Duke  of  Guienne  also  served  the
king  very  honestly  in  this  war,  with  a  considerable  body  of
troops,  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  affairs  were  in  a  danger-
ous condition ;  yet  if,  in  the  beginning  of  this  rupture,  the
duke  (as  I  said  before)  would  have  consented  to  the  marriage
of  her  daughter  with  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  all  the  above-
mentioned  great  lords  would  have  abandoned  the  king,  and
employed  all  their  power  and  interest  against  him  ;  but  it  is
in  vain  for  man  to  determine  in  these  cases,  for  God  Al-
mighty ever  executes  as  he  pleases.


CH.  III. —  How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  took  Picquigny  ;  and  the  means
he  found  out  to  make  a  Truce  with  the  King  for  a  Year,  to  the  great
Dissatisfaction  of  the  Constable  of  France — 1471.

You  have  already  been  sufficiently  informed  of  the  motives
of  this  war,  and  that  the  two  princes  were  at  first  deluded,
and  invaded  one  another  without  understanding  the  true
grounds  of  the  quarrel ;  which  is  a  convincing  argument  of
the  marvellous  subtilty  of  those  that  managed  that  affair,
and  confirms  the  old  saying,  That  one  half  of  the  world  does
not  know  what  the  other  is  doing.  But  all  these  passages
which  I  have  mentioned  happened  in  a  very  little  space  of
time  ;  for,  in  less  than  a  fortnight  after  the  taking  of  Amiens,
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  took  the  field  near  Arras  (for  he  re-
tired no  farther),  and  marched  afterwards  towards  the  Somme,
directly  to  Picquigny.  As  he  was  upon  his  march,  a
messenger  (no  better  than  a  footman)  came  to  him  from  the
Duke  of  Bretagne,  who  told  him  from  his  master,  that  the
king  had  acquainted  him  with  much  of  his  affairs,  and  among
the  rest,  that  he  had  considerable  parties  in  several  of  his  great
towns,  naming  Antwerp,  Bruges  and  Brussels  :  he  gave  him


176  THE  MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1471.

notice,  also,  that  the  king  designed  to  besiege  him  wherever
he  should  find  him,  though  it  were  in  Ghent  itself.  I  am  of
opinion  that  this  message  was  intended  only  in  favour  of  the
Duke  of  Guienne,  and  to  further  the  match.  But  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  was  highly  displeased  at  this  information,  and
told  the  messenger  immediately,  that  his  master  was  mis-
informed, and  that  it  was  only  some  bad  courtiers  about  him
who  had  filled  his  imagination  with  those  jealousies  and  ap-
prehensions, solely  with  a  design  to  deprive  him  of  the
supplies  which  by  his  alliance  he  was  obliged  to  send  him  ;
and  that  as  to  the  town  of  Ghent,  and  the  rest  which  he
mentioned,  he  was  misinformed,  for  they  were  too  large  to  be
besieged  ;  that  he  should  undeceive  his  master,  letting  him
know  how  he  found  him  attended,  and  that  he  was  now
marching  to  pass  the  River  Somme,  and  was  resolved  to  fight
the  King  of  France,  if  he  endeavoured  to  interrupt  the
course  of  his  arms.  He  desired  him,  therefore,  that  he  would
entreat  the  duke  his  master,  from  him,  to  declare  himself
immediately  against  the  king,  and  that  he  would  show  him-
self no  otherwise  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  than  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  had  expressed  himself  towards  him  in  the  treaty
of  Peronne.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy  arrived  the  next  day  with  his  army
near  a  town  (strongly  seated  upon  the  Somme)  called  Pic-
quigny.  *  His  design  was  to  lay  a  bridge  thereabouts  over  the
river,  and  pass  it  with  his  army  ;  but  there  being  by  accident
at  that  time  400  or  500  archers,  and  some  few  of  the  nobility
in  the  town,  they  resolved  to  march  out,  and  dispute  the
passage  with  him.  They  sallied  out  upon  a  long  causeway
to  engage  him,  and  advanced  so  far,  that,  being  repulsed,
their  distance  from  the  town  gave  the  duke's  men  an  oppor-
tunity of  pursuing  them ;  and  they  did  it  so  effectually,  that
they  killed  a  great  number  of  them  before  they  could  recover
their  works,  and  possessed  themselves  of  the  suburbs  at  the
end  of  the  causeway.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  immediately

*  On  the  23rd  of  February,  1471,  the  duke  encamped  at  Winencourt,
near  Picquigny,  and  on  the  24th  at  Belloy :  his  vanguard  took  the  town
of  Picquigny,  which  was  immediately  set  on  fire,  and  in  the  evening  the
castle  surrendered  on  composition.  The  Castle  of  Picquigny  is  now  a
picturesque  ruin,  overlooking  the  town  :  in  former  times  a  stone  stood
there  to  commemorate  its  capture  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.


1471.]  THE DUKE BESIEGES AMIENS.  177

planted  four  or  five  great  guns  to  batter  the  town  (though
the  town  was  impregnable  on  that  side,  because  of  the  river's
running  between  them)  :  however,  the  archers,  observing
that  their  bridge  was  almost  finished,  and  expecting  to  be
besieged  as  soon  as  the  enemy  had  passed  the  river,  abandoned
the  town,  and  marched  away  in  great  confusion.  The  castle
held  out  two  or  three  days,  but  the  garrison  was  forced  at
last  to  surrender,  and  march  away  without  their  arms.

This  little  action  revived  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  courage,
so  that  he  encamped  about  Amiens*,  and  pitched  his  tents  in
two  or  three  several  places,  giving  out  that  he  kept  the  field,
to  see  if  the  king  would  venture  a  battle  with  him.  At  length
he  approached  so  near,  that  his  artillery  fired  into  and  over
the  town ;  and  in  that  camp  he  continued  for  six  weeks
together.  There  Avere  in  the  town  1400  of  the  king's  men-
at-arms,  and  4000  frank-archers,  and  with  them  the  constable,
with  all  the  great  lords  of  France,  as  the  grand-master,  the
admiral,  the  marshal,  the  seneschals,  and  a  great  number  of
persons  of  quality  besides.  In  the  meantime  the  king  was
at  Beauvais,  where  he  assembled  a  great  army.  The  king
was  attended  by  his  brother  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  Duke
Nicholas  of  Calabria  f  (eldest  son  of  Duke  John  of  Calabria
and  Lorraine,  sole  heir  of  the  house  of  Anjou),  and  by  the
rest  of  the  nobility  of  his  kingdom,  assembled  by  virtue  of
the  arriere-ban  ;  who,  as  I  have  been  since  informed,  had  a
great  curiosity  at  that  time  to  find  out  the  intrigue  and
mystery  of  this  expedition,  for  they  saw  his  business  Avas
far  from  being  done,  and  that  he  was  deeper  engaged  in  war
than  ever  he  was  before.

Those  Avho  Avere  in  Amiens  had  a  design  to  sally  out  and
attack  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  army,  if  the  king  would  have

*  On  the  6th  of  March,  1471,  he  encamped  at  Mez,  near  Amiens  ;  on
the  10th,  he  advanced  to  the  Abbey  of  St.  Acheul  ;  and  on  the  27th,
he  encamped  in  the  Valley  of  the  Cross,  close  to  Amiens.  Lenglet,  ii.
198.

f  Nicholas,  Duke  of  Calabria  and  Lorraine,  was  born  in  1448.  He
was  the  son  of  John  of  Calabria  and  Mary  of  Bourbon.  He  succeeded
liis  father  in  1470,  and  died,  unmarried,  on  the  24th  of  July,  1473.
Anne,  the  daughter  of  Louis  XL,  had  been  betrothed  to  him  from  her
cradle  ;  but,  probably  from  the  hope  of  espousing  Mary  of  Burgundy,
he  renounced  that  alliance,  although  he  had  twice  received  the  dowry  of
his  intended  bride.

N


178  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1471.

advanced,  and  joined  them  with  the  forces  which  he  had  at
Beauvais.  But  the  king,  having  notice  of  their  design,  sent
express  orders  to  forbid  it ;  for  though,  in  all  probability,
this  action  was  likelier  to  turn  to  his  advantage  than  other-
wise, yet  it  could  not  be  attempted  without  manifest  danger,
especially  to  those  in  the  town,  for  they  were  obliged  to  sally
out  of  the  gates  ;  and  there  being  but  two,  and  one  of  them
very  near  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  army,  and  their  whole  body
consisting  of  infantry,  if  they  had  been  repulsed,  it  would
have  been  difficult  for  them  to  have  made  their  retreat,  and
they  would  have  been  in  great  danger,  not  only  of  being  cut
in  pieces  themselves,  but  also  of  losing  the  town.  In  this
posture  of  affairs  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  despatched  one  of
his  pages  (called  Simon  de  Quingy,  who  was  afterwards
Bailiff  of  Troyes)  with  a  letter  to  the  king,  only  of  six  lines,
but  under  his  own  hand.  The  letter  was  very  humble,  and
in  it  he  complained  that  he  had  been  tempted  to  invade  him
upon  other  people's  designs,  and  declared  that,  if  he  had
been  rightly  informed,  he  was  confident  he  never  would  have
attempted  it.

Meanwhile  the  king's  army  in  Burgundy  had  fought  and
defeated  the  whole  force  of  that  country,  and  though  the
number  of  the  slain  was  not  very  considerable,  yet  the  vic-
tory was  great;  many  prisoners  were  taken,  and  an  abundance
of  towns  besieged  and  carried  by  storm.  The  news  of  this
defeat  extremely  surprised  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  im-
mediately caused  a  report  to  be  spread  in  his  army  that  his
forces  had  won  the  battle.  The  king  was  highly  pleased  at
the  receipt  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  letter,  for  the  reasons
above  mentioned,  and  because  he  did  not  love  to  carry  on
tedious  enterprises ;  he  returned  him  an  answer,  and  sent  a
commission  to  empower  certain  persons  in  Amiens  to  enter
upon  a  truce.  At  first  a  cessation  was  agreed  on  for  some
few  days  only ;  but  at  length,  as  I  remember,  they  had  one
for  a  year  *,  with  which  the  Constable  of  St.  Paul  seemed  to
be  highly  displeased :  and  without  doubt  (whatever  some
people  may  say  or  think  to  the  contrary)  the  constable  was
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  mortal  enemy.  Several  treaties

*  On  the  10th  of  April,  1471,  the  king  and  duke  made  a  truce  for
three  months  ;  at  the  expiration  of  which  term,  another  truce  was  mads
for  a  year.


147L]  THE DUKE ASSEMBLES THE ESTATES.  179

and  conferences  they  had,  but  never  the  least  friendship
proceeded  from  any  of  them,  as  the  event  demonstrated.
Yet  they  continued  sending  one  to  the  other,  and  endeavour-
ing a  reconciliation ;  the  duke  did  it  in  hopes  by  this  means
to  recover  St.  Quentin,  for  whenever  the  constable  enter-
tained the  least  suspicion  or  fear  of  the  king,  he  promised  to
restore  that  town  ;  and  sometimes  it  proceeded  so  far,  that,  by
the  consent  of  the  constable,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  forces
approached  within  two  or  three  leagues  of  the  town,  in  expec-
tation to  be  received ;  but  when  they  were  to  be  admitted,
the  constable's  heart  always  failed  him,  and  he  sent  them  back,
which  proved  afterwards  highly  to  his  disadvantage.  He
had  a  strong  opinion  that,  by  the  strength  of  his  position,
and  the  great  number  of  his  forces  (which  the  king  had  to
pay),  he  should  be  able  to  keep  the  king  and  the  duke  in  the
same  jealousy  and  discord  as  they  were  in  at  that  time ;  but
his  design  was  very  dangerous,  for  they  were  both  of  them
too  powerful  and  too  sensible  to  be  imposed  on  at  that  rate.
Upon  the  breaking  up  of  these  armies,  the  king  retired
into  Touraine,  the  Duke  of  Guienne  into  his  own  country,
and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  into  Flanders ;  and  affairs  con-
tinued in  that  posture  for  some  time.  The  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy called  a  general  assembly  of  the  Estates  *  of  his
country,  to  whom  he  remonstrated  the  damage  he  had
sustained  by  not  having  a  good  body  of  men-at-arms  ready
as  the  king  had  ;  assuring  them  that,  if  he  had  had  but  500
men-at-arms  ready  to  secure  his  frontiers,  the  king  had  never
undertaken  that  war,  and  they  had  continued  in  peace.  He
laid  also  before  them  the  dangers  to  which  they  were  still
exposed,  and  pressed  very  hard  that  they  would  allow  and
pay  him  for  800  lances.  At  last  they  consented  to  give  him
a  subsidy  of  sixscore  thousand  crownsf ,  besides  all  other
duties  that  they  yearly  paid  him  ;  neither  was  Burgundy  com-
prehended in  this  grant.  But  his  subjects  made  great  scruple,
(and  for  several  reasons),  to  put  themselves  into  such  a  state
of  subjection  as  the  kingdom  of  France  was  in,  by  reason  of

*  The  three  Estates  of  Burgundy  met  at  Abbeville  on  the  22nd  of
July,  1471  ;  and  on  the  12th  of  August  following,  a  report  of  their
proceedings  was  made  to  the  town-council,  at  Mons.  Gachard,  i.  225.

f  This  subsidy  of  120,000  crowns  was  not  raised  until  towards  the
close  of  1471.  Gachard,  i.  225.


180  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1471.

their  standing  army.  And  to  speak  impartially,  their  unwil-
lingness was  not  without  cause;  for  when  he  had  once  got  500
or  600  horse,  he  hankered  after  more,  and  attempted  more
boldly  upon  his  neighbours  ;  the  sixscore  thousand  crowns  he
multiplied  to  500,000,  and  increased  his  guards  to  such  a
number,  that  at  last  they  became  a  great  grievance  to  his  sub-
jects. My  opinion  is,  that  guards,  or  standing  forces,  may  be
employed  very  usefully  under  a  prudent  and  judicious  prince:
but  when  it  is  otherwise,  or  he  happens  to  die,  and  leaves  his
successors,  children,  the  service  in  which  their  governors
employ  them  is  not  always  safe  or  advantageous  for  either
prince  or  subject.

Notwithstanding  these  correspondences  and  truces,  the
hatred  between  the  king  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  rather
increased  than  diminished.  The  Duke  of  Guienne,  upon  his
return  into  his  own  country,  solicited  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
very  hard  to  marry  his  daughter ;  which  proposal  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  did  willingly  entertain,  and  indeed  so  he  did
whoever  was  proposed  ;  so  that  I  am  of  opinion  he  had  no
mind  to  have  a  son-in-law,  nor  that  his  daughter  should
marry  in  his  life-time,  but  chose  rather  to  keep  her  as  a
decoy  to  allure  princes  to  his  party,  and  bind  them  to  his
assistance ;  for  he  had  so  many  and  so  great  enterprises  in
his  head,  as  could  not  be  compassed  in  one  man's  life.
Besides,  to  speak  the  truth,  they  were  but  little  better  than
impossible,  for  one  half  of  Europe  was  not  sufficient  to
content  his  insatiable  desire  of  extending  his  dominions.
He  had  courage  enough  to  undertake  the  most  difficult
enterprises,  his  body  was  capable  of  as  much  pains  and
fatigue  as  was  necessary ;  he  was  powerful  in  men  and
money;  but  he  was  defective  in  judgment,  and  in  the  cun-
ning management  of  his  affairs  :  and  if  a  prince  be  deficient
in  that  point,  let  him  be  every  way  as  complete  and  as
nicely  qualified  for  heroic  actions  as  he  will,  it  signifies
nothing ;  so  that  I  look  upon  sense  as  proceeding  entirely
from  the  grace  of  God.  In  short,  he  that  could  have  taken
part  of  the  king's  qualities,  and  mingled  them  with  the  duke's,
might  have  made  a  perfect  prince  ;  for  certainly  the  king
was  much  superior  to  him  in  judgment  and  management,
and  the  end  sufficiently  demonstrated  it  to  all  the  world.


1470.]  OP THE CIVIL WARS IN ENGLAND.  181


Cn.  IV.  —  Of  the  Civil  Wars  between  the  Princes  in  England,  during
the  Difference  between  Louis  XI.  and  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy. —
1470.

IN  mentioning  the  preceding  passages,  I  had  almost  forgotten
to  speak  of  Edward,  King  of  England  ;  for  those  three  great
princes,  King  Louis  XI.  of  France,  King  Edward  IV.,  and
Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  were  contemporaries.  I  shall
not  here  observe  the  method  and  order  of  writing  which  is
usual  among  historians,  nor  name  the  years  and  moments  of
time  when  every  action  happened ;  neither  shall  I  produce
any  examples  out  of  history  (of  which  you  know  enough,
and  it  would  be  like  talking  Latin  to  monks).  I  shall  only
give  you  a  plain  account  of  what  I  have  seen,  known,  and
heard  of  these  three  great  princes  above  mentioned.  In  my
judgment,  you  that  live  in  the  age  when  these  affairs  were
transacted,  have  no  occasion  of  being  informed  of  the  exact
hours  when  everything  was  done.

I  have  formerly  *  mentioned  the  reasons  that  prevailed
with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  marry  the  sister  of  Edward,
King  of  England,  and  it  was  principally  to  strengthen  his
alliance  against  the  King  of  France  ;  otherwise  he  would
never  have  done  it,  for  the  love  he  bore  to  the  house  of
Lancaster,  to  which  he  was  allied  by  his  mother,  who  was
Infanta  of  Portugal,  but  her  mother  f  was  the  Duke  of
Lancaster's  daughter ;  wherefore  his  kindness  for  the  house
of  Lancaster  was  as  great  as  his  hatred  to  that  of  York.
At  the  time  of  this  marriage,  the  house  of  Lancaster  was
quite  depressed,  and  of  the  house  of  York  there  was  no
great  talk ;  for  Edward,  who  was  both  Duke  of  York  and
King,  enjoyed  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  kingdom.  In
the  war  between  these  two  contending  houses,  there  had
been  seven  or  eight  |  memorable  battles  in  England ;  in

*  See  book  i.  chap.  5.

f  Philippa  of  Lancaster,  daughter  of  John  of  Gaunt,  Duke  of
Lancaster,  and  Blanche  his  wife.  She  married  John,  King  of  Portugal;
and  died  on  the  19th  of  June,  or  18th  of  July,  1415.

$  There  had  been  twelve,  viz.,  at  St.  Albans,  in  1455  ;  at  Blorehcath,
in  1459  ;  at  Northampton  and  Waketield,  in  1460  ;  at  Mortimer's
Cross,  Barnerheath  and  Towton,  in  1461  ;  at  Hexliam,  in  1463  ;  at

N  3


182  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMBINES.  [1470.

which  threescore  or  fourscore  persons  of  the  blood-royal  of
that  kingdom  were  cruelly  slain,  as  is  said  before  in  these
Memoirs.  Those  that  survived  were  fugitives,  and  lived  in
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  court ;  all  of  them  young  gentlemen
(whose  fathers  had  been  slain  in  England)  whom  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  had  generously  entertained  before  this  marriage,
as  his  relations  of  the  house  of  Lancaster.  Some  of  them
were  reduced  to  such  extremity  of  want  and  poverty  before
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  received  them,  that  no  common
beggar  could  have  been  poorer.  I  saw  one  of  them,  who  was
Duke  of  Exeter  *  (but  he  concealed  his  name),  following  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  train  bare-foot  and  bare-legged,  begging
his  bread  from  door  to  door.  This  person  was  the  next  of
the  house  of  Lancaster;  he  had  married  King  Edward's  sister,
and  being  afterwards  known,  had  a  small  pension  allowed
him  for  his  subsistence.  There  were  also  some  of  the  family
of  the  Somersets  f,  and  several  others,  all  of  them  slain
since,  in  the  wars.  The  fathers  and  relations  of  these
persons  had  plundered  and  destroyed  the  greatest  part  of
France,  and  possessed  it  for  several  years,  and  afterwards
they  turned  their  swords  upon  themselves,  and  killed  one
another ;  those  who  were  remaining  in  England,  and  their
children,  have  died  as  you  see ;  and  yet  there  are  those  who
affirm  that  God  does  not  punish  men  as  he  did  in  the  days
of  the  children  of  Israel,  but  suffers  the  wickedness  both  of
princes  and  people  to  remain  unpunished.  I  do  believe,
indeed,  he  does  not  speak  and  converse  with  mankind  as  he
did  formerly ;  for  he  has  left  them  examples  enough  in  the
world  to  instruct  them ;  but  you  may  see,  by  the  sequel  of
this  discourse,  and  by  reflecting  on  what  you  know  besides,
that  of  those  bad  princes,  and  others,  who  cruelly  and
tyrannically  employ  the  power  that  is  in  their  hands,  none,
or  but  few  of  them,  die  unpunished,  though,  perhaps,  it  is

Banbury  and  Stamford,  in  1470  ;  at  Barnet,  in  1471  ;  and  at  Tewkes-
bury,  in  1471.

*  Henry  Holland,  Duke  of  Exeter,  was  the  son  of  John,  Duke  of
Exeter,  and  Anne,  daughter  of  Edmund,  Earl  of  Stamford.  He  married
Anne,  sister  of  Edward  IV.,  whom  he  divorced  on  the  12th  of  November,
1472.  He  was  found  dead  at  sea  between  Dover  and  Calais,  in  1475.

f  The  Duke  of  Somerset  was  with  the  Count  of  Charolois  at  the
battle  of  Montlhery  ;  and  again,  at  Ghent,  in  1469.


1470.]  THE EARL OF AVAKWICli's POAVER.  183

neither  in  the  same  manner,  nor  at  the  same  time,  that  those
who  are  injured  desire.

But  to  return  to  King  Edward.  The  greatest  support  of
the  house  of  York  was  the  Earl  of  Warwick  ;  and  the
greatest  partisan  of  the  house  of  Lancaster  was  the  Duke
of  Somerset.  This  Earl  of  Warwick,  in  respect  of  the
eminent  services  he  had  done  him,  and  the  care  he  had  taken
of  his  education,  might  have  been  well  called  King  Edward's
father ;  and  indeed  he  was  a  very  great  man ;  for  besides
his  own  patrimony,  he  was  possessed  of  several  lordships
which  had  been  given  him  by  the  king,  some  of  crown  lands,
and  some  that  were  confiscated.  He  was  made  Governor  of
Calais  *,  and  had  other  great  offices,  so  that  I  have  heard
he  received  annually  in  pensions  and  that  kind  of  profits,
80,000  *crowns,  besides  his  inheritance.  By  accident
the  Earl  of  Warwick  had  fallen  out  -j-  with  his  master  the
year  before  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  expedition  against
Amiens.  |  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  indeed,  in  some
measure,  been  the  occasion  of  the  breach  between  them,  as
he  disliked  the  mighty  sway  and  authority  that  the  earl  bore
in  England.  Besides,  there  was  no  good  understanding
between  them,  for  the  Earl  of  Warwick  held  constant
correspondence  with  the  King  of  France  our  master.  In
short,  about  this  very  time,  or  a  little  before,  the  Earl  of
Warwick  was  grown  so  exorbitant  in  his  power,  that  he
imprisoned  his  master  King  Edward  §,  put  the  Queen's  |]

*  He  received  this  appointment  immediately  after  the  first  battle
of  St.  Albans,  which  was  fought  on  the  23rd  of  May,  1455.

f  The  Earl  of  Warwick,  finding  that  his  influence  with  Edward  waS
on  the  decline,  excited  insurrections  in  the  north  of  England,  in  the  hope
thereby  to  regain  his  power.  As  one  of  his  daughters  was  married  to
the  king's  brother,  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  he  made  common  cause  with
that  prince,  and  they  both  betrayed  Edward's  confidence  by  marching
against  him  with  the  troops  which  they  had  received  orders  to  levy  in  his
name.  This  was  in  March,  1470.

J  On  the  6th  of  March,  1471.

§  About  the  beginning  of  1470,  the  king  and  the  earl  were  nearly
coming  to  blows,  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  reconcile  them  ;  while
the  king,  trusting  to  these  negotiations  of  peace,  had  relaxed  his  vigi-
lance, the  Earl  of  Warwick  tell  suddenly  on  his  camp,  and  took  him
prisoner.  Edward  was  conveyed  to  Middleham  Castle,  but  speedily
made  his  escape  from  captivity.

|  Elizabeth  Woodville  was  married  1.  to  Sir  John  Grey  of  Groby,


184  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1470.

father  *  (the  Lord  Rivers)  and  two  of  his  sons  to  death,  and
the  third  was  in  great  danger  (though  all  of  them  were
great  favourites  of  the  king.)  He  also  caused  several  knights
to  be  put  to  death.  For  some  time,  he  used  the  king  very
honourably,  and  put  new  servants  about  him,  hoping  that  he
would  have  forgotten  the  old,  for  he  looked  upon  his  master
as  a  very  weak  prince.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  was
extremely  concerned  at  what  had  happened,  and  privately
contrived  a  way  for  King  Edward's  escape,  and  that  he
might  have  an  opportunity  of  speaking  with  him :  and  their
plot  succeeded  so  well,  that  King  Edward  escaped  out  of
prison,  raised  men,  and  defeated  a  great  body  of  the  Earl  of
Warwick's  troops.  King  Edward  was  very  fortunate  in  his
battles,  for  he  fought  at  least  nine  pitched  battles  (always  on
foot),  and  was  always  conqueror.  The  Earl  of  Warwick
finding  himself  too  weak  to  oppose  King  Edward,  having
first  given  instructions  to  his  private  friends  what  they  were
to  do  in  his  absence,  put  to  sea  with  the  Duke  of  Clarence,
who  had  married  his  daughter  f,  and  was  then  of  his  faction,
notwithstanding  that  he  was  brother  to  the  king  ;  and  carry-
ing with  them  their  wives  and  children,  and  a  great  number
of  force?,  he  appeared  before  Calais.  There  were  at  that
time  several  of  the  earl's  servants  in  the  town,  and  one  in
the  quality  of  his  lieutenant,  Lord  Wenlock  J,  who,  instead
of  receiving  him,  fired  his  great  guns  upon  him.  Whilst
they  lay  at  anchor  before  the  town,  the  Duchess  of  Clarence
(who  was  daughter  to  the  Earl  of  Warwick)  was  brought  to

who  fell  in  the  second  battle  of  St.  Albans,  on  the  17th  of  February,
1461  ;  and  2.  to  Edward  IV.  She  had  two  children  by  her  first
marriage,  Thomas,  Marquis  of  Dorset,  and  Richard.  She  married  King
Edward  in  1465  ;  and  in  1486,  was  confined  in  Bennondsey  Abbey,
where  she  died  some  years  afterwards.

*  Richard  Woodville,  Earl  Rivers,  married  Jacqtietta  of  Luxembourg,
widow  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  brother  of  King  Henry  V.  He  was
taken  prisoner  in  1469,  with  his  son,  John  Woodville,  and  conducted  to
Northampton,  where  they  were  both  beheaded.

f  Isabella,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  and  Anne  Beauchamp,
his  wife,  was  born  at  Warwick  Castle  on  the  5th  of  September,  1451.
She  was  married  at  Calais  on  the  llth  of  July,  1469.

J  John,  Lord  Wenlock,  Chief  Butler  of  England,  was  appointed
Lieutenant  of  Calais  in  1470,  audwas  killed  at  the  battle  of  Tewkesbury
on  the  4th  of  May,  1471.


1470.] -WARWICK  REFUSED ADMISSION INTO CALAIS. 185

bed  of  a  son  *,  and  great  entreaties  had  to  be  used  before
Wenlock  and  the  rest  could  be  persuaded  to  send  her  two
flagons  of  wine,  which  was  great  severity  in  a  servant  to  use
towards  his  master  ;  for  it  is  to  be  presumed  the  earl  thought
himself  secure  of  that  place,  it  being  the  richest  treasure
belonging  to  England,  and  the  best  captaincy  in  the  world
(or  at  least  in  Christendom) ;  and  this  I  know,  for  I  was
there  several  times  during  their  differences,  and  was  told  by
the  chief  officer  of  the  staple  for  cloth,  that  he  would
willingly  farm  the  government  of  the  town  from  the  King  of
England  at  15,000  crowns  per  annum  ;  for  the  Governor  of
Calais  receives  all  profits  on  that  side  of  the  sea,  and  has  the
benefit  of  all  convoys,  and  the  entire  disposal  and  management
of  the  garrison.

The  King  of  England  was  extremely  pleased,  and  well
satisfied  with  Lord  Wenlock  for  refusing  his  captain,  and
sent  him  a  patent  to  constitute  him  governor,  in  the  Earl  of
Warwick's  room ;  for  he  was  an  old  experienced  officer,  a
wise  gentleman,  and  of  the  Order  of  the  Garter.  The  Duke
of  Burgundy  was  also  well  pleased  with  him  for  this  action,  and
being  at  St.  Omer-j- ,  he  sent  me  to  Lord  Wenlock,  to  assure
him  of  a  pension  of  1000  crowns,  and  to  desire  him  to
continue  that  affection  which  he  had  already  shown  to  the
King  of  England.  I  found  him  fixed  and  resolved  to  be  so,
and  in  the  Hotel  de  1'Etape  in  that  town,  he  swore  solemnly
to  me,  that  he  would  serve  the  King  of  England  against
all  opposers  whatsoever ;  and  when  he  had  done,  all  the
garrison  and  townsmen  took  the  same  oath.  I  was  near
two  months  going  and  coming  to  and  from  him,  to  keep  him
steady  in  his  allegiance ;  but  the  most  part  of  that  time  I
was  with  him,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  come  to  Boulogne,
and  had  his  residence  there ;}:,  in  order  to  the  setting  out  a
great  fleet  against  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  who,  at  his  de-
parture from  Calais,  had  taken  several  ships  belonging  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  subjects,  which  was  partly  the  occasion
of  the  war  between  the  King  of  France  and  him.  For  the
Earl  of  Warwick's  soldiers  selling  all  their  booty  in  Nor-

*  This  child  probably  died  very  young,  for  Dugdale  makes  no  mention
of  him.

t  On  the  28th  of  June,  1470.

j  He  had  been  there  ever  since  the  26th  of  July.


186  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1470.

mandy,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  by  way  of  reprisal,  seized
upon  all  the  French  merchants  who  came  to  the  fair  at
Antwerp.

Since  it  is  as  absolutely  necessary  to  be  acquainted  with
the  examples  of  the  deceit  and  craftiness  of  this  world,  as
with  instances  of  integrity  (not  to  make  use  of  them,  but  to
arm  ourselves  against  them),  I  shall  in  this  place  lay  open
a  trick,  or  piece  of  policy  (but,  call  it  what  you  please,  it
was  certainly  wisely  managed),  by  which  you  may  under-
stand the  juggling  of  our  neighbours,  as  well  as  our  own,
and  that  there  are  good  and  bad  people  in  all  places  of  the
world.  "When  the  Earl  of  Warwick  came  to  Calais,  which
he  looked  upon  as  his  principal  refuge,  and  expected  to  be
received,  Lord  "Wenlock,  being  a  person  of  great  prudence,
sent  him  word,  that  if  he  entered  he  was  a  lost  man,  for  all
England  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  would  be  against  him;
besides,  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  would  be  his  enemies,  as
well  as  a  great  part  of  the  garrison,  as  Monsieur  de  Duras*,
who  was  the  King  of  England's  marshal,  and  several  others,
who  had  great  interest  in  the  place,  were  hostile  to  him.
Wherefore  he  advised  him,  as  the  best  thing  he  could  do,  to
retire  into  France,  and  not  to  concern  himself  for  Calais,  for
of  that  he  would  give  him  a  fair  account  upon  the  first  op-
portunity. He  did  his  captain  good  service  by  giving  him
that  counsel,  but  none  at  all  to  his  king.  Certainly  no  man
was  ever  guilty  of  a  higher  piece  of  ingratitude  than  Lord
Wenlock,  considering  the  King  of  England  had  made  him
Governor  in  chief  of  Calais,  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
settled  a  large  pension  upon  him.

*  Galhard  de  Durfort,  Lord  of  Duras,  retired  to  England  in  1453,
was  made  a  Knight  of  the  Garter,  and  appointed  Governor  of  Calais.
He  was  recalled  to  France  in  1476,  by  Louis  XL,  and  was  killed  in  that
king's  service  in  Burgundy,  in  1487.  He  married  Anne,  daughter  of  the
I>uke  of  Suffolk.


1470.]  WARWICK  ASSISTED liY  KING LOUIS.  187


CH.  V.  —  How  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  by  the  Assistance  of  Lonis,  King
of  France,  drove  King  Edward  IV.  out  of  England,  to  the  great
Displeasure  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  received  him  into  his
Countries. — 1470.

THE  Earl  of  Warwick,  who  followed  Wenlock's  counsel,
landed  in  Normandy*,  and  was  kindly  received  by  the  King
of  France,  who  furnished  him  with  great  sums  of  money  to
pay  his  troops.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  at  this  time  a
great  fleet  abroad,  infesting  the  king's  subjects  both  by  land
and  sea ;  and  this  fleet  was  so  powerful,  that  none  durst
oppose  it.  The  king  ordered  the  Bastard  of  Bourbonf,
Admiral  of  France,  with  a  strong  squadron  J,  to  assist  the
English  against  any  attempt  that  should  be  made  upon  them
by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  fleet.  All  this  happened  the
season  before  the  surrender  of  St.  Quentin  and  Amiens,
which  was  in  the  year  1470.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  was
stronger  at  sea  than  the  Earl  of  Warwick  and  the  king  to-
gether ;  for  at  Sluys  he  had  seized  upon  several  great  ships
belonging  to  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  two  Genoese  vessels,
besides  many  hulks  from  Germany.

King  Edward  was  not  a  man  of  any  great  management  or
foresight,  but  he  was  of  an  invincible  courage,  and  the  hand-
somest prince  my  eyes  ever  beheld.  The  Earl  of  Warwick's
landing  in  Normandy  did  not  so  much  affect  him  as  it  did
the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  presently  perceiving  there  were
great  transactions  in  England  in  favour  of  the  Earl  of  War-
wick, gave  frequent  information  of  it  to  that  king,  but  he
never  heeded  it ;  which  in  my  opinion  was  great  weakness,
considering  the  mighty  preparations  the  King  of  France  had
made  against  him,  for  he  fitted  out  all  the  ships  he  could  get,
and  well  manned  and  victualled  them,  and  ordered  the  English
fugitives  to  be  equipped.  By  his  management  also  a  marriage

*  Between  Honfleur  and  Harfleur,  in  May,  1470.

f  Louis,  Bastard  of  Bourbon,  a  natural  son  of  Charles  I.,  Duke  of
Bourbon,  by  Jeanne  de  Bournan,  was  legitimated  in  September,  1463;
he  married  Jeanne,  a  natural  daughter  of  Louis  XL,  and  died  on  the  19th
of  January,  1486.

J  According  to  Chastellain,  it  consisted  of  "  sixty  fine  and  powerful
ships."


188  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1470.

was  concluded  between  the  Earl  of  Warwick's  second
daughter  and  the  Prince  of  Wales*,  which  prince  was  the
only  son  to  King  Henry  VI.  (who  was  at  that  time  alive,
and  prisoner  in  the  tower.)  An  unaccountable  match!  to
dethrone  and  imprison  the  father,  and  marry  his  only  son  to
the  daughter  of  him  that  did  it.  It  was  no  less  surprising
that  he  should  delude  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  brother  to  the
king  whom  he  opposed,  who  ought  in  reason  to  have  been
afraid  of  the  restoration  of  the  house  of  Lancaster ;  but
affairs  of  so  nice  a  nature  are  not  to  be  managed  without
great  cunning  and  artifice.

During  the  whole  time  of  this  preparation,  I  stayed  at  Calais
to  keep  Lord  Wenlock  firm  to  his  allegiance ;  but  I  could
discover  nothing  of  his  juggling,  though  he  had  been  at  it
for  three  months.  ]V[y  business  with  him  then  was,  to
desire  that  he  would  order  twenty  or  thirty  of  the  Earl  of
Warwick's  servants  who  were  there,  to  depart  the  town;  for
I  was  assured  the  king's  fleet,  in  conjunction  with  the  earl's,
was  ready  to  set  sail  from  Normandy,  and  if  they  should  land
suddenly  in  England,  it  might  happen  that  those  servants  of
the  Earl  of  Warwick's  might  raise  some  tumult  or  other  in
the  town  of  Calais,  that  he  might  not  be  able  to  appease,  for
which  reason  I  was  very  earnest  for  their  being  turned  out.
Before,  he  had  always  promised  me  he  would,  but  then  he
took  me  aside,  and  told  me  that  he  would  keep  the  town  well
enough,  but  he  had  something  else  to  impart  to  me,  and  that
was,  that  I  would  acquaint  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  that  if  he
desired  to  show  himself  a  friend  to  England,  he  would  advise
him  to  employ  his  good  offices  rather  in  mediating  peace,
than  endeavouring  to  promote  war ;  and  this  he  said  in  re-
spect of  the  preparations  which  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had
made  against  the  Earl  of  Warwick.  He  told  me  farther,
that  it  would  be  no  hard  matter  to  compass  an  accommodation,
for  that  very  day  there  was  a  lady  passed  by  Calais  into
France,  with  letters  to  the  Duchess  of  Clarence,  and  in  them
overtures  of  peace  from  King  Edward ;  and  he  said  truly ;

*  Edward,  son  of  Henry  VI.  and  Margaret  of  Anjou.  He  married
Anne,  youngest  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  and  was  killed  in
the  battle  of  Tewkesbury,  on  the  4th  of  May,  1471.  His  widow  after-
wards married  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  subsequently  ascended  the
throne  as  Richard  ILL


1470.]  FEMALE DIPLOMACY.  189

but  as  he  had  done  with  others,  so  the  lady  dissembled  with
him  ;  for  her  business  was  of  another  kind  of  importance,
which  she  accomplished  at  last,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Earl
of  Warwick  and  all  his  party.

You  cannot  be  better  informed  by  any  other  person  of  the
secret  contrivances  and  subtle  collusions  which  happened  on
our  side  of  the  water,  than  by  me,  especially  as  to  the  trans-
actions of  these  last  twenty  years.

The  secret  affair  to  be  managed  by  this  lady,  was  to  solicit
the  Duke  of  Clarence  not  to  contribute  to  the  subversion  of
his  own  family,  by  endeavouring  to  restore  the  house  of
Lancaster ;  that  he  would  remember  their  old  insolences,
and  the  hereditary  hatred  that  was  between  them,  and  not
be  so  infatuated  as  to  imagine  that  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  who
had  married  his  daughter  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  sworn
allegiance  to  him  already,  would  not  endeavour  to  place  him
upon  the  throne.  This  lady  managed  the  affair  that  was
committed  to  her  charge,  with  so  much  cunning  and  dexterity,
that  she  prevailed  with  the  Duke  of  Clarence  to  promise  to
come  over  to  the  king's  party  as  soon  as  he  was  in  England.

This  lady  was  no  fool,  nor  loquacious  ;  and  being  allowed  the
liberty  of  visiting  her  mistress  the  Duchess  of  Clarence,  she
for  that  reason  was  employed  in  this  secret,  rather  than  a
raan.  Wenlock  was  a  cunning  man,  and  shrewd  enough ;
yet  this  lady  was  too  hard  for  him,  wheedled  him,  and  carried
on  her  intrigues  till  she  had  effected  the  ruin  of  the  Earl  of
Warwick  and  all  his  faction  ;  for  which  reason  it  is  no
shame  for  persons  in  his  condition  to  be  suspicious,  and  keep
a  watchful  eye  over  all  comers  and  goers ;  but  it  is  a  great
disgrace  to  be  outwitted,  and  to  lose  anything  through  one's
own  negligence ;  however,  our  suspicions  ought  to  be
grounded  on  some  foundation,  for  to  be  over-suspicious  is  as
bad  the  other  way.

You  have  already  been  informed  that  the  Earl  of
Warwick's  fleet,  with  the  squadron  the  King  of  France  had
sent  to  convoy  him,  was  ready  to  sail,  and  that  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  navy  lay  ready  at  Havre  to  engage  them ;  but
it  pleased  God  to  order  it  so,  that  a  great  storm  arising  that
night,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  navy  was  driven  by  stress  of
weather,  some  into  Scotland,  some  into  Holland,  and  all  of
them  dispersed  •,  after  which,  in  a  short  time,  the  weather


190  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1470.

coming  about  fair  for  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  he  took  his  op-
portunity, and  sailed  safely  to  England.  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  had  sent  King  Edward  word  of  the  port  where  the
earl  designed  to  land,  and  had  persons  constantly  about  him,
to  put  him  in  mind  of  taking  care  of  himself,  and  putting
his  kingdom  in  a  posture  of  defence.  But  he  never  was  con-
cerned at  anything,  but  still  followed  his  hunting,  and  no-
body was  so  trusted  by  him  as  the  Archbishop  of  York*  and
the  Marquis  of  Montague t,  both  the  Earl  of  Warwick's
brothers,  who  had  sworn  to  be  true  to  him  against  their
brother,  and  all  opposers  whatsoever ;  and  the  king  put  an
entire  confidence  in  them.

Upon  the  Earl  of  Warwick's  landing  j,  great  numbers  came
in  to  him;  and  King  Edward  when  he  heard  it,  was  much
alarmed ;  and  (when  very  late)  he  began  to  look  about  him,
and  sent  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  desire  that  his  fleet
might  be  ready  at  sea  to  intercept  the  Earl  of  Warwick  on
his  return  to  France,  for  on  land  he  knew  how  to  deal  with
him.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  not  well  pleased  with
these  words,  for  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  greater  piece  of  policy
to  have  hindered  the  earl  from  landing,  than  to  be  forced  to
run  the  hazard  of  a  battle,  to  drive  him  out  again.  The
Earl  of  Warwick  had  not  been  landed  above  five  or  six  days
before  the  whole  country  came  in  to  him,  and  he  encamped
within  three  leagues  of  the  king,  whose  army  was  superior
to  the  earl's  (had  they  been  all  true  to  his  interest),  and
waited  on  purpose  to  give  him  battle  :  the  king  was  possessed
of  a  fortified  village  or  house§,  to  which  (as  he  told  me  him-
self) there  was  no  access  but  by  one  bridge,  which  proved  of

*  George  Neville,  Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  was  created
Bishop  of  Exeter  on  the  25th  of  November,  1455,  before  he  had  attained
his  twentieth  year.  He  became  Lord  Chancellor  of  England  in  1460,
and  Archbishop  of  York  in  1465  ;  and  he  died  on  the  8th  of  June,
1476.

f  John  Neville,  Marquis  of  Montague,  married  Isabella,  daughter  of
Sir  Edmond  Ingoldsthrop  of  Borough  Green,  and  was  killed  in  the
battle  of  Barnet  on  the  30th  of  April,  1471.

J  About  four  months  after  their  departure  from  England,  in  August,
the  Earl  of  Warwick,  the  Duke  of  Clarence  and  their  retainers  landed,
eome  at  Plymouth,  others  at  Dartmouth  and  Exmouth,  and  thence
marched  towards  London.

§  Kapin  states  that  Edward  was  at  Lynn  at  this  time.


1-170.]  DANGER OF KING EDWARD.  191

great  service  to  him  ;  the  rest  of  his  forces  were  quartered
in  the  neighbouring  villages.  As  he  sate  at  dinner,  news
was  suddenly  brought  him  that  the  Marquis  of  Montague,
the  Earl  of  Warwick's  brother,  and  several  other  persons  of
quality,  were  mounted  on  horseback,  and  had  caused  their
soldiers  to  cry,  "  God  bless  King  Henry."  At  first  King
Edward  would  give  no  credit  to  it,  but  despatched  other
messengers  to  inquire,  and  in  the  meantime  armed  himself,
and  posted  guards  to  defend  the  bridge  in  case  of  any  assault.
There  was  with  him  at  that  time  a  very  prudent  gentleman
called  the  Lord  Hastings*,  High  Chamberlain  of  England,  in
great  authority  with  the  king  ;  and  he  deserved  it,  for  though
his  wife  was  the  Earl  of  Warwick's  sister,  he  continued  loyal
to  his  king,  and  was  then  in  his  service  (as  he  told  me  after-
wards) with  a  body  of  3000  horse.  There  was  likewise
with  him  the  Lord  Scales  f  (brother  to  King  Edward's
queen)  besides  several  good  knights  and  gentlemen  who
began  to  think  that  all  was  not  well,  for  the  messen-
gers confirmed  what  had  been  told  the  king  before,  and  that
the  enemy  was  marching  boldly  on,  with  a  design  to  surprise
him  in  his  quarters.

It  happened  by  God's  grace  that  King  Edward's  quarters
were  no  great  distance  from  the  sea,  and  some  ships  that  fol-
lowed with  provisions  for  his  army,  lay  at  anchor  with  two
Dutch  merchant  vessels  hard  by.  King  Edward  had  but  just
time  to  get  aboard  one  of  them  ;  his  chamberlain  stayed  a
little  behind,  and  advised  his  lieutenant  and  the  rest  of  the
officers  to  go  in  with  their  men  to  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  but
conjured  them  to  retain  their  old  affection  and  allegiance  to
the  king  and  himself  ;  and  then  he  also  went  aboard  the  ship
with  the  others,  which  were  just  ready  to  set  sail.  It  is  the
custom  in  England,  when  a  battle  is  won,  to  give  quarter,
and  no  man  is  killed,  especially  of  the  common  soldiers  (for
they  know  everybody  will  join  the  strongest  side),  and  it  is

*  William,  Lord  Hastings,  son  of  Richard  Hastings,  and  Alice,
daughter  of  Lord  Camoys.  He  married  Catherine,  daughter  of  Richard
Neville,  last  Earl  of  Salisbury  ;  and  was  beheaded  by  order  of  Richard
III.  on  the  13th  of  June,  1483.

f  Anthony  Woodville,  Lord  Scales  and  Earl  Rivers,  was  the  son  of
Richard  Woodville  and  Jacquetta  of  Luxembourg.  He  marri  d  1.
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Lord  Scales,  and  2.  Mary,  daughter  of  Henry
Pitz  Le-.ves.  He  was  beheaded  in  1483.


192  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1470.

but  seldom  that  they  are  ransomed ;  so  that  when  the  king
had  made  his  escape,  not  one  of  his  men  was  put  to  the
sword.  King  Edward  told  me,  that  in  all  the  battles  which
he  had  gained,  his  way  was,  when  the  victory  was  on  his
side,  to  mount  on  horseback,  and  cry  out  to  save  the  common
soldiers,  and  put  the  gentlemen  to  the  sword/  by  which
means  none,  or  very  few  of  them,  escaped.

And  thus  King  Edward  made  his  escape  in  the  year  1470,
by  the  assistance  of  a  small  vessel  of  his  own  and  two  Dutch
merchantmen,  attended  only  by  700  or  800  men,  with-
out any  clothes  but  what  they  were  to  have  fought  in,
no  money  in  their  pockets,  and  not  one  of  them  knew  whither
they  were  going.  It  was  very  surprising  to  see  this  poor
king  (for  so  he  might  justly  be  called)  run  aivay  in  this
manner,  and  be  pursued  by  his  own  servants.  He  had  in-
dulged himself  in  ease  and  pleasures  for  twelve  or  thirteen
years  together,  and  enjoyed  a  larger  share  of  them  than  any
prince  in  his  time.  His  thoughts  were  wholly  employed
upon  the  ladies  (and  far  more  than  was  reasonable),  hunting,
and  adorning  his  person.  In  his  summer-hunting,  his  custom
was  to  have  several  tents  set  up  for  the  ladies,  where  he
treated  them  after  a  magnificent  manner ;  and  indeed  his
person  was  as  well  turned  for  love-intrigues  as  any  man  I
ever  saw  in  my  life  :  for  he  was  young,  and  the  most  hand-
some man  of  his  time  ;  I  mean  when  he  was  in  this  adversity,
for  afterwards  he  grew  very  corpulent.  But  see  now  how,
on  a  sudden,  he  is  fallen  into  the  calamities  of  the  world  !
He  sailed  directly  for  Holland.  At  that  time  the  Easterlings  *
were  at  war  both  with  the  English  and  French  ;  they  had
many  ships  at  sea,  and  were  dreaded  by  the  English,  and
upon  good  grounds ;  for  they  were  good  soldiers,  had
done  them  much  prejudice  that  year  already,  and  had  taken
several  of  their  ships.  The  Easterlings  at  a  great  distance
descried  the  ships  which  were  with  the  king,  and  about  seven
or  eight  of  them  began  to  give  them  chase ;  but  being  far
before  them,  he  gained  the  coast  of  Holland,  or  rather  some-
thing lower,  for  he  put  into  Friesland,  not  far  from  a  little
town  called  Alquemaref,  where  he  came  to  an  anchor,  and,

*  Easterlings,  in  French  Ostrelins,  was  the  name  given  to  the  merchants
of  the  Hanseatic  League.

f  Alkmaar,  the  capital  of  North  Holland,  distant  about  twenty  miles
from  Amsterdam.


1470.] EDWARD  IX  DANGER  FROM THE EASTERLINGS. 193

it  being  low  water,  the  king  could  not  get  into  the  har-
bour, but  ran  himself  as  near  the  town  as  he  could.  The
Easterlings  came  as  near  him  as  they  could  possibly  make,
and  dropt  their  anchors,  intending  to  board  him  the  next
tide.

Misfortune  and  danger  never  go  alone  :  the  king's  success
and  his  courage  were  now  strangely  altered.  A  fortnight  be-
fore that  man  would  have  been  looked  upon  as  mad,  who  should
have  told  him,  "  The  Earl  of  Warwick  shall  drive  you  out
of  England,  and  in  eleven  days  have  the  supreme  power  and
dominion  in  his  own  hands"  (for  it  cost  him  no  more  time
to  bring  the  whole  kingdom  to  obedience).  Besides,  he
laughed  at  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  for  squandering  his  money
in  the  defence  of  the  sea,  giving  out,  that  he  wished  his  ad-
versary were  landed  in  England ;  but  what  excuse  could  he
make  for  himself  after  such  a  loss,  and  by  his  own  fault,
unless  this,  "  That  I  did  not  think  it  possible  ?"  and,  if  a
prince  be  but  arrived  to  years  of  discretion,  he  ought  to
blush  at  such  an  excuse,  for  it  will  not  serve  his  turn.  So
that  this  is  a  fair  example  for  such  princes  as  think  it
beneath  them  to  be  afraid,  or  have  a  watchful  eye  on  their
enemies,  and  are  fond  of  such  courtiers  as  flatter  and  in-
dulge them  in  that  opinion;  and  think  they  are  the  more
valued  and  esteemed  for  it,  and  that  it  is  a  proof  of  their
courage  and  resolution  to  despise  and  laugh  at  danger.  I
know  not  what  they  may  say  to  their  faces,  but  I  am  sure
wise  men  account  such  expressions  great  folly.  It  is  ho-
nourable to  fear  where  there  is  occasion,  and  provide  against
it  with  all  the  caution  imaginable.  A  wise  man  in  a  prince's
court  is  a  great  treasure  to  his  master,  if  the  one  has  liberty
to  speak  truth,  and  the  other  discretion  enough  to  believe
him,  and  follow  his  advice.

By  chance  the  Lord  de  la  Gruthuse*,  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's governor  in  Holland,  was  at  that  place  where  and
when  King  Edward  wished  to  land ;  who,  by  some  persons
put  on  shore,  was  immediately  informed  of  his  miserable

*  Louis  de  Bruges,  Lord  de  la  Gruthuyse,  Prince  of  Stecnhuyse,
Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  was  the  son  of  Jean  de  Bruges  and
Marguerite  de  Steenhuyse.  He  was  created  Earl  of  Winchester  for  his
eminent  services  to  King  Edward  IV.  ;  and  he  died  on  the  24th  of
November,  1492.

O


194  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1470.

condition,  and  the  danger  he  was  in  by  reason  of  the  Easter-
lings.  The  governor  sent  immediately  to  the  Easterlings
to  charge  them  to  lie  still,  and  went  on  board  the  king's  ship
himself,  and  invited  him  on  shore ;  whereupon  the  king
landed,  with  his  brother  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  (who  was
called  afterwards  King  Richard  III.),  and  about  1500  men  in
their  train.  The  king  had  no  money  about  him,  and  gave
the  master  of  the  ship  a  gown  lined  with  beautiful  martens,
and  promised  to  do  more  for  him  whenever  he  had  an  oppor-
tunity ;  but  sure  so  poor  a  company  was  never  seen  before  ;
yet  the  Lord  de  la  Gruthuse  dealt  very  honourably  by  them,
for  he  gave  many  of  them  clothes,  and  bore  all  their  ex-
penses till  they  came  to  the  Hague,  to  which  place  he  safely
conducted  them.*  He  then  despatched  the  news  of  his
arrival  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  much  surprised
when  he  heard  it,  and  would  have  been  much  better  pleased
if  it  had  been  news  of  his  death  ;  for  he  was  in  great  appre-
hension of  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  who  was  his  enemy,  and  at
that  time  absolute  in  England.  The  earl,  immediately  after
his  landing,  had  prodigious  numbers  of  people  flock  in  to
hirnf:  even  the  king's  own  party,  some  for  love,  and  others
through  fear,  submitted  to  him  wholly ;  so  that  eve^y  day
his  army  increased,  and  not  long  after  he  marched  to  Lon-
don. A  great  number  of  good  knights  and  squires,  who
•were  in  King  Edward's  interest,  fled  to  the  sanctuaries
in  London,  and  did  the  king  good  service  afterwards ;
and  this  did  the  queen  his  wife,  who,  in  great  want  of  all

*  King  Edward  arrived  at  the  Hagne  on  the  llth  of  October,  1470  ;
and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  gave  him  500  golden  crowns  per  month  for
his  support.  Lenglet,  ii.  196.

f  The  numher  of  AVarwick's  partisans  was  very  great,  especially  in
London.  He  had  obtained  them,  according  to  Oliver  de  la  Marche,  by
three  ways,  which  do  honour  to  his  ability,  if  not  to  his  honesty.  "  The
first,  by  flatteries,  and  feigned  humility  to  the  people  of  London,  by  whom
he  was  much  loved.  Secondly,  he  was  master  of  the  five  ports  of  Eng-
land, where  he  allowed  great  injury  to  be  done  ;  and  never,  in  his  time,
was  justice  done  in  England  to  any  foreigner  who  had  suffered  loss  ;
wherefore  he  was  beloved  by  the  English  freebooters,  whom  he  thus
contributed  to  support.  And  thirdly,  he  kept  the  city  of  London  on  his
side  by  always  owing  300,000  or  400,000  crowns  to  different  citizens  ;  and
those  whose  debtor  he  was  desired  his  life  and  prosperity,  that  they  might
be  paid  thdr  dues."  La  Marche,  ii.  276.


1470.] HENRY VI. RELEASED FROM THE TOWER.  195

things  that  were  necessary,  was  there*  brought  to  bed  of  a
prince.f


CH.  VL— How  the  Earl  of  Warwick  released  Henry  VI.,  King  of  Eng-
land, out  of  the  Tower.  —  1470.

THE  Earl  of  Warwick,  immediately  upon  his  arrival  in
London,  went  directly  to  the  Tower  (which  is  the  castle),
and  released  King  Henry,  whom  long  before  he  had  com-
mitted thither  himself.  When  he  imprisoned  him,  he  went
before  him,  crying  "  Treason,  treason,  and  behold  the  traitor!"
but  now  he  proclaimed  him  king,  attended  him  to  his  palace
at  Westminster,  and  restored  him  to  his  royal  prerogative,
and  all  in  the  Duke  of  Clarence's  presence,  who  was  not  at
all  pleased  with  the  sight.  Immediately  he  despatched  300
or  400  men  over  to  Calais  to  overrun  the  Boulonnois,  which
party  was  well  received  by  the  Lord  Wenlock,  whom  I  men-
tioned before,  and  the  affection  which  he  had  always  borne
to  his  master,  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  was  at  that  time  very
conspicuous.  That  very  day  on  which  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
received  the  news  of  King  Edward's  being  in  Holland,  I  was
come  from  Calais,  and  found  him  at  Boulogne,  having  heard
nothing  of  that,  or  of  King  Edward's  defeat.  The  first  news
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  heard  of  him  was,  that  he  was  killed,
and  he  was  not  at  all  concerned  at  it,  for  his  affection  was
greater  for  the  house  of  Lancaster  than  for  York,  and  there
were  at  that  very  time  in  his  court  the  Dukes  of  Exeter  and
Somerset,  and  several  others  of  King  Henry's  party  ;  so  that
he  thought  by  their  means  to  be  easily  reconciled  to  that
family ;  but  he  dreaded  greatly  the  Earl  of  Warwick.  Besides
he  knew  not  after  what  manner  to  carry  himself  to  King
Edward  (whose  sister  he  had  married);  and  moreover  they
were  brethren  of  the  same  orders,  for  the  king  wore  the
Golden  Fleece,  and  the  duke  the  Garter.

*  She  went  to  "  St.  Catherine's  Abbey,  say  some,  but  others  say  to  the
sanctuary  at  Westminster." Chastellaiu,  486.

f  Edward  V.,  born  on  the  4th  of  November,  1470.
O  2


196  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1470.

The  duke  despatched  me  presently  back  to  Calais,  and  a
gentleman  or  two  with  me,  who  were  of  King  Henry's  party.
He  gave  me  instructions  how  I  was  to  proceed  with  this  new
set,  and  pressed  me  very  earnestly  to  go,  assuring  me  the
business  required  good  service.  I  went  as  far  as  Tourneghem
(a  castle  near  Guynes),  but  durst  venture  no  farther ;  for  I
found  the  people  flying  from  the  English,  who  had  sent  out
a  strong  party  to  plunder  and  harass  the  country.  I  sent  im-
mediately to  the  Lord  Wenlock  for  a  passport ;  though  before
I  used  to  go  without  any  such  thing,  and  was  always  honour-
ably entertained,  for  the  English  are  naturally  of  a  free  and
generous  temper.

This  was  a  new  phase  of  affairs  to  me,  for  I  had  never  seen
such  mutations  in  the  world  before.  That  night  I  sent  the
duke  word  of  the  danger  which  hindered  me  from  proceeding
in  my  journey ;  but  not  knowing  what  answer  I  should
receive  from  Wenlock,  I  did  not  say  that  I  had  sent  for  a
passport.  He  sent  me  a  signet  ring  from  off  his  finger,  com-
manding me  to  go  on,  and  if  I  was  taken  prisoner,  he  would
ransom  me.  He  made  no  scruple  to  expose  any  of  his  servants
to  danger,  when  he  thought  it  for  his  advantage  ;  but  I  had
well  provided  for  myself  by  sending  for  a  passport,  which  I
received  with  very  gracious  letters  from  the  Lord  Wenlock,
assuring  me  that  I  should  have  the  liberty  of  coming  and
going  as  formerly.  Upon  these  letters  I  went  on  to  Guynes ;
where  I  found  the  captain  at  the  gate,  who  presented  me
with  a  glass  of  wine,  yet  did  not  invite  me  into  the  castle  as
he  was  wont,  but  showed  me  great  respect,  and  treated  the
gentlemen  who  were  with  me,  who  were  of  King  Henry's
party,  very  nobly.  From  thence  I  went  to  Calais,  but
nobody  came  out  to  meet  me,  as  formerly ;  all  were  in  the
Earl  of  Warwick's  livery.  At  the  gate  of  my  lodgings,  and
the  door  of  my  chamber,  the  people  had  made  more  than  a
hundred  white  crosses  with  certain  rhymes  underneath,  signi-
fying that  the  King  of  France  and  Earl  of  Warwick  were  all
one;  all  which  I  thought  very  surprising.  I  sent,  however,  to
Gravelines  (which  is  about  five  leagues  from  Calais),  re-
quiring them  to  seize  all  English  merchants  and  their  effects
because  of  all  the  mischief  done  us  in  their  incursions  into
the  Boulonnois.  The  Lord  Wenlock  sent  to  me  to  dine  with
him  ;  I  found  him  well  attended,  with  a  ragged  staff  of  gold


1470.] COMMIXES  GOES  AS  ENVOY  TO  CALAIS. 197

upon  his  bonnet,  which  was  the  cognizance  of  the  Earl  of
Warwick  ;  all  the  rest  had  ragged  staffs  likewise,  but  they
who  could  not  be  at  the  expense  of  gold,  had  them  of  cloth.
I  was  informed  at  dinner,  that  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour
after  the  arrival  of  an  express  from  England  with  the  news,
the  whole  town  had  got  this  livery,  so  hasty  and  sudden
was  the  change ;  and  this  was  the  first  time  that  I  had  ever
seen  or  considered  such  an  instance  of  the  instability  of  all
human  affairs.

The  Lord  Wenlock  made  me  many  compliments,  and  some
excuses  in  behalf  of  his  captain  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  from
whom,  as  he  told  me,  he  had  received  many  favours  ;  but  for
the  rest  who  were  with  him,  I  never  heard  people  talk  so
extravagantly.  Those  whom  I  had  looked  upon  as  the  king's
greatest  friends,  were  the  most  bitter  and  invective  against
him  ;  yet  I  am  apt  to  think  some  did  it  for  fear,  though  others
spoke  the  real  sentiments  of  their  hearts.  Those  whom  I  for-
merly endeavoured  to  have  turned  out  of  the  town  (as  being
servants  to  the  earl)  were  now  in  great  reputation ;  yet
they  never  knew  of  my  ever  having  spoken  anything  against
them  to  the  Lord  Wenlock.  I  told  them  upon  all  occasions
that  King  Edward  was  dead,  and  that  I  had  certain  informa-
tion of  it  (though  indeed  I  well  knew  to  the  contrary)  ;
I  added,  likewise,  that  if  he  were  not  dead,  it  was  of  no  great
importance,  for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  alliance  was  with
the  king  and  kingdom  of  England,  so  that  this  accident  could
not  infringe  it ;  for  whomever  they  declared  their  king,
should  be  so  to  us :  and  in  consideration  of  such  revolutions
in  times  past,  they  had  put  in  these  very  words,  "  with  the
king  and  the  kingdom  ;"  and  we  were  to  have  four  of  the
chief  towns  in  England  as  a  security  for  performance  of
these  articles.  The  merchants  pressed  very  hard  that  I  might
be  detained,  because  their  goods  had  been  seized  at  Gravelines,
and,  as  they  pretended,  by  my  express  command.  At
length  we  came  to  this  composition,  that  they  should  pay
for,  or  restore,  all  the  cattle  which  had  been  plundered ;
for  by  agreement  with  the  house  of  Burgundy  they  had
liberty  to  take  what  cattle  they  wanted,  for  the  necessary
provision  of  the  town,  out  of  certain  grounds  that  were
appointed,  on  paying  a  certain  price ;  and  for  prisoners,
they  had  taken  none.  Hereupon  it  was  concluded  between

o  3


198  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1470.

us,  that  the  alliance  which  we  had  made  with  the  crown  of
England  should  stand  good,  only  we  were  to  put  in  Henry
instead  of  Edward.

This  accommodation  was  extremely  welcome  to  the  Duke
of  Burgundy ;  for  the  Earl  of  Warwick  was  sending  4000
men  over  to  Calais,  to  make  war  upon  him,  and  furiously
invade  his  territories,  and  no  way  could  be  found  out  to
pacify  him.  But  the  great  merchants  of  London  (many
of  whom  were  then  at  Calais)  diverted  him  from  that  under-
taking, because  it  was  the  staple  *  of  their  wools,  and  it  is
almost  incredible  what  prodigious  returns  they  make  from
thence  twice  every  year ;  there  their  wool  lies  till  the  mer-
chants come  over,  and  their  chief  vent  is  into  Flanders  and
Holland:  for  which  reason,  therefore,  they  were  very  solicitous
to  promote  this  accommodation,  and  stop  the  forces  which
the  Earl  of  Warwick  was  sending  over.  This  treaty  fell  out
very  luckily  for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy ;  for  it  happened  at
the  same  time  that  the  King  of  France  had  taken  Amiens
and  St.  Quentin,  and  if  he  had  been  forced  to  have  main-
tained war  with  both  these  kings  at  a  time,  he  had  certainly
been  ruined.  He  tried  all  the  ways  imaginable  to  pacify  the
Earl  of  Warwick ;  declaring  himself  of  the  house  of  Lan-
caster, and  that  he  would  do  nothing  to  the  prejudice  of
King  Henry;  and  making  use  of  such  other  expressions  as  he
thought  would  serve  his  turn  best.

In  the  meantime  King  Edward  arrived  at  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's court  at  St.  Pol  f ,  and  pressed  very  hard  for  supplies
to  enable  him  to  recover  his  kingdom  ;  for  he  assured  him  of
the  great  interest  he  had  in  England,  and  entreated  him,  for
God's  sake,  not  to  abandon  him,  since  he  had  married  his
sister,  and  they  were  besides  brethren  of  the  same  orders.
The  Dukes  of  Somerset  and  Exeter  violently  opposed  it,  and
used  all  their  artifice  to  keep  him  firm  to  King  Henry's
interest.  The  duke  was  in  suspense,  and  knew  not  which
side  to  favour  ;  he  was  fearful  of  disobliging  either,  because

*  The  staple  of  wool  at  Calais  was  established  by  King  Edward  HI.
Eapin,  iii.  231.

f  On  Wednesday,  the  2nd  of  January,  1471,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
left  Hesdin  and  went  to  Aire,  where  he  met  the  King  of  England.  He
remained  there  on  the  3rd,  and  returned  to  Hesdin,  after  dinner,  on  the
4th.  Lenglet,  ii.  197.


1471.] KING  EDWARD'S  DEPARTURE  FOR  ENGLAND. 199

he  was  engaged  in  a  desperate  war  at  home ;  but  at  length
he  struck  in  with  the  Duke  of  Somerset  and  the  rest  of  that
party,  upon  certain  promises  which  they  made  him,  against
the  Earl  of  Warwick,  their  ancient  enemy.  King  Edward
was  present  at  the  place,  and  was  much  dissatisfied  to  see  how
unsuccessfully  his  affairs  went  on ;  yet  they  gave  him  all
the  fair  words  imaginable,  and  told  him  that  all  was  but
dissimulation,  to  keep  off  a  war  against  two  kingdoms  at
once ;  for  if  the  duke  were  ruined,  he  would  not  be  in  a
capacity  to  assist  him  afterwards,  if  he  should  be  ever
so  inclinable  to  do  it.  However,  finding  King  Edward  bent
upon  his  return  to  England,  and  being  unwilling,  for  several
reasons,  absolutely  to  displease  him,  he  pretended  publicly
that  he  would  give  him  no  assistance,  and  issued  out  a  pro-
clamation forbidding  any  of  his  subjects  to  go  along  with
him  ;  but  privately  and  underhand  he  sent  him  50,000  florins
with  St.  Andrew's  cross*,  furnished  him  with  three  or  four
great  ships,  which  he  ordered  to  be  equipped  for  him  at  La
Vere  f  in  Holland,  which  is  a  free  port  where  all  persons  are
received ;  besides  which,  he  hired  secretly  fourteen  Easter-
ling  ships  for  him,  which  were  well  armed,  and  had  promised
to  transport  him  into  England,  and  serve  him  fifteen  days
afterwards ;  which  supply  was  very  great,  considering  those
times.


CH.  VII. —  How  Kinp  Edward  returned  into  England,  where  he  de-
feated the  Earl  of  Warwick  in  Battle,  and  the  Prince  of  Wales  after-
wards.—1471.

KING  Edward  set  sail  for  England  in  the  year  147 1$.,  at
the  same  time  as  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  marched  towards
Amiens  against  the  King  of  France.  The  duke  was  of
opinion  that  the  affairs  of  England  could  not  go  amiss  for  him,
since  he  was  sure  of  friends  on,  both  sides.  King  Edward

*  Equal  to  more  than  200,000  pounds  sterling.

f  Now  Weer,  or  Ter  Veere,  a  town  in  the  province  of  Zealand,  on  the
eastern  coast  of  the  island  of  Walcheren.

J  He  embarked  at  Ter  Veere  on  the  2nd  of  March,  1471,  and  landed
at  Ravenspur  on  the  14th  of  the  same  month.
O  4


200  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [H71.

was  no  sooner  landed,  but  he  marched  directly  for  London,
where  he  had  above  2000  of  his  party  in  sanctuary;  among
whom  were  300  or  400  knights  and  esquires,  who  were  of
great  advantage  to  his  affairs,  for  he  brought  over  with  him
a  small  number  of  forces.  The  Earl  of  Warwick  was  at  that
time  in  the  north  with  a  powerful  army,  but  upon  the  news
of  King  Edward's  landing,  he  marched  back  again  with  all
speed  towards  London,  in  hopes  to  have  got  thither  before
him.  However,  he  presumed  the  city  would  have  been  true
to  him,  but  he  was  mistaken ;  for  King  Edward  was
received  into  the  city  on  Maunday  Thursday*,  with  the
universal  acclamation  of  the  citizens,  contrary  to  the  expect-
ation of  most  people,  for  everybody  looked  upon  him  as
lost :  and  without  dispute,  if  the  citizens  had  but  shut  their
gates  against  him,  he  had  been  irrecoverably  lost,  for  the
Earl  of  Warwick  was  within  a  day's  march  of  him.  As  I
have  been  since  informed,  there  were  three  things  especially,
which  contributed  to  his  reception  into  London.  The  first
was,  the  persons  who  were  in  the  sanctuaries,  and  the  birth  of  a
young  prince,  of  whom  the  queen  was  there  brought  to  bed.
The  next  was,  the  great  debts  which  he  owed  in  the  town,
which  obliged  all  the  tradesmen  who  were  his  creditors  to
appear  for  him.  The  third  was,  that  the  ladies  of  quality,
and  rich  citizens'  wives  with  whom  he  had  formerly  intrigued,
forced  their  husbands  and  relations  to  declare  themselves
on  his  side.  He  stayed  but  two  days  in  the  town,  for  on
Easter-eve  he  marched  with  all  the  forces  he  could  collect  to
give  the  Earl  of  Warwick  battle :  the  next  day,  being  Easter-
day,  they  metf ,  and  as  they  were  drawn  up,  and  stood  in
order  of  battle  one  against  the  other,  the  Duke  of  Clarence
went  over  to  his  brother  King  Edward,  and  carried  with
him  near  12,000  men,  which  was  a  great  discouragement  to
the  Earl  of  Warwick,  and  a  mighty  strengthening  to  King
Edward,  who  before  was  but  weak.

You  have  already  heard  how  the  negotiation  with  the
Duke  of  Clarence  was  managed ;  yet,  for  all  this,  the  battle
was  sharp  and  bloody :  both  sides  fought  on  foot ;  and  the
king's  vanguard  suffered  extremely  in  this  action,  and  the

*  April  11.  1471.

f  The  battle  was  fought  upon  a  plain  near  Barnet,  between  London
and  St.  Albans,  known  by  the  name  of  Gladsraore  Heath.


1471.]  BATTLE  OP  BARNET.  201

earl's  main  battle  advanced  against  his,  and  so  near,  that  the
king  himself  was  engaged  in  person,  and  behaved  himself  as
bravely  as  any  man  in  either  army.  The  Earl  of  Warwick's
custom  was  never  to  fight  on  foot,  but  when  he  had  once  led
his  men  to  the  charge,  he  mounted  on  horseback  himself,  and
if  he  found  victory  inclined  to  his  side,  he  charged  boldly
among  them ;  if  otherwise,  he  took  care  of  himself  in  time,
and  provided  for  his  escape.  But  now  at  the  importunity  of
his  brother,  the  Marquis  of  Montague  (who  was  a  person  of
great  courage),  he  fought  on  foot,  and  sent  away  his  horses.
The  conclusion  of  all  was,  that  the  earl,  the  Marquis  of  Mon-
tague, and  many  other  brave  officers,  were  killed,  for  the
slaughter  was  very  great.  King  Edward  had  resolved,  at  his
departure  from  Flanders,  to  call  out  no  more  to  spare  the
common  soldiers,  and  kill  only  the  gentlemen,  as  he  had  for-
merly done ;  for  he  had  conceived  a  mortal  hatred  against  the
commons  of  England,  for  having  favoured  the  Earl  of  War-
wick so  much,  and  for  other  reasons  besides,  so  that  he  spared
none  of  them  at  that  time.  This  battle  was  bravely  fought,
and  on  the  king's  side  there  were  killed  1500  men.

The  very  day  on  which  this  fight  happened,  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  being  before  Amiens,  received  letters  from  the
duchess,  his  wife,  that  the  King  of  England  was  not  at  all
satisfied  with  him*;  that  the  assistance  he  had  given  him
was  not  done  frankly  and  willingly,  but  as  if  for  a  very
little  cause  he  would  have  deserted  him  ;  and,  to  speak
plainly,  there  was  never  great  friendship  between  them  after-
wards ;  yet  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  seemed  to  be  extremely
pleased  at  the  news,  and  published  it  everywhere.  I  had
almost  forgotten  to  acquaint  you  that  King  Edward,  finding
King  Henry  in  London,  took  him  along  with  him  to  the  fight.
This  King  Henry  was  a  very  ignorant  prince  and  almost  an
idiot ;  and  (if  what  was  told  me  be  true)  after  the  battle  was
over,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  (who  was  King  Edward's
brother,  and  afterwards  called  King  Richard)  slew  this  poor
King  Henry  with  his  own  hand,  or  caused  him  to  be  carried
into  some  private  place,  and  stood  by  while  he  was  killed,  f

*  Edward  nevertheless  wrote,  on  the  28th  of  May,  1471,  a  letter  in
•which  he  thanked  the  duke  for  the  valuable  and  brotherly  assistance  he
had  given  him  in  his  distress.  See  Salazard,  iv.  306.

•(•  King  Henry  VI.,  says  Home,  "  expired  5*>  the  Tower  a  few  days


202  THE KEMOIKS OP PHILIP  DE COMMUTES. [1471.

The  Prince  of  "Wales  (of  whom  I  have  spoken  before)  had
landed  in  England  before  this  battle,  and  had  joined  his  forces
with  those  of  the  Dukes  of  Exeter  and  Somerset,  and  several
others  of  their  family  and  party  ;  so  that  in  all  (as  I  have  been
informed  by  those  who  were  in  that  army)  they  amounted
to  above  40,000  men.  If  the  Earl  of  Warwick  had  stayed
till  he  had  been  joined  by  those  forces,  in  all  probability  they
had  won  the  day.  But  the  fear  he  had  of  the  Duke  of
Somerset,  whose  father  and  brother  he  had  put  to  death  * ,
and  the  hatred  he  bore  to  Queen  Margaret,  mother  to  the
Prince  of  Wales,  induced  him  to  fight  alone,  without  waiting
for  them.  By  this  example  we  may  observe  how  long  old
animosities  last,  how  highly  they  are  to  be  feared  in  themselves,
and  how  destructive  and  dangerous  they  are  in  their  conse-
quences.

As  soon  as  King  Edward  had  obtained  this  victory,  he
marched  against  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  there  he  had
another  great  battle  f;  for  though  the  Prince  of  Wales's
army  was  more  numerous  than  the  king's,  yet  King  Edward
got  the  victory ;  and  the  Prince  of  Wales  f,  several  other

after  the  battle  of  Tewkesbury,  but  whether  he  died  a  natural  or  violent
death  is  uncertain.  It  is  pretended,  and  was  generally  believed,  that  the
Duke  of  Gloucester  killed  him  with  his  own  hands  ;  but  the  universal
odium  which  that  prince  has  incurred,  inclined  perhaps  the  nation  to
aggravate  his  crimes,  without  any  sufficient  authority.  It  is  certain,  how-
ever, that  Henry's  death  was  sudden  ;  and,  though  he  laboured  under  an
ill  state  of  health,  this  circumstance,  joined  to  the  general  manners  of  the
age,  gave  a  natural  ground  of  suspicion,  which  was  rather  increased
than  diminished  by  the  exposing  of  his  body  to  public  view."

*  The  Earl  of  Warwick  was  not  personally  the  cause  of  their  death.
Edmund  Beaufort,  Duke  of  Somerset,  lost  his  life  at  the  battle  of  St.
Albans,  on  the  23rd  of  May,  1455,  commanding  the  army  opposed  to
that  of  which  Warwick  was  the  leader.  The  two  sons  of  this  Duke  of
Somerset,  Edmund  and  John,  were  slain  in  the  battle  of  Tewkesbury.

f  This  battle  was  fought  near  Tewkesbury,  in  Gloucestershire,  on  the
4th  of  May,  1471.

J  "  Queen  Margaret  and  her  son,"  says  Hume,  "  were  taken  prisoners,
and  brought  to  the  king,  who  asked  the  prince,  in  an  insulting  manner,
how  he  dared  to  invade  his  dominions  ?  The  young  prince,  more
mindful  of  his  high  birth  than  of  his  present  fortune,  replied  that  he
came  thither  to  claim  his  just  inheritance.  The  ungenerous  Edward,
insensible  to  pity,  struck  him  on  the  face  with  his  gauntlet :  and  the
Dukes  of  Clarence  and  Gloucester,  Lord  Hastings,  and  Sir  Thomas


1471.]  ESTABLISHMENT OF KING EDWARD.  203

great  lords,  and  a  great  number  of  common  soldiers,  were
killed  upon  the  spot,  and  the  Duke  of  Somerset,  being  taken,
was  beheaded  the  next  day.  In  eleven  days  the  Earl  of
Warwick  had  gained  the,  whole  kingdom  of  England,  or  at
least  reduced  it  to  his  obedience.  In  twenty-one  days  King
Edward  recovered  it  again,  but  it  cost  him  two  great  and
desperate  battles  to  regain  it.  And  thus  you  have  an  account
of  the  revolutions  of  England.  King  Edward  caused  num-
bers of  persons  to  be  put  to  death  in  many  places,  especially
those  that  were  guilty  of  any  confederacy  against  him.  Of
all  nations  in  the  world,  the  English  are  most  inclined  to
such  battles.  After  this  fight,  King  Edward  enjoyed  con-
tinual peace  till  his  death,  yet  not  without  some  troubles  and
afflictions  of  mind ;  but  I  shall  forbear  saying  any  more
about  English  affairs,  till  I  can  do  it  more  conveniently  in
another  place.


CH.  VIII. — How  the  "War  was  renewed  between  King  Louis  and  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  at  the  Solicitation  of  the  Dukes  of  Guienne  and
Bretagne. — 1471.

THE  place  where  I  broke  off  relating  our  affairs  on  this  side
the  water,  was  at  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  departing  from
before  Amiens*,  the  king's  retreat  into  Touraine,  and  his
brother  the  Duke  of  Guienne's  return  into  his  own  province.
The  Duke  of  Guienne  still  persisted  in  his  solicitation  for
the  marriage,  to  which  he  pretended,  with  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's daughter,  as  I  have  already  said.  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  seemed  to  entertain  it  very  kindly,  and  to  be
pleased  with  his  proposals,  yet  never  suffered  it  to  come  to
any  conclusion,  but  admitted  of  every  new  overture  that  was
made  ;  nor  could  he  ever  forget  the  stratagem  they  had  made
use  of  to  force  him  to  consent  to  this  match.  The  Count  of
St.  Paul,  Constable  of  France,  had  a  great  desire  to  be  the
main  instrument  in  this  marriage;  the  Duke  of  Bretagne
had  also  a  design  to  be  the  principal  manager  himself;  and

Gray,  taking  the  blow  as  a  signal  for  further  violence,  hurried  the  prince
into  the  next  apartment,  and  there  despatched  him  with  their  daggers."
Commines  says  erroneously  that  he  fell  on  the  field.
*  On  the  10th  of  April,  1471.


204  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMBINES.  [1471.

the  king's*  chief  business  was,  if  possible,  to  break  it  off.
But  his  majesty  might  have  spared  his  pains,  for  the  two
reasons  which  I  have  mentioned  before ;  besides,  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  had  no  mind  to  have  his  son-in-law  so  power-
ful, but  designed  to  make  his  advantage  of  his  daughter,  and
advance  his  own  interest  by  entertaining  everybody  ;  so
that  the  king  lost  his  pains.  But  not  being  able  to  dive  into
another  man's  thoughts,  he  had  good  reason  to  be  afraid,  for
by  this  marriage  his  brother  would  have  grown  very  con-
siderable, and,  in  conjunction  with  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,
might  have  embroiled  the  king's  affairs,  and  brought  his
children  into  very  dangerous  circumstances.  In  the  mean-
time several  ambassadors  went  both  publicly  and  privately
to  negotiate  this  affair.

The  going  and  coming  of  ambassadors  in  this  manner
is  sometimes  very  dangerous ;  for  many  ill  things  are  often
transacted  by  them,  and  yet  there  is  necessity  of  sending  and
receiving  them.  Those  who  read  this  chapter  may  perhaps
demand  what  expedient  I  can  propose  to  remedy  this  incon-
venience. I  am  sensible  there  are  many  persons  better
qualified  to  treat  of  this  subject  than  myself;  yet  this  I
shall  venture  to  say,  that  ambassadors  who  come  from  true
friends,  where  there  is  no  ground  of  suspicion,  ought,  in  my
judgment,  to  be  treated  with  abundance  of  freedom  and
openness ;  and,  if  the  quality  of  the  persons  permit,  should
be  often  admitted  to  the  king's  presence,  provided  the  prince
be  wise  and  affable,  for  otherwise  the  less  he  is  seen  the
better  ;  and  whenever  he  gives  audience  he  ought  to  be
magnificently  dressed,  well  prepared  in  his  answers,  and  not
permitted  to  hold  any  long  discourse,  for  the  friendship  be-
tween princes  is  not  of  long  duration.  If  ambassadors  are
sent  in  a  public  or  private  capacity  between  princes  that  are
in  continual  hatred  and  war  with  one  another,  as  all  those
that  I  have  known  and  been  conversant  with  in  my  time
have  been,  in  my  opinion  they  are  not  greatly  to  be  trusted.
However,  they  are  to  be  honourably  received  and  civilly
entertained;  for  to  send  to  meet  them,  to  lodge  them  in
handsome  apartments,  and  to  appoint  honest  and  discreet
persons  to  attend  them,  is  safe  as  well  as  civil ;  for  thereby

*  See  the  instructions  given  by  the  king  to  M.  du  Bouchage  oa  thii
subject,  in  Lenglet,  iii.  160.


1471.]  CONCERNING AMBASSADORS.  205

you  not  only  discover  what  persons  they  generally  converse
with,  but  also  prevent  fickle  and  mutinous  people  from  re-
sorting to  them  with  news,  and  there  is  no  court  without  some
mal-contents.  Again,  I  would  advise  that  they  have  their
audience  and  despatch  as  soon  as  possible,  for  to  me  it  seems
dangerous  to  keep  an  enemy  in  one's  house  ;  but  to  feast  them,
to  bear  their  expenses,  and  to  make  them  presents,  is  but
honourable.

Moreover,  though  war  be  proclaimed,  no  treaty  nor  over-
ture of  peace  ought  to  be  interrupted,  for  nobody  knows
what  occasion  they  may  have  of  them  hereafter,  but  all
should  be  carried  on  smoothly,  and  all  messengers  be  heard  as
before  ;  yet  a  strict  eye  is  to  be  kept  upon  such  as  have  any
discourse  with  them,  or  are  sent  to  them  with  any  message
either  by  night  or  day  ;  and  this  should  be  managed  with  as
much  secrecy  as  possible.  Were  it  my  case,  for  one  ambas-
sador or  message  they  sent  me,  I  would  be  sure  to  send  them
two  ;  nay,  though  they  grew  weary,  and  desired  to  have  no
more,  I  would  not  fail  to  send  when  I  had  opportunity  and
convenience,  for  there  is  no  spy  so  good  or  so  safe,  nor  who
can  have  such  liberty  to  pry  and  inform  himself ;  and  if  you
send  two  or  three  ambassadors  at  once,  it  is  impossible  the
enemy  should  be  so  cautious,  but  that  one  or  other  of  them
may  secretly  or  otherwise  pick  up  something  to  serve  their
turn ;  I  mean,  if  they  carry  themselves  civilly  towards  them,  as
they  ought  to  do  to  ambassadors.  It  is  also  to  be  supposed
a  wise  prince  will  make  it  his  business  to  place  some  friend
or  other  about  his  enemy,  and  ward  him  off  as  long  as  he
can  ;  for  in  such  cases  a  prince  cannot  do  always  as  he  would.
But  perhaps  it  may  be  objected,  that  this  is  but  the  way  to
puff  up  your  enemy,  and  make  him  more  proud.  It  is  no
matter  if  it  does ;  I  shall  know  the  more  of  his  councils,  and
at  the  making  up  of  our  accounts,  the  whole  profit  and
honour  will  be  mine.  Though  the  enemy  should  have  the
same  designs  upon  me,  I  would  not  forbear  sending,  but
listen  to  all  propositions  without  rejecting  any,  that  I  might
always  have  fresh  occasion  to  send ;  for  all  men  have  not  an
equal  share  of  wisdom  and  penetration,  neither  have  they  as
much  experience  in  such  affairs,  nor  is  there  any  necessity
that  they  should  have  ;  yet  in  this  case,  the  wisest  is  always
the  most  fortunate,  and  of  this  I  will  give  you  a  clear  and


206  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  _ [1472.

undeniable  proof.  Never  was  there  any  treaty  between  the
French  and  the  English,  but  the  French  always  overreached
them  by  their  sense  and  ability,  insomuch  that,  as  I  have  been
told,  the  English  have  a  common  proverb  among  them,  That
in  all,  or  most,  of  their  battles  and  engagements  with  the
French  the  English  had  the  better,  but  in  all  their  treaties
of  peace  they  were  juggled  and  outwitted.  And  certainly,
at  least  in  my  thoughts,  I  have  known  politicians  in  this
kingdom  as  proper  to  manage  such  secret  negotiations  as  any
persons  alive,  especially  those  of  King  Louis's  training  up  ;
for  in  these  cases  the  persons  employed  ought  to  be  com-
plaisant, and  men  who,  to  compass  their  master's  designs,
can  digest  words  and  overlook  neglects ;  and  such  were  for
King  Louis's  turn.  I  have  enlarged  a  little  on  the  subject
of  ambassadors,  and  the  caution  that  is  to  be  used  towards
them;  but  it  is  not  without  reason,  for  I  have  known  so
many  intrigues,  and  so  much  mischief  carried  on  under  that
colour,  that  I  could  not  forbear  laying  this  matter  open,  or
speak  less  of  it  than  I  have  done.

This  marriage  between  the  Duke  of  Guienne  and  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  daughter  proceeded  so  far,  that  promises
were  passed,  not  only  by  word  of  mouth,  but  by  letters  ;  but
the  like  was  done  also*  by  Nicholas,  Duke  of  Calabria  and
Lorraine,  the  son  of  John,  Duke  of  Calabria  (whom  I  have
mentioned  before);  as  also  by  Philibert,  Duke  of  Savoyf,
who  died  lately ;  and  afterwards  by  Duke  Maximilian  of
Austria  J,  now  King  of  the  Romans,  and  only  son  to  the
Emperor  Frederick,  which  last  received  a  letter  under  the
lady's  own  hand  (written  by  her  father's  express  command),

*  By  letters  dated  June  13.  1472.

f  Philibert,  Duke  of  Savoy,  son  of  Amadeus  IX.,  Duke  of  Savoy,  and
Yolande  of  France,  daughter  of  Charles  VII.,  was  born  on  the  7th  of
August,  1465,  and  succeeded  his  father  on  the  28th  of  March,  1472.
In  January,  1474,  he  married  Bianca  Maria,  daughter  of  Galeazzo
Marie  Sforza,  Duke  of  Milan  ;  and  he  died  on  the  22nd  of  April,  1482.

J  Maximilian  of  Austria,  son  of  Frederick  III.  and  Eleanor  of  Portugal,
was  born  on  the  22nd  of  March,  1459,  elected  King  of  the  Romans  on
the  16th  of  February,  1486,  crowned  on  the  9th  of  April  following,  and
succeeded  his  father  in  1493.  He  married  1.  Mary  of  Burgundy,  on  the
20th  of  August,  1477  ;  and  2.  in  1494,  Bianca  Maria,  widow  of  Philibert,
Duke  of  Savoy.  In  1489,  he  was  contracted  to  Anne  of  Bretagne,  but
this  match  was  broken  off.  He  died  on  the  12th  of  January,  1519.


1472.] THE KING  CORRUPTS GUIEXXE's SERVANTS.  207

and  with  it  a  rich  diamond  as  a  present.  These  promises
were  made  with  all  these  princes  in  less  than  three  years'
time ;  and  sure  I  am  none  of  them  would  ever  have  been
accomplished  while  he  lived,  at  least  by  his  consent ;  but
Duke  Maximilian  (since  King  of  the  Romans)  made  his  ad-
vantage of  that  promise,  as  I  shall  declare  hereafter.  I  do
not  mention  this  with  any  design  to  reflect  upon  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  or  any  other  person  I  have  spoken  of,  but  only  to
describe  things  as  to  my  own  certain  knowledge  they  hap-
pened ;  for  I  do  not  suppose  that  blockheads  and  inferior
persons  will  give  themselves  the  trouble  of  reading  these
Memoirs,  but  princes  and  other  great  statesmen  may  do  it,
and  find  some  information  to  reward  their  pains.

Whilst  this  marriage  was  in  agitation,  new  enterprises
were  still  contriving  against  the  king.  In  the  behalf  of  the
Duke  of  Guienne,  there  were  resident  at  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's court,  the  Lord  d'Urfe,  Poncet  de  Riviere,  and
several  other  officers  of  less  note.  On  the  Duke  of  Bre-
tagne's  part,  there  was  the  Abbe  de  Begar  *  (since  Bishop
of  Leon),  who  acquainted  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  that  the
king  was  endeavouring  to  corrupt  the  servants  of  the  Duke
of  Guienne,  and  was  in  a  fair  way  of  bringing  them  over  to
his  party,  either  by  love  or  force  ;  that  he  had  already
caused  a  castle  f  belonging  to  Monsieur  d'EstissacJ  (one  of
the  duke's  servants)  to  be  demolished  ;  and  that  he  had
begun  several  other  things  against  him,  and  inveigled
several  of  his  domestics ;  from  whence  it  might  be  reason-
ably concluded,  that  as  the  king  had  formerly  dispossessed
him  of  Normandy,  after  he  had  given  it  him  by  way  of
appanage,  so  now  he  would  disseize  him  of  Guienne.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy  sent  several  embassies  to  the
king  about  these  affairs,  who  replied,  that  his  brother  the
Duke  of  Guienne  was  in  fault,  who  by  endeavouring  to

*  Vincent  de  Kerlean,  Abbe  de  Begar,  Chancellor  of  Bretagne,  and
councillor  of  Duke  Francis  II.,  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Leon  in  1473,
and  made  his  solemn  entry  into  his  church  on  the  10th  of  June  in  that
year.  He  died  in  1476.

I  The  Castle  of  Coulonges,  between  Toulouse  and  Lectoure.
Jean,  Lord  of  L'Esparre,  Baron  of  Estissac,  was  the  son  of  Lancelot.
Lord  of  L'Esparre,  and  Jeanne,  Lady  of  Estissac. His  son  Geoffiroi
d'Estissac,  Bishop  of  Maillezais,  was  one  of  the  patrons  of  the  celebrated
Rabelais.


208  TEE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1472.

extend  his  territories,  gave  occasion  to  all  those  disputes ;
and  without  that,  he  would  not  meddle  with  his  appanage
in  the  least.  But  here  one  may  observe  by  the  by,  how
great  the  troubles  and  distractions  of  a  kingdom  are,  when
they  happen  in  a  time  of  confusion  and  discord,  how  difficult
and  uneasy  they  are  to  be  managed,  and  how  far  from  a
conclusion,  when  once  they  are  begun ;  for  though  at  first
the  quarrel  be  only  between  two  or  three  princes,  or  persons
of  lower  condition,  before  two  years  be  expired,  the  whole
neighbourhood  will  be  concerned  and  invited  to  the  feast.
However,  in  the  beginning  of  an  affair,  every  man  presumes
there  will  be  a  speedy  end,  but  it  is  very  uncertain,  as  you
will  plainly  perceive  by  what  follows.

At  the  time  above  mentioned,  the  Duke  of  Guienne  (or
his  ministers)  and  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  solicited  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  not  to  employ  the  English,  who  were  enemies
to  the  crown,  in  any  of  his  wars  upon  any  account  whatso-
ever ;  and  since  their  own  pretences  were  only  for  the  ease
and  advantage  of  the  kingdom  of  France,  they  did  not
doubt  but  that  if  his  forces  were  in  readiness,  they  should  be
strong  enough  of  themselves,  by  reason  of  the  great  intelli-
gence which  they  had  with  many  officers  and  governors  of
towns.  I  was  present  one  day  when  the  Lord  d'Urfe
pressed  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  assemble  his  army  with
all  possible  diligence ;  the  duke  called  me  aside  to  a  window,
and  said,  "  Do  you  see  this  Lord  d'Urfe  ?  he  presses  me  very
earnestly  to  raise  what  forces  I  can,  and  tells  me  we  shall  do
great  matters  for  the  advantage  of  the  kingdom.  Do  you
believe,  if  I  enter  France  with  my  army,  I  shall  do  them  any
good  ?  "  I  replied  (smiling)  that  I  thought  not :  he  answered
again  in  these  very  words,  "  I  love  the  kingdom  of  France
better  than  the  Lord  d'Urfe  believes,  for  whereas  they  have
but  one  king,  I  wish  they  had  six."

Whilst  this  treaty  of  marriage  was  on  foot,  Edward,  King
of  England  (being  deceived  as  well  as  the  King  of  France,
in  supposing  it  real),  used  his  utmost  endeavours  with  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  to  break  it  off ;  remonstrating  to  him,  that
as  the  King  of  France  had  no  son*,  if  he  died,  the  crown
would  devolve  upon  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  so  that  all  Eng-

*  This  is  an  error  ;  for  Charles  VIII.  was  born  on  the  30th  of  June,
1470.


1472.]  ILLNESS OF TOE DTJKE OP GTJIENXE.  209

land  would  be  in  danger  of  being  utterly  ruined  by  the  con-
summation of  that  marriage,  which  would  annex  so  many
lordships  to  that  crown ;  and  he  took  this  matter  marvel-
lously to  heart,  and  so  did  his  whole  council  (though  with-
out any  cause) ;  nor  could  all  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
excuses  induce  the  English  to  believe  him.  However  (for
nil  the  solicitation  of  the  agent  of  the  Dukes  of  Guienne  and
Bretagne  to  the  contrary),  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  a
mind  the  English  should  be  concerned  in  the  war  ;  butit  was
to  be  done  privately,  as  if  he  had  known  nothing  of  it ;  but
the  English  were  so  far  from  embracing  this  opportunity,
that  they  would  at  that  time  rather  have  assisted  the  King
of  France,  so  fearful  were  they,  lest  by  this  marriage  the
territories  of  the  house  of  Burgundy  should  be  annexed  to
the  crown  of  France.

You  see  here  (according  to  my  design)  these  great  princes
thoroughly  employed  and  surrounded  with  men  of  such
wisdom  and  foresight,  that  their  lives  were  not  sufficient  to
accomplish  half  what  they  foresaw  ;  and  it  proved  so  after-
wards, for  one  after  another,  ali  of  them  died  in  a  short
space  of  time,  in  the  midst  of  their  anxieties  and  hurry,
every  one  rejoicing  and  triumphing  at  the  death  of  his  com-
panion, as  a  thing  which  he  most  passionately  desired.  Not
long  after,  their  masters  followed  them,  and  left  their  suc-
cessors deeply  involved  in  wars  and  troubles,  excepting
only  our  present  king*,  who  found  his  kingdom  at  peace  both
abroad  and  at  home ;  his  father  having  provided  better  for
him  than  he  ever  could  or  would  have  done  for  himself,  for
in  my  time  he  was  never  out  of  war  till  a  little  before  his
death.

About  this  time  the  Duke  of  Guienne  fell  sick ;  some
were  of  opinion  he  was  in  great  danger,  others  said  i.e  would
soon  recover  of  his  illness.  His  agents  in  the  meanwhile
pressed  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  (seeing  the  season  was
opportune)  to  take  the  field,  and  open  the  campaign,  for  the
King  of  France  had  already  assembled  his  army  about
St.  Jean  d'Angely  or  Saintes ;  and  they  prevailed  so  far,

*  Charles  VIII.,  son  of  Louis  XI.  and  Charlotte  of  Savoy,  was  con-
secrated at  l\heims  on  the  30th  of  May,  1484.  On  the  13th  of
December,  1491,  he  married  Anne  of  Bretagne  ;  and  he  died  on  the  7th
of  April,  1498.

P


210  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1472.

that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  ordered  his  forces  to  rendez-
vous about  Arras*,  and  then  marched  towards  Peronne,
Roye,  and  Montdidier.  His  army  was  very  numerous,
and  in  better  order  than  it  ever  was  before ;  for  it  consisted
of  1200  standing  lances,  who  to  every  man-at-arms  had
three  archers,  all  of  them  well  armed,  and  well  mounted ;
besides,  in  every  company  he  had  ten  supernumerary
men-at-arms,  without  reckoning  the  lieutenants  or  cornets.
The  nobles  of  the  country  were  likewise  in  complete
order ;  for  they  were  well  paid  (the  country  being  at  that
time  very  rich),  and  commanded  by  notable  knights  and
esquires.


CH.  IX. — How  the  final  Peace  which  was  negotiating  between  the  King
and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  was  broken  oft'  by  the  Duke  of  Guienue's
Death  and  how  those  two  great  Princes  laboured  to  circumvent  one
another. — 1472.

As  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  setting  out  from  Arras,  two
couriers  arrived,  one  of  them  with  news,  that  Nicholas,  Duke
of  Calabria  and  Lorraine,  heir  to  the  house  of  Anjou,  and
son  to  John,  Duke  of  Calabria,  was  upon  his  journey  to  his
court,  in  order  to  marry  his  daughter.  The  duke  received
him  very  honourably,  and  gave  him  great  hopes  of  success.
The  next  day,  which  (if  I  mistake  not)  was  the  15th  of
Mayf,  1472,  letters  arrived  from  Simon  de  Quingy  (AV!IO
was  the  duke's  ambassador  at  the  king's  court),  importing
that  the  Duke  of  Guienne  was  dead,  and  the  king  already  in
possession  of  great  part  of  his  country.  Not  long  after,  we
heard  the  news  from  several  parts,  but  all  gave  a  different
account  of  his  death.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy,  being  highly  concerned  at  the
death  of  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  at  the  instigation  of  other
people  as  much  concerned  as  himself,  wrote  letters  J  full  of

*  The  duke  was  at  Arras  on  May  16.  1472  ;  at  Peronne,  June  9.;  at
Eoye,  June  14.;  and  on  the  25th  of  the  same  mouth,  he  encamped  out-
side Maisnil,  near  Montdidier.

f  The  duke  died  on  the  28th  of  May.

j  In  these  letters,  dated  from  the  camp  before  Beauvais,  July  16.
1472,  the  duke  accuses  the  king  of  having  poisoned  his  brother  by  means


1472.] CAPTURE  AND  SACK  OF  NESLE. 211

bitter  reflections  upon  the  king  to  several  of  the  Duke  of
Guienne's  towns,  but  to  no  purpose  ;  yet  I  am  of  opinion,
that  if  the  duke  had  not  been  dead,  the  king  would  have
found  work  enough,  for  the  Bretons  were  up  in  arms,  and
had  a  stronger  party  in  the  kingdom  than  ever  they  had
before ;  but  his  death  put  a  stop  to  all.  In  this  violent
passion  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  took  the  field,  marched
towards  Nesle,  in  Vermandois  *,  and  began  a  more  cruel
and  barbarous  war  than  ever  before,  burning  and  de-
stroying all  wherever  he  marched.  His  van  besieged
Nesle,  in  which  there  was  a  small  garrison  of  frank-
archers,  but  otherwise  the  town  was  of  no  great  strength.
The  duke  himself  had  his  quarters  three  leagues  oflf.  A
herald,  coming  to  them  with  a  summons,  was  slain  by  the
inhabitants  of  the  town.  The  governor*  would  fain  have
excused  it,  and  having  obtained  a  passport,  came  out  to  that
purpose,  but  could  not  agree  upon  the  matter.  As  he
returned  into  the  town,  the  garrison  stood  exposed  upon  the
walls,  but  there  being  a  truce  whilst  the  governor  was
abroad,  nobody  fired  upon  the  townsmen ;  however,  they
killed  two  more  of  the  besiegers.  Upon  which  the  truce  was
broken,  and  word  was  sent  in  to  Madame  de  Nesle,  to  tell
her,  that  if  she  pleased,  she  and  her  servants  might  have  the
liberty  of  coming  out,  and  bringing  all  her  moveables  with
her  ;  which  she  had  no  sooner  done,  but  the  town  was
attacked,  taken,  and  most  of  the  garrison  put  to  the  sword.
Those  who  were  taken  alive  were  hanged,  except  some
few  whom  the  common  soldiers  in  mere  compassion  suf-
fered to  escape ;  some  of  them  had  their  hands  cut  off,
a  cruelty  which  gives  me  concern  to  mention ;  but  having
been  upon  the  spot,  I  thought  myself  obliged  to  give
some  account  of  it.  It  must  be  granted  that  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  was  highly  enraged  to  be  guilty  of  so  bar-
barous an  action,  or  that  there  must  have  been  some
extraordinary  cause  that  provoked  him  to  it.  Two  were
alleged ;  one  was,  the  strange  report  of  the  manner  of  the

of  a  friar  named  Jourdain  Favre,  and  of  Henri  de  la  Eoche,  esquire  of
his  kitchen.

*  On  Thursday,  June  11.  1472.

t  "  Named  Le  Petit  Picard,  who  was  captain  of  500  frank-arcnera,
from  the  Isle  of  France,  who  were  in  that  town." Lenglet,  ii.  94.

P  2


212  THE MEilOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES.  [1472.

Duke  of  Guienne's  death,  as  if  the  king  had  been  concerned
in  it ;  and  the  other,  the  indignation  he  conceived  at  the  loss
of  Amiens  and  St.  Quentin,  which  I  have  mentioned  before.

Whilst  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  with  the  above-
mentioned  army,  and  before  the  Duke  of  Guienne's  death,
the  Lord  of  Craon,  and  Peter  Doriole*,  Chancellor  of  France,
came  to  him  twice  or  thrice,  with  proposals  for  a  final  and
lasting  peace,  which  could  never  be  compassed  before,  be-
cause the  duke  insisted  upon  the  restitution  of  Amiens  and
St.  Quentin,  to  which  the  king  would  by  no  means  consent :
but  now,  seeing  the  duke's  preparations,  and  hoping  it  might
conduce  to  the  following  design,  he  agreed  to  restore  them.
The  conditions  of  peace  were,  that  the  king  should  deliver
up  Amiens  and  St.  Quentin,  and  whatever  else  was  in
dispute  between  them  ;  that  he  should  likewise  abandon  the
Count  of  Nevers,  and  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  Constable  of
France,  with  all  the  lands  and  territories  belonging  to  either
of  them,  to  be  disposed  of  as  his  own,  if  the  duke  could  get
the  possession  of  them.  On  the  other  side,  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  was  to  renounce  the  Dukes  of  Guienne  and
Bretagne,  as  also  the  protection  of  their  countries,  and  to
permit  him  to  act  against  them  as  he  pleased.  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  swore  to  these  articles  in  my  presence ;  and  the
Lord  of  Craon  and  the  Chancellor  of  France  having  taken
,the  same  oath  in  behalf  of  the  kincr,  took  their  leaves  of  the
duke,  but  advised  him  not  to  disband,  but  rather  march  forward
with  his  army,  to  hasten  their  master's  surrender  of  the
above-mentioned  towns  ;  and  Simon  de  Quingy  was  sent
with  them  to  see  the  king  take  his  oath,  and  confirm  what
his  ambassadors  had  done.  The  king  delayed  the  ratification
of  this  treaty  for  some  days,  and  in  the  meantime  his
brother  the  Duke  of  Guienne  died.

Soon  after  Simon  de  Quingy  returned,  being  sent  back  by
the  king  with  mild  and  courteous  words,  but  no  swearing  to
the  peace,  which  the  duke  highly  resented,  as  a  thing  done
in  scorn  and  contempt.  Whilst  the  war  lasted,  for  this  and

*  Pierre  d'Oriolle,  Lord  of  Loire  in  Aulnis,  was  the  son  of  Jean
d'Oriolle,  Burgess  and  Mayor  of  La  Eochelle,  and  Collette  du  Gue-
charrox  ;  he  was  appointed  Chancellor  of  France  on  the  26th  of  June,
1472,  and  resigned  his  office  in  May,  1483.  He  died  on  the  14th  of
September,  1485.


1472.] ATTEMPT  OF  THE  KING  TO  OUTWIT  THE  DUKE. 213

several  other  reasons  you  have  heard  before,  the  duke's
ministers  made  bold  with  his  majesty,  and  gave  him  most
bitter  and  reproachful  language,  and  the  king's  own  subjects
did  not  dissemble  the  matter,  but  were  very  free  with  his
character.

Those  who  hereafter  may  read  these  Memoirs,  may  think
I  have  spoken  very  disrespectfully,  and  with  too  much  free-
dom, of  these  two  great  princes,  or  that  else  they  were
persons  of  but  small  honour  or  faith.  I  would  not  willingly
speak  ill  of  either  of  them  ;  and  what  great  obligations  I
have  to  the  king  my  master  all  the  world  knows.  But  to
continue  my  history  in  the  same  manner  (as  you,  my  good
Lord  Archbishop  of  yienne,  have  desired  me)  I  am  obliged
to  give  an  impartial  and  true  account  of  what  I  know,  which
way  soever  it  happened.  However,  were  they  to  be  com-
pared with  the  rest  of  the  great  princes  that  reigned  in
Europe  at  the  same  time,  they  would  appear  noble  and  con-
spicuous, and  our  king  very  wise,  for  he  left  his  kingdom
enlarged,  and  at  peace  with  all  his  enemies.  But  now  let  us
observe  a  little  what  artifices  and  stratagems  they  used  to
overreach  and  circumvent  one  another,  that  in  case  any
young  prince,  who  has  the  same  game  to  play,  should  here-
after accidentally  meet  with  this  history,  he  may,  by  reading
it,  be  prepared,  and  defend  himself  the  better ;  for  though
neither  enemies  nor  princes  are  always  alike,  yet  their
affairs  being  often  the  same,  it  is  not  altogether  unprofitable
to  be  informed  of  what  is  past.  To  give  then  my  opinion,  I
am  very  confident  these  two  princes  had  the  same  desire  of
circumventing  each  other,  and  their  ends  (as  you  shall  hear
afterwards)  were  the  same.

Each  of  them  had  a  numerous  army  in  the  field;  the  king
had  taken  several  towns,  and  whilst  the  treaty  was  on  foot,
pressed  his  brother  very  hard.  There  were  already  come
over  to  the  king,  of  the  Duke  of  Guienne's  party,  the  Lord
of  Curton*,  Patris  Foucart -J-,  and  several  others.  The

*  Gilbert  de  Chabannes,  Lord  of  Carton,  Baron  of  llochefort,  was  the
son  of  Jacques  de  Chabannes  and  Anne  de  Lavicu.  He  was  councillor
and  chamberlain  to  the  Duke  of  Guieime,  and  afterwards  to  the  king,
and  was  made  Governor  of  Limousin  in  1473.  He  died  in  1493.

f  Patrice  Foucart  was  captain  of  forty  archers  of  the  guard  of  the
Duke  of  Berry  and  Guienne,  and  chamberlain  to  that  prince.

p  3


214  THE MEMOIRS OP  PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1472.

king's  army  had  actually  invested  La  Rochelle,  and  held  great
intelligence  in  the  town,  which  was  much  increased  by  the
report  of  the  peace,  and  the  Duke  of  Guienne's  illness ;  and
I  believe  the  king's  resolution  was  (if  either  he  succeeded
in  his  enterprise  there,  or  his  brother  died)  not  to  swear  to
the  peace  ;  but,  if  the  enemy  got  the  better  of  him,  he  would
then  swear,  and  keep  his  engagements,  to  deliver  himself
from  danger.  In  this  manner  he  spun  out  his  time,  managed
all  his  affairs  with  wonderful  diligence,  and,  as  you  have
heard,  kept  Simon  de  Quingy  eight  days  together  in  sus-
pense, and  in  the  meantime  his  brother  happened  to  die  ;
for  he  knew  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  so  intent  upon  the
restitution  of  those  two  towns*,  that  he  durst  not  be  angry,
but  might  securely  be  wheedled  for  a  fortnight  or  three
weeks,  till  he  saw  what  he  had  best  do ;  and  so  it  fell  out.

Having  already  spoken  of  the  king,  and  the  artifice  he
used  to  overreach  and  circumvent  the  duke,  now  it  is  ne-
cessary that  we 'Should  say  something  of  the  duke's  designs
upon  the  king,  and  how  he  would  have  acted  if  the  Duke  of
Guienne's  death  had  not  intervened.  At  the  king's  request,
Simon  de  Quingy  had  a  commission  from  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy (as  soon  as  the  king  had  sworn  to  the  peace,  and
letters  confirming  what  his  ambassadors  had  done,  had  been
received)  to  signify  the  contents  of  the  peace  to  the  Duke
of  Bretagne,  and  also  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  Duke  of
Guienne,  who  were  in  Bretagne,  to  the  end  they  might  notify
it  to  their  master,  who  was  then  at  Bordeaux ;  and  this  the
king  proposed  as  a  thing  that  would  startle  the  Bretons,
since  they  found  themselves  forsaken  by  an  ally  who  was
the  main  support  of  all  their  hopes.  Simon  de  Quingy  had
by  chance  in  his  retinue  one  of  the  equerries  of  the  Duke
of  Burgundy's  stable,  whose  name  was  Henry,  a  Parisian  by
birth,  and  a  very  sensible,  intelligent  person,  to  whom  the
duke  had  given  a  letter  under  his  own  hand,  directed  to  his
ambassador  Simon  de  Quingy,  but  his  instructions  were,  not
to  deliver  that  letter  till  the  ambassador  had  left  the  king,
and  arrived  at  the  Duke  of  Bretagne's  court  at  Nantes.
Then  he  was  to  deliver  the  letter  to  him,  show  him  his
credentials,  and  let  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  know,  that  he  had

*  Amiens  and  St.  Quentin.


1472.] THE DUKE ATTEMPTS TO CHEAT THE KING. 215

no  occasion  to  fear  that  his  master  would  quit  his  alliance
with  him  and  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  for  he  would  still  stand
by  them  both  with  his  life  and  fortune ;  that  what  had  been
already  transacted  was  only  to  avoid  war  for  the  present,
and  repossess  himself  of  Amiens  and  St.  Quentin,  which  the
king  had  taken  from  him  in  time  of  peace,  and  contrary  to
his  promise.  He  was  likewise  ordered  to  acquaint  him,
that  the  duke  his  master  (as  soon  as  he  should  be  possessed
of  what  he  demanded)  would  send  notable  ambassadors  on
purpose  to  the  king,  to  desire  and  entreat  his  majesty  to
desist  from  his  enterprises  against  those  two  dukes ;  and
would  not  adhere  too  strictly  to  the  oath  he  had  taken ;  for
he  was  resolved  to  keep  it  with  no  more  strictness  than  the
king  had  kept  his  in  the  treaty  before  Paris,  called  the
treaty  of  Conflans,  and  the  pacification  at  Peronne,  which
for  a  long  time  he  neglected  to  confirm  and  ratify.  He
designed  likewise  to  put  him  in  mind,  that  he  had  seized  the
said  towns  in  time  of  peace  contrary  to  his  solemn  promise,
and  therefore  he  ought  not  to  be  surprised  if  the  duke  had
taken  the  same  measures  to  recover  them.

As  to  the  Constable  of  France  and  the  Count  of  Nevers,
whom  the  king  had  abandoned,  though  he  had  a  mortal
hatred  against  them,  and  not  without  cause,  yet  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  would  pass  by  all  their  injuries  and  affronts,  if
the  king  would  do  the  same  by  the  Dukes  of  Bretagne  and
Guienne,  and  suffer  all  parties  to  live  in  peace  according  to
his  oath,  and  the  treaty  of  peace  at  Conflans,  where  they
were  all  of  them  assembled  together  ;  protesting  that,  if  he
refused,  he  should  be  .obliged  to  assist  his  allies  with  all  the
forces  he  could  raise ;  and  that  the  duke  was  actually  in  the  field
when  this  embassy  was  despatched.  But  it  happened  other-
wise. Man  proposes,  and  God  disposes ;  for  death  (which
divides  all  things,  and  defeats  the  counsels  of  mankind)
gave  them  other  work  to  do ;  for  the  king  (as  you  have
heard)  did  not  deliver  up  the  two  towns,  and  yet  seized
upon  the  duchy  of  Guienne,  as  rightfully  reverting  unto  him
upon  the  death  of  his  brother.


p  4


216  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1472.

Articles  of  a  Treat//  between  Louis  XI.  and  Charles,  Duke
of  Burgundy,  whereby  the  Treaties  of  Arras,  Conflans,
and  Peronne,  are  confirmed.  Concluded  at  the  Castle  of
Crotoy,  October  3.  1472.

1.  That  there is a firm and  lasting peace concluded
between  the  king  and  his  kingdom,  and us  and  our  terri-
tories ;  and  that  all  hostilities  shall  cease  for  ever  between
them  and  their  subjects,  &c.

2.  That  the  said  peace  may  be  the  better  confirmed  and
established,  and  the  friendship  remain  inviolable,  the  treaty
made  at  Arras  between  the  late  King  Charles  and  our  late
most  dear  lord  and  father,  as  also  the  treaty  of  Conflans,
together with  that  of  Peronne,  are hereby  confirmed  as
much  as  if  they  were  expressly  and  word  for  word  inserted,
and  shall  remain  in  their  full  force,  so  far  as  they  concern
the  king  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy. And  all  those  points
and articles  of  the treaty  of  Peronne,  not  yet  executed,
shall  be  fully  accomplished,  in  the  same  way  and  manner,
and  within  the  same  time,  as  is  specified  in  the  said  treaty.

3.  By  this  present  treat)1"  the  king  is  to  surrender  to  us,
or those  authorised  by  us,  the  towns  of  Amiens  and  St.
Quentin, with  the provostships  of  Vimeux,  Foulloy,  and
Beauvais,  with  all  their  appurtenances,  and  whatever  has
been transferred to us by the treaty of Conflans and
Peronne,  to  be  employed  by  us  in  the  manner  prescribed
by  the  said  treaties. In  like  manner  the  king  is  to  give  up
to  us  the  towns,  provostships,  and  territories  of  Roye  and
Montdidier,  with  their  appurtenances  ;  as  also  what  was  to
have  been  taken  from  the  provostship  of  Peronne. And  as
to  those  places,  towns,  castles,  and  fortresses  in  the  duchy,
county, and  country  of  Burgundy,  Charolois, Maconnois,
Auxerrois,  arid  Liege,  which  the  king  surrenders  to  us,  we
shall  enjoy  them  with  all  their  appurtenances,  as  we  did
before  any  contests  arose  about  them.

4.  As  to  all  moveables  possessed  on  either  side,  as  nlso
all  rents,  revenues,  and  profits,  no  disputes  or  law-suits  shall
be  made  concerning  them.

5.  The  subjects  on  both  sides  shall  be  fully  restored  to  all
their  lands,  signiories, and  inheritances,  and  all  irnmove-
ables  in  the  condition  they  are ;  as  also  such  moveables  as


1472.]  TREATY  OF  CROTOT.  217

are  upon  the  spot,  and  arrearages  of  rents,  and  thus  be  put
into  the  possession  of  them  without  any  let  or  molestation.

6.  All  disorders  and  injuries  done  and  committed  during
the  war  on  either  side  are  remitted,  pardoned,  and  abolished,
in  such  a  manner  as  if  they  had  never  been,  and  no  law-suit
or  process  shall  ever  be  formed  concerning  them.

7.  Seeing  both  the  king  and  we  have,  in  the  beginning  of
the  troubles,  forbidden  all  trade  and  commerce  between  our
subjects,  a  free  trade  and  commerce  is  now  restored,  both  by
sea  and  land,  as  before  the  war.

8.  All  judgments,  judicial  proceedings, and sentences,
given  on  either  side  during  the  war  against  the  adherents  of
the  king  or  us,  upon  the  account  of  contumacy  or  otherwise,
shall  be  null  and  of  no  effect.

9.  The  allies  of  both  parties  shall  be  comprehended  in
this  treaty,  if  within  a  year  after  the  conclusion  of  it  they
signify  their  assent  in  due  form,  which  assent  or  declaration
the  king  and  the  duke  are  to  notify  to  one  another  within
two  months  after  the  same  is  made  ;  but,  in  case  that  should
not  be  done,  there  shall  be  no  breach  of  the  peace  between
them. The  observance  of  all  which  we  do  oblige  ourselves
unto,  in  the  most  solemn  manner  imaginable,  upon  the  word
of  a  prince,  and  upon  the  forfeiture  of  all  we  have ;  and  in
case  we  contravene  the  same,  we  shall  subject  ourselves  to
all  censures  ecclesiastical:  we  shall  also  cause  these  presents
to  be  registered  in  all  our  courts  by  our  proper  officers.


CH.  X. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  having  encamped  before  Beau-
ais,  and  finding  he  could  not  take  it,  raised  the  Siege,  and  marched
with  his  Army  to  Rouen.  — 1472.

BUT  to  proceed  in  my  relation  of  the  war,  of  which  I  was
speaking  before.  After  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  barbarous
treatment  of  the  poor  garrison  of  Nesle,  he  broke  up  from
thence*,  and  marched  with  his  whole  army  and  invested
Roye,  in  which  place  there  was  a  garrison  of  1500  frank-
archers,  besides  a  considerable  number  of  men-at-arms  of
the  arriere-ban.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy's  army  never  made

*  The  duke  left  Nesle  for  Roye  on  Sunday,  June  14. 1472. Lenglet,
ii.  95.


218  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1472.

so  fine  an  appearance  as  at  that  time ;  whereupon  the  next
morning  the  frank-archers,  being  struck  with  a  sudden  fear,
leaped  over  the  walls,  and  surrendered  themselves  prisoners
of  war.  The  next  day  the  remaining  part  of  the  garrison
delivered  up  the  town  upon  composition,  leaving  behind
them  their  horses  and  arms,  only  the  men-at-arms  were
allowed  to  march  away  with  their  horses.  Having  left  a
small  garrison  in  this  town,  he  advanced  to  Montdidier,  with
a  full  design  to  have  demolished  it  quite ;  but,  finding  that
the  people  of  that  district  had  a  great  affection  for  him,  he
ordered  it  to  be  repaired,  and  put  a  garrison  in  it.

From  thence  his  design  was  to  have  marched  directly  into
Normandy ;  but  as  he  was  on  his  way,  near  to  Beauvais,  the
Lord  des  Cordes,  scouring  the  country  before  him  with  his
vanguard,  made  some  attempt  upon  the  town ;  and  at  the
first  attack,  the  suburb,  which  faces  the  bishop's  palace*,
was  taken  by  one  Jacques  Montmartinf,  a  covetous  Burgun-
dian,  who  commanded  100  of  the  duke's  lancers  and  300  of
his  standing  archers.  The  Lord  des  Cordes  made  an  attack
in  another  quarter ;  but  his  ladders  were  too  short  and  too
few.  He  had  two  pieces  of  cannon  with  him,  which  were
fired  twice  (and  no  more)  at  the  gatef,  where  they  made  a
great  breach ;  and  if  he  had  had  ammunition  to  have  con-
tinued his  attack,  he  had  certainly  taken  the  town  ;  but  he
was  ill-provided,  and  not  furnished  for  so  great  an  under-
taking. Upon  our  first  investment  there  were  no  forces  in
the  town  but  Loyset  de  Ballaigny§,  the  governor,  with  some
few  of  the  arriere-ban  ;  but  that  would  not  have  saved  the
town,  had  not  God  himself  interposed,  and  preserved  it  mira-
culously. The  Burgundians  were  engaged  with  the  French

*  The  Burgundians  arrived  before  Beauvais  on  Saturday,  June  27.
1472,  and  attacked  the  town  in  two  places,  at  the  Porte  de  Bresle,  and
at  the  Porte  de  Lin^on,  behind  the  bishop's  palace.

f  Jacques,  Lord  of  Montmartin  and  Loulans,  knight,  was  captain  of
the  archers  of  the  guard  of  Duke  Philip  the  Good.  On  the  22nd  of
January,  1454,  he  married  Guigonne,  daughter  of  Jacques  Bouton.  In
1475,  he  was  one  of  the  chamberlains  of  Duke  Charles  of  Burgundy  ;
and  he  subsequently  became  a  chamberlain  and  councillor  of  Louis  XL

|  The  Porte  de  Bresle.

§  Louis  Gommel,  Lord  of  Balagny,  was  an  esquire,  councillor  and
chamberlain  of  Louis  XI.,  Captain  of  Beauvais,  and  captain-general  of
the  frank-archers.


1472.]  SIEGE OP BEAUVAIS.  219

hand  to  hand  through  the  breach  in  the  gate,  and  the  Lord  des
Cordes  despatched  several  messengers  to  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy to  acquaint  him  that,  if  he  marched  up  presently  with
his  army,  he  would  take  the  town.  Before  the  duke's  ar-
rival, some  of  the  inhabitants  brought  kindled  faggots  to  throw
in  the  faces  of  those  who  were  forcing  the  gate;  and  so  many
were  thrown,  that  the  gate  was  set  on  fire,  and  the  Burgun-
dians  were  glad  to  retire  till  the  flame  was  extinguished.*

The  duke,  upon  his  arrival,  concluded  the  town  would  be
his  own  as  soon  as  the  fire  could  be  quenched,  which  was
very  great ;  for  the  whole  gate  was  in  a  flame.  If  the  duke
could  have  been  persuaded  to  have  posted  part  of  his  army
on  the  side  towards  Paris,  no  succours  could  have  been
thrown  into  it,  and  the  town  could  not  possibly  have  escaped.
But  it  pleased  God  that  he  was  afraid  where  there  was  no
occasion  ;  for  it  was  only  the  passing  of  a  small  rivulet  that
made  him  scruple  it  then;  and  yet  afterwards,  when  the
garrison  was  considerably  reinforced,  he  would  fain  have
attempted  it,  though  with  the  hazard  of  his  whole  army ;  and
much  ado  there  was  to  dissuade  him  from  it.  In  the  mean-
time the  fire,  of  which  I  was  speaking,  continued  burning  all
day  long  (which  was  the  28th  of  June,  1472).  Towards
night  ten  of  the  king's  standing  lances,  and  no  more,  got  into
the  town,  as  I  have  been  told  (for  at  that  time  I  was  in  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  service)  ;  but  they  were  not  perceived,
because  on  one  side  everybody  was  busy  in  taking  up  their
quarters,  and,  on  the  other,  there  was  nobody  at  all.  By
break  of  day  the  next  morning  the  duke's  cannon  came  up,
and  some  time  after  we  saw  a  reinforcement  of  at  least  200
rneii-at-arms  enter  the  town  together.  I  believe,  had  they
not  arrived  as  they  did,  the  town  would  have  capitulated.  But
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  in  such  a  violent  passion,  that  he
was  for  storming  it  immediately ;  and  certainly,  if  he  had
taken  it,  he  would  have  burned  it  to  the  ground,  which
would  have  been  a  great  loss  ;  and  truly  I  am  of  opinion
it  was  preserved  by  a  miracle.  From' the  time  the  recruits
entered,  for  fifteen  days  together,  or  thereabouts,  the  duke's
cannon  fired  continually  on  the  town  ;  and  the  breaches  in

*  "  Which  fire  was  kept  up  more  than  a  week  afterwards,  with  wood
from  the  neighbouring  houses,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  entering  the
town."  Lenglet,  iii.  207.


220  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMBINES. [1472.

the  town-wall  were  wide  enough  and  fit  for  a  general  storm.
However,  the  ditch  being  full  of  water  on  one  side  of  the
gate,  which  was  burnt,  a  bridge  was  of  necessity  to  be  made ;
but  on  the  other  side  of  the  gate  we  could  make  our  ap-
proaches to  the  walls  without  any  danger,  unless  it  were  from
one  casemate,  which  lay  too  low  for  our  cannon  to  batter.

It  is  not  only  dangerous  but  imprudent  to  attack  a  town
where  the  garrison  is  so  strong.  Besides  (if  I  mistake  not),
the  constable  was  in  or  near  the  town,  I  know  not  which,  with
the  Marshal  Joachim,  the  Marshal  of  Loheac,  the  Lord  of
Crussol*,  William  de  Valleef,  Mery  de  Cohe  |,  Sallezard,
Thevenot  de  Vignoles  §,  all  of  them  old  soldiers,  with  at  least
100  men-at-arms  of  the  standing  forces,  a  good  body  of  foot,
besides  many  brave  men,  who  accompanied  them  in  the  nature
of  volunteers.  For  all  this  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  resolved  to
storm  it ;  but  he  was  singular  in  his  opinion  ;  for  there  was
not  one  officer  in  the  whole  army  that  agreed  with  him  in  it.
As  he  was  in  his  tent  that  night,  and  laid  down  in  his  clothes,
he  asked  some  who  were  about  him  if  they  thought  that  the
town  expected  to  be  stormed  ?  They  answered  "Yes,"  and
that  the  garrison  was  strong  enough  to  defend  it,  though  it
were  fortified  only  with  a  hedge.  Upon  which  the  duke  laughed,
and  replied,  "You  will  not  find  a  man  there  in  the  morning."

About  break  of  day||  the  town  was  bravely  attacked,  but
better  defended.  Our  men  pressing  eagerly  forward  over  the
bridge,  in  order  to  mount  the  breach,  the  Lord  Despiris^f,

*  Louis,  Lord  of  Crussol  and  Beaudiner,  Grand  Pantler  of  France,
and  Seneschal  of  Poitou,  was  the  son  of  Geraud  Bastet,  Lord  of  Crussol,
and  Alix  de  Lastic.  He  died  in  August,  1473.

f  Guillaume  de  Valee,  Esquire,  Lord  of  La  Roche-Tesson,  in
Normandy,  was  captain  of  100  lances,  and  lieutenant  of  the  Seneschal
of  Normandy.  His  wife  was  Isabeau  Tesson.

J  Mery  de  Coue,  Esquire,  Lord  of  Fontenailles,  councillor  and
chamberlain  of  the  king,  was  Captain  of  the  town  and  Castle  of  Ainboise.
He  was  lieutenant  of  eighty  lances  in  August,  1470,  when  he  signed  the
treaty  of  Ancenis.

§  Estevenot  de  Talauresse,  surname;!  Vignoles,  Lord  of  Aussemont,
was  Bailiff  of  Montferrat  in  1462,  councillor  and  chamberlain  of  Louis
XI.,  and  Seneschal  of  Carcassonne.  In  1473,  the  king  gave  him  the
barony  of  St.  Sulpice  in  the  diocese  of  Toulou<e.

||  On  the  9th  of  July,  1472. Lenglet,  iii.  212.

•[  Ame  Rabutin,  Lord  of  Epery,  and  Bailiff  of  Charolois,  had  been  a
councillor  and  chamberlain  of  Duke  Philip  the  Good.  His  wife  was
Claude  de  Travers,  daughter  of  Pierre,  Lord  of  La  Parcheresse.


1472.]  THE BESIEGERS REPULSED.  221

being  in  the  middle  of  them,  was  crowded  to  death.  He  was
an  ancient  knight  of  Burgundy,  and  the  bravest  person  that
was  killed  that  day.  On  the  other  side  of  the  gate  several
of  our  men  got  upon  the  walls,  hut  some  of  them  never  came
back  again.  They  were  at  push  of  pike  a  great  while  to-
gether, and  the  assault  continued  a  long  time.  Orders  were
given  for  fresh  troops  to  march  up,  and  relieve  those  that
had  made  the  first  attack  ;  but  the  duke  perceiving  they
would  lose  their  time,  ordered  them  immediately  to  draw  off.
The  garrison  made  no  sally,  for  they  saw  us  drawn  up  in  order
of  battle  ready  to  receive  them.  In  this  attack  we  had  about
sixscore  men  killed  (some  say  more) ;  among  whom  was  the
Lord  Despiris,  who  was  the  only  officer  of  any  note  that  was
lost ;  and  the  number  of  the  wounded  was  full  1000.  The
next  night  after  this  they  sallied  out  upon  us ;  but  the
party  being  small,  most  of  them  on  horseback,  and  their
horses  incommoded  by  the  cords  of  our  tents,  they  did  us  no
great  mischief ;  for  they  had  two  or  three  officers  killed  and
wounded,  and  we  lost  but  one  of  ours,  whose  name  was
Jacques  d'Orson  *,  a  brave  soldier,  and  master  of  the  duke's
ordnance,  who  not  long  after  died  of  his  wounds.

About  a  week  after  this  repulse,  a  fancy  came  into  the  duke's
head  to  divide  his  army,  and  post  one  part  of  it  before  the  gate
towards  Paris ;  but  he  found  none  of  his  officers  approved  of
that  design.  Upon  his  first  arrival,  indeed,  it  was  practi-
cable ;  but  now  the  garrison  was  so  considerably  reinforced,
that  it  was  too  late  to  be  done.  Seeing  there  was  no  remedy,
he  raised  the  siege  f,  and  marched  off  in  very  good  order.  He
expected  they  would  have  sallied  out  and  fallen  upon  his
rear,  and  he  had  taken  care  to  have  given  them  a  warm  re-
ception ;  but  they  were  too  cunning  for  that.  From  thence
he  marched  with  hi.s  army  towards  Normandy,  having  pro-
mised the  Duke  of  Bretagne  to  meet  him  before  Rouen  ;  but
upon  the  Duke  of  Guienne's  death  he  altered  his  resolution,
and  stirred  not  out  of  his  own  territories.  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  presented  himself  before  Euj;  and  after  taking

*  Jacques  d'Orson  was  a  chamberlain  of  the  Count  of  Charolois,  whom
he  attended  at  the  siepc  of  Audenarde  in  1452.

f  On  Wednesday,  July  22.  1472. Lenglet,  iii.  214.

j  The  duke  arrived  before  Eu  on  the  28th  of  July,  and  remained
there  until  the  9th  of  August.


222  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1472.

that  town  and  the  town  of  St.  Valery*,  he  destroyed  with,
fire  and  sword  the  whole  country  to  the  very  walls  of  Dieppe.
He  also  took  Neufchastel,  and  burnt  it,  with  the  whole  country
of  Caux,  or  at  least  the  greatest  part  of  it,  to  the  very  walls
of  Rouen,  to  which  city  he  marched  in  person.  In  this
expedition  he  lost  several  of  his  foragers,  and  his  army
was  mightily  distressed  for  want  of  provisions  ;  so  that,
winter  drawing  on,  he  retired.  His  back  was  no  sooner
turned,  but  the  king's  forces  retook  Eu  and  St.  Valeryf ,
by  which  seven  or  eight  of  the  townsmen  were  left  prisoners
at  discretion.


CH.  XL — How  the  King  concluded  a  Peace  with  the  Duke  of  Bre-
tagne,  and  a  Truce  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  ;  and  how  th
of  St.  Paul  very  narrowly  escaped  a  Plot,  that  was  laid  for  him  by  these
two  great  Princes.  — 1472  — 4.

ABOUT  this  time  (which  was  in  the  year  1472),  I  came  into
the  King  of  France's  service,  who  had  also  entertained  most
of  the.  Duke  of  Guienne's  servants  :  the  king  was  then  at
Pont  de  Ce,  having  assembled  all  his  forces  against  the
Duke  of  Bretagne,  with  whom  he  was  at  war.  At  this
place  arrived  certain  ambassadors  from  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,
and  others  were  sent  in  return  to  his  court.  Among  those
who  came  in  an  embassy  to  the  king,  there  was  Philip  des
Essars  J,  a  servant  of  the  duke's,  and  William  de  Soubs-
Plainville  §,  a  servant  of  the  Lord  of  Lescut,  who,  when  he

*  On  the  30th  of  August,  1472.

t  Eu  and  St.  Valery  surrendered  to  the  king  on  composition.  It  was
stipulated  hy  the  first  town,  that  the  knights  should  have  liberty  to
depart,  "  each  on  a  little  nag  ;  and  all  the  other  Burgundians,  who  were
in  number  more  than  100,  departed  each  with  a  stick  in  his  hand,
and  left  all  their  clothes,  property,  and  horses;  and  payed  10,000
crowns."  The  second  town  surrendered  on  the  same  terms,  and  paid
6000  crowns.  Lenglet,  ii.  100.

J  Philippe  des  Essars,  Lord  of  Thieux,  son  of  Antoine  des  Essars,
•was  steward  to  the  king  in  1464,  and  afterwards  filled  the  same  office
in  the  household  of  the  Duke  of  Bretagne.  He  died  in  1478.

§  Guillaume  de  Soupplainville  was  steward  to  Francis,  Dnke  of
Bretagne,  Vice-admiral  of  Guienne,  Bailiff  of  Hontargis,  and  Lord  of
Soupplainville  and  Villemandeur.


1472.]  OVERTURES  FOR  PEACE.  223

saw  his  master,  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  past  all  hopes  of  re-
covery, embarked  at  Bourdeaux  for  Bretagne,  whither  he
retired,  fearing  lest  he  might  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  king,
wherefore  he  made  his  escape  early.  And  he  brought  with
him  the  Duke  of  Guienne's  confessor,  and  one  of  the
equerries  of  his  stable  *,  who  were  suspected  to  have  had  a
hand  in  the  duke's  death,  and  were  kept  prisoners  for  it  in.
Bretagne  for  several  years  after.  These  embassies  forward
and  backward  continued  not  long,  before  the  king  deter-
mined to  have  peace  on  that  side,  and  to  behave  himself  so
handsomely  to  the  Lord  of  Lescut,  as  to  bring  him  back
again  into  his  service,  and  make  him  forget  his  old  animosity;
for  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  had  neither  courage  nor  conduct
but  what  he  derived  from  him ;  yet  so  powerful  a  prince,
with  so  cunning  and  wise  a  statesman,  was  not  to  be  de-
spised. The  Bretons  themselves  (while  he  was  with  him)
would  willingly  have  accepted  of  a  peace  ;  and  certainly  the
generality  of  them  desired  nothing  more,  for  there  are  con-
stantly many  of  them  in  the  kingdom  of  France  in  great
posts  and  reputation,  and  not  without  cause,  for  heretofore
they  have  done  his  majesty  signal  service.  Some  persons
(whose  judgment  in  state  affairs  was  not  so  good  as  the  king's)
condemned  this  accommodation  ;  but  in  my  opinion  I  think
his  majesty  acted  very  prudently.  He  had  a  great  value  for
the  person  of  this  Lord  of  Lescut,  saying,  that  he  could  com-
mit any  affair  to  his  management  without  danger,  for  he
knew  him  to  be  a  person  of  honour  and  integrity,  and  one
who  in  all  the  late  troubles  would  never  hold  any  correspond-
ence with  the  English,  nor  consent  that  any  towns  in  Nor-
mandy should  be  put  into  their  hands,  but  still  advised  to
the  contrary,  which  was  the  chief  reason  of  his  preferment
afterwards.

For  these  reasons  he  desired  Monsieur  Soubs-Plainville  to
set  down  in  writing  what  the  Lord  of  Lescut  his  master's
demands  were,  both  for  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  and  himself.
Soubs-Plainville  did  so,  and  they  were  these  :  For  the  Duke
of  Bretagne,  a  pension  of  80,000  francs :  for  the  Lord  of
Lescut,  a  pension  of  6000  francs,  half  of  Guienne,  the  two

*  Friar  Jourdain  Favre,  surnamed  De  Vercors,  and  Henri  de  la  Roche,

esquire  of  the  kitchen.


224  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1472.

seneschalships  ofLannes  and  Bordelois,  the  command  of  one
of  the  castles  of  Bourdeaux,  the  captainships  of  Blaye,  and
of  the  two  castles  of  Bayonne,  of  Dax  and  St.  Sever,  24,000
crowns  in  ready  money,  the  king's  order  of  St.  Michael,  and
the  countship  of  Comminges.  All  was  granted  and  made
good  ;  only  the  duke's  pension  was  retrenched  to  half  the  sum,
and  that  paid  but  two  years.  Besides,  the  king  gave  Monsieur
Soubs-Plainville  6000  crowns ;  but  he  did  not  pay  the
ready  money  which  I  have  mentioned  both  for  his  master
and  himself,  till  four  years  after  the  agreement.  Besides
which  sum,  Soubs-Plainville  had  an  annual  pension  of  1200
francs,  the  mayoralty  of  Bayonne,  the  bailiwick  of  Montar-
gis,  and  some  other  little  offices  in  Guienne  ;  all  which  were
enjoyed  both  by  him  and  his  master  during  the  king's  life.
Philip  des  Essars  was  made  Bailiff  of  Meaux,  and  master  of
the  waters  and  forests  of  France,  with  a  present  of  4000
crowns  and  a  pension  of  1200  francs.  From  that  time  to  the
death  of  our  master,  they  enjoyed  these  places  ;  and  the
Count  of  Comminges  acquitted  himself  like  a  loyal  and  faith-
ful subject.

After  the  king  had  settled  his  affairs  in  Bretagne,  he
marched  towards  Picardy.  It  was  always  the  custom  of  the
king  and  Duke  of  Burgundy,  as  soon  as  winter  drew  on,  to
make  a  cessation  of  arms  for  six  or  twelve  months,  and
sometimes  longer.  According  to  that  custom,  a  new  one  *
was  proposed,  and  the  Chancellor  of  Burgundy,  with  ambas-
sadors, came  to  negotiate  it.  The  king  showed  the  chancellor
the  final  peace  which  had  been  concluded  between  him  and  the
Duke  of  Bretagne,  by  which  the  said  duke  renounced  his
alliance  with  the  English f  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy;
wherefore  the  king  insisted  that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
ambassadors  should  not  name  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  among
their  allies ;  but  the  ambassadors  would  not  agree  to  it,  but
urged  that  it  might  be  left  to  his  own  choice  to  declare  him-
self for  the  king  or  their  master  as  he  pleased,  provided  he

*  This  truce  was  concluded  on  the  3rd  of  November,  1472  ;  it  was  to
last  for  five  months,  from  the  3rd  of  November  to  the  1st  of  April
following.

f  The  treaty  of  alliance  between  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  and  the  King  of
England  had  been  concluded  at  Chateauguion  on  Uie  llth  of  September,
1472


1473.]  COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE CONSTABLE.  225

did  it  in  the  usual  time.  They  remonstrated,  likewise,  that
the  duke  had  formerly  abandoned  them  under  letters  of  his
hand,  and  yet  not  departed  from  their  amity ;  adding,  that
they  did  look,  indeed,  upon  the  Duke  of  Bretagneas  a  prince
who  was  guided  more  by  other  men's  judgments  than  his
own :  yet,  in  the  conclusion,  they  observed,  he  always
recollected  who  was  most  necessary  to  him.  And  all  this
happened  in  the  year  1473.

Whilst  this  treaty  was  on  foot,  both  sides  murmured  loudly
against  the  Count  of  St.  Paul,  Constable  of  France.  The
king,  and  those  who  were  nearest  about  him,  had  conceived
great  hatred  against  him,  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  a
greater,  with  better  reason,  for  I  have  heard  the  true  causes
on  both  sides.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  forget  that  the
Count  of  St.  Paul  had  been  the  occasion  of  the  taking  of
Amiens  and  St.  Quentin ;  and  he  shrewdly  suspected  that  he
was  the  true  cause  and  fomenter  of  the  war  between  him  and
the  king ;  for  during  the  cessation  of  hostilities  he  gave
him  the  best  words  in  the  world,  but  as  soon  as  war  began
again,  lie  showed  himself  to  be  his  mortal  enemy  ;  besides,
the  count  would  have  forced  him  to  have  married  his
daughter,  as  you  have  heard.  The  duke  had  also  another
quarrel  against  him,  and  that  was,  that  during  the  time  the
duke  lay  before  Amiens,  the  constable  made  an  inroad  into
Hainault,  and,  among  the  rest  of  his  actions,  burned  a  castle
called  Solre,  which  belonged  to  a  certain  knight  called
Baudouin  de  Lannoy.*  At  that  time  it  was  not  usual  to
burn  any  places  on  either  side :  but,  to  retaliate  upon  the
constable,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  fired  all  that  summer
wherever  he  came  ;  so  that,  to  be  revenged  of  the  constable,
both  sides  began  to  conspire  against  him.  In  discourse
between  some  of  the  king's  party  and  certain  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  courtiers,  whom  they  knew  to  be  the  constable's
enemies,  they  happened  to  mention  him ;  and  all  of  them
agreeing  that  he  was  the  occasion  of  the  war,  they  began  to
open  themselves  mere  freely,  and  discover  all  his  expressions

*  Baudoin  dc  Lannoy,  surnamcd  the  Stutterer,  Lord  of  Molembais,
Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  and  Governor  of  Lille,  was  the  sou  of
Gilbert  de  Lanuoy,  and  Catherine,  Lady  of  Molembais.  lie  died  in
1474.

Q


226  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1473.

on  both  sides.,  and,  by  degrees,  they  unanimously  resolved  to
contrive  his  ruin.

But  some  persons  may  hereafter,  perhaps,  demand,  whether
the  king  was  not  able  to  have  ruined  him  alone?  I  answer,
No;  for  his  territories  lay  just  between  the  king  and  the
Duke  of  Burgundy ;  he  had  St.  Quentin,  a  large  and  strong
town  in  Vermandois ;  he  had  Han  and  Bohain,  and  other
considerable  places  not  far  from  St.  Quentin,  which  he  might
always  garrison  with  what  troops,  and  of  whatever  country,
he  pleased.  He  had  400  of  the  king's  men-at-arms,  well  paid,
of  whom  he  was  commissary  himself,  and  he  made  his  own
musters,  by  which  means  he  gained  much  money,  for  he  never
kept  up  his  full  complement.  He  had  likewise  a  salary  of
45,000  francs,  and  exacted  a  crown  upon  every  pipe  of  wine
that  passed  into  Hainault  or  Flanders  through  any  of  his  do-
minions; and,  besides  all  this,  he  had  great  lordships  and
possessions  of  his  own,  a  great  interest  in  France,  and  also
in  Burgundy,  upon  account  of  his  relations.

The  truce  lasted  a  whole  year,  and  during  that  time  this
plot  was  contriving  against  the  Constable  of  France.  The
king's  agents  applied  themselves  to  one  of  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's knights,  called  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt,  who  for  a
long  time  had  hated  the  constable,  but  more  particularly  of
late,  upon  the  following  occasion :  In  a  convention  at  Roye,
where  the  constable  and  others  were  met  on  the  king's  part,
with  the  Chancellor  of  Burgundy,  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt,
and  others  in  behalf  of  the  duke,  in  the  heat  of  their  argu-
ment, the  constable  in  a  passion  gave  the  Lord  of  Humber-
court the  lie.  The  Lord  of  Humbercourt  made  no  other
reply,  but  that  he  would  not  expect  satisfaction  from  him,
but  from  the  king,  upon  whose  security  he  was  come  thither,
under  the  character  of  an  ambassador;  for  the  affront  was
not  so  much  to  him  as  to  his  master,  whose  person  he  repre-
sented, and  to  whom  he  would  give  an  account.  This  single
piece  of  insolence,  which  was  so  suddenly  committed,  was  the
occasion  afterwards  not  only  of  the  constable's  death,  but  also
of  the  ruin  of  his  family,  as  the  sequel  of  this  history  will  in-
form you.  For  this  reason,  persons  in  great  authority,  and
princes  themselves,  ought  to  be  careful  of  their  language,
and  consider  to  whom  it  is  they  speak;  for  the  greater  the
person  is,  the  greater  is  the  injury,  and  it  lies  heavier  upon


1474.]  THE  CONSTABLE'S  CRAFT.  227

him  that  is  affronted,  because  lie  thinks  the  grandeur  and
authority  of  him  that  committed  the  outrage  make  it  more
remarkable,  and  more  liable  to  be  objected  against  him.  If
it  be  one's  own  king  or  master,  it  makes  one  despair  of  a
further  preferment  i'rom  him  ;  and  generally  the  hope  of
future  advancement  mak^s  courtiers  serve  a  prince  better  and
more  faithfully  than  the  thought  of  what  they  already  possess.

But  to  return.  The  king's  agents  made  continual  appli-
cations to  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  and  the  chancellor  (who
was  present  when  that  abusive  language  was  given  at  Roye,
and  was  besides  a  particular  friend  of  the  Lord  of  Humber-
court) ;  and  so  far  they  proceeded  in  that  affair,  that  they
appointed  a  meeting  at  Bouvines,  which  is  a  town  not  far
from  Namur,  to  consult  further  about  it.  On  the  king's  part
there  were  the  Lord  of  Curton,  Governor  of  Limousin,  and
Monsieur  John  Heberge*,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Evreux  ;  and
for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  there  were  the  Chancellor  of
Burgundy  and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt,  whom  I  have
already  mentioned.  This  was  in  the  year  1474.

The  constable,  having  private  information  that  they  were
contriving  something  against  him,  sent  immediately  to  both
princes  to  let  them  know  that  he  understood  their  designs  ;
and  he  managed  the  matter  so  cunningly,  that  he  created  a
jealousy  in  the  king  that  the  duke  intended  to  deceive  him,
and  debauch  the  constable  from  his  party ;  upon  which  the
king,  in  great  haste,  despatched  a  message  to  his  ambas-
sadors at  Bouvines,  commanding  them  not  to  conclude  any-
thing against  the  constable,  for  reasons  which  he  would  tell
them,  but  to  prolong  the  truce  according  to  their  instructions  ;
which  was  for  six  months  or  a  year,  I  know  not  which.
When  the  messenger  arrived,  the  whole  affair  was  concluded,
and  the  articles  sealed  and  exchanged  the  night  before.  But
the  ambassadors  were  so  good  friends,  and  understood  one
another  so  well,  that  they  delivered  back  their  writings,  by
which  the  constable,  for  certain  reasons  there  mentioned,
was  declared  criminal,  and  an  enemy  to  both  princes  ;  and
the  princes  did  mutually  promise  and  swear,  that  which  of
them  soever  should  get  him  first  in  his  power,  should  cause  him

*  Jean  Heberge  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Evreux  in  1473,  and  took
the  oaths  on  the  4th  of  April,  1474.  He  died  on  the  28th  of  August,
1479.

Q  2


228  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1474.

to  be  executed  within  eight  days  after  his  apprehension,  or
else  deliver  him  over  to  the  other,  to  be  disposed  oi'  at  his
pleasure  ;  and  it  was  further  concluded,  that  he  should  be
declared  an  enemy  to  both  princes  by  sound  of  trumpet,  with
all  that  served,  or  favoured,  or  assisted  him.  The  king  also
promised  to  deliver  up  the  town  of  St.  Quentin,  so  often
mentioned  before,  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  all  the
money  and  moveables  belonging  to  the  constable  which
should  be  found  in  the  kingdom  of  France,  with  all  his
signioiies  and  lordships  held  of  the  said  duke,  and  particu-
larly Han  and  Bohain,  two  strong  places ;  in  order  to  which
it  was  agreed  that,  on  a  certain  day,  both  the  king's  forces
and  the  duke's  troops  were  to  meet  before  Han,  and  besiege
the  constable  in  that  town.

But  all  this  agreement  was  quashed*,  for  the  reasons
above  mentioned,  and  a  day  and  place  appointed  for  a  con-
ference between  the  king  and  the  constable  (the  king
having  first  given  security  for  his  return);  for  the  constable
was  fearful  for  his  person,  as  having  had  intelligence  of  the
whole  business  at  Bouvines.  The  place  was  three  leagues
from  Noyon,  towards  La  Fere,  upon  a  little  river  which  was
impassable,  by  reason  that,  on  the  constable's  side,  the  fords
were  taken  away.  Upon  a  causeway  in  that  place  a  strong
barrier  was  erected.  The  constable  was  the  first  that  ap-
peared at  it,  attended  by  all,  or  the  greatest  part,  of  his
men-at-arms ;  for  he  had  300  gentlemen  in  his  train,  all  of
them  well  armed,  and  he  wore  his  own  cuirass  under  a  loose
coat.  The  king  was  attended  by  600  men-at-arms,  and
among  them  the  Count  of  Dammartin,  Lord  High  Steward
of  France,  who  was  the  constable's  mortal  enemy.  The  king
sent  me  before,  to  excuse  him  to  the  constable  for  staying  so
long  ;  but  presently  after  his  majesty's  arrival  they  discoursed
together  with  five  or  six  on  each  side.  The  constable  excused
his  coming  in  arms,  pretending  he  could  not  otherwise  secure
himself  against  the  Count  of  Dammartin.  The  conclusion
was,  that  all  things  past  should  be  buried  in  oblivion,  and
no  mention  be  made  of  them  for  the  future,  upon  which  the
constable  came  over  to  the  king's  side ;  the  Count  of  Darn-

*  All  the  clauses  of  this  agreement,  however,  recur  in  the  truce  for
nine  years  made  between  the  king  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  on  the
13th  of  September,  1475.


1474.]  CONCERNING THE KING'S WISDOM.  229

martin  and  he  were  reconciled;  he  waited  upon  the  king
that  night  to  ?soyon,  and  the  next  morning  returned  to
St.  Quentin,  very  well  satisfied,  as  he  said.  But  when  the
king  came  to  consider  what  he  had  done,  and  understood  the
dissatisfaction  of  his  subjects,  he  began  to  be  sensible  of
having  committed  a  great  oversight,  in  giving  a  meeting  to
his  servant,  suffering  a  barrier  between  them  at  that  inter-
view, and  permitting  him  to  come  attended  with  such  a
number  of  men-at-arms,  all  his  subjects,  and  paid  out  of  his
purse  ;  so  that  if  his  hatred  to  the  constable  was  great  before,
this  conference  mightily  increased  it,  neither  was  the  con-
stable himself  really  much  better  pleased.


CH.  XII.— A  Digression,  not  altogether  improper  in  this  place,  con-
cerning the  Wisdom  of  the  King  and  the  Constable,  with  useful  Re-
marks tor  those  who  are  in  authority  with  Princes.  — 1474.

HE  that  seriously  considers  this  action  of  the  king's,  must
certainly  allow,  that  his  majesty  acted  with  great  wisdom  and
prudence;  for  it  is  not  improbable  that  the.  constable  might
have  made  his  peace  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  by  the
surrender  of  St.  Quentin,  notwithstanding  all  his  promises
to  the  contrary.  But  certainly  for  a  wise  man  (as  the  con-
stable undoubtedly  was),  he  took  the  wrongest  measures  in
the  world,  or  else  God  had  strangely  infatuated  his  under-
standing, to  come  thus  in  that  warlike  manner  and  disguise
to  converse  with  his  king  and  master,  under  a  guard  of  so
many  horse,  all  of  them  the  king's  subjects,  and  at  that  time
in  his  pay;  and  indeed  by  his  looks  he  seemed  to  be  ashamed
of  the  action  himself,  for  as  soon  as  the  king  came  to  him,
though  they  were  parted  by  nothing  but  a  rail,  he  ordered  it
immediately  to  be  opened,  and  in  coming  to  the  king,  was  in
no  little  danger  that  day.

Perhaps  he  and  some  of  his  friends  might  highly  value
themselves  upon  this  action,  and  think  it  glorious  to  have  a
monarch  stand  in  awe  of  him,  as  being  sensible  of  the  king's
timidity;  and  indeed  sometimes  he  was  fearful,  but  never
without  just  cause.  The  king  had  extricated  himself  out  of

ft  3


230  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1474.

all  his  troubles  and  wars  with  the  great  lords  of  his  king-
dom, by  large  presents,  and  larger  promises,  and  was  sen-
sible of  many  false  steps  he  had  made,  and  for  the  future  was
resolved  to  put  nothing  to  a  venture  that  he  could  gain
otherwise.  Many  were  of  opinion  it  was  from  his  fear  and
cowardice  that  this  cautious  way  of  acting  proceeded  ;  but
several  persons,  who,  upon  the  strength  of  that  imagination,
durst  presume  to  provoke  his  anger,  if  they  were  feebly  sup-
ported, found  themselves  strangely  mistaken,  as  the  Count
of  Armagnac  and  others,  who  paid  dear  for  that  opinion  ;  for
he  knew  very  well  how  to  distinguish  between  the  appear-
ance and  reality  of  danger  :  and  this  I  dare  boldly  say  in
his  commendation  (and  if  I  have  said  it  before,  it  is  not  un-
worthy to  be  repeated),  that  in  my  whole  life  I  never  knew
any  man  so  wise  in  misfortunes.

But  to  return  to  the  constable,  who  perhaps  had  a  mind
that  the  king  should  be  afraid  of  him — at  least.  I  suppose  he
had  (for  I  would  not  accuse  him  wrongly,  and  what  I  say  is
only  for  the  information  of  such  as  are  in  the  service  of  great
princes,  and  have  not  an  equal  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of
this  world). — Had  I  a  friend  in  that  capacity,  I  would  advise
him  to  carry  himself  so,  that  his  master  might  love  him,  and
not  dread  him  ;  for  I  never  saw  any  courtier  whose  authority
depended  upon  the  awe  he  inspired  his  prince,  but  some  time
or  other  he  was  ruined,  and  by  his  master's  consent.  Many
examples  of  this  nature  have  been  seen  in  our  time,  or  not
long  before,  in  this  kingdom,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Lord  de  La
Tremouille  *  and  others.  In  England,  the  Earl  of  Warwick
and  his  faction  were  a  remarkable  instance ;  I  could  name
others  in  Spain,  and  elsewhere ;  but  perhaps  those  who
shall  read  this  chapter,  may  know  it  better  than  I.  This
arrogance  generally  proceeds  from  some  extraordinary  service
that  they  have  performed,  by  which  they  are  so  strangely
puffed  up,  that  they  think  their  merit  ought  to  bear  them  out
in  whatever  they  do,  and  that  their  masters  cannot  live

*  George,  Lord  of  La  Trcmoillo,  Grand  Chamberlain  of  France,  and
prime  minister  of  Charles  VII.,  was  the  son  of  Guy  de  la  Tremoille  and
Marie  de  Sully.  His  favour  and  influence  with  the  king  gained  him  the
hatred  of  many  of  the  nobles,  who  arrested  him  and  imprisoned  him  at
Montresor,  whence  he  was  liberated  only  on  payment  of  a  heavy  ransom.
He  died  on  the  6th  of  May,  1446.


1474.]  MODESTY RECOMMENDED TO COURTIERS.  231

without  them.  But  princes,  on  the  contrary,  are  of  opinion,
that  the  best  service  their  subjects  can  do  them,  is  no  more
than  their  duty :  and  they  like  to  be  told  this  by  their  ser-
vants, and  desire  nothing  more  than  to  be  rid  of  those  who
are  arrogant  in  their  behaviour.

Again,  in  this  place  I  must  insert  two  things  which  the
king,  my  master,  told  me  once  in  a  discourse  about  persons
who  had  done  great  service  (and  he  named  the  author  from
whom  he  received  that  information),  that  to  have  served  too
well  is  sometimes  the  ruin  of  the  agent ;  and  that  most  often,
great  ingratitude  is  the  reward  of  long  and  faithful  services  ;
usually  upon  account  of  the  arrogance  of  those  who  have
performed  them,  who,  presuming  too  much  upon  their  good
fortune,  behave  themselves  insolently  towards  their  master
or  fellow-subjects ;  so  that  princes  are  not  always  to  be
blamed,  if  their  subjects  are  not  rewarded  according  to  their
deserts.  His  majesty  told  me  further,  that  he  thought  that
person  more  happy  in  his  preferments  at  court,  whom  his
prince  had  advanced  beyond  his  desert,  whereby  he  re-
mained a  debtor  to  his  prince,  than  he  who,  by  any  signal
service,  had  put  his  prince  under  great  obligation  to  him ;
for  he  himself  loved  those  persons  with  a  greater  affection
who  were  obliged  to  him,  than  those  (whoever  they  were)  to
whom  he  was  obliged.  So  that  in  all  conditions  of  life,  it  is
a  difficult  matter  to  live  well  in  this  world,  and  a  great
blessing  it  is  to  those  whom  God  hath  naturally  endowed
with  a  right  understanding.


232  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1474.


BOOK  THE  FOURTH.


CH.  I. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  having  seized  upon  the  Dnchy  of
Guelders,  attempted  farther  Inroads  upon  the  Germans,  and  besieged
Xuz. — 1474.

THE  interview  between  the  king  and  the  constable  occurred
in  1474,  and  at  that  time,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  seized
upon  the  province  of  Guelders  *,  upon  a  quarrel  well  worthy
to  be  related,  to  demonstrate  the  justice  and  power  of  God.
There  was  a  young  Duke  of  Guelders  called  Adolphus  f,  who
had  married  a  daughter  £  of  the  house  of  Bourbon,  sister  to
the  present  duke,  Pierre.  The  marriage  having  been  con-
summated in  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  court,  he  still  retained
some  affection  for  him,  and  continued  his  friend.  This
young  duke  had  committed  a  most  execrable  net,  in  seizing
upon  his  father  §  one  night  as  he  was  going  to  bed,  carrying
him  five  German  leagues  on  foot,  bare-legged,  in  very  cold
weather,  and  confining  him  a  close  prisoner  in  a  dungeon  at
the  bottom  of  a  tower  ||,  where  there  was  no  light  but  what
came  through  a  cleft  in  the  wall ;  and  he  kept  him  in  that

*  On  the  15th  of  June,  the  duke  encamped  near  Montfoort,  on  the
Yssel,  in  the  duchy  of  Guelders.  Lenglct,  ii.  206.

f  Adolphus,  son  of  Arnold,  Duke  of  Guelders,  and  Catherine  of  Cleves,
married  his  aunt,  Catherine  of  Bourbon,  on  the  18th  of  December,  1463,
and  was  killed  at  the  siege  of  Tonrnay  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1477.

J  Catherine,  daughter  of  Charles  L,  Duke  of  Bourbon.

§  Arnold  of  Egmont,  Duke  of  Guelders,  was  the  son  of  John  of
Egmont  and  Mary  of  Arkel.  He  married  Catherine,  daughter  of  Adol-
phus, Duke  of  Cleves;  and  died  on  the  24th  of  February,  1473.

||  In  the  town  of  Thiel,  on  the  Waal,  in  Guelders.  Duke  Arnold  was
set  at  liberty  in  December,  1 470.


1474.] UNNATURAL  CONDUCT  OF  DUKE  ADOLPHUS. 233

miserable  condition  for  the  space  of  six  months.  This
barbarous  action  occasioned  a  desperate  war  between  the
Duke  of  Cleves  (whose  sister  the  imprisoned  duke  hud
married)  and  the  young  Duke  Adolphus.  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  often  interposed  his  good  offices,  and  would  fain
have  accommodated  their  difference,  but  could  not.  At
length  the  pope  and  the  emperor  *  began  to  stir  in  the  affair,
and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  commanded  upon  great
penalty  to  release  Duke  Arnold  from  prison,  and  it  was
done  ;  for  the  young  duke,  seeing  so  many  princes  concerned
in  the  business,  and  fearing  lest  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
would  otherwise  have  done  it  by  force,  did  not  dare  to
refuse.  I  saw  them  both  several  times  in  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  chamber,  pleading  their  causes  before  the  council,
and  the  good  old  man  in  a  passion  threw  his  son  his  glove,
and  demanded  a  combat.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  would
fain  have  reconciled  them,  and  offered  to  the  young  duke,
who  was  his  favourite,  the  title  of  governor  of  the  province,
with  the  whole  revenue  thereof,  and  that  only  a  small  town
near  Brabant,  called  Grave  f,  with  a  revenue  of  6000
florins  (one  half  to  be  received  out  of  the  profits  of  the  said
town,  and  the  other  as  a  pension),  should  be  continued  to  his
father,  with  the  title  of  duke,  as  was  but  reasonable.  I  was
deputed  (with  others  wiser  than  myself)  to  make  this  proposal
to  the  young  duke,  whose  answer  was,  "  That  he  had  rather
fling  his  father  headforemost  into  a  well,  and  himself  after
him,  than  consent  to  such  an  accommodation ;  for  his  father
had  been  duke  four  and  forty  years  already,  and  it  was  time
now  that  he  should  have  his  turn ;  but  he  would  willingly
allow  him  a  pension  of  3000  florins,  upon  condition  he  would
leave  the  duchy,  and  never  come  into  it  again ; "  besides
several  other  extravagant  and  detestable  expressions  to  that
effect.

This  happened  just  at  the  time  when  the  king  took  Amiens
from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  then  with  these  two
dukes  at  Dourlens  |,  very  busy  in  adjusting  their  differ-

*  Pope  Paul  IV.  and  the  Emperor  Frederick  III.

f  Grave,  a  strong  town  on  the  Meuse,  in  Dutch  Brabant.

j  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  arrived  at  Doullens  on  the  17th  of  January,
1471,  and  remained  there  until  the  3rd  of  February  following.  Lcnglet,
ii.  197.


234  THE ME3IOIRS OF PHILIP DE CO3EMIXES.  [1474.

ences.  Upon  the  news  of  the  taking  of  Amiens,  he  removed
suddenly  to  Hesdin,  and  forgot  their  controversy  which  was
before  him.  The  young  duke  disguised  himself  like  a  French-
man, and  endeavoured  (with  only  one  servant)  to  make  his
escape  into  his  own  country.*  Passing  a  ferry  not  far  from
Namur,  he  paid  a  florin  for  his  passage,  which  being
observed  by  a  priest  that  stood  by,  he  presently  suspected
him,  and  asked  the  ferry-man  what  it  was  he  had  given  him  ;
then,  looking  earnestly  upon  him,  he  recognised  him,  and
caused  him  to  be  apprehended  and  carried  to  ]S"amur  f ;
where  he  was  kept  a  prisoner  till,  upon  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's death,  the  citizens  of  Ghent  released  him,  and  would
have  forced  the  duke's  daughter  it  (since  Duchess  of  Austria)
to  have  married  him.  After  which,  taking  him  along  with
them  in  their  expedition  against  Tournay,  he  was  miserably
slain,  and  sordidly  buried,  as  if  the  vengeance  of  God
Almighty,  for  his  barbarity  to  his  father,  could  not  have
been  otherwise  satisfied.  The  old  duke  dying  before  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  during  his  son's  imprisonment
(upon  the  account  of  his  inhuman  and  vile  treatment),
disinherited  him,  and  left  the  succession  of  Guelders  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy ;  by  virtue  of  which  title  (though  he
found  some  little  resistance)  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  con-
quered it,  and  enjoyed  it  till  his  death,  for  he  was  then
powerful,  and  at  peace  with  the  king ;  and  his  successors
enjoy  it  to  this  day,  and  shall  do  as  long  as  God  shall  think
good.§  This  I  have  related  for  no  other  reason  (as  I  said  in
the  beginning)  but  to  show  that  such  unnatural  impiety
never  goes  unpunished.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy  returned  into  his  own  country,
mightily  puffed  up  by  the  acquisition  of  this  duchy.  He
took  great  pleasure  in  concerning  himself  with  the  affairs  of

*  Expresses  had  been  sent  to  Maestricht  and  Bois-le-Duc,  by  Duke
Charles,  on  the  10th  of  February,  to  order  his  arrest  if  he  made  his
appearance  in  those  towns.

f  He  was  arrested  at  Namur,  and  sent  thence,  by  the  duke's  order,
to  Vilvorde,  where  he  attempted  to  escape,  but  was  recaptured,  and  sent
to  the  Castle  of  Courtray.

J  Mary  of  Burgundy.

§  The'Emperor  Maximilian,  husband  of  Mary  of  Burgundy,  lost  the
duchy  of  Guelders  in  1492;  and  Charles  of  Egmont,  the  son  of  Duke
Adolph,  was  then  restored  to  his  inheritance.


1474.]  POLICY OP THE KING AND DUKE.  235

the  empire ;  for  the  emperor  was  a  mean-spirited  prince,  and
to  avoid  the  expense  of  war,  would  tamely  suffer  anything.
Besides,  of  himself,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  princes
of  the  empire,  he  could  do  but  little.  For  this  reason  the
duke  prolonged  his  truce  with  the  king*,  though  some  of
the  king's  courtiers  were  utterly  against  it,  alleging  the
danger  of  the  duke's  growing  too  powerful :  and  what  they
urged  was  not  altogether  unreasonable ;  but  they  wanted
experience  and  foresight,  and  therefore  did  not  understand
the  matter.  Others  f  (of  greater  judgment  and  knowledge,
in  respect  that  they  had  been  in  those  countries)  advised  by
all  means  that  the  cessation  of  arms  might  be  prolonged,  and
the  duke  permitted  to  tire  and  exhaust  himself  against  the
Germans  (whose. grandeur  and  strength,  when  united,  are  al-
most inconceivable.)  ;  for  he  was  of  such  an  ambitious  temper,
that  the  taking  of  one  town,  or  the  accomplishing  of  one
design,  did  but  excite  and  hurry  him  on  to  attempt  another ;
so  that  one  war  drawing  a  second  upon  him  (contrary  to  the
king's  humour),  his  restless  desires  were  not  to  be  satish'ed
with  any  single  success.  Wherefore  they  advised  the  king,
as  the  best  and  easiest  way  to  revenge  himself  upon  him,
rather  to  give  him  some  little  assistance,  than  the  least  sus-
picion of  breaking  the  truce  ;  for  the  greatness  and  puissance
of  the  princes  of  Germany  would  quickly  confound  and  ex-
haust him,  and  (the  emperor  himself  not  being  a  warlike
prince)  they  would  certainly  unite  and  oppose  him ;  and  so
it  happened  in  the  conclusion.

There  were  at  that  time  two  persons  that  pretended  a
right  to  the  bishopric  of  Cologne  :  one  of  them  was  brother
to  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  J;  and  the  other  was  the  Count
Palatine  of  the  Rbine.§  The  Duke  of  Bui-gundy  sided  with

*  The  truce  was  prolonged  from  the  loth  of  June,  1474,  to  the  1st  of
May,  1475.  See  Lenglet,  iii.  315.

f  It  appears  almost  certain  that  Commines  here  alludes  to  himself.
See  Meyer,  Annal.  Fland.,  361.

J  Herman  IV.,  son  of  Louis  I.,  Landgrave  of  Hesse,  and  Anne,
daughter  of  Frederick  I.,  Elector  of  Saxony.  He  was  elected  Arch-
bishop of  Cologne  on  the  llth  of  August,  J4SO,  and  died  iii  the  autumn
of  1508.

§  Robert  of  Bavaria,  Count  Palatine,  was  the  son  of  Louis  le  Barbu,
Count  Palatine  of  the  Rhine,  and  Matilda  of  Savoy.  He  died  in
prison  on  the  17th  of  July,  1480.


236  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1474.

the  Palatine,  and  undertook  to  establish  him  by  force  in  that
dignity  ;  and  (in  hopes  of  gaining  some  of  the  towns  there-
about for  himself)  he  besieged  Nuz*  (which  is  a  town  not
far  from  Cologne)  in  the  year  1474.  And  ilia  Landgrave
of  Hesse  f  was  there  with  a  good  number  of  men.  The  duke,
however,  had  so  many  things  upon  the  anvil  at  once,  and  so
many  enterprises  and  designs  in  his  head,  that  he  sank  be-
neath the  burden  of  them.  He  would  fain  have  persuaded
Edward,  King  of  England,  to  have  brought  over  a  great
army,  which  (upon  his  solicitation)  he  had  raised  at  that
time,  to  favour  his  designs  in  Germany,  which  were  as
follows : — If  he  took  Nuz,  he  designed  to  have  put  a  strong
garrison  into  it,  and  two  or  three  towns  more  in  that
neighbourhood  (by  which  means  Cologne  would  have  been,
blocked  up),  and  then  to  have  marched  up  the  Rhine  as  far
as  the  county  of  Ferrette,  which  was  then  under  his  juris-
diction J;  by  which  means  all  the  Rhine,  as  far  as  Holland,
would  have  been  under  his  dominion ;  which  space  of
ground  contains  more  fortified  towns  and  castles  than  any
kingdom  in  Christendom,  except  France.  The  truce  which
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  made  with  the  king,  had  been
prolonged  for  six  months  §  ;  and  the  greatest  part  of  it  being
expired,  the  king  desired  it  might  be  renewed,  that  the  duke
might  have  enough  of  the  war  in  Germany  ;  but  the  duke,
because  of  his  promise  to  the  English  ||,  would  not  consent
to  it.

I  would  willingly  have  omitted  this  siege  of  Nuz,  as  an
affair  not  absolutely  necessary  to  my  history  ;  and,  besides,
I  was  not  at  it ;  but  I  am  obliged  to  mention  it  on  account
of  some  matters  which  depend  on  it.  The  town  of  Nuz  was
strongly  fortified,  and  in  it  there  were  the  Landgi-ave  of

*  Nuz,  new  called  Neuss,  a  town  in  the  regency  of  Dusseldorf,  in  the
Prussian  States.  The  duke  encamped  before  Xeuss  on  the  30th  of  July,
1474.  See  Lenglet,  ii.  214;  and  for  details  of  the  siege,  Molinet.  i.  27.

f  Henry  III.,  brother  of  Herman.  He  married  Anne,  daughter  of
the  Count  of  Dietz,  and  died  on  the  12th  of  January,  1483.

J  He  had  had  it  in  his  possession  since  1468. See  p.  125.

§  It  had  been  prolonged  for  nearly  a  year. See.  p.  235.

||  By  the  treaty  of  alliance  ami  confederation  made  between  the
King  of  England  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  on  the  25th  of  July,  1474,
among  other  conventions,  the  duke  pledged  himself  to  listen  to  no  pro-
position of  trace  or  peace  without  Edward's  consent.  Byrner,  v.  41.


1474.]  POWER OF THE DUKE OF BURGUNDY.  237

Hesse,  and  many  of  his  relations  and  friends,  with  a  hody  of
1800  horse,  as  I  was  informed,  all  choice  troops  (as  they
proved  afterwards),  and  as  many  foot  as  they  thought  need-
ful for  the  defence  of  the  place.  This  landgrave,  as  I  said
before,  was  brother  to  the  bishop,  who  was  chosen  in  oppo-
sition to  that  person  whom  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  would
have  advanced.  Upon  which,  being  highly  disgusted,  he
laid  siege  to  Nuz  in  the  year  1474.

His  army  was  at  that  time  more  numerous  and  in  better
order  than  it  ever  had  been  formerly;  especially  his  cavalry ;
for,  upon  pretence  of  some  designs  upon  Italy,  he  had  got
together  about  1000  Italian  men-at-arms,  under  the  command
of  the  Count  of  Campobasso,  a  Neapolitan,  a  partisan  of  the
house  of  Anjou,  a  most  perfidious  and  dangerous  man.
There  was  likewise  James  Galeot,  a  Neapolitan  gentleman
(a  very  brave  officer),  and  several  others,  whose  names,  for
brevity  sake,  I  omit.  Besides,  he  had  with  him  3000
English,  all  stout  soldiers,  and  a  vast  number  of  his  own
subjects  well  armed,  mounted,  and  disciplined  in  his  wars ;
and  a  fine  train  of  artillery.  All  these  were  prepared  and
in  readiness  to  join  the  English  (that  were  raising  in  England
with  all  expedition)  upon  their  first  landing.  But  things  of
such  importance  are  managed  very  tediously  there;  for  the
king  not  being  able  to  undertake  such  an  affair  without
calling  together  his  parliament,  which  is  in  the  nature  of  our
Three  Estates,  and,  as  it  consists  for  the  most  part  of  sober
and  pious  men,  is  very  serviceable  and  strengthening  to
the  king.  At  the  meeting  of  this  parliament  the  king  de-
clares his  intention,  and  desires  aid  of  his  subjects  (for  no
money  is  raised  in  England  but  upon  some  expedition  into
France  or  Scotland,  or  some  such  extraordinary  occasion)  ;
and  then  they  supply  him  very  liberally,  especially  against
France ;  yet  the  Kings  of  England  have  this  artilice  when
they  want  money,  and  have  a  desire  to  have  any  supplies
granted,  to  raise  men,  and  pretend  quarrels  with  Scotland
or  France ;  and  having  encamped  with  their  army  for  about
three  months,  disband  it,  return  home,  and  keep  the  re-
mainder of  the  money  for  their  own  private  use  ;  and  this
trick  King  Edward  understood  very  well,  and  often  prac-
tised it.

It  was  a  whole  year  before  this  English  army  could  be


238  . THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [1474.

raised  and  set  in  order.  When  it  was  ready,  towards
the  beginning  of  the  summer,  notice  was  given  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  lay  then  before  Nuz.  and  was  of
opinion  that  in  a  few  days  he  should  put  his  bishop  into
possession,  and  have  Nuz  and  other  towns  assigned  him  for
the  purposes  above  mentioned.

I  am  of  opinion  this  was  God's  own  doing,  in  mercy  to  the
kingdom  of  France,  or  else  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  might
have  done  great  mischief  to  that  nation  with  an  army  of  old
troops  accustomed  for  several  years  together  to  invade  it,
without  any  resistance  but  what  was  made  by  the  fortified
towns ;  and  yet  something  may  be  attributed  to  the  king's
wisdom  and  management,  who  would  not  put  anything  to  a
venture ;  not  so  much  for  fear  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
as  of  tumults  at  home  upon  the  loss  of  a  battle ;  for  he  did
not  believe  himself  safe  with  his  servants  or  subjects,  es-
pecially the  great  lords  ;  and,  if  I  may  speak  freely,  he  often
told  me  that  he  knew  the  inclination  of  his  subjects  very
well,  and  should  find  them  inclinable  to  rebellion  upon  the
loss  of  a  battle,  or  any  such  misfortune.  Wherefore,  when-
ever the  Duke  of  Burgundy  invaded  any  part  of  his  do-
minions, his  majesty's  way  was  to  put  strong  garrisons  into
all  the  towns  by  which  he  was  likely  to  march;  so  that  (with-
out the  expense  and  hazard  of  an  army  in  the  field)  the  duke's
forces  in  a  little  time  wasted  and  baffled  themselves  without
endangering  the  nation  ;  which  (in  my  judgment)  was  very
good  policy.  However,  the  duke  being  so  strong  as  I  have
represented  him,  if  the  English  army  had  appeared  at  the
beginning  of  the  summer  (which  it  doubtless  would  have
done,  if  the  duke  had  not  committed  the  error  of  besieging
Nuz),  certainly  the  kingdom  of  France  would  have  been  in
imminent  danger ;  for  the  King  of  England  had  never  in-
vaded France  with  so  numerous  and  well-disciplined  an
army  ;  all  the  great  lords  of  England  attended  him  without
any  exception ;  and  they  amounted  to  about  1500  men-at-
arms  (a  great  number  for  the  English"),  all  well  accoutred
and  with  a  great  retinue ;  besides  14,000  archers  on  horse-
back, with  their  bows  and  arrows,  and  a  numerous  body  of
camp-servants  on  foot,  but  not  one  page  in  the  whole  army.
Besides,  the  King  of  England  was  to  have  landed  3000  men


1474.]  THE SIEGE OF KUZ.  239

in  Bretagne*  to  join  the  Duke  of  Bretagne's  army.  I  saw
likewise  two  letters  under  the  hand  of  the  Lord  of  Urfe,
Master  of  the  Horse  of  France,  but  who  was  then  in  the
Duke  of  Bretagne's  service ;  one  directed  to  the  King  of
England,  and  the  other  to  the  Lord  Hastings,  High  Cham-
berlain of  England,  which  had  this  among  other  expressions  :
That  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  would  do  more  by  his  intrigues
in  a  month,  than  the  King  of  England  and  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  both  could  do  in  six,  with  all  the  force  they
could  bring.  Nor  do  I  question  the  truth  of  what  he  said,
if  things  had  been  managed  as  they  might  have  been.  But
God,  who  is  ever  careful  of  the  preservation  of  this  king-
dom, disposed  of  them  otherwise,  as  you  shall  understand
hereafter.  These  letters  above  mentioned  were  purchased
of  one  of  the  English  secretaries  for  threescore  marks  of
silver  by  our  king,  whom  God  pardon !


CH.  II. — How  the  Town  of  Xuz  was  relieved  by  the  Germans  and  the
Emperor;  and  of  other  Enemies  whom  the  King  of  France  stirred  up
against  the  Duke  of  Burgundy. — 1474.

As  I  said  before,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  invested  Nuz,
and  met  with  greater  difficulties  in  that  siege  than  he  ex-
pected. The  city  of  Cologne  (which  lies  four  leagues  higher
upon  the  Rhine)  was  forced  to  be  at  the  expense  of  100,000
florins  of  gold  a  month,  to  secure  themselves  against  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  had,  in  conjunction  with  some  of
the  neighbouring  towns  above  it,  upon  the  Rhine,  put  into
the  field  a  body  of  15,000  or  16,000  foot,  and  posted  them
with  a  large  train  of  artillery  upon  the  bank  of  the  river
opposite  to  the  duke's  camp,  with  a  design  to  intercept  all
his  convoys  of  provision,  which  came  by  water  out  of  the
country  of  Guelders  up  the  river,  and  to  sink  his  boats  with
their  cannon.  The  emperor  and  the  electoral  princes  of  the

*  By  letters  dated  June  12.  1475,  King  Edward  entrusted  to  John
Audley  and  Galhard  dc  Duras,  Lord  of  Durfort,  the  command  of  the
fleet  destined  to  succour  the  Duke  of  Bretagne.  Kymer,  v.  3.  64.


240  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  [1474.

empire  had  a  meeting  about  this  affair  ;  and  it  was  una-
nimously resolved  to  raise  un  army.  The  king  having  st'nt
several  ambassadors  to  them,  to  solicit  them  to  that  purpose,
they  sent  to  him  a  Canon  of  Cologne  (of  the  house  of  Ba-
varia), and  another  ambassador  with  him,  with  a  roll  or  list
of  the  army  which  the  emperor  designed  to  raise,  provided
the  king  would  make  a  diversion  on  his  side.  They  were
sure  of  a  favourable  answer  from  his  majesty,  and  whatever
they  demanded  was  granted.  Besides,  the  king  promised  in
writing,  both  to  the  emperor  and  to  several  princes  and
cities,  that  as  soon  as  the  emperor  should  take  the  field,  and
advance  to  Cologne,  he  would  send  20,000  men  to  join  them
under  the  command  of  the  Lords  of  Craon  and  Sallezard.

Hereupon  the  German  army  was  raised,  and  got  ready,
amounting  to  an  almost  incredible  number  of  men  ;  for  all
the  princes  of  Germany,  both  spiritual  and  temporal,  and  all
the  bishops  and  free-towns,  sent  in  their  respective  forces  in
great  numbers.  I  was  informed  that  the  Bishop  of  Munster  *
(who  is  none  of  the  greatest)  led  into  that  army  6000  foot
and  1400  horse,  all  clothed  in  green  uniforms,  besides  1200
waggons ;  but  his  bishopric  was  hard  by.  It  was  seven
months'  time  before  this  army  was  raised  and  fit  to  march  ;
and  it  then  posted  itself  within  half  a  league  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  campf  ;  and  (as  I  have  been  informed  by  se-
veral of  the  duke's  people)  it  was  three  times  the  number  of
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  army  and  the  English  army  to-
gether, both  in  men.  tents,  and  pavilions  ;  and  besides  this
army  of  the  emperor's,  there  was  the  army  on  the  other  side

*  Henry,  Count  of  Schwartzburg,  was  first  Bishop  of  BreTnen,  and
afterwards,  in  1467,  Bishop  of  Munster.  He  died  on  the  24th  of  De-
cember, 1497.  The  valorous  conduct  of  this  prelate  at  the  siege  of
Neuss  is  commemorated  in  the  following  passage  from  his  epitaph :  —

Caesareas  aquilas  infcstaque  signa,  viator,

Suspensa  ad  tumulum  praesulis,  oro,  vide.
Principis  ha?c  meruit  virtus,  cum  Xussia  dura
Burgundi  quatitur  obsidione  ducis.

(Witt,  564,  597.)

t  "  He  came  so  near  as  to  lodge  at  Zons,  and,  on  the  following  day,
established  his  artillery  at  about  a  league  from  the  siege. lie  hail  i:i
front  of  him  a  high  mountain,  the  river  Khine  on  one  side,  and  largo
deep  trenches  on  the  other, from the  mountain -slope  to  the  river."
Molinet.  i.  117.


1474.]  OBSTINACY  OP THE DUKE.  241

of  the  river,  which  continually  annoyed  the  enemy,  both  by-
cannonading  their  camp,  and  intercepting  their  convoys.

As  soon  as  the  emperor  and  the  princes  of  the  empire
were  arrived  before  Nuz,  they  despatched  a  certain  doctor
(of  great  reputation  among  them),  called  Hesevare*  (who
was  afterwards  made  a  cardinal),  to  the  king.  His  business
was  to  solicit  his  majesty  to  perform  his  promise,  and  to
send  his  20,000  men  ;  otherwise  the  Germans  would  accom-
modate matters  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  The  king
promised  him  fair,  made  him  a  present  of  400  crowns,
despatched  him  immediately,  and  sent  along  with  him  to
the  emperor  one  John  Tiercelinf ,  Lord  of  Brosse  ;  but  this
did  not  satisfy  the  doctor,  so  that  there  were  great  intrigues
carried  on  by  all  sides  during  this  siege.  The  king  en-
deavoured to  make  peace  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  or
at  least  to  prolong  the  truce,  to  prevent  the  English  from
landing  :  the  King  of  England,  on  the  other  hand,  tried  to
persuade  the  duke  to  raise  the  siege  before  Nuz,  and
(according  to  his  engagement)  to  make  war  upon  France,
for  the  winter  began  to  approach  ;  on  which  errand  the
Lord  Scales  (nephew  to  the  constable,  and  a  very  good
knight)  was  sent  twice,  with  several  other  ambassadors,  to
the  duke ;  but  the  duke  was  perverse,  as  if  God  Almighty
had  infatuated  his  senses  and  understanding  ;  for  all  his  life
long  he  had  been  labouring  to  get  the  English  over  to  invade
France,  and  now,  when  they  were  ready,  and  all  things  pre-
pared to  receive  them,  both  in  Bretagne  and  elsewhere,  he
obstinately  persisted  in  an  enterprise  in  which  it  was  im-
possible for  him  to  succeed.

There  was  at  that  time  with  the  emperor  an  apostolic  legate^:,

*  George  Hesler,  Apostolical  and  Imperial  Prothonotary,  Canon  and
Archdeacon  of  Cologne,  was  a  native  of  Wurtzburg  in  Bavaria.  At
the  solicitation  of  the  Emperor  Frederick  III.,  Sixtus  IV.  created  him  a
cardinal,  on  the  10th  of  December,  1477;  and  he  was  drowned  while
attempting  to  cross  the  Danube  in  a  boat,  in  the  month  of  September,
1482.

t  Jean  Tiercelin,  Lord  of  Brosse,  chamberlain  of  Louis  XL.  and
governor  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  afterwards  Louis  XII..  was  the  son  of
Mace  Tiercelin,  Lord  of  Brosse ;  and  married  Louise  de  Longchamp.
His  mission  to  the  emperor  was  "  to  maintain  and  continue  the  ancient
alliances  between  the  two  powers."  Lenglet.  iii.  371.

£  Alexander  NannL  appointed  Bishop  of  Forli  in  1470,  Vice-Legate

R


242  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMUTES.  [1474.

who  passed  daily  from  one  camp  to  the  other,  to  negotiate
a  peace.  The  King  of  Denmark  also,  being  quartered  in  a
small  town*  not  far  from  the  two  armies,  endeavoured  the
same;  so  that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  might  have  had
honourable  terms,  and  marched  off  to  the  King  of  England,
but  he  would  not  accept  of  them.  He  excused  himself  as
handsomely  as  he  could  to  the  English,  telling  them  that  his
honour  was  engaged,  and  it  would  be  a  lessening  to  his  re-
putation to  raise  the  siege ;  and  such  like  excuses.  These
were  not  the  English  who  had  reigned  in  his  father's  days,  and
had  behaved  themselves  with  so  much  valour  and  conduct
in  the  old  wars  with  France ;  but  these  were  all  raw  soldiers,
utterly  unacquainted  with  French  affairs ;  so  that  the  duke
did  very  unwisely,  if  he  had  any  design  to  make  use  of  them
for  the  future,  for  he  would  have  had  to  lead  them  on,  as  it
were,  step  by  step,  at  least  during  the  first  campaign.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy's  perverse  resolution  to  continue
the  siege  of  Nuz  occasioned  two  or  three  other  wars  to
break  out  upon  him.  The  Lord  of  Craon,  for  the  advantage
of  the  king's  affairs,  persuaded  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  f  that  it
would  turn  highly  to  his  advantage  to  quarrel  with  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  in  this  present  juncture;  though  he  was
in  perfect  amity  with  him,  and  had  been  in  treaty  with
him  since  the  death  of  Duke  Nicholas  of  Calabria,  yet  he
sent  him  a  defiance  (by  means  of  the  Lord  of  Craon)  as  he
lay  in  his  camp  before  Nuz  ;  and  immediately  he  took  the
field,  invaded  the  duchy  of  Luxembourg,  committed  great
ravages  in  the  country,  and  razed  a  town  called  Pierre-fortJ,
in  the  said  province,  not  above  two  leagues  from  Nancy.
Moreover,  by  the  conduct  and  management  of  the  king  and
his  ambassadors,  a  ten  years'  alliance  was  concluded  between
the  Swiss  and  the  towns  upon  the  Rhine  (as  Basle,  Stras-
burg,  and  others)  who  had  been  at  enmity  before.

A  peace  was  likewise  made  between  Sigismund,  Duke  of

and  Governor  of  Umbria  in  1474,  and  Apostolic  Nuncio  in  Germany
under  the  pontificate  of  Pius  IV.  He  died  at  Rome  in  1485.

*  At  Unterbilk,  a  little  town  on  the  other  side  of  the  Rhine,  two
leagues  from  Neuss.  Mplinet,  i.  74.

f  Rene  II.,  son  of  Ferri  II.,  Count  of  Vaudemont,  and  Yolande  of
Anjou,  succeeded  Nicholas,  Duke  of  Lorraine,  in  1473,  at  the  age  of
twenty-two,  and  died  on  the  10th  of  December,  1508.

J  Pierfort,  in  the  arrondissement  of  Toul,  and  department  of  Meurthe.


1474.] FERRETTE  RESTORED  TO  THE  DUKE  OP  AUSTRIA. 243

Austria,  and  the  Swiss,  in  order  to  facilitate  his  recovery  of
the  county  of  Ferrette,  which  he  had  engaged  to  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  for  100,000  florins  of  the  Rhine;  but  one
thing  remained  in  dispute  between  them  still,  for  the  Swiss
pressed  hard  to  have  passage  when  they  pleased  (either  with
their  arms  or  without)  through  four  towns  in  the  county
of  Ferrette  ;  and  it  being  referred  to  the  king*,  he  decided
in  favour  of  the  Swiss.

All  things  being  resolved  on,  they  were  executed  accord-
ingly ;  for,  in  a  fair  night,  Peter  Archambaultf,  the  governor
of  the  county  of  Ferrette  for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  was
surprised,  and  800  men  with  him  ;  the  men  were  all  imme-
diately discharged,  but  the  governor  was  detained  and  carried
prisoner  to  Basle,  where  process  being  made  against  him
for  certain  excesses  and  violences  which  he  had  committed
in  the  said  county  of  Ferrette},  his  head  was  struck  off,
and  the  county  restored  to  Sigismund,  Duke  of  Austria.
Then  the  Swiss  began  to  make  war  upon  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  and  took  Blasmond  §,  belonging  to  the  Marshal
of  Burgundy,  who  was  of  the  house  of  Neufchastel.  They
also  besieged  the  castle  of  Herycourt||,  belonging  also  to  the
house  of  Neufchastel ;  the  Burgundians  attempted  to  relieve
it,  but  were  beaten,  and  a  great  number  of  them  killed ;  after

*  The  act  in  which  Louis  XL  declares  himself  favourable  to  the  pre-
tensions of  the  Swiss,  is  dated  Senlis,  June  11.  1474.  See  Lenglet,
iii.  312.

f  Pierre  de  Hagenbach,  knight,  councillor  and  steward  to  Duke
Charles,  was  High  Bailiff  of  Ferrette,  and  Lord  of  Belmont.  His  name
occurs  in  the  narrative  of  an  act  of  adulation  and  despotism  so  singular
that  we  do  not  hesitate  to  mention  it.  Philip,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  fell
ill,  and  his  head  was  shaved  by  order  of  his  physicians.  In  order  not  to
be  the  only  man  in  such  a  plight,  he  issued  an  edict  that  all  his  nobles
should  in  like  manner  shave  their  heads:  more  than  500  noblemen,
for  love  of  the  duke,  did  so;  and  Pierre  de  Hagenbach  and  others,
to  prove  their  devotedness,  no  sooner  caught  sight  of  an  unshaven
nobleman  than  they  forcibly  deprived  him  of  his  hair.  Oliver  de  la
Man-he,  ii.  227.

J  The  grievances  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  county  of  Ferrette  are  set
forth  in  a  document  quoted  by  Lenglet,  iii.  351.

§  Blamout,  in  the  arrondissement  of  Montbelliard,  department  of
Doubs.

||  Hericourt,  in  the  arrondissement  of  Vesoul,  department  of  Haute-
Saone,


244  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1475.

which  the Swiss  did  much  mischief, ravaged the  whole
country,  and  then  retired  for  that  time.


CH.  III. — How  the  King  took  from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  the  Castle  of
Tronquoy,with  the  Towns  of  Montdidier,  Roye,and  Corbie,  and  the  En-
deavours he  used  to  persuade  the  Emperor  Frederick  to  seize  upon  such
Towns  as  belonged  to  the  Duke  in  the  Empire. — 1475.

THE  truce  between  the  king  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
now  expired*,  to  the  king's  no  small  regret,  for  he  had
much  rather  have  renewed  it ;  but  finding  it  was  impossible
to  be  done,  he  besieged  a  little  castle  called  Tronquoy,  in
the  beginning  of  the  summer  of  1475,  and  took  it  by  assault
in  a  few  hours'  time.  The  next  day  f  the  king  sent  me  to
parley  with  the  garrison  of  Montdidier,  who  marched  away
with  their  baggage,  and  abandoned  the  town.  The  day
after  I  was  sent  with  the  Admiral  of  France,  Bastard  of
Bourbon,  to  capitulate  with  Roye,  which,  despairing  of  relief,
surrendered  to  the  king.J  They  would  neither  of  them  have
submitted,  had  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  been  in  the  country,
for  which  reason,  though  contrary  to  our  promise,  both  of
them  were  burnt;  from  thence  the  king  marched  with  his
army  to  Corbie,  where  he  was  expected.  TVe  carried  on
our  approaches  very  well,  and  fired  from  our  batteries  for
three  days  successively.  In  the  town  there  were  the  Lord
of  Contay§,  and  several  other  officers,  who  surrendered  at
last  ||,  and  marched  out  with  their  baggage ;  two  days  after,
the  poor  town  was  plundered,  and  then  burnt,  as  the
other  two  had  been.


*  On  the  1st  of  May,  1475. See  above,  book  iv.  chap.  i.

f  Montdidier  was  taken  on  the  4th  of  May.

J  Eoye  surrendered  on  the  6th  of  May.

§  Louis,  Lord  of  Contay  and  Forest,  was  the  son  of  Gnillaume  de
Contay  and  Marguerite  de  Sully.  During  his  father's  lifetime,  he  was
Governor  of  Arras.  He  was  also  chamberlain  to  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy. He  married  Jacqueline  de  Nesle,  and  was  killed  at  the  battle
of  Nancy  on  the  5th  of  January,  1476.

||  On  the  llth  of  May  ;  the  inhabitants  fled  to  Amiens.


1475.]  SIEGE OF ABRAS.  245

The  king  at  this  time  had  some  thoughts  of  retiring  with
his  army,  supposing  the  necessity  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
affairs  would  have  put  him  upon  a  new  truce ;  but  a  certain
lady  (whom  I  know,  but  will  not  name,  because  she  is  still
living)  wrote  to  the  king  to  desire  his  majesty  to  march
with  his  army  to  Arras,  and  the  country  thereabouts.  The
king  believed  her,  for  she  was  a  person  of  honour;  yet  I
cannot  commend  her  for  it,  because  she  was  under  no
obligation  to  do  it ;  but  the  king,  nowever,  sent  thither  the
Admiral  Bastard  of  Bourbon  with  a  strong  detachment  *,
who  burnt  a  great  many  of  their  towns  between  Abbeville
and  Arras.  The  citizens  of  Arras,  having  enjoyed  a  long
series  of  peace  and  prosperity,  and  being  grown  haughty
and  arrogant,  compelled  their  garrison  to  make  a  sally ;  but
being  too  weak  for  the  king's  party,  when  they  came  to
charge,  they  were  most  of  them  taken  or  killed,  especially
their  officers,  and  among  the  rest  Monsieur  Jacques  de
St.  Paul,  brother  to  the  constable,  the  Lord  of  Contay,  the
Lord  of  Carency  f ,  and  some  of  the  nearest  relations  to  the
lady  who  was  the  occasion  of  that  undertaking ;  and  indeed
she  herself  was  a  great  sufferer  by  it,  but  the  king  made
her  handsome  reparation  for  the  losr  she  had  sustained.

About  this  time  the  king  had  sent  John  Tiercelin,  Lord
of  Brosse,  on  an  embassy  to  the  emperor,  to  prevent  any
accommodation  between  him  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
and  to  excuse  him  to  the  emperor  for  not  having  sent  his
forces  according  to  his  promise.  His  ambassador  was  to
assure  his  imperial  majesty  that,  for  the  future,  he  would  be
more  punctual,  and  to  magnify  his  incursions  and  exploits,
as  well  against  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  own  country,  as
against  the  country  of  Picardy.  Besides  which,  he  was  to
make  a  new  proposal,  that  they  should  mutually  engage  and
swear,  one  to  the  other,  to  make  no  peace  nor  truce  without
the  knowledge  and  consent  of  both ;  that  the  emperor  should

*  On  Wednesday,  the  27th  of  June,  the  admiral  came  before  Arras.
Lenglet,  ii.  117.

t  Pierre  de  Bourbon,  Lord  of  Carrncy,  son  of  Jean  de  Bourbon  and
Jeanne  de  Vendome,  was  born  in  February,  1424  Louis  XI.  had
him  tried  and  condemned  to  death  for  high  treason ;  but  in  consideration
for  his  family,  granted  him  his  life  and  restored  him  to  liberty,  but  con-
fiscated his  estates,  as  appears  by  letters  patent  of  the  20th  of  April,
1469.

it  3


246  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMUTES. [1475.

seize  and  take  all  such  lordships  as  belonged,  or  ought  to
belong,  to  the  said  Duke  of  Burgundy,  in  the  empire,  and
declare  them  forfeited  ;  upon  which  terms  the  king  would  pos-
sess himself  of  all  that  the  duke  held  of  the  crown  of  France,
as  Flanders,  Artois,  Burgundy,  and  the  rest.  The  emperor
was  never  accounted  valiant  in  his  life,  but  being  old  he  had
seen  much,  and  had  a  great  deal  of  experience ;  and  these
treaties  and  contrivances  between  him  and  the  king  having
taken  up  much  time,  the  emperor  by  degrees  grew  weary  of
the  war,  though  it  had  cost  him  nothing,  for  the  German
princes  were  all  at  their  own  charges,  as  their  custom  is,
whenever  the  common  interest  of  the  empire  is  concerned.

By  way  of  answer  to  the  king's  ambassadors,  the  emperor
told  them  the  following  story :  Not  far  from  a  certain  town
in  Germany  there  was  a  great  bear,  that  did  a  great  deal  of
mischief;  two  or  three  boon  companions  who  used  often  to
drink  together,  came  to  a  tavern,  where  they  had  run  up  a
large  reckoning  before,  and  desired  the  landlord  that  he
would  give  them  credit  but  for  that  one  reckoning,  and
before  two  days  were  at  an  end  they  would  wipe  off  all
scores,  for  they  were  resolved  to  kill  that  bear  which  had
done  so  much  mischief,  and  whose  skin  would  yield  them  a
great  deal  of  money,  besides  all  the  presents  that  would  come
in  to  them  for  the  service  they  had  done  the  country  in
destroying  that  ravenous  beast.  Their  landlord  trusted
them  once  more,  and  when  they  had  dined,  away  they
marched  in  search  of  the  bear.  Her  den  happening  to  be
nearer  than  they  supposed  it  was,  they  stumbled  upon  the
bear  before  they  expected,  and,  being  all  three  in  great
consternation,  they  took  to  their  heels;  one  ran  towards
the  town,  the  other  climbed  up  a  tree,  but  the  third  was
overtaken,  and,  having  fallen  down,  the  bear  trampled  upon
him  with  her  feet,  and  ran  her  snout  into  his  ear.  The
poor  man  had  thrown  himself  flat  on  the  ground,  and  lay  in
a  posture  as  if  he  were  dead.  Now,  it  is  the  nature  of  that
beast  to  suppose  that  whatever  prey  it  seizes  upon,  whether
man  or  beast,  is  dead  when  it  perceives  no  further  motion,
and  it  then  lets  it  alone.  Accordingly,  this  bear  went  away
to  her  den,  without  doing  him  any  hurt.  By  degrees  the  poor
man  began  to  look  up,  and  finding  the  enemy  retired,  he  got
upon  his  legs,  and  ran  as  fast  as  he  could  to  the  town.  His


1475.] THE  CONSTABLE  SUSPECTED.  247

companion  that  had  taken  refuge  in  the  tree,  having  seen
the  whole  mystery,  came  down  with  all  speed,  ran  and
hallooed  after  him,  desiring  him  to  stop ;  so  he  turned  back
very  civilly,  and  stayed  till  he  came  up.  When  he  who  had
been  on  the  tree  had  overtaken  him,  he  asked  his  companion,
upon  oath,  what  counsel  it  was  which  the  bear  was  so  long
in  whispering  into  his  ear.  His  comrade  replied,  "  she
charged  me  never  for  the  future  to  sell  the  bear's  skin  till
the  beast  was  dead."  And  with  this  story  the  king's
ambassador  was  despatched,  for  the  emperor  gave  him  no
other  answer  in  public ;  the  meaning  of  which  was,  "  That
if  the  king  came  according  to  his  promise,  they  would  take
the  duke  if  they  could ;  and  when  he  was  taken,  they  would
talk  of  dividing  his  dominions."


CH.  TV. —  How  the  Constable  fell  again  under  the  Suspicion  both  of  the
King  and  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy. — 1475.

You  have  already  heard  that  Monsieur  James  de  St.  Paul
and  other  officers  were  taken  prisoners  in  the  action  before
Arras,  which  was  an  accident  very  unpleasing  to  the  con-
stable, for  James  was  his  favourite  brother.  But  this  mis-
fortune came  not  alone ;  for  almost  at  the  same  time*  his
son,  the  Count  of  Roussy  (Governor  of  Burgundy  for  the
duke)  was  taken  prisoner  likewise ;  and  not  long  after  died
the  constable's  wife  I,  an  excellent  lady,  and  sister  to  the
Queen  of  France,  upon  which  account  he  found  much  favour
and  support ;  for  the  combination  (which,  as  you  have  heard,
was  for  some  time  interrupted  at  Bouvines)  was  still  carried
on  against  him ;  and  the  constable  never  thought  himself
safe  afterwards,  but  was  held  in  perpetual  suspicion  by  both
sides,  but  more  especially  by  the  king,  for  he  was  sensible

*  On  the  20th  of  June,  1475. See  note,  p.  150.

f  Marie  de  Savoie,  daughter  of  Louis,  Duke  of  Savoy,  and  Anne  of
Cyprus,  married  Louis,  Constable  of  St.  Paul,  on,  the  1st  of  August,
1466.  She  died  in  1475.

£ 4


248  THE MEMOIRS OF  PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1475.

his  majesty  repented  of  having  withdrawn  his  articles  at
Bouvines.

The  Count  of  Dammartin,  with  others,  was  quartered
with  his  men-at-arms  in  the  neighbourhood  of  St.  Quentin ;
and  the  constable  was  afraid  of  them,  as  if  they  had  been
enemies,  and  threw  300  of  his  own  troops  into  that  town,  and
stayed  amongst  them  himself,  for  he  had  no  confidence  in
the  king's  forces,  but  lived  in  continual  anxiety  and  disquiet
of  mind.  The  king  sent  several  messages  with  orders  to
him  to  take  the  field  and  march  into  Hainault,  and  besiege
Avennes  at  the  same  time  that  the  admiral  with  his  de-
tachment made  an  incursion  into  Artois,  which  he  did,  but
with  incredible  fear.  He  had  not  lain  many  days  before  the
town,  with  a  strong  guard  about  his  person,  before  he
retired  to  St.  Quentin  again,  and  sent  the  king  word  (which
message,  by  the  king's  order,  was  delivered  to  me)  that  he
had  raised  the  siege  upon  certain  information  that  there
were  two  persons  in  the  army  employed  by  the  king  to  as-
sassinate him  ;  and  he  told  so  many  circumstances  to  confirm
it,  that  most  people  began  to  believe  it,  and  one  of  the  per-
sons was  suspected  of  having  revealed  something  to  him,
that  he  ought  to  have  kept  secret.  I  will  not  name  the
persons,  nor  make  any  further  mention  of  this  matter.

The  constable  sent  frequently  into  the  Duke  of  Bur-
.  gundy's  quarters  (and  I  think  his  object  was  to  divert  him
from  this  foolish  expedition) ;  and  upon  the  return  of  his
agents,  he  always  sent  some  news  or  other  to  the  king,
which  he  imagined  would  greatly  please  his  majesty,  and
withal  acquainted  him  with  his  design  in  sending  so  often  to
the  duke,  by  which  artifice  he  thought  to  amuse  and  cajole
the  king.  Sometimes,  also,  he  sent  to  let  the  king  know
that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  affairs  were  in  a  very  pros-
perous condition ;  but  it  was  only  to  frighten  him  ;  and  so
fearful  was  he  of  being  surprised,  that  he  begged  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  to  send  to  him  his  brother  James  de  St.  Paul
(before  his  capture),  the  Lord  of  Fiennes*,  and  other  of
his  relations  (who  were  then  with  the  duke  at  the  siege  of
Nuz),  and  that  he  would  allow  him  to  put  them  and  their


*  Jacques  de  Luxembourg:,  Lord  of  Fiennes,  was  the  son  of  Thibaud
de  Luxembourg,  and  Philippa  de  Melun;  and  he  died  in  1487.


1475.]  ALARM  OP TIIE CONSTABLE.  249

troops  into  St.  Quentin  (but  without  the  cross  of  St.  Andrew,
which  is  the  badge  and  cognisance  of  the  house  of  Bur-
gundy) ;  and  he  promised  to  keep  St.  Quentin  for  the  duke,
and  in  a  little  time  to  deliver  up  the  town  entirely  to  him ;
and  for  better  security  offered  to  promise  this  under  his
hand.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  granted  his  request ;  but
when  his  brother  James,  the  Lord  of  Fiennes,  and  the  rest
of  his  relations,  came  twice  within  a  league  or  two  of
St.  Quentin,  and  were  ready  to  enter,  his  fear  vanished,  he  re-
pented, and  sent  them  back  from  whence  they  came  ;  and  on
a  third  occasion  he  did  so  again  ;  such  was  his  desire  to
carry  his  affairs  swimmingly  between  both  parties,  and  pre-
serve himself  in  the  position  he  was  in,  for  he  exceedingly
feared  them  both.

These  passages  I  learned  from  several  persons,  and  parti-
cularly from  the  mouth  of  Monsieur  James  de  St.  Paul,  who,
when  he  was  prisoner,  told  them  to  the  king,  when  nobody
was  present  but  myself,  and  the  sincerity  of  his  answers
was  very  serviceable  to  him.  The  king  demanded  of  him
what  number  of  troops  he  designed  to  have  put  into  the
town.  He  told  his  majesty  that,  on  the  third  occasion,  he
had  3000.  Then  the  king  asked  him  if  he  had  succeeded,
and  entered  the  town,  for  whom  he  would  have  kept  it?
whether  for  him  or  for  the  constable  ?  Monsieur  James  de
St.  Paul  replied,  that  on  the  first  two  occasions  he  came  only  to
encourage  his  brother  ;  but  the  third  time,  having  observed
that  his  brother  had  twice  before  deceived  both  his  master
and  his  majesty,  if  he  had  found  his  party  the  strongest,  he
would  have  kept  it  for  his  master,  but  without  any  violence
or  detriment  to  his  brother ;  only  if  he  had  commanded  him
to  evacuate  the  town,  he  would  have  disobeyed  his  orders.
Not  long  after  this  private  conference,  the  king  released
Monsieur  James,  gave  him  men-at-arms  and  a  large  estate,
and  employed  him  afterwards  in  several  affairs  as  long  as
he  lived ;  and  all  because  of  the  freedom  and  sincerity  of
his  answers.

Since  I  began  to  speak  of  Nuz,  I  have  intermingled  several
occurrences,  which,  however,  were  coincident ;  for  the  siege
continued  a  year*,  and  they  happened  during  that  time.

*  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  lay  before  Nuz  from  the  30th  of  July,  1474,
to  the  27th  of  June,  1475.


250  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMM1NES.  [1475.

There  were  two  things  which  mightily  tempted  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  to  raise  the  siege :  one  was  the  war  which  the
King  of  France  had  begun  against  him  in  Picardy,  in  which
he  had  burnt  three  pretty  little  towns*,  and  wasted  a  good
part  of  the  flat  country  in  Artois  and  Ponthieu  ;  the  other
was  the  great  army  which,  at  his  request  and  solicitation,
the  King  of  England  had  raised ;  for  he  had  been  importun-
ing him  all  his  life  long  to  invade  France,  and  could  never
effect  it  till  now.  The  King  of  England  and  all  his  nobility
were  highly  discontented  at  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  delays,
and  added  threats  to  their  entreaties ;  as  they  had  reason,  for
they  had  been  at  a  prodigious  expense  in  raising  an  army,
and  the  best  part  of  the  season  was  almost  spent.  The
Duke  of  Burgundy  thought  it  highly  for  his  honour  that  so
puissant  an  army  as  the  emperor's  (consisting  of  the  forces
of  so  many  princes,  prelates,  and  states),  which  amounted  to
a  greater  number  than  had  been  assembled  together  since
the  memory  of  man,  and  for  a  long  time  previously,  were
not  able  to  force  him  to  raise  the  siege.  But  he  paid  dearly
for  his  vanity ;  for  the  man  who  makes  profit  by  a  war,
bears  away  all  the  honour  of  it.  However,  the  legate  I
mentioned  before  continued  his  good  offices  on  both  sides  so
long,  that  at  length  a  peace  f  was  concluded  between  the
Emperor  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  Nuz  was  delivered
into  the  hands  of  the  Pope's  legate,  to  be  disposed  of  as  his
Holiness  should  direct.  But  to  what  extremity  must  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  have  been  reduced,  to  see  himself  pressed
so  hard  by  the  French  forces  on  one  side,  and  the  English
menaces  on  the  other ;  especially  at  a  time  when  Nuz  was
reduced  to  such  a  miserable  condition,  that  in  fifteen  days
they  must  have  surrendered  unconditionally,  or  starved?
Nay,  I  was  told  by  a  captain  who  was  then  in  the  town,
and"  whom  the  king  afterwards  took  into  his  service,  that  it
could  not  have  held  out  ten  days  longer  ;  and  yet  for  these
urgent  reasons  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  forced  to  raise
the  siege  in  1475.

*  Montdidier,  Roye,  and  Corbie.

•j-  This  ptace  was  confirmed  on  the  17th  of  November,  i475.


1475.^  KING  EDWARD INVADES FRANCE.  251


Cn.  V.  —  How  the  King  of  England  passed  the  Sea  with  a  powerful
Army  to  assist  his  Ally,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  against  the  King  of
France,  to  whom  he  sent  a  Defiance  by  one  of  his  Heralds-at-arms.
—1475.

BUT  to  proceed.  The  King  of  England,  in  order  to  embark
for  Calais  *,  had  marched  down  to  Dover  with  an  army  ;  the
most  numerous,  the  best  disciplined,  the  best  mounted,  and
the  best  armed,  that  ever  any  king  of  that  nation  invaded
France  withal.  He  was  attended  by  the  flower  of  the
English  nobility,  consisting  of  1500  men-at-arms,  richly
accoutred  after  the  French  fashion,  well  mounted,  and  most
of  them  barded,  and  every  one  of  them  had  several  persons
on  horseback  in  his  retinue.  His  archers  were  15,000,  on
horseback,  with  their  bows  and  arrows,  besides  a  great
number  of  foot  soldiers,  and  others  to  pitch  his  tents  and
pavilions,  take  care  of  the  artillery,  and  enclose  his  camp ;
and  there  was  not  one  page  in  the  whole  army ;  besides
which,  there  was  a  body  of  3000  men  who  were  to  be  landed
in  Bretagne.  I  have  already  mentioned  this  before,  but
however,  it  is  not  impertinent  to  do  it  again,  if  it  were  for
no  other  reason  but  to  show,  that,  if  the  providence  of  God
had  not,  by  peculiar  mercy  to  this  kingdom  (which  He  has
preserved  more  graciously  than  any  other  in  the  world),
infatuated  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  understanding,  no  one
could  ever  have  believed  that  he  would  be  so  blind  to  his
own  interest  as  to  invest,  and  obstinately  to  carry  on  the
siege  of,  a  town  so  strongly  fortified  and  so  bravely  defended
as  Nuz  was;  and  especially  at  that  juncture,  when  he  had
at  last  prevailed  upon  the  English,  after  many  importunities,
to  pass  the  seas,  and  invade  France  in  conjunction  with
him  ;  a  thing  that  he  had  been  labouring  at  all  his  life-time,
but  could  never  effect  till  now.  Besides,  he  knew  that  the
troops  of  that  nation  were  at  present  of  little  importance  in
his  wars  with  France,  and  if  he  expected  any  real  assistance
from  them  afterwards,  it  was  necessary  he  should  have  made
one  campaign  with  them  at  least,  to  have  acquainted  and

*  "And  about  midsummer,  in  the  year  1475,  King  Edward  brought
his  army  to  Calais  in  great  pomp  and  triumph.  It  consisted  of  about
22,000  rren;  but  the  archers  were  badly  mounted,  and  unused  to  riding
on  horseback."  Molinet,  i.  139.  141.


2o2  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  [1475.

instructed  them  in  the  method  of  our  wars ;  for  though  no
nation  is  more  raw  and  undisciplined  than  the  English  at
their  first  coming  over,  yet  a  little  time  makes  them  brave
soldiers,  excellent  officers,  and  wise  councillors.  But  the
duke  did  just  the  contrary,  and,  among  the  rest  of  the  dis-
advantages that  followed,  the  summer  was  almost  spent,  and
his  own  army  so  diminished  and  fatigued,  that  he  was  ashamed
they  should  he  seen ;  for  he  had  lost  before  Nuz  4000  of  his
standing  forces,  the  very  flower  of  his  army ;  by  which  one
may  see  how  God  disposed  him  to  act  in  this  affair  contrary
to  his  reason  and  interest,  which  he  understood  better  than
any  one  else  ten  years  before.

The  King  of  England  being  at  Dover,  ready  to  embark,
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  sent  him  500  Dutch  boats,  which
were  flat  and  low,  and  very  proper  for  the  transportation  of
horses  (which  boats,  in  Holland  and  Zealand,  are  called
scuts) ;  yet,  notwithstanding  that  vast  number,  and  all  that
the  king  could  provide  of  his  own,  the  embarking  and  land-
ing his  forces  at  Calais  occupied  three  weeks,  though  the
distance  between  Dover  and  that  place  is  but  seven  leagues.
From  whence  one  may  observe  with  what  prodigious
difficulty  the  Kings  of  England  transport  their  armies  into
France ;  and  if  the  King  of  France  had  understood  the  sea
as  well  as  he  did  land  affairs,  King  Edward  could  never
have  landed  in  France,  at  least  that  year ;  but  his  majesty
had  no  skill  in  naval  matters,  and  those  to  whom  he  gave
authority  in  war  knew  less  of  them  than  himself;  yet  one
of  our  men-of-war,  belonging  to  Eu,  took  two  or  three  of
their  transports.

Before  the  King  of  England  embarked  from  Dover,  he
sent  one  of  his  heralds,  named  Garter,  a  native  of  Nor-
mandy, to  the  King  of  France,  with  a  letter  of  defiance,
written  in  such  an  elegant  style,  and  in  such  polite  language,
that  I  can  scarcely  believe  any  Englishman  *  wrote  it.

The  contents  were,  that  our  king  should  surrender  to  the
King  of  England  the  kingdom  of  France  as  his  right  and
inheritance,  to  the  end  that  he  might  restore  the  church,  the
nobility,  and  the  people  to  their  ancient  liberty,  and  relieve

*  Our  English  historian,  Habington,  foils  foul  of  Philip  de  Commines
for  this  passage,  and  casts  severe  censures  both  on  him  and  his  Memoirs
for  this  unjust  reflection  on  our  nation.


1475.] ENGLISH HERALD SENT TO THE FRENCH KING. 253

them  from  the  great  oppression  and  burdens  they  groaned
under ;  and  if  he  refused,  he  declared  all  the  ensuing
miseries  and  calamities  would  lie  at  hi'  door,  according  to
the  forms  usual  upon  such  occasions.  The  King  of  France
read  the  letter  to  himself,  and  then,  wisely  withdrawing
into  another  room,  commanded  the  herald  to  he  called  in ;
he  then  told  him  that  he  was  very  sensible  his  master  had
not  made  this  descent  upon  any  disposition  of  his  own,  but
at  the  importunity  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  of  the
Commons  of  England ;  that  it  was  visible  the  summer  was
far  spent,  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  returned  from  Nuz,
but  in  such  a  weak  and  miserable  condition,  that  he  would
not  be  in  a  capacity  to  assist  him  ;  that,  as  to  the  constable,
he  wae  satisfied  he  held  intelligence  with  the  King  of
England  (for  he  had  married  his  niece),  but  there  was  no
confidence  to  be  reposed  in  him,  for  he  would  deceive  King
Edward,  as  he  had  often  deceived  him ;  and  having  enume-
rated the  favours  which  he  had  conferred  upon  him,  he
added,  "  His  design  is  to  live  in  eternal  dissimulation,  to
treat  with  everybody,  and  to  make  his  advantage  of  all."
Besides  which  the  king  used  several  other  arguments  to
induce  the  herald  to  persuade  his  master  to  an  accommoda-
tion with  him,  gave  him  300  crowns  with  his  own  hand,  and
promised  him  1000  more  upon  the  conclusion  of  the  peace;
and  then,  in  public,  his  majesty  ordered  him  to  be  presented
with  a  fine  piece  of  crimson  velvet,  thirty  ells  in  length.

The  herald  replied,  that,  according  to  his  capacity,  he
would  contribute  all  that  lay  in  his  power  towards  a  peace,
and  he  believed  his  master  would  not  be  averse  to  it ;  but
there  was  no  making  any  proposals,  till  he  was  landed  with
his  whole  army  in  France,  and  then,  if  his  majesty  pleased,
he  might  send  a  herald  to  desire  a  passport  for  his  am-
bassadors, if  he  had  a  mind  to  send  any  to  him;  but  withal
he  desired  his  majesty  to  address  letters  to  the  Lords
Howard  *  or  Stanley  f,  and  also  to  himself,  that  he  might
introduce  his  herald.

*  John  Howard,  created  Duke  of  Norfolk  and  Earl  Marshal  of
England  on  the  28th  of  June,  1483,  was  the  son  of  Robert  Howard  and
Margaret,  daughter  of  Thomas  de  Mowbray,  Duke  of  Norfolk.  He  was
killed  at  the  battle  of  Bosworth  Field  on  the  22nd  of  August,  1485.

f  Thomas  Stanley,  afterwards  Earl  of  Derby  and  Lord  High  Con-
stable of  England.  He  died  on  the  9th  of  November,  1 504.


254  THE  MEMOIRS  OP  PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  [1475.

There  were  abundance  of  people  attending  without,  during
the  king's  private  discourse  with  the  herald,  all  of  them
impatient  to  hear  what  the  king  would  say,  and  to  see  how
his  majesty  looked  when  he  came  forth.  When  he  had
done,  he  called  me,  and  charged  me  to  entertain  the  herald,
till  he  ordered  him  an  escort,  that  I  might  keep  him  from
talking  privately  with  anybody  ;  he  commanded  me  like-
wise to  give  him  a  piece  of  crimson  velvet  of  thirty  ells,
which  I  did.  After  which  the  king  addressed  himself  to  the
rest  of  the  .company,  gave  them  an  account  of  his  letters  of
defiance,  and  calling  seven  or  eight  of  them  apart,  he  ordered
the  letters  to  be  read  aloud,  showing  himself  very  cheerful
and  valiant,  without  the  least  sign  of  fear  in  the  world ;  for
indeed  he  was  much  revived  by  what  he  had  learned  from
the  herald.


Cn.  VI. — Of  the  Trouble  and  Perplexity  of  the  Constable,  and  of  certain
Letters  he  wrote  to  the  King  of  England  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
which,  afterwards  were  partly  the  Cause  of  his  Death. — 1475.

I  HERE  must  say  a  word  or  two  concerning  the  constable,
who  was  in  great  perplexity  for  the  trick  which  he  had  played
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  about  St.  Quentin ;  and  he  now
looked  upon  himself  as  quite  ruined  in  the  king's  favour,  who
had  already  drawn  away  from  him  the  Lords  of  Genly*  and
of  Moiiy  (two  of  his  principal  servants),  though  the  Lord  of
Motty  went  to  visit  him  sometimes.  The  king  very  earnestly
desired  the  constable  to  come  to  him,  and  offered  him  certain
recompenses  which  he  demanded  for  the  county  of  Guise,  and
which  the  king  had  formerly  promised  him ;  the  constable
was  willing  to  come,  but  required  that  the  king  should  swear
upon  the  cross  of  St.  Lou  of  Angers  |  neither  to  do,  nor  con-

*  Jean  de  Hangest,  Lord  of  Genlis,  was  the  son  of  Jean  de  Hangest
and  Marie  de  Sarrbruck.  After  having  served  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
until  the  death  of  that  prince,  he  became  a  councillor  and  chamberlain
of  Louis  XL,  and  was  appointed  Captain  of  Rouen.  He  died  in  1490.

f  The  cross  of  Saint  Lo  or  Saint  Loup  at  Angers,  was  very  celebrated
during  the  reign  of  Louis  XI. ;  it  was  a  piece  of  the  true  cross  preserved
in  the  collegiate  Church  of  Saint  L6,  in  the  suburbs  of  Angers.


1475.]  KING EDWARD LANDS AT CALAIS.  255

sent  that  any  mischief  should  be  done  to  his  person  ;  insist-
ing, that  his  majesty  might  as  well  take  this  oath  to  him  now,
as  he  had  formerly  done  to  the  Lord  of  Lescut.*  The  king
replied,  that  he  would  never  take  that  oath  again  for  any
man  whatever  ;  but  let  him  propose  any  other,  and  he  would
take  it.  You  must  understand  that  both  constable  and  king
were  in  great  uneasiness  and  perplexity  of  mind  ;  so  that  for
a  good  while  together  there  was  not  a  day  passed,  but  some-
body or  other  went  between  them  to  settle  this  oath.  And
to  a  thoughtful  man  it  is  a  great  instance  of  the  misery  and
infelicity  of  human  life,  that  we  should  speak  and  write  so
many  things  contrary  to  our  minds,  as  if  it  were  done  on  pur-
pose to  shorten  it.  But  if  these  two  I  have  mentioned  were
full  of  cares  and  anxieties,  the  King  of  England  and  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  had  their  share  of  trouble  also.

The  King  of  England's  landing  at  Calais,  and  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  raising  the  siege  of  Nuz,  occurred  much  about
the  same  time.  The  duke,  with  long  journeys  (but  a  small
retinue),  came  directly  to  wait  on  the  King  of  England  f  at
Calais,  having  sent  his  army  (shattered  and  fatigued,  as  you
have  heard)  into  the  countries  of  Barrois  and  Lorraine  to
plunder,  and  refresh  themselves  :  for  you  have  already  heard
that  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  had  begun  war  upon  him,  and
defied  him  before  Nuz.  This  was  a  great  oversight  (among
the  rest)  of  which  he  was  guilty  in  respect  to  the  English,
who  expected  him  to  have  joined  them  at  their  landing  with
at  least  2500  men-at-arms,  well  provided,  and  a  considerable
body  of  horse  and  foot  (as  the  duke  had  promised)  J  ;  and
that  he  should  have  opened  the  campaign  in  France  three
months  before  their  descent,  that  they  might  have  found  the
king  either  tired  of  the  war,  or  in  great  distress  :  but,  as  you

*  That  Louis  XI.  respected  this  oath,  is  evident  from  a  letter  which
he  wrote  to  Tannegtiy  Duchastel  on  the  13th  of  November,  1472.  "I
have  sworn  to  M.  de  Lescun  on  the  true  cross  of  Saint  L6  that  he  may
come  to  me  in  safety  ;  wherefore  I  beseech  you  to  set  no  ambushes,  for
I  would  not  wish  to  be  in  danger  on  account  of  breaking  that  oath."
Alorice,  iii.  250.

f  He  arrived  at  Calais  on  the  14th  of  July. Lenglet,  ii.  217.

j  By  the  treaty  concluded  between  the  two  princes  on  the  27th  of
July,  1475,  it  was  stipulated  that  the  succour  to  be  given  by  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  to  King  Edward  shou'd  consist  of  not  less  than  10,000  men,
or  more  than  20,000  men.  llymer,  v.  3.  43.


256  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1475.

have  heard  before,  God  Almighty  prevented  it.  The  King
of  England,  accompanied  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  went
from  Calais  to  Boulogne,  and  from  thence  to  Peronne,  where
the  duke  entertained  the  English  but  coldly ;  for  he  ordered
the  gates  to  be  shut,  and  sutfered  very  few  to  come  into  the
town,  and  the  rest  had  to  encamp  in  the  fields,  which  they
were  the  better  able  to  endure,  because  they  had  tents,  and
were  well  provided  with  all  things  necessary  upon  such  an
occasion.

They  were  no  sooner  arrived  at  Peronne,  but  the  con-
stable despatched  one  of  his  servants  (called  Louis  de  Creville)
to  make  his  excuse  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  for  not  having
delivered  St.  Quentin,  pretending  that  if  he  had  done  so,  he
would  have  been  for  ever  disabled  from  serving  him  any
further  in  the  kingdom  of  France,  for  he  would  have  thereby
lost  all  his  credit  and  influence  in  that  nation.  But  now
the  King  o'f  England  was  come,  he  would  act  hereafter  ac-
cording to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  directions;  and  for
greater  assurance,  the  messenger  delivered  him  a  letter  to
the  King  of  England,  in  which  the  constable  seemed  to
refer  the  character  of  his  integrity  to  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's testimony.  Besides  this,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
received  another  sealed  up  and  addressed  to  himself,  in
which  the  constable  made  strong  professions  of  friendship
and  service  to  the  duke,  and  that  he  would  assist  him  and
his  allies  (and  particularly  the  King  of  England)  against  all
persons  and  princes  whatever.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy
gave  the  letter  to  the  King  of  England,  and  acquainted  him
with  the  contents  of  his  own,  exaggerating  a  little,  and  as-
suring the  king  that  the  constable  would  receive  him  into
St.  Quentin,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  towns ;  and  the  king
really  believed  it,  because  he  had  married  the  constable's
niece,  and  he  thought  him  so  terribly  afraid  of  the  King  of
France,  that  he  would  not  venture  to  break  his  promise  to
the  duke  and  himself.  Nor  was  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  less
credulous  than  King  Edward.  But  neither  the  perplexities
of  the  constable,  nor  his  dread  of  the  King  of  France,  had  as
yet  carried  him  so  far ;  his  design  was  only  to  wheedle  and
amuse  tlu  m  (according  to  his  custom),  and  lay  before  them
such  plausible  reasons  as  might  prevail  upon  them  not  to
force  him  to  declare  himself  openly.  The  King  of  England


147o.]  BAD  RECEPTION  OF THE ENGLISH.  257

and  his  nobility  were  not  so  well  skilled  in  artifice  and
subtlety  as  the  lords  of  this  kingdom,  but  went  more  bluntly
and  ingenuously  about  their  affairs  ;  so  that  they  were  not  so
sharp  at  discovering  the  intrigues  and  deceptions  common
on  this  side  the  water.  The  English  that  have  never  tra-
velled are  naturally  passionate,  as  the  people  are  generally
in  all  cold  countries.  Our  kingdom  (as  you  see)  is  neither
pierced  with  cold,  nor  scorched  with  the  sun,  being  bounded
on  the  east  by  Italy,  Spain,  and  Catalonia ;  on  the  west,  by
Flanders  and  Holland  ;  and  by  Germany  on  the  south,  all
along  the  country  of  Champagne ;  so  that  part  of  our
country  being  hot,  and  part  of  it  cold,  our  people  are  of  two
complexions;  but  in  my  judgment,  there  is  no  country  in
the  whole  universe  better  situated  than  France.

The  King  of  England  (who  perhaps  had  had  some  pro-
mises made  him  before,  but  not  to  so  great  an  extent  as
now)  being  overjoyed  at  the  news  he  received  from  the
constable,  set  out  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  his  small
retinue  (for  the  main  body  of  his  army  had  marched  into
Barrois  and  Lorraine,  as  I  have  said)  from  Peronne  towards
St.  Quentin.  A  party  of  English  (not  having  patience  to
march  with  the  army)  had  gone  forward,  expecting  (as  I
was  told  some  few  days  after)  that  the  citizens  would  have
ordered  the  bells  to  be  rung  for  joy  at  their  approach,  and
that  they  would  have  met  them  with  the  usual  ceremony  of
the  cross  and  holy  water.  But  they  were  mightily  mis-
taken ;  for  they  no  sooner  came  in  sight  of  the  town,  than  the
great  guns  were  fired  upon  them,  and  a  strong  body  of  horse
and  foot  sallied  out  to  engage  them ;  in  which  action  two  or
three  English  were  killed,  and  some  few  taken  prisoners.  It
happened  to  be  a  terrible  rainy  day,  yet  they  were  forced  to
march  through  it,  and  retire  to  their  army,  much  out  of
humour  with  the  constable,  and  calling  him  a  traitor.  The
Duke  of  Burgundy  was  resolved  to  take  his  leave  the  next
morning  of  the  King  of  England  (which  was  a  strange
thing,  considering  it  was  upon  his  importunity  that  he  had
undertaken  this  expedition),  and  return  to  his  forces  in
Barrois,  pretending  he  would  do  great  feats  for  the  English  ;
but  the  English  being  naturally  of  a  jealous  temper,  novices
on  this  side  of  the  water,  and  astonished  at  this  kind  of  pro-
ceeding, began  to  entertain  an  ill  opinion  of  their  ally,  and

s


258  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1475.

could  not  believe  he  had  any  array  at  all;  besides,  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  could  not  satisfy  them  as  to  the  constable's
manner  of  receiving  them,  though  he  endeavoured  to  per-
suade them  all  was  well,  and  that  what  was  done  would  turn
to  their  advantage ;  but  all  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  argu-
ments could  not  pacify  them,  and  being  disheartened  at  the
approach  of  winter,  they  seemed  by  their  expressions  to  be
more  inclinable  to  peace  than  war.


CH.  VII. — How  the  King  of  France  disguised  one  of  his  menial  Servants  in
a  Herald's  Coat,  and  sent  him  with  a  Message  to  the  King  of  England,
who  gave  him  a  favourable  Answer — 1475.

IN  the  meantime,  even  at  the  very  moment  of  the  duke's
taking  his  leave,  the  English  took  a  gentleman's  servant
belonging  to  the  King  of  France's  court,  named  James  de
Grasse.*  This  servant  was  brought  immediately  before  the
King  of  England  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  ;  and  being
ordered  into  a  tent,  after  some  slight  examination  of  him,
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  took  his  leave,  and  set  out  by  the
way  of  Brabant  for  Mazieresf,  where  part  of  his  army  lay.
The  King  of  England  ordered  the  servant  to  be  released,  as
being  the  first  prisoner  they  had  taken.  Upon  his  departure,
the  Lords  Howard  and  Stanley  gave  him  a  noble,  and  de-
sired him  "  to  present  their  most  humble  service  to  the
king  his  master,  when  he  had  an  opportunity  of  speaking  to
him."  The  servant  came  with  all  speed  to  Compiegne
(where  the  court  was  at  that  time)  to  give  the  king  an  ac-
count of  their  message ;  but  his  majesty  was  afraid  of  him,
and  suspected  him  to  be  a  spy,  because  his  master's  brother
Gilbert  de  Grasse },  was  then  in  Bretagne,  and  a  great

*  Jacques  de  Grassay,  Esquire,  Lord  of  Tors  and  Estree  in  Bour-
bonnois,  was  the  son  of  Regnault  Grassay,  Lord  of  Savigny-sur-Brais.  He
was  one  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  king's  body-guard  at  this  period;  and
he  afterwards  became  esquire-carver  to  King  Charles  VUL

f  Mezieres,  in  the  department  of  Ardennes.

j  Gilbert  de  Grassay,  Knigrht.  Lord  of  Champeiroux,  was  an  equerry
to  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  in  1465.  He  was  ta"ken  prisoner  at  the  sur-


1475.]  CURIOUS HABIT OP THE FRENCH KING.  259

favourite  of  that  duke.  The  servant  had  irons  clapped  upon
him  immediately,  and  a  guard  was  set  to  watch  him  that
night ;  yet  several  courtiers  talked  with  him  by  the  king's
orders,  and  told  his  majesty  that  by  his  discourse  he  seemed
a  very  honest  fellow,  and  that  he  might  venture  to  see  him
without  any  manner  of  danger.

Upon  these  assurances,  the  next  morning  the  king  spoke
with  him  himself;  and,  after  he  had  discoursed  with  him  a
little  while,  he  ordered  his  irons  to  be  knocked  off,  but  kept
him  still  in  custody :  from  thence  the  king  went  to  dinner,
full  of  thought  and  consultation,  whether  he  had  best  send
to  the  King  of  England  or  not.  Before  he  sat  down  to  the
table  he  spoke  something  of  it  to  me,  for  his  way  was  (as
you  know,  my  Lord  of  Vienne)  to  speak  privately  and
familiarly  with  those  who  were  about  him,  as  I  Avas  then,  and
others  have  been  since ;  and  he  had  a  strange  fancy  to
whisper  into  people's  ears.  He  was  thinking  upon  what  the
King  of  England's  herald  had  told  him,  that  he  should  send
to  the  King  of  England  for  a  passport  for  his  ambassadors,
as  soon  as  that  prince  had  landed,  and  that  his  negotiation,
should  be  addressed  to  the  Lords  Howard  and  Stanley.  As
soon  as  he  was  sat  down,  and  had  considered  a  little,
according  to  his  custom  (which  to  those  who  were  unac-
quainted with  his  fancy  seemed  strange,  and  might  induce
them  to  believe  he  was  a  prince  of  no  great  wisdom,  but  that
his  actions  declared  the  contrary),  he  whispered  me  in  the
ear,  and  bade  me  rise  and  go  dine  in  my  chamber,  and  send
for  a  servant*  belonging  to  the  Lord  des  Hallesf ,  who  was
eon  to  Merichon  J  of  Rochelle,  and  ask  him  whether  he
would  venture  with  a  message  into  the  King  of  England's
army,  in  the  habit  of  a  herald.  I  obeyed  his  orders,  and
was  much  astonished  at  the  sight  of  the  servant,  for  he-
seemed  to  me  neither  of  a  stature  nor  aspect  fit  for  such  an
undertaking;  yet  his  judgment  was  good  (as  I  found  after-
wards), and  his  manner  of  expressing  himself  tolerable

render  of  Vannes  in  1488  ;  and  soon  afterwards  he  entered  the  service
of  France,  and  became  one  of  the  king's  councillors  and  chamberlains.

*  According  to  Lenglet,  this  servant's  name  was  Merindot.

•f  Olivier  Merichon,  Knight,  Lord  des  Holies  de  Poitiers,  was  cup-
bearer to  King  Louis  XL  in  1472.

J  Jean  Merichon,  councillor  of  King  Louis  XI.,  was  Lord  of  Ure  and
La  Gort,  near  La  Kochelle  ;  he  married  Marie  de  Parthenay-Soubise.

8  2


260  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1475.

enough ;  but  the  king  had  never  talked  with  him  but  once.
The  poor  man  was  confounded  at  the  proposal,  and  fell
down  upon  his  knees  before  me,  as  one  that  thought  himself
ruined  and  undone.  I  did  all  I  could  to  encourage  him,  and
told  him  he  should  have  money  for  his  pains,  and  a  place  in
the  Isle  of  Re ;  and  for  his  greater  assurance,  I  persuaded
him  that  the  English  had  made  the  first  overture  themselves.
I  made  him  dine  with  me,  and  (there  being  nobody  but  he
and  I,  and  one  servant  that  waited)  by  degrees  I  gave  him
instructions  what  he  was  to  do,  and  how  he  was  to  behave
himself  in  this  affair.

Not  long  after,  the  king  sent  for  me,  and  I  gave  him  a
relation  of  what  had  passed,  and  recommended  others  to  him,
who,  in  my  opinion,  were  more  proper  for  his  design ;  but
he  would  employ  no  other,  and  went  and  talked  with  him
himself,  and  animated  him  more  with  one  word  than  I  could
do  with  a  hundred.  There  came  along  with  the  king  into
my  chamber  only  the  Lord  de  Villiers*,  at  that  time  Master
of  the  Horse,  and  now  Bailiff  of  Caen.  When  the  king  had
sufficiently  prepared  and  encouraged  his  man,  he  sent  the
Master  of  the  Horse  for  the  banner  of  a  trumpeter  to  make
his  herald  a  coat  of  arms,  for  the  king  was  not  so  stately  or
vain  as  to  have  either  herald  or  trumpeter  in  his  train,  as
other  princes  have ;  wherefore  the  master  of  the  horse  and
one  of  my  servants  made  up  the  coat  of  arms  as  well  as  they
could ;  and  having  fetched  a  scutcheon  from  a  little  herald
(called  Plein  Chemin,  in  the  service  of  the  Admiral  of
France),  they  fastened  it  about  him,  sent  for  his  boots  and
his  cloak  privately,  and  his  horse  being  got  ready,  he*
mounted,  and  nobody  perceived  him,  with  a  bag  or  budget
at  the  bow  of  his  saddle,  in  which  his  coat  of  arms  was  put ;
and  having  been  well  instructed  what  he  was  to  say,  away
he  went  directly  to  the  English  army.

Upon  his  arrival  in  his  herald's  coat,  he  was  immediately
stopped,  and  carried  to  the  King  of  England's  tent ;  being
asked  his  business,  he  told  them  he  was  come  with  a  mes-
sage from  the  King  of  France  to  the  King  of  England,  and

*  Alain  Goyon  de  Villiers,  councillor  and  chamberlain  of  Louis  XT.,
Captain  and  Bailift'  of  Caen,  and  Master  of  the  Horse  of  France,  was  the
son  of  Jean  Goyon,  Lord  of  Matignon,  and  Marguerite  de  Mauny.  He
died  in  1490.


1475.] OVERTURES  FROM  LOUIS  FOR  PEACE. 261

had  orders  to  address  himself  to  the  Lords  Howard  and
Stanley.  He  was  carried  into  a  tent  to  dinner,  and  very
civilly  entertained.  After  the  King  of  England  had  dined,
he  sent  for  the  herald,  who  told  him  that  his  errand  was  to
acquaint  his  majesty,  that  the  King  of  France  for  a  long
time  had  had  a  desire  to  be  at  amity  with  him,  that  both
their  kingdoms  might  be  at  ease,  and  enjoy  the  blessing  of
peace ;  that  since  his  accession  to  the  crown  of  France,  he
never  had  made  war,  or  attempted  anything  against  him  or
his  kingdom ;  and  as  for  having  entertained  the  Earl  of
Warwick  formerly,  he  said  he  had  done  that  more  in  op-
position to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  than  out  of  any  quarrel
with  King  Edward.  Then  he  went  on  to  state  that  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  had  invited  him  over,  only  in  order  to
make  his  own  terms  the  better  with  the  King  of  France;
and  if  others  had  joined  with  him,  it  was  only  to  secure
themselves  against  their  former  offences,  or  to  advance  their
own  private  affairs ;  which  when  they  had  once  compassed,
they  would  not  regard  the  interest  of  the  King  of  England,
provided  they  had  attained  their  own  ends.  He  represented
likewise  the  lateness  of  the  season,  that  winter  was  ap-
proaching, that  his  master  was  sensible  of  the  great  charge
the  King  of  England  had  been  at,  and  that  he  knew  there
were  in  England  many,  both  of  the  nobility  and  merchants,
who  were  desirous  of  a  war  on  this  side  the  water ;  yet  if
the  King  of  England  should  be  inclined  to  a  treaty,  his
master  would  not  refuse  to  come  to  such  terms  as  should  be
agreeable  both  to  himself  and  to  his  subjects ;  and  if  the
King  of  England  had  a  mind  to  be  more  particularly  in-
formed of  these  matters,  if  he  would  give  him  a  passport  for
100  horse,  his  master  would  send  ambassadors  to  him  with
full  instructions :  or  if  the  king  should  think  it  more  proper
to  depute  certain  commissioners,  and  let  them  have  a  con-
ference together  in  some  village  between  the  two  armies,  he
would  willingly  consent,  and  send  them  a  passport.

The  King  of  England  and  part  of  his  nobility  were  ex-
tremely pleased  with  these  proposals ;  a  passport  was  given
to  the  herald  according  to  his  desire,  and  having  been  pre-
sented with  four  nobles  in  money,  he  was  attended  by  a  herald
from  the  King  of  England  to  obtain  the  King  of  France's
passport  in  the  same  form  as  the  other  ;  which  being  given,

8  3


262  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1475.

the  next  morning  the  commissioners  met  in  a  village  near
Amiens.  On  the  part  of  the  King  of  France,  there  were  the
Bastard  of  Bourbon,  Admiral  of  France,  the  Lord  of  St.
Pierre*,  and  the  Bishop  of  Evreux,  called  Heberge.  On
the  King  of  England's  sidef,  there  were  the  Lord  Howard,
one  Chalanger  J,  and  one  Doctor  Morton  §,  who  is  at  present
Chancellor  of  England  and  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.

Some  people  (I  believe)  will  think  this  too  great  a  con-
descension in  our  king ;  but  the  wiser  sort  may  see,  by  what
I  have  said  before,  that  his  kingdom  was  in  great  danger,
had  not  God  himself  supported  it  by  disposing  the  king  to
so  fortunate  a  resolution,  and  infatuating  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's understanding  so  as  to  make  him  commit  so  many
irreparable  errors,  and  lose  that  by  his  own  obstinacy  which
he  had  been  endeavouring  so  long  to  obtain.  We  had,
besides,  many  private  intrigues  and  secret  cabals  among  us,
which  would  have  produced  great  and  speedy  troubles  to
this  nation,  as  well  in  the  direction  of  Bretagne,  as  of  other
places,  had  not  the  king  consented  to  this  peace  :  so  that
what  I  have  often  said  before,  I  must  once  again  repeat  and
confirm,  that  I  do  certainly  believe,  by  what  I  have  seen  in
my  time,  that  God  has  a  particular  and  more  than  ordinary
care  of  the  preservation  of  this  kingdom.

*  Jean  Blosset,  Lord  of  Saint  Pierre,  was  councillor  and  chamberlain
of  the  king,  Seneschal  of  Normandy,  and  Captain  of  Avranches.  He  died
about  1507.

f  The  ambassadors  of  the  King  of  England  were  four  in  number:  the
three  mentioned  by  Commines,  and  William  Dudley,  dean  of  the  royal
chapel.

1  Thomas  Saint  Leger,  one  of  the  king's  body-guard ;  he  was  created
a  Knight  of  the  Bath  on  the  5th  of  July,  1483,  by  Richard  III.;  and
subsequently  beheaded  by  order  of  that  same  prince,  for  having  joined
the  party  of  the  Earl  of  Richmond.

§  John  Morton,  born  at  Bere,  near  Blandford,  in  Dorsetshire,  was
originally  Rector  of  St.  Dunstan's  Church  in  London.  He  was  appointed
Bishop  of  Ely  on  the  8th  of  August,  1478,  translated  to  the  see  of
Canterbury  on  the  9th  of  October,  1486,  and  created  Lord  Chancellor
on  the  8th  of  August,  1487.  Pope  Alexander  VL  made  him  a  cardinal
in  1493;  and  he  died  at  Knole  on  the  21st  of  September,  1500.


1475.] TERMS  AGREED  TO  BY  EDAYARD  AXD  LOUIS. 263

CH.  VIII. —  How  a  Truce  for  nine  Years  was  negotiated  between  the
Kings  of  France  and  England,  notwithstanding  the  Difficulties  and
Impediments  interposed  by  the  Constable  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.
—1475.

As  you  have  heard,  our  ambassadors  met  on  the  day  after
the  return  of  our  herald,  for  we  were  within  four  leagues  of
one  another,  or  even  less.  Our  herald  was  well  treated,  and
had  his  money,  and  the  office  in  the  Isle  of  Re,  where  he
was  born.  Many  overtures  passed  between  our  ambassadors.
The  English  at  first  demanded,  according  to  their  custom,  the
crown  of  France,  and  by  degrees  they  fell  to  Normandy  and
Guienne ;  our  commissioners  replied  as  became  them :  so
that  the  demand  was  well  urged  on  the  one  side,  and  well
refused  on  the  other :  yet,  from  the  very  first  day  of  the
treaty,  there  was  great  prospect  of  an  accommodation,  for
both  parties  seemed  very  inclinable  to  hearken  to  reasonable
proposals :  our  commissioners  came  back,  and  the  others
returned  to  their  camp.  The  king  was  informed  of  their
demands,  and  the  final  resolution*  was,  to  have  72,000
crowns  paid  them  down  before  they  left  the  kingdom ;  a
marriage  was  to  be  concluded  between  our  present  king  and
the  eldest  daughter  f  of  King  Edward,  who  is  now  Queen  of
England,  and  for  her  maintenance  either  the  duchy  of
Guienne  was  to  be  assigned  J,  or  a  pension  of  50,000  crowns,

*  The  terms  finally  agreed  upon  by  the  Kings  of  France  and  England
are  contained  in  four  distinct  acts,  reported  in  Rymer  (vol.  v.  part  3.  pp.
65 — 68),  and  all  dated  on  the  29th  of  August,  1475.  Their  provisions
may  be  thus  briefly  stated:  1.  King  Edward  engages  to  return  to  England
with  his  army  as  soon  as  Louis  XI.  has  paid  him  the  sum  of  75,000
crowns.  2.  A  truce  of  seven  years,  commencing  at  the  date  of  the  treaty,
and  finishing  at  sunset  on  the  29th  of  August,  1482,  is  concluded  between
the  two  sovereigns.  3.  The  Kings  of  France  and  England  undertake  to
mutually  assist  each  other  in  case  either  prince  should  be  attacked  by
his  enemies  or  by  his  rebellious  subjects;  and  to  make  this  alliance  still
closer,  Prince  Charles,  son  of  Louis  XL,  is  to  wed  the  Princess  Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Edward  IV.,  as  soon  as  they  are  both  of  marriageable  age.
4.  The  King  of  France  engages  to  pay  annually  to  the  King  of  England,
in  two  instalments,  the  sum  of  50,000  crowns ;  such  payment  to  continue
oniy  during  the  life-tune  of  either  prince.

f  Elizabeth,  born  in  1466,  married  Henry  VIL,  King  of  England,  on
the  18th  of  January,  1486,  and  died  on  the  llth  of  February,  1503.

J  It  will  be  seen  by  the  previous  note,  that  no  reference  was  made  to
this  demand  in  the  final  treaty.

8  4


264  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE C03IM1NES. [1475.

to  be  paid  annually  during  nine  years,  in  the  Tower  of
London  ;  at  the  end  of  which  term,  the  present  king  and  his
queen  were  to  enjoy  quietly  the  whole  revenue  of  Guienne,  and
our  king  was  to  be  discharged  from  paying  the  pension  for  the
future.  There  were  several  other  articles ;  but,  as  they  were  of
no  great  weight  or  importance,  I  shall  pass  them  over ;  only
this  I  shall  add  that  in  this  peace,  which  was  to  continue
nine*  years  between  the  two  crowns,  the  allies  on  both  sides
were  to  be  comprehended  if  they  pleased,  and  the  Dukes  of
Burgundy  and  Bretagne  were  named  expressly  by  the
English.  The  King  of  England  offered  (which  was  strange)
to  make  a  discovery  of  some  persons  who  (as  he  said)  were
traitors  to  our  king  and  his  crown,  and  to  produce  proofs  of
their  treason  under  their  own  hands.

King  Louis  was  extremely  pleased  with  the  progress  that
our  commissioners  had  made  in  this  affair.  He  held  a
council  to  consult  what  measures  to  take,  and  I  was  present
at  it :  some  were  of  opinion  all  this  was  but  a  trick  and
artifice  in  the  English :  but  the  king  was  of  another  mind,
and  he  inferred  it  from  the  time  of  the  year  (it  being  pretty
near  winter),  and  their  being  unprovided  with  any  place
for  a  secure  quarter;  as  also  from  the  delays  and  disap-
pointments which  they  had  suffered  from  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, who  had  (as  it  were)  forsaken  them  already  ;  and  as
for  the  Constable,  he  was  well  assured  he  would  not  deliver
tip  any  of  his  towns,  for  the  king  sent  every  hour  to  enter-
tain and  wheedle  him,  and  prevent  him  from  doing  any
harm.  Besides,  our  king  was  perfectly  acquainted  with  the
King  of  England's  temper,  and  that  he  loved  to  indulge
himself  in  ease  and  pleasures  :  so  that,  by  consequence,  it
plainly  appeared  that  his  majesty  spoke  more  wisely,  and
had  a  better  judgment  of  these  affairs,  than  any  of  his
council.  Whereupon  he  resolved  to  raise  the  money  with
all  expedition,  and  after  debating  the  means  of  raising  it,  it
was  resolved  it  should  be  done  by  a  loan,  and  that  every  one
should  advance  something  for  greater  despatch.  The  king
declared  he  would  do  anything  in  the  world  to  get  the  King
of  England  out  of  France,  except  putting  any  of  his  towns
into  his  possession  ;  for  rather  than  do  that,  he  would  hazard
alL

*  This  is  a  mistake :  the  truce  was  to  last  seven  years.


1475.]  MESSENGERS  FROM  THE  CONSTABLE  TO  THE  KING. 265

The  Constable  began  to  perceive  these  intrigues,  to  fear
he  had  offended  all  parties,  and  to  be  jealous  of  the  designs
which  he  knew  had  been  concluded  against  him  atBouvines;
for  which  reason  he  sent  very  frequently  to  the  king.  At
this  very  hour  there  arrived  at  court  a  servant  of  the  Con-
stable's, named  Louis  de  Creville,  and  one1  of  his  secretaries,
named  John  Richer,  who  are  both  still  alive,  who  were
ordered  by  the  king  to  deliver  their  message  to  the  Lord  du
Bouchage  and  to  me.  The  message  which  they  brought  to
the  king  pleased  his  majesty  extremely ;  for  he  resolved  to  make
his  advantage  of  it,  as  you  shall  hear.  The  Lord  of  Contay,
who  (as  I  have  already  mentioned)  was  a  servant  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  had  not  long  since  been  taken  prisoner
before  Arras ;  and  he  travelled  upon  his  parole  between
the  duke  and  the  king,  who  had  promised  him  not  only
his  liberty,  but  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  if  he  could
dispose  his  master  to  a  peace.  It  happened  that  he  was
just  returned  from  waiting  on  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
the  very  day  the  two  gentlemen  above  mentioned  arrived
from  the  Constable.  The  king  caused  the  Lord  of  Contay
and  myself  to  hide  ourselves  behind  a  great  old  screen  that
stood  in  his  chamber,  that  the  Lord  of  Contay  might  hear
and  report  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  the  language  with
which  the  Constable  and  his  creatures  treated  him.  The
king  seated  himself  upon  a  stool  near  the  screen,  that  we
might  more  distinctly  hear  what  the  said  Louis  de  Creville
(with  whom  none  of  the  king's  servants  except  the  Lord  du
Bouchage  were  admitted)  had  to  say ;  and  he  and  his  col-
league began  their  discourse,  telling  the  king  that  their
master  had  sent  them  lately  to  wait  on  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, and  that  they  had  used  many  arguments  to  induce
him  to  a  rupture  with  the  English,  and  that  they  had  found
him  in  so  great  a  passion  against  the  King  of  England,  that
they  were  in  a  fair  way  to  prevail  upon  him,  not  only  to
abandon,  but  also  to  fall  upon  and  destroy  his  army,  in  their
retreat ;  and  to  please  the  king  the  more,  as  he  thought,
when  he  spoke  those  words,  Louis  de  Creville,  in  imitation
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  stamped  with  his  foot,  swore  by
St.  George,  called  the  King  of  England  Blancborgne,  the
son  of  an  archer  who  bore  his  name,  with  as  many  invec-
tives besides,  as  could  possibly  be  used  against  any  man.


266  THE  MEMOIRS OF  PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1475.

The  king  pretended  to  be  highly  pleased  at  the  relation,  and
desired  him  to  tell  him  it  over  again,  and  to  raise  his  voice,
for  of  late  he  was  grown  a  little  deaf;  De  Creville  was  not
backward,  but  began  again,  and  acted  it  to  the  life.

The  Lord  of  Contay,  who  was  with  me  behind  the  screen,
was  the  most  surprised  person  in  the  world,  and  all  the  ar-
guments that  could  have  been  used  could  never  have  made
him  believe  it,  had  he  not  overheard  it  himself.  In  the
conclusion,  they  advised  his  majesty,  in  order  to  prevent  the
imminent  danger  that  threatened  his  affairs,  to  make  a  truce ;
and  promised  that  the  Constable  should  do  all  that  lay  in  his
power  to  forward  the  negotiation ;  and,  to  satisfy  the  Eng-
lish in  some  measure,  they  proposed  that  the  king  should
give  them  a  small  town  or  two  for  their  winter  quarters,
which  could  not  be  so  bad  but  they  would  be  glad  of  them ;
yet,  naming  no  towns,  it  was  presumed  ttey  intended  St.
Valery  and  Eu.  By  this  means  the  Constable  thought  to
reconcile  himself  to  the  English,  and  expiate  the  affront
which  he  had  put  upon  them  by  refusing  to  admit  them  into
his  towns.  The  king,  having  sufficiently  acted  his  part,  and
made  the  Lord  of  Contay  hear  every  word  that  was  spoken,
gave  them  no  uncivil  answer,  but  only  told  them  that  he
would  send  to  his  brother,  and  give  him  an  account  of  his
affairs  ;  and  then  they  took  their  leave,  and  withdrew.

One  of  them  swore  to  the  king,  that  whatever  secret  he
might  be  intrusted  with  that  concerned  his  majesty's  affairs,
he  would  certainly  discover  it  to  him.  The  king  could
scarce  dissemble  his  resentment  at  their  advising  him  to  give
the  English  the  towns ;  but,  fearing  lest  it  might  provoke  the
Constable  to  do  worse,  he  would  not  make  such  a  reply  as
might  lead  them  to  suspect  that  he  disliked  the  proposition  ;
but  he  sent  a  messenger  of  his  own  to  the  Constable,  for  the
way  was  but  short,  and  it  took  up  no  great  time  to  go
thither  and  return.  When  the  ambassadors  were  gone  out,
the  Lord  of  Contay  and  I  came  from  behind  the  screen,  and
found  the  king  very  pleasant,  and  laughing  heartily ;  but  the
Lord  of  Contay  was  out  of  all  patience  to  hear  such  fellows
speak  so  disrespectfully  of  his  master  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
especially  considering  the  great  transactions  which  were  at
that  time  pending  between  the  Constable  and  him.  The
Lord  of  Contay  was  impatient  to  be  on  horseback,  and  to


147o.] THE DUKE UNEXPECTEDLY  VISITS  EDWARD. 267

make  a  relation  of  it  to  his  master ;  and  he  therefore  was
immediately  despatched,  with  a  copy  of  instructions  written
with  his  own  hand,  and  a  letter  of  credence  under  the  king's
hand.

Our  negotiation  with  the  English  was  already  concluded,
as  you  have  heard,  and  all  these  intrigues  were  carried  on
at  one  time.  The  King  of  France's  commissioners,  who  had
had  a  conference  with  the  English,  reported  their  proposals,
and  the  King  of  England's  envoys  returned  to  their  camp.
At  last  it  was  agreed  upon  by  the  ambassadors  on  both  sides,
that  the  two  kings  should  have  an  interview,  and  swear
mutually  to  the  performance  of  the  articles;  after  which  the
King  of  England  should  return  into  his  own  country,  upon
the  receipt  of  72,000  crowns,  and  that  the  Lord  Howard  and
Sir  John  Chene  *,  his  Master  of  the  Horse,  should  be  left  as
hostages  till  he  was  arrived  in  England.  Lastly,  a  pension
of  16,000  crowns  a  year  was  promised  to  the  privy  coun-
cillors of  the  King  of  England — viz.,  to  the  Lord  Hastings,
2000  crowns  a  year,  who  would  never  give  an  acquittance
for  it  f ;  to  the  Chancellor  J,  2000  ;  and  the  rest  to  the  Lord
Howard,  the  Master  of  the  Horse,  Chalanger,  Sir  Thomas
Montgomery  §,  and  several  others ;  besides  a  great  deal  of
ready  money  and  plate  that  was  distributed  among  the  rest
of  the  King  of  England's  retinue.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  then  at  Luxemburg,
having  notice  of  these  proceedings,  came  in  mighty  haste  ||
to  the  King  of  England,  attended  only  with  sixteen  horse  in
his  retinue.  The  King  of  England  was  extremely  surprised

*  Sir  John  Cheyne  was,  at  the  period  of  his  visit  to  France,  Master  of
the  Horse.  He  was  created  a  Knight  of  the  Bath  by  Richard  III.  on
the  5th  of  July,  1483.  He  afterwards  joined  the  party  of  the  Earl  of
Richmond,  and  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Bosworth  Field  on  the  22nd
of  August,  1485.

f  Lord  Hastings  was  not  always  so  scrupulous,  for  he  gave  receipts
for  a  pension  granted  him  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  in  1471.  Lenglet,
iii.  617.

J  See  note,  p.  276.

§  Sir  Thomas  Montgomery  was  a  Knight  of  the  Garter,  and  one  of
King  Edward's  council.  He  was  created  a  Knight  of  the  Bath  by
Richard  III.  on  the  5th  of  July,  1483.

||  On  the  18th  of  August,  he  slept  at  Peronne,  and  proceeded  on  the
following  day  to  King  Edward's  camp  near  Saint  Christ,  on  the  Somme.
Lenglet,  ii.  217.


268  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1475.

at  his  unexpected  arrival,  and  demanded  what  it  was  that
brought  him  thither,  for  he  saw  by  his  countenance  that  he
was  angry.  The  duke  told  him  he  was  come  to  discourse
with  him.  The  King  of  England  asked  whether  it  should
be  in  public  or  private  ?  Then  the  duke  asked  him  if  he
had  made  a  peace ;  the  king  told  him,  he  had  made  a  truce
for  nine  years,  in  which  the  Duke  of  Bretagne  and  himself
were  comprehended,  and  he  desired  they  would  accept  of
that  comprehension.  The  duke  fell  into  a  violent  passion,
and  in  English,  a  language  that  he  spoke  very  well,  began
to  commemorate  the  glorious  achievements  of  his  prede-
cessors on  the  throne  of  England,  who  had  formerly  invaded
France,  and  how  they  had  spared  no  pains,  nor  declined  any
danger,  that  might  render  them  famous,  and  gain  them
immortal  honour  and  renown  abroad.  Then  he  inveighed
against  the  truce,  and  told  the  king  he  had  not  invited  the
English  over  into  France  out  of  any  necessity  he  had  of
their  assistance,  but  only  to  put  them  in  a  way  of  recovering
their  own  right  and  inheritance ;  and  to  convince  them  he
could  subsist  without  their  alliance,  he  was  resolved  not  to
make  use  of  the  truce  till  the  king  had  been  three  months  in
England  *  ;  and  having  delivered  himself  after  this  manner,
he  took  his  leave  of  the  king,  and  returned  to  Luxemburg.
The  King  of  England  and  his  council  were  extremely  dis-
pleased with  his  language,  but  others  who  were  adverse  to
the  peace  highly  extolled  it.


CH.  IX. — How  the  King  entertained  the  English  in  Amiens,  and  of  the
Place  appointed  for  the  Interview  of  the  two  Kings. — 1475.

IN  order  to  bring  the  peace  to  a  conclusion,  the  King  of
England  advanced  within  half  a  league  of  Amiens,  and  the
King  of  France  being  upon  one  of  the  gates  f,  saw  his  army
marching  at  a  great  distance.  To  speak  impartially,  his

*  He  nevertheless  made  a  proposal  for  a  truce  of  nine  years  with  the
king,  on  the  13th  of  September  following.  See  Lenglet,  iii.  409.

f  Louis  XI.  arrived  at  Amiens  on  the  22nd  of  August,  See  Dupont,
i.  362.


1475.]  THE ENGLISH  ENTERTAINED B?  LOTTIS.  2C9

troops  seemed  but  raw  and  unused  to  action  in  the  field  ;  for
they  were  in  very  ill  order,  and  observed  no  manner  of
discipline.  Our  king  sent  the  King  of  England  300  cart-
loads of  the  best  wines  in  France  as  a  present ;  and  I  think
the  carts  made  as  great  an  appearance  as  the  whole  English
army.  Upon  the  strength  of  the  truce,  numbers  of  the
English  came  into  the  town,  where  they  behaved  themselves
very  imprudently,  and  without  the  least  regard  to  their
prince's  honour  ;  for  they  entered  the  town  all  armed,  and  in
great  companies,  so  that  if  the  King  of  France  could  have
dispensed  with  his  oath,  never  was  there  so  handsome  an
opportunity  of  cutting  off  a  considerable  number  of  them ;
but  his  majesty's  design  was  only  to  entertain  them  nobly,
and  to  settle  a  firm  and  lasting  peace,  that  might  continue
during  his  reign.  The  king  had  ordered  two  large  tables  to
be  placed  on  each  side  of  the  street,  at  the  entrance  of  the
town  gate,  which  were  covered  with  a  variety  of  good  dishes
of  all  sorts  of  food  most  proper  to  relish  their  wine,  of  which
there  was  great  plenty,  and  of  the  richest  that  France  could
produce  ;  and  abundance  of  servants  to  wait  on  them,  but  not
a  drop  of  water  was  drunk.  At  each  of  the  tables  the  king
had  placed  five  or  six  boon  companions,  persons  of  rank  and
condition,  to  entertain  those  that  had  a  mind  to  take  a  hearty
glass  ;  amongst  these  were  the  Lord  of  Craon,  the  Lord  of
Briquebec  *,  the  Lord  of  Bressure  f,  the  Lord  de  Villiers,
and  several  others.  Those  English  who  were  within  sight
of  the  gate,  saw  the  entertainment,  and  there  were  persons
appointed  on  purpose  to  take  their  horses  by  the  bridles,  and
lead  them  to  the  tables,  where  every  man  was  treated
handsomely  as  he  came,  in  his  turn,  to  their  very  great
satisfaction.  When  they  had  once  entered  the  town,  wher-
ever they  went,  or  whatever  they  called  for,  nothing  was  to
be  paid  ;  there  were  nine  or  ten  taverns  liberally  furnished
with  all  that  they  Avanted,  where  they  had  whatever  they
had  a  mind  to  call  for,  without  paying  for  it,  according  to

*  Jean  d'Estouteville,  Knight,  was  Lord  of  Briquebec,  Hambie,  Gasce,
and  Mesnil-Seran,  and  Castellan  of  Gavre.

f  Jacques  de  Beaumont,  Lord  of  Bressuire  and  La  Motte-Sainte-Herare,
and  Seneschal  of  Poitou,  was  the  son  of  Andre  de  Beaumont  and  Jeanne
de  Torsay.  He  married  Jeanne  de  Rochechouart.  He  was  one  of  the
chamberlains  of  Louis  XI.


270  THE MEMOIRS  OP PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1475.

the  King  of  France's  orders,  who  bore  all  the  expense  of
that  entertainment,  which  lasted  three  or  four  days.

You  have  already  heard  how  dissatisfied  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy was  with  the  truce,  but  the  Constable  was  much  more
so  ;  for  having  deceived  all  parties,  he  could  expect  nothing
but  inevitable  ruin.  He  sent  therefore  his  confessor  to  the
King  of  England  with  letters  of  credence  to  this  purpose,
to  desire  him  for  God's  sake  not  to  depend  on  the  oaths  and
promises  of  the  King  of  France,  but  for  the  present  to  accept
of  Eu  and  St.Valeryforhis  winter  quarters,  for  in  two  months
time  he  would  manage  aifairs  so  as  that  his  troops  should  be
better  accommodated ;  but  he  said  nothing  about  security,
he  only  gave  him  great  hopes :  and  lest  the  want  of  money
should  have  forced  the  king  to  consent  to  this  truce,  he
offered  to  lend  him  50,000  crowns,  and  made  him  several
other  fair  proposals  besides.  By  this  time  the  King  of
France  had  ordered  the  two  towns  of  Eu  and  St.  Valery  to  be
burnt,  because  the  Constable  had  proposed  to  deliver  them
up  to  the  English,  and  the  English  were  informed  of  it.
However,  the  King  of  England  returned  this  answer  to  the
Constable,  that  the  truce  was  already  concluded,  and  could
not  be  altered ;  but  if  he  had  performed  his  promise,  it  had
never  been  made.  Which  answer  stung  the  Constable  to  the
very  soul,  and  made  him  desperate  on  all  sides.

I  have  already  given  you  an  account  of  the  king's  noble
entertainment  of  the  English  at  Amiens.  One  night  the
Lord  of  Torcy  *  came  to  the  king,  and  told  him  their  num-
bers in  the  town  were  so  considerable,  that  he  apprehended
there  might  be  some  danger  in  it ;  but  his  majesty  was
angry  with  him  for  it,  so  everybody  else  was  silent.  The  next
day  was  Childermas-day,  on  which  the  king  neither  spoke
himself,  nor  permitted  any  one  else  to  apply  to  him  about
business,  but  took  it  as  an  ill  omen,  and  would  be  very
pettish  when  any  such  thing  was  proposed,  especially  by
those  who  waited  on  him,  and  knew  his  temper.  However,
on  the  morning  I  speak  of,  when  the  king  was  dressed,  and
had  gone  in  to  his  devotions,  one  came  to  me  with  news  that

*  Jean  d'Estouteville,  Lord  of  Torcy,  Blainville  and  Ondeauville,  and
grand  master  of  the  cross-bow-men  of  France,  was  the  son  of  Guillaume
de  Torcy  and  Jeanne  d'Ondeauville :  he  married  Fran9oise  de  la  Roche-
foucauld, and  died  on  the  llth  of  September,  1491.


147o.]  DISORDERLY  CONDUCT  OP THE ENGLISH.  271

there  were  at  least  9,000  English  in  the  town.  I  resolved
to  risk  his  displeasure,  and  acquaint  him  with  this  fact ;
whereupon,  entering  into  his  closet,  I  said,  "  Sir,  though  it
be  Childermas-day,  I  think  myself  bound  in  duty  to  inform
your  majesty  of  what  I  have  heard."  Then  I  gave  him  an.
account  of  the  number  of  troops  already  in  the  town,  and
that  more  were  coming  in  every  moment ;  that  they  were
all  armed,  and  that  nobody  durst  shut  the  gate  upon  them
for  fear  of  provoking  them.  The  king  was  not  offended,  but
left  his  prayers,  and  told  me,  that  for  once  he  would  put  off
the  devotions  of  that  day.  He  commanded  me  immediately
to  get  on  horseback,  and  endeavour  to  speak  with  some  of
the  English  officers  of  note,  to  desire  them  to  order  their
troops  to  retire  ;  and  if  I  met  any  of  his  captains,  to  send
them  to  him,  for  he  would  be  at  the  gate  as  soon  as  I.

I  met  three  or  four  English  commanders  of  my  ac-
quaintance, and  spoke  to  them  according  to  the  king's
directions;  but  for  one  that  they  commanded  to  leave  the
town,  there  were  twenty  came  in.  After  me,  the  king  sent
the  Lord  of  Gie  *  (now  Marshal  of  France),  and  having
found  me,  we  went  together  into  a  tavern,  where,  though  it
was  not  nine  o'clock,  there  had  already  been  111  reckonings
to  pay  that  morning.  The  house  was  filled  with  company,
some  were  singing,  some  were  asleep,  and  all  were  drunk ;
upon  seeing  which,  I  concluded  there  was  no  danger,  and
sent  to  inform  the  king  of  it ;  who  came  immediately  to  the
gate,  well  attended,  and  ordered  200  or  300  men-at-arms  to
be  armed  privately  in  their  captains'  houses,  and  some  of
them  he  posted  at  the  gate  by  which  the  English  entered.
The  king  ordered  his  dinner  to  be  brought  to  the  porter's
lodgings  at  the  gate,  where  his  majesty  dined,  and  did
several  English  officers  the  honour  of  admitting  them  to
dinner  with  him.  The  King  of  England  had  been  informed
of  this  disorder,  and  was  much  ashamed  of  it,  and  sent  to  the
King  of  France  to  desire  his  majesty  to  admit  no  more  of
his  troops  into  the  town.  The  King  of  France  sent  him
word  back,  he  would  not  do  that,  but  if  he  pleased  to  send  a

*  Pierre  de  Rohan,  Knight,  Count  of  Marie  and  Porcien,  and  Lord
of  Git-,  was  the  son  of  Louis  de  Rohan  and  Marie  de  Montauban.  He
was  created  Marshal  of  France  in  1475,  and  died  on  the  22nd  of  April,
1513.


272  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP  DE COMM1NES. [1475.

party  of  his  own  guards  thither,  the  gate  should  be  delivered
up  to  them,  and  they  might  let  in  or  shut  out  whomever  they
pleased.  In  short,  so  they  did,  and  several  of  the  English,
by  their  king's  express  command,  were  ordered  to  evacuate
the  tou-n.

And  then,  in  order  to  bring  the  whole  affair  to  a  conclu-
sion, they  consulted  what  place  would  be  most  convenient
for  the  interview  of  the  two  kings,  and  persons  were  ap-
pointed to  survey  it ;  the  Lord  du  Bouchage  and  I  were
chosen  to  represent  our  master ;  and  the  Lord  Howard,  one
Chalanger,  and  a  herald,  represented  the  King  of  England.
Upon  our  taking  a  view  of  the  river,  we  agreed  the  best  and
securest  place  was  Picquigny,  a  strong  castle  some  three
leagues  from  Amiens,  belonging  to  the  Vidame  *  of  Amiens,
which  had  been  burnt  not  long  before  by  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy; the  town  lies  low,  the  River  Somme  runs  through  it,
and  is  not  fordable  or  wide  near  it.  On  the  one  side,  by  which
our  king  was  to  come,  was  a  fine  champaign  country ;  and  on
the  other  side  it  was  the  same,  only  when  the  King  of
England  came  to  the  river,  he  was  obliged  to  pass  a  cause-
way about  two  bow-shots  in  length,  with  marshes  on  both
sides,  which  might  have  produced  very  dangerous  consequences
to  the  English,  if  our  intentions  had  not  been  honourable.
And  certainly,  as  I  have  said  before,  the  English  do  not
manage  their  treaties  and  capitulations  with  so  much  cunning
and  policy  as  the  French  do,  let  people  say  what  they  will,
but  proceed  more  ingenuously,  and  with  greater  straightfor-
wardness in  their  affairs  ;  yet  a  man  must  be  cautious,  and
have  a  care  not  to  affront  them,  for  it  is  dangerous  meddling
with  them.

After  we  had  fixed  upon  the  place,  our  next  consultation
was  about  a  bridge  which  was  ordered  to  be  built,  large  and
strong,  for  which  purpose  we  furnished  our  carpenters  with
materials.  In  the  midst  of  the  bridge  there  was  contrived  a
strong  wooden  lattice,  such  as  the  lions'  cages  are  made  with,
the  hole  between  every  bar  being  no  wider  than  to  thrust  in

*  The  Vidame  of  Amiens,  at  this  time,  was  Jean  d'Aillv,  Knight,
Baron  of  Picquigny,  Raineval,  La  Broye.  Morancourt,  and  Po!-
councillor  and  chamberlain  of  King  Louis  XI. He  married  Yolande  de
Bouigogne.  a  natural  daughter  of  Duke  Philip  the  Good;  and  died  in
1492.


1475.] QUARREL BETWEEN  BURGUNDY  AND  ORLEANS. 273

a  man's  arm ;  the  top  was  covered  only  with  boards  to  keep
off  the  rain,  and  the  body  of  it  was  big  enough  to  contain
ten  or  twelve  men  of  a  side,  with  the  bars  running  across  to
both  sides  of  the  bridge,  to  hinder  any  person  from  passing
over  it  either  to  the  one  side  or  the  other ;  and  in  the  river
there  was  only  one  little  boat  rowed  by  two  men,  to  convey
over  such  as  had  a  mind  to  cross  it.

I  will  now  relate  the  reason  that  induced  the  king  to
have  the  place  of  their  interview  contrived  after  such  a
fashion,  that  there  should  be  no  passage  from  one  side  to  the
other;  and  perhaps  the  time  may  come,  when  this  may  be
useful  to  some  persons,  who  may  have  the  same  occasion.
During  the  minority  of  Charles  VII.  the  kingdom  of  France
was  much  infested  by  the  English.  Henry  V.  lay  before
Eouen*,  and  had  straitened  it  very  much,  and  the  greatest
part  of  those  in  the  town  were  either  subjects,  or  partisans  of
John,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  then  reigning.

There  had  been  a  long  and  great  difference  f  between
John,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  the
whole  kingdom,  or  most  of  it,  was  engaged  in  their  quarrel,
to  the  prejudice  of  the  king's  affairs  ;  for  faction  never  begins
in  any  country,  but  it  is  difficult  to  extinguish,  and  dangerous
in  the  end.  In  this  quarrel  that  I  speak  of,  the  Duke  of
Orleans  had  been  killed  in  Paris  one  year  before.  J  Duke
John  had  a  powerful  army,  and  advanced  to  raise  the  siege
of  Rouen ;  that  he  might  do  it  with  more  ease,  and  assure
himself  of  the  king's  friendship,  it  was  agreed  that  the  king§
and  he  should  have  an  interview  at  Montereau-Fault-Yonne,
where  a  bridge  was  erected,  with  a  barrier  in  the  midst,  and

*  This  was  in  the  year  1418.

f  The  frequent  attacks  of  insanity  to  which  King  Charles  VX  was
subject,  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  govern  alone,  and  the  adminis-
tration of  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  was  therefore  entrusted  to  his
brother  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  to  his  cousin  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.
Neither  of  these  princes  was,  however,  satisfied  with  a  mere  share  in  the
royal  power;  and  on  the  23rd  of  November,  1407,  the  Duke  of  Orleans
was  assassinated  by  order  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  Hence  arose  a  civil
war,  which  lasted  until  1435.

J  This  should  be  eleven  years  —  (1407 — 1418).

§  Charles  VII.  was  at  this  time  Dauphin  only,  as  his  father  did  not
die  until  1422.  It  was  not  until  after  the  capture  of  Rouen  by  Henry  V.
that  the  dauphin  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  became  reconciled,  and  signed
a  peace  at  Arras  on  the  1 1th  of  July,  1419.


274  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1475.

in  the  middle  of  the  barrier  a  little  wicket,  which  was  bolted
on  both  sides ;  by  which  means,  and  by  the  consent  of  both
parties,  they  might  pass  to  either  side.  The  king  came  on
one  side,  and  Duke  John  on  the  other,  both  attended  with  a
strong  party  of  their  guards,  but  especially  Duke  John;  they
met,  and  had  a  long  conference  upon  the  bridge,  and  about
the  duke's  person  there  were  not  above  three  or  four  at  the
most.  In  the  height  of  their  discourse,  the  duke  (either  by
the  persuasion  of  others,  or  out  of  a  desire  to  pay  a  more  than
ordinary  respect  to  his  majesty)  unbolted  the  wicket  on  his
side,  and  it  being  opened  by  the  others,  he  passed  through  it
to  the  king,  and  was  immediately  slain  *,  himself  and  all  those
who  attended  him ;  which  was  the  occasion  of  abundance  of
mischief  that  ensued  afterwards,  as  everybody  knows :  but
this  is  not  material  to  my  design,  so  I  shall  speak  of  it  no
farther,  only  let  me  tell  you,  you  have  the  story  just  as  the
king  told  it  me  himself,  when  he  sent  me  to  choose  a  place,
commanding  expressly  that  there  should  be  no  door;  for
said  he,  if  that  had  not  been,  there  had  been  no  means  of
inviting  the  duke  to  the  other  side,  and  then  that  misfortune
had  been  prevented, — the  principal  contrivers  and  executors
of  which  were  some  of  the  murdered  Duke  of  Orleans'
servants,  who  were  present  at  that  time,  and  had  great  au-
thority with  King  Charles  VII.


CH.  X. — Of  the  Interview  between  the  twoKings.'and  of  their  swearing  to
the  Truce  which  had  been  concluded  before;  and  how  some  fancied  the
Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  the  King  of  England's  Tent  in  the  Shape
of  a  White  Pigeon. — 1475.

THE  barrier  being  finished,  and  the  place  fitted  for  the  inter-
view, as  you  have  already  heard,  on  the  next  day,  which
was  the  29th  of  August,  1475,  the  two  kings  appeared.  The
King  of  France  came  first,  attended  by  about  800  men-
at-arms:  on  the  King  of  England's  side,  his  whole  army
was  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle ;  and  though  we  could  not
discover  their  whole  force,  yet  we  saw  such  a  vast  number

*  On  the  10th  of  September,  1419.


1475.  J INTERVIEW BETWEEN EDAVARD  AND  LOUIS.  275

both  of  horse  and  foot,  that  the  body  of  troops  that  were
with  us  seemed  very  inconsiderable  in  comparison  with
them;  but  indeed  the  fourth  part  of  our  army  was  not  there.
It  was  given  out  that  twelve  men  of  a  side  were  to  be  with
each  of  the  kings  at  the  interview,  and  that  they  were  already
chosen  from  among  their  greatest  and  most  trusty  courtiers.
With  us  we  had  four  of  the  King  of  England's  party  to  view
what  was  done  among  us,  and  they  had  as  many  of  ours,  on  their
side,  to  have  an  eye  over  their  actions.  As  I  said  before,
our  king  came  first  to  the  barrier,  attended  by  twelve  persons;
among  whom  were  John,  Duke  of  Bourbon,  and  the  Cardinal
his  brother.  It  was  the  king's  royal  pleasure  (according  to
an  old  and  common  custom  that  he  had),  that  I  should  be
dressed  like  him  on  that  day.

The  King  of  England  advanced  along  the  causeway  (which
I  mentioned  before)  very  nobly  attended,  with  the  air  and
presence  of  a  king  :  there  were  in  his  train  his  brother  the
Duke  of  Clarence,  the  Earl  of  Northumberland*,  his  cham-
berlain the  Lord  Hastings,  his  Chancellor,  and  other  peers  of
the  realm ;  among  whom  there  were  not  above  three  or  four
dressed  in  cloth  of  gold  like  himself.  The  King  of  England
wore  a  black  velvet  cap  upon  his  head,  with  a  large  fleur  de
lys  made  of  precious  stones  upon  it :  he  was  a  prince  of  a
noble  and  majestic  presence,  but  a  little  inclining  to  corpulence.
I  had  seen  him  before  when  the  Earl  of  Warwick  drove  him
out  of  his  kingdom ;  then  I  thought  him  much  handsomer,
and  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance,  my  eyes  had  never
beheld  a  more  handsome  person.  When  he  came  within  a
little  distance  of  the  barrier,  he  pulled  off  his  cap,  and  bowed
himself  within  half  a  foot  of  the  ground ;  and  the  King  of
France,  who  was  then  leaning  against  the  barrier,  received  him
with  abundance  of  reverence  and  respect.  They  embraced
through  the  holes  of  the  grate,  and  the  King  of  England
making  him  another  low  bow,  the  King  of  France  saluted
him  thus: — "Cousin,  you  are  heartily  welcome  ;  there  is  no
person  living  I  was  so  ambitious  of  seeing,  and  God  be
thanked  that  this  interview  is  upon  so  good  an  occasion.'

•  Henry  Percy,  Earl  of  Northumberland,  was  the  son  of  Henry  Percy
and  Eleanor  Poynin-rs.  He  married  Maud,  daughter  of  William  Herbert,
first  Earl  of  Pembroke.  He  was  killed  in  a  popular  riot,  during  the  fourth
year  of  the  reign  of  King  Henry  VII.

T  2


276  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMBINES. [1475.

The  King  of  England  returned  the  compliment  in  very  good
French.

Then  the  Chancellor  of  England  (who  was  a  prelate,  and
Bishop  of  Lisle  *)  began  his  speech  with  a  prophecy  (with
which  the  English  are  always  provided)  that  at  Picquigny  a
memorable  peace  was  to  be  concluded  between  the  English
and  French.  After  he  had  finished  his  harangue,  the  instru-
ment was  produced  which  contained  the  articles  the  King  of
France  had  sent  to  the  King  of  England.  The  Chancellor
demanded  of  our  king,  whether  he  had  dictated  the  said
articles  ?  and  whether  he  agreed  to  them  ?  The  king  re-
plied, Yes:  and  King  Edward's  letters  being  produced  on  our
side,  he  made  the  same  answer.  The  missal  being  then
brought  and  opened,  both  the  kings  laid  one  of  their  hands
upon  the  book,  and  the  other  upon  the  holy  true  cross,  and
both  of  them  swore  religiously  to  observe  the  contents  of  the
truce,  which  was,  that  it  should  stand  firm  and  good  for  nine
years  complete  ;  that  the  allies  on  both  sides  should  be  com-
prehended ;  and  that  the  marriage  between  their  children
should  be  consummated,  as  was  stipulated  by  the  said  treaty.
After  the  two  kings  had  sworn  to  observe  the  treaty,  our
king  (who  had  always  words  at  command)  told  the  King  of
England  in  a  jocular  way,  he  should  be  glad  to  see  his
majesty  at  Paris;  and  that  if  he  would  come  and  divert  him-
self with  the  ladies,  he  would  assign  him  the  Cardinal  of
Bourbon  for  his  confessor,  who  he  knew  would  willingly
absolve  him,  if  he  should  commit  any  sin  by  way  of  love
and  gallantry.  The  King  of  England  was  extremely  pleased
with  his  raillery,  and  made  his  majesty  several  good  re-
partees, for  he  knew  the  cardinal  was  a  jolly  companion.

After  some  discourse  to  this  purpose,  our  king,  to  show
his  authority,  commanded  us  who  attended  him  to  withdraw,
for  he  had  a  mind  to  have  a  little  private  discourse  with  the
King  of  England.  We  obeyed,  and  those  who  were  with

*  The  personage  here  alluded  to  by  Commines,  is  Thomas  of  Rother-
ham,  who  was  born  on  the  24th  of  August,  1423,  and  became  Keeper  of
the  Great  Seal,  Bishop  of  Rochester  in  1468,  Bishop  of  Lincoln  in  1471,
and  Archbishop  of  York  in  1480.  He  was  appointed  Lord  High  Chan-
cellor of  England  in  1474,  and  with  an  interval  of  two  years,  occupied
that  post  until  his  death,  on  the  29th  of  May,  1500.  Commiues  here
mistakes  Lisle  for  Lincoln.


147o.] INTERVIEW BETWEEN  EDWARD A>*D LOUIS.  277

the  King  of  England,  seeing  us  retire,  did  the  same,  without
waiting  to  be  commanded.  After  the  two  kings  had  been
alone  together  for  some  time,  our  master  called  me  to  him,
and  asked  the  King  of  England  if  he  knew  me  ?  The  King
of  England  replied  he  did,  and  named  the  places  where  he
had  seen  me,  and  told  the  king  that  formerly  I  had  endea-
voured to  serve  him  at  Calais*,  when  I  was  in  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  service.  The  King  of  France  demanded,  if  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  refused  to  be  comprehended  in  the  treaty
(as  might  be  expected  from  his  obstinate  answer),  what  the
King  of  England  would  have  him  do  ?  The  King  of  England
replied,  he  would  offer  it  him  again,  and  if  he  refused  it  then,
he  would  not  concern  himself  any  farther,  but  leave  it
entirely  to  themselves.  By  degrees  the  king  came  to  men-
tion the  Duke  of  Bretagne  (who  indeed  was  the  person  he
aimed  at  in  the  question),  and  made  the  same  demand  about
him.  The  King  of  England  desired  he  would  not  attempt
anything  against  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,  for  in  his  necessity
he  had  never  found  so  true  and  faithful  a  friend.f  The
king  pressed  him  no  farther,  but  recalling  his  retinue,  took
his  leave  of  the  King  of  England  in  the  handsomest  and
most  civil  terms  imaginable,  and  saluted  all  his  attendants
in  a  most  particular  manner:  and  both  the  kings  at  a  time
(or  very  near  it)  retired  from  the  barrier,  and  mounting  on
horseback,  the  King  of  France  returned  to  Amiens,  and  the
King  of  England  to  his  army.  The  King  of  England  was
accommodated  by  the  King  of  France  with  whatever  he  wanted,
even  to  the  very  torches  and  candles.  The  Duke  of  Glouces-
ter, the  King  of  England's  brother,  and  some  other  persons
of  quality,  were  not  present  at  this  interview,  as  being  averse
to  the  treaty ;  but  they  recollected  themselves  afterwards,
and  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  waited  on  the  king  our  master
at  Amiens,  where  he  was  splendidly  entertained,  and  nobly
presented  both  with  plate  and  fine  horses.  J

*  See  above,  p.  188.

f  Our  historian  Habington  states  this  reply  of  King  Edward  somewhat
differently,  and  says  he  answered  resolutely,  "That  he  would  JRjver
forsake  the  care  of  a  confederate  who  had  maintained  his  faith  so
constantly."

J  The  other  English  lords  who  took  presents,  or  rather  pensions  from
the  French  king,  were,  the  Lord  Hastings,  lord  chamberlain  ;  the  Lord

T  3


278  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [H?O.

As  the  king  returned  from  this  interview,  he  spoke  to
me  by  the  way  upon  two  points :  one  was,  that  the  King  of
England  had  been  so  easily  persuaded  to  come  to  Paris.
His  majesty  was  not  at  all  pleased  with  it,  and  he  told  me,
"  He  is  a  very  handsome  prince,  a  great  admirer  of  the  ladies,
and  who  knows  but  some  of  them  may  appear  to  him  so
charming,  as  may  give  him  a  desire  of  making  us  a  second
visit.  His  predecessors  have  been  too  often  in  Paris  and
Normandy  already ;  and  I  do  not  care  for  his  company  so
near,  though  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  I  shall  gladly
esteem  him  as  my  friend  and  brother."  Besides,  the  king
was  displeased  to  find  him  so  obstinate  in  relation  to  the
Duke  of  Bretagne,  on  whom  he  would  fain  have  made  war,
and  to  that  purpose  made  another  overture  to  him  by  the
Lord  du  Bouchage  and  the  Lord  of  St.  Pierre.  But  when
the  King  of  England  saw  himself  pressed,  he  gave  them
this  short  but  generous  answer,  "  That  if  any  prince  invaded
the  Duke  of  Bretagne's  dominions,  he  would  cross  the  seas
once  more  in  his  defence."  Upon  which  they  importuned
him  no  farther.

When  the  king  had  arrived  at  Amiens,  and  was  ready  to  go
to  supper,  three  or  four  of  the  English  lords,  who  had  at-
tended upon  the  King  of  England  at  the  interview,  came  to
sup  with  his  majesty ;  and  the  Lord  Howard  being  of  the
number,  he  told  the  king  in  his  ear,  that  if  he  desired  it,  he
would  find  a  way  to  bring  his  master  to  him  to  Amiens,  and
to  Paris  too,  to  be  merry  with  him  for  some  time.  Though
this  offer  and  proposition  were  not  in  the  least  agreeable  to
the  king,  yet  his  majesty  dissembled  the  matter  pretty  well,
and  fell  a  washing  his  hands,  without  giving  a  direct
answer ;  but  he  whispered  me  in  the  ear,  that  what  lie
suspected  was  at  last  come  really  to  pass.  After  supper
they  fell  upon  the  subject  again ;  but  the  king  put  it  off
with  the  greatest  wisdom  imaginable,  pretending  that  his  ex-
pedition against  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  would  require  his
departure  immediately.  Though  these  affairs  were  of  very
great  importance,  and  great  prudence  was  used  on  both
sides  to  manage  them  discreetly ;  yet  there  were  some

Howard;  Sir  John  Cheyne,  master  of  the  horse;  Sir  Anthony  St.  Leger,
and  Sir  Thomas  Montgomery.


147.3.] AXXIETT  OF LOTJIS CONCERNING THE ENGLISH. 279

pleasant  occurrences  among  them,  worthy  to  be  transmitted
to  posterity.  Nor  ought  any  man  to  wonder  (considering
the  great  mischiefs  which  the  English  have  brought  upon
this  kingdom,  and  the  recentness  of  their  date),  that  the
King  of  France  should  be  at  so  much  labour  and  expense  to
send  them  home  in  a  friendly  manner,  that  he  might  make
them  his  friends  for  the  future,  or  at  least  divert  them  from
making  war  against  him.

The  next  day,  a  great  number  of  English  came  to  Amiens,
some  of  whom  reported  that  the  Holy  Ghost  had  made  that
peace,  and  prophecies  were  produced  to  confirm  it ;  but
their  greatest  argument  to  support  this  opinion  was  that,
during  the  time  of  their  interview,  a  white  pigeon  came  and
sate  upon  the  King  of  England's  tent,  and  could  not  be
frightened  away  by  any  noise  they  could  make  in  the  camp.
But  some  gave  another  reason,  and  that  was,  that  a  small
shower  of  rain  having  fallen  that  day,  and  soon  after  the
sun  shining  out  very  warmly,  the  poor  pigeon,  finding  that
tent  higher  than  the  rest,  came  thither  only  to  dry  herself.
And  this  reason  was  given  me  by  a  Gascon  gentleman,  called
Louis  de  Breteilles  *,  who  was  in  the  King  of  England's
service.  He  was  very  much  displeased  at  this  peace ;  and
having  been  an  old  acquaintance  of  mine,  he  told  me  pri-
vately, that  we  did  but  laugh  at  the  King  of  England.
Among  the  rest  of  our  discourse,  I  asked  him  how  many
battles  the  King  of  England  had  won.  He  told  me  nine,
and  that  he  had  been  in  every  one  of  them  in  person.  I
demanded  next  how  many  he  had  lost  ?  He  replied,  never
but  one,  and  that  was  the  one  in  which  we  had  outwitted
him  now ;  for  he  was  of  opinion  that  the  ignominy  of  his
returning  so  soon,  after  such  vast  preparations,  would  be  a
greater  disgrace  and  stain  to  his  arms  than  all  the  honour
he  had  gained  in  the  nine  former  victories.  I  acquainted
the  king  with  this  smart  answer,  and  the  king  replied,  "  He
is  a  shrewd  fellow,  I  warrant  him,  and  we  must  have  a  care
of  his  tongue."  The  next  day  he  sent  for  him,  and  had
him  to  dinner  at  his  own  table,  and  made  him  very  advan-
tageous proposals,  if  he  would  quit  his  master's  service,  and

*  According  to  Oliver  cle  la  Marche,  ii.  26G,  he  was  a  Gascon  squire
iu  the  service  of  Lord  Scales.

T  4


280  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1475.

live  in  France ;  but  finding  he  was  not  to  be  prevailed  on,
he  presented  him  with  1000  crowns,  and  promised  that  he
would  do  great  things  for  his  brothers  in  France.  Upon
his  going  away,  I  whispered  him  in  the  ear,  and  desired
him  to  employ  his  good  offices  to  continue  and  propagate
the  love  and  good  understanding  which  had  now  begun
between  the  two  kings.

The  king  was  in  the  greatest  concern  imaginable,  for  fear
he  should  drop  some  word  or  other,  that  might  make  the
English  suspect  he  had  imposed  upon  them,  and  laughed  at
them.  The  next  morning  after  the  interview,  his  majesty
being  in  his  closet,  with  only  three  or  four  of  us  with  him,
he  began  to  droll  and  jest  about  the  wines  and  presents
which  he  had  sent  to  the  English  camp ;  but,  turning  sud-
denly round,  he  perceived  a  merchant  of  Gascony,  who  lived
in  England,  and  had  come  to  court  to  beg  leave  to  export  a
certain  quantity  of  Bordeaux  wines,  without  paying  the
duties ;  the  obtaining  of  which  privilege  would  have  been
very  advantageous  to  him.  The  king  was  much  surprised
at  the  sight  of  him,  and  wondered  how  he  came  thither.
The  king  asked  him  of  what  town  in  Guienne  he  was ;  and
whether  he  had  married  in  England?  The  merchant  re-
plied, yes,  he  had  a  wife  in  England,  but  the  estate  he  had
there  was  but  small.  Before  he  went  out,  the  king  ap-
pointed a  person  to  go  with  him  to  Bordeaux,  and  I  had
also  some  discourse  with  him  by  his  majesty's  express  com-
mand. The  king  gave  him  a  considerable  employment  in
the  town  where  he  was  born,  granted  him  the  exemption  of
the  duties  upon  his  wines,  and  gave  him  1000  francs  to
bring  over  his  wife ;  but  he  was  to  send  his  brother  into
England  for  her,  and  not  go  thither  to  fetch  her  himself;  and
this  penalty  the  king  imposed  upon  himself  for  having  used
his  tongue  too  freely.


CH.  XI. — How  the  Constable  endeavoured  to  excuse  himself  to  the
King  of  France,  upon  the  Conclusion  of  the  Peace  with  the  English ;
and  how  a  Truce  was  likewise  made  for  Nine  Years  between  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  and  the  King  of  France. — 1475.

THE  next  day  after  the  interview,  the  Constable  despatched
one  of  his  servants,  called  Rapine,  with  letters  to  the  king,


1475.] THE  CONSTABLE'S  PROPOSALS  TO  THE  KING. 281

who  preferred  him  afterwards  for  having  been  faithful  to
his  master;  the  king  ordered  the  Lord  du  Lude*  and  myself
to  receive  his  message.  At  the  same  time  the  Lord  of
Contay,  whom  I  have  mentioned  so  often,  had  returned  from
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  court  with  his  head  full  of  designs
against  the  Constable ;  so  that  the  Constable  looked  upon
himself  as  ruined  and  undone,  and  knew  not  to  which  of  the
saints  he  should  address  his  devotions.  Rapine's  message
was  very  submissive ;  he  told  us  that  his  master  was  very
sensible  that  many  accusations  and  charges  had  been  brought
against  him  to  the  king,  but  his  mnjesty  would  know  from
experience,  that  he  had  no  traitorous  intentions.  However,
to  give  the  king  greater  evidence  of  his  loyalty,  he  made
some  proposals  to  his  majesty,  that  if  he  pleased  to  order
matters  so,  he  would  persuade  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to
join  his  forces  with  the  king's,  and  destroy  the  King  of
England  and  his  whole  army  on  their  return ;  and  by  his
manner  of  speaking,  it  seemed  to  us  that  his  master  was  in.
the  height  of  despair.  We  told  him  that  peace  was  already
concluded  with  the  English,  and  that  we  were  not  desirous
of  beginning  a  new  war.  The  Lord  du  Lude  proceeded  so
far  as  to  ask  Rapine  if  he  did  not  know  how  his  master  had
disposed  of  his  ready  money  ?  I  was  amazed  that  this  ques-
tion (for  Rapine  had  the  character  of  being  a  good  servant)
did  not  give  him  a  hint  of  his  master's  impending  ruin,
discover  the  designs  that  were  forming  against  him,  and
make  the  Constable  fly,  especially  when  he  reflected  on  the
danger  he  had  escaped  only  the  year  before.  But  I  have
seen  but  very  few  people  in  my  time,  that  knew  how  to  fly
from  danger  in  time.  Some  have  not  profited  by  the  ex-
perience they  might  have  had  of  their  neighbours'  misfor-
tunes ;  others  never  travelled  into  foreign  countries,  which  is
certainly  a  great  fault  in  a  man  of  quality,  for  to  have  seen
the  world  gives  a  man  great  wisdom  and  presence  of  mind ;
others  are  too  passionately  fond  of  their  wives,  their  chil-
dren, or  their  estates ;  and  one  or  other  of  these  reasons  has
been  the  ruin  of  many  a  brave  man.

After  we  had  given  his  majesty  an  account  of  Rapine's

*  Jean  Daillon,  Lord  du  Lude,  knight,  councillor  and  chamberlain
to  Louis  XL,  and  Governor  of  Dauphiny.  He  was  a  compere  of'  the  king,
•vvho  nicknamed  him  Maistre  Jtlian  des  haliktez.


282  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1475.

message,  he  called  for  one  of  his  secretaries.  There  were
then  in  his  presence  only  the  Lord  Howard*,  an  English
courtier,  who  knew  nothing  of  our  intrigue  with  the  Con-
stable, the  Lord  of  Contay,  who  was  newly  returned  from
the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  we  two  who  had  been  in  dis-
course with  Rapine.  The  king  dictated  a  letter  to  the
Constable,  in  which  his  majesty  acquainted  him  with  what
had  been  transacted  the  day  before  in  relation  to  the  truce.
He  told  him,  that  at  that  instant  he  had  many  weighty
affairs  upon  his  hands,  and  wanted  such  a  head  as  his  to
finish  them ;  and  then  turning  to  the  English  nobleman  and
the  Lord  of  Contay,  he  told  them,  "  I  do  not  mean  his  body
—  I  would  have  his  head  with  me,  and  his  body  where  it  is."
After  the  letter  was  read,  it  was  delivered  to  Rapine,  who
was  mightily  pleased  with  it,  and  took  it  as  a  great  com-
pliment in  the  king  to  say,  that  he  wanted  such  a  head  as
his  master's,  for  he  did  not  understand  the  ambiguity  of  the
phrase.  The  King  of  England  sent  two  letters,  which  the
Constable  had  written  to  himf ,  to  the  King  of  France,  and
acquainted  his  majesty  with  all  the  proposals  he  had  ever
made  him,  by  which  it  may  easily  be  discerned  into  what  a
miserable  condition  he  had  brought  himself,  when  every  one
of  these  three  great  princes  desired  his  destruction.

As  soon  as  the  King  of  England  had  received  his  money,
and  delivered  the  Lord  Howard  and  Sir  John  Cheyne,  his
master  of  the  horse,  as  hostages,  as  he  had  promised  till  he
was  landed  in  England,  he  retreated  towards  Calais  by  long
and  hasty  marches  ;  for  he  was  apprehensive  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  anger,  and  of  the  hatred  of  the  peasants  ;  and
indeed  if  any  of  his  soldiers  straggled,  some  of  them  were
sure  to  be  knocked  on  the  head.

At  the  beginning  of  our  affairs  with  the  English,  you  may
remember  that  the  King  of  England  had  no  great  inclination

*  This  was  that  John,  Lord  Howard,  who,  in  consideration  of  his
descent  from  the  Lady  Margaret,  daughter  of  Thomas,  first  Duke  of
Norfolk,  was,  by  Richard  III.,  created  Duke  of  Norfolk,  and  lost  his  life
with  him  at  Bosworth  Field.  From  him  are  descended  the  Duke  of
Norfolk,  and  all  the  noble  families  of  the  Howards  now  in  being.

f  In  these  letters  he  told  him  that  "  he  was  a  cowardly,  dishonoured
and  poor  king,  for  having  made  such  a  treaty  with  the  King  of  France,  on
account  of  the  promises  he  had  made  him,  none  of  which  he  intended  to
keep."  Lenglet,  ii.  120.


1475.]  KING EDWARD RETURNS TO ENGLAND.  283

to  make  this  descent ;  and  as  soon  as  he  came  to  Dover,  and
before  his  embarkation  there,  he  entered  into  a  sort  of  a
treaty  with  us.  But  that  which  prevailed  with  him  to  trans-
port his  army  to  Calais,  was,  first,  the  solicitation  of  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  the  natural  animosity  of  the  English
against  the  French,  which  has  existed  in  all  ages;  and  next,
to  reserve  to  himself  a  great  part  of  the  money  which  had
been  liberally  granted  him  for  that  expedition ;  for,  as  you
have  already  heard,  the  kings  of  England  live  upon  their  own
demesne  revenue,  and  can  raise  no  taxes  but  under  the  pre-
tence of  invading  France.  Besides,  the  king  had  another
stratagem  by  which  to  content  his  subjects,  for  he  had
brought  along  with  him  ten  or  twelve  of  the  chief  citizens  of
London,  and  other  towns  in  England,  all  fat  and  jolly,  the
leaders  of  the  English  commons,  of  great  power  in  their
country,  such  as  had  promoted  the  war,  and  had  been  very
serviceable  in  raising  that  powerful  army.  The  king  ordered
very  fine  tents  to  be  made  for  them,  in  which  they  lay ;  but,
that  not  being  the  way  of  living  they  had  been  used  to,  they
soon  began  to  grow  weary  of  the  campaign,  for  they  expected
they  should  come  to  an  engagement  within  three  days  after
their  landing,  and  the  king  multiplied  their  fears  and  exagge-
rated the  dangers  of  a  war,  on  purpose  that  they  might  be
better  satisfied  with  a  peace,  and  aid  him  to  pacify  the  mur-
murs of  the  people  upon  his  return  into  England ;  for  since
Arthur's  days,  never  King  of  England  invaded  France  with
so  great  a  number  of  the  nobility  and  such  a  formidable
army.  But,  as  you  have  heard,  he  returned  immediately
into  England  upon  the  conclusion  of  the  peace,  and  reserved
the  greatest  part  of  the  money  that  had  been  raised  to  pay
the  army  for  his  own  private  use ;  so  that  in  reality,  he  ac-
complished most  of  the  designs  he  had  in  view.*  The  King
of  England  was  not  of  a  complexion  or  turn  of  mind  to  endure
much  hardship  and  labour,  and  those  any  King  of  England
who  designs  to  make  any  considerable  conquest  in  France,
must  expect  to  suffer.  Besides  our  king  was  in  a  tolerable
posture  of  defence,  though  in  all  places  he  was  not  so  well
prepared  as  he  ought  to  have  been,  by  reason  of  the  variety

*  The  city  of  London,  however,  seemed  well  pleased  with  this  expedi-
tion, and  the  lord  mayor  and  aldermen  received  the  king  on  Blackheath
with  great  formalities,  and  conducted  him  in  great  pomp  to  Westminster.


284  THE MEMOIRS OP  PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1475.

and  multitude  of  his  enemies.  Another  great  design  the  King
of  England  had  in  view,  which  was  the  accomplishment  of
the  marriage  between  our  present  King  Charles  VIII.  and
his  daughter*,  and  this  wedding,  causing  him  to  wink  at
several  things,  was  a  great  advantage  to  our  master's  affairs.

After  all  the  English,  except  their  hostages,  were  landed
in  England,  the  King  of  France  retired  towards  Laon,  to  a
little  town  called  Vervins,  bordering  upon  the  marshes  of
Hainault  ;  for  the  Chancellor  of  Burgundy  and  other  ambas-
sadors were  at  Avesnes  in  Hainault  with  the  Lord  of  Cuntny,
with  a  commission  from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  treat  of
an  accommodation  ;  and  the  king  himself  had  a  great  desire
to  obtain  a  general  peace.  The  vast  numbers  of  the  English
had  put  him  into  great  alarm;  he  had  seen  enough  of  their
exploits  in  his  time  in  his  kingdom,  and  had  no  mind  to  see
any  more  of  them.  The  Chancellor,  who  was  one  of  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  plenipotentiaries,  as  you  have  heard,
sent  news  to  the  king,  that  if  he  pleased  to  send  his  ambas-
sadors to  a' bridge  half  way  between  Avesnes  and  Vervins,
he  and  his  colleagues  would  certainly  meet  them  there.  The
king  sent  them  word  he  would  come  thither  himself;  and
though  some  persons  whom  he  consulted  endeavoured  to
dissuade  his  majesty  from  it,  yet  he  went,  and  took  the
English  hostages  along  with  him ;  and  they  were  present
when  the  king  gave  audience  to  the  ambassadors,  who  had  a
strong  guard  of  archers  and  other  soldiers ;  but  no  business
was  despatched  then,  only  the  king  took  them  to  dinner  with
him.

One  of  the  English  that  was  there  began  to  repent  of  the
peace,  and  told  me  at  the  window,  that  had  they  seen  many
such  men  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  before,  perhaps  the
peace  had  not  been  concluded  so  soon.  The  Viscount  of
Narbonnef  (now  called  the  Lord  of  Fouez)  overhearing  him,
replied,  "Could  you  be  so  weak  as  to  believe  the  Duke  of

*  King  Edward  upon  his  return  from  France,  caused  his  eldest
daughter  Elizabeth  to  be  styled  Dauphiness.

f  Jean  de  Foix,  Viscount  of  Narbonne,  was  the  son  of  Gaston  IV.,
Count  of  Foix,  and  Eleanor  of  Arragon,  afterwards  Queen  of  Navarre.
He  married  Marie  de  France,  sister  of  King  Louis  XII;  and  died  in.
November,  1500.  He  assumed  the  title  of  Count  of  Foix  in  1483,  on
the  death  of  his  nephew,  Fran9ois  Phoebus,  Count  of  Foix  and  King  of
Navarre.


1475.]  TREATY  OP  VERVINS.  285

Burgundy  had  not  great  numbers  of  such  soldiers  ?  he  had
only  sent  them  into  quarters  of  refreshment,  but  you  were  in
such  haste  to  be  at  home  again,  that  six  hundred  pipes  of
wine  and  a  pension  from  our  king  sent  you  quickly  back
into  England."  The  Englishman  was  in  a  passion,  and  an-
swered with  much  warmth,  "  I  plainly  see,  as  everybody
said,  that  you  have  done  nothing  but  cheat  us.  Do  you  call
the  money  your  king  has  given  us  a  pension  ?  It  is  a
tribute,  and,  by  St.  George,  you  may  prate  so  much  as  will
bring  us  back  again  to  prove  it."  I  interrupted  their  dis-
course, and  turned  it  into  a  jest;  but  the  Englishman  would
not  understand  it  so,  and  I  informed  the  king  of  it,  and  his
majesty  was  highly  offended  with  the  Viscount  of  Nar-
bonne.

The  King  of  France  had  but  a  short  conference  with  the
Chancellor  and  the  rest  of  the  plenipotentiaries  at  that  time  ;
for  it  was  agreed  they  should  wait  on  his  majesty  at  Vervins,
and  so  they  did.  When  they  were  at  Vervins,  the  king  ap-
pointed Tanneguy  du  Chastel,  and  Pierre  Doriole,  Chancellor
of  France,  to  negotiate  with  them,  and  committed  the  whole
management  of  the  affair  to  them.  Great  representations
were  made,  and  both  sides  were  very  zealous  for  the  advan-
tage of  their  masters.  The  king's  ambassadors  made  their
report  and  acquainted  his  majesty  that  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy's commissioners  had  been  haughty  in  their  language,
but  they  had  given  them  as  good  as  they  brought,  and  then
repeated  their  answers.  The  king  was  not  pleased  with  them,
and  told  them  there  had  been  too  many  of  those  smart  answers
already  ;  and  that  as  the  debate  was  only  about  a  truce,  not
a  final  peace,  he  would  have  no  more  such  expressions  used,
and  therefore  he  would  treat  with  them  himself.  Whereupon
his  majesty  requested  the  Chancellor  and  the  rest  of  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  plenipotentiaries  to  attend  him  in  his
chamber,  where  none  of  his  court  being  present  but  the  Lord
Admiral,  the  late  Bastard  of  Bourbon,  the  Lord  du  Bouchage,
and  myself,  he  concluded  a  truce  with  them  for  nine  years
to  come*,  whereby  all  things  were  to  be  restored  that  had


*  This  treaty  is  dated  on  the  13th  of  September,  1475,  and  was  to
continue  from  that  date  until  the  12th  of  September,  1484.  Commines
does  not  mention  that,  by  one  of  the  articles,  four  gentlemen,  one  of


286  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1475.

been  taken:  but  the  ambassadors  desired  the  king  that  it
might  not  yet  be  proclaimed  by  sound  of  trumpet,  as  the
visual  manner  was,  in  order  to  save  the  duke's  oath  to  the
King  of  England  (when  he  swore  in  his  passion  he  would  not
accept  of  the  benefit  of  the  truce  till  the  king  had  been  in
England  three  months),  lest  he  should  think  their  master  had
spoken  otherwise  than  he  designed.

The  King  of  England  being  highly  disgusted  at  the  Duke
of  Burgundy's  rejection  of  his  truce,  and  present  endeavour
to  make  a  separate  peace  with  the  king,  despatched  a  great
favourite  of  his,  called  Sir  Thomas  Montgomery,  to  the  king
at  Vervins,  and  he  happened  to  arrive  there  at  the  very  time
the  king  was  negotiating  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
envoys.  Sir  Thomas  desired,  on  behalf  of  the  King  of
England,  his  master,  that  the  King  of  France  would  not
consent  to  any  other  truce  with  the  duke  than  what  Avas
already  made.  He  also  pressed  his  majesty  not  to  deliver
St.  Quentin  into  the  duke's  hands  ;  and,  as  farther  encourage-
ment, he  offered  to  pass  the  seas  next  spring  with  a  pow-
erful army  to  assist  him,  provided  his  majesty  would  continue
the  war  against  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  compensate  him
for  the  prejudice  he  should  sustain  in  his  duties  upon  wool
at  Calais,  which  would  be  worth  little  or  nothing  in  war  time
(though  at  other  times  they  were  valued  at  50,000  crowns  a
year).  He  proposed,  likewise,  that  the  King  of  France
should  pay  one  half  of  his  army,  and  he  would  pay  the  other
himself.  The  King  of  France  returned  the  King  of  England
abundance  of  thanks,  and  made  Sir  Thomas  a  present  of
plate ;  but  as  to  the  continuation  of  the  war,  he  begged  to  be
excused,  for  the  truce  was  already  concluded,  and  upon  the
same  terms  as  that  which  had  been  agreed  to  between  them ;
only  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  pressed  mightily  to  have  a  se-
parate truce  by  himself* ;  which  he  excused  as  well  as  he
could,  to  please  and  satisfy  the  English  ambassador,  who
with  this  answer  returned  into  England,  and  the  hostages
with  him.  The  king  was  extremely  surprised  at  the  King

whom  was  himself,  were  excluded  from  all  share  in  the  treaty.  Lenglet,
iii.  409.

*  This  was  the  main  point  King  Edward  endeavoured  to  prevent,
since,  by  articling  apart,  the  duke  showed  his  independence,  and  that  the
English,  by  their  arms,  had  in  no  way  advanced  his  affairs.


1475.]  TREATY  OF  VERVINS.  287

of  England's  offers,  which  were  delivered  only  before  me  :
he  conceived  it  would  be  very  dangerous  to  bring  the  King
of  England  into  France  again,  for  between  those  two  nations
(when  together)  any  trifling  accident  might  raise  some  new
quarrel,  and  they  might  easily  make  friends  again  with  the
Duke  of  Burgundy, — which  consideration  greatly  forwarded
the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  with  the  Burgundians.


A  Treaty  or  Truce  of  Commerce  made  for  Nine  Years
between  Louis  XL  and  Charles,  the  last  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, at  Vervins,  September  13.  1475.

1.  That  there  shall  be  a  good  and  firm  truce  concluded;
and  all  hostilities  cease,  both  by  sea  and  land  and  on  fresh
waters,  between  the  king  and  the  duke,  their  heirs,  suc-
cessors, territories,  and  subjects,  from  the  13th  day  of  Sep-
tember, for  nine  years— viz.,  to  1484,  without  any  manner  of
contravention  on  either  side,  under  the  pretence  of  letters  of
mark,  countermark,  reprisals,  debts,  or  otherwise  whatsoever;
and  supposing  anything  done  contrary  hereunto,  restitution
shall  be  made  without  delay,  that  is,  within  eight  days  after
the  imparting  of  the  fact  by  one  party  to  the  other ;  and  if
that  be  not  done,  the  party  aggrieved  shall  by  force  of  arms
recover  such  places  as  have  been  voluntarily  given,  or  taken
from  him,  and  the  other  shall  make  no  resistance  ;  and  yet  the
truce  shall  not  be  violated  thereby  ;  and  the  party  that  shall
not  make  the  said  restitution,  shall  bear  all  the  other's  charge.

2.  All  the  subjects  and  servants  on  either  side,  of  what
quality,  condition,  or  nation  soever  they  be,  shall  follow  their
occupations  peaceably,  and  quietly,  and  without  any  molesta-
tion whatsoever,  as  in  time  of  peace.

3.  No  manner  of  hostilities  shall  be  committed  during  the
truce,  but  all  persons  whatsoever,  without  distinction,  shall
go,  sojourn,  converse,  or  trade  in  the  dominions  of  each  other
without  any  safe-conduct,  and  without  any  molestation  or
injury  whatsoever  ;  only  armed  soldiers  shall  not  enter  into
each  other's  territories  in  a  greater  number  than  fourscore  or
a  hundred  horse.

4.  All  persons  of  all  ranks  and  vocation?,  during  the  truce,
shall  return  to  the  enjoyment  and  possession  of  their  bene-
fices, places,  lands,  signiories,  and  other  estates,  in  the  con-


288  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1475.

dition  wherein  they  shall  find  them ;  and  shall  be  admitted
without  any  molestation  or  delay,  without  being  obliged  to
do  homage  anew,  but  either  in  person  or  by  their  substitutes
making  oath  before  the  proper  officer  that  they  will  do
nothing  in  prejudice  to  the  party  to  whom  they  belong;  and
upon  the  expiration  of  the  truce  they  shall  be  left  in  full
obedience  to  the  party  whose  they  are  at  present :  neverthe-
less, the  king  is  content  to  give  up  Rambures  entirely  to  the
lord  of  it,  without  putting  any  guard  into  it,  upon  condition
he  swears  and  signs  before  the  person  who  shall  make  that
restitution,  that  during  the  truce,  and  after  the  expiration  of
it,  he  shall  do  nothing  that  is  prejudicial  to  the  king  and  his
dominions,  iior  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  his  territories,
nor  put  any  garrison  into  the  place,  that  shall  endamage
either  party.

5.  As  to  the  fortresses  of  Beaulieu  and  Vervins,  the  duke
consents,  that  upon  the  actual  restitution  of  the  town  and
bailiwick  of  St.  Quentin,  and  the  places  concerning  which
treaties  have  been  made  between  the  king  and  himself,  they
shall  be  demolished,  and  the  revenue  and  lordships  remain  in
the  possession  of  the  lords  of  them.

6.  The  lands  and  signiories  of  La  Fere,  and  Chastellez,
Vandeul,  and  St.  Lambert,  depending  on  the  Count  of  Marie,
shall  remain  under  the  king's  obedience ;  but  the  signiory
and  revenue  thereof  are  to  be  the  count's.

7.  The  castles, towns, territories, and chastellanies  of
Marie,  Jassy,  Montcornet,  St.  Goubain,  and  Assy,  shall  be
under  the  duke's  obedience  ;  but  the  revenue  shall  belong  to
the  said  count.

8.  As  to  this  truce,  so  far  as  it  concerns  persons  returning
to  their  possessions  on  either  side,  the  Bastard  of  Burgundy,
the  Sieur  de  Renty,  Jean  de  Chassa,  and  Philip  de  Commines,
are  wholly  excepted.

9.  All  infractions  made  on  either  side  of  this  truce,  shall
be  severely  punished  according  to  the  demerits  of  them,  and
reparation  shall  be  made,  within  six  days  after  they  come  to
be  known,  by  the  conservators  of  the  truce  on  either  side.

10.  The  conservators  are  on  the  king's  part:  for  the  county
of  Eu,  St.  Valery,  and  the  adjacent  places,  the  Marshal  de
Gamaches ;  for  Amiens,  Beauvoisis,  and  the  neighbouring
marches,  Monsieur  de  Torcy ;  for  Compiegne,  Noyon,  and


1475.]  TREATY  OF  VERVINS.  289

those  marches,  the  Bailiff  of  Vermandois ;  for  the  county  of
Guyse,  La  Tierache,  and  Rathelois,  the  Sieur  de  Villiers ;
for  the  chastellany  of  La  Fere  and  Laon,  the  Provost  of  the
city  of  Laon  ;  for  all  Champagne,  the  governor  thereof;  for
the  countries  of  the  king  about  the  marches  of  Burgundy,
Monsieur  de  Beaujeu ;  for  the  bailiwick  of  Lyonnois,  the
Bailiff  of  Lyon ;  for  all  the  sea-coast  of  France,  the  lord
admiral.

11.  On  the  part  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy:  for  the  country
of  Ponthieu  and  Vimeux,  Monsieur  Philip  de  Crevecoeur,
Lord  des  Cordes;  for  Corbie  and  the  provostship  of  Feuilloy
and  Beauquesne,  the  Lord  of  Contay  ;  for  Peronne,  and  the
provostship  of  Peronne,  the  Lord  of  Clary,  and  in  his  absence
the  Lord  de  la  Hargerie,  and  likewise  for  the  provostships
and  towns  of  Montdidier,  Roye,  and  the  adjacent  countries  ;
for  Artois,  Cambresis,  and  Beaurevoir,  John  de  Longueval,
Lord  of  Vaux  ;  for  the  country  of  Marie,  the  Lord  of  Hum-
bercourt;  for  the  country  of  Hainault,  the  Lord  of  Aimeries,
Grand  Bailiff  of  Hainault ;  for  the  country  of  Liege  and
jSamur,  the  Lord  of'Humbercourt;  for  the  country  of  Luxem-
bourg, the  governor  of  the  said  country  of  Luxembourg,  the
Marquis  of  Rothelin  ;  for  the  country  of  Burgundy,  duchy
and  county,  &c.,  subject  to  the  duke,  the  Marshal  of  Bar-
gundy  ;  for  the  country  of  Muconnois  and  adjacent  places,
Monsieur  de  Clessy,  Governor  of  Maconnois ;  for  the  country
of  Auxerre  and  places  adjacent,  Monsieur  Tristan  de  Tou-
lonjon,  Governor  of  Auxerre  ;  for  the  town  and  chastellany
of  Bar-sur- Seine, the Sieur d'Eschauez ; for the sea of
Flanders,  Monsieur  de  Lalain,  admiral ;  for  the  sea  of  Holland,
Zealand, Artois,  and Boulonnois, the  Count  of Boukam,
admiral  of  those  parts.

12.  If  any  of  the  conservators  of  the  truce  on  either  side
shall  contravene  the  same,  the  king  and  the  duke  shall  ap-
point others  well  instructed  in  the  premises,  in  the  room  of
them.

13.  The  conservators,  or  their  deputies  in their  lawful
absence,  shall  meet  once  a  week  alternately,  on  the  borders  of
the territories of  each  prince, to  hear  complaints  and  to
redress them  ; and if great  difficulty  should  arise, they
are  to  refer  the  same  to  the  superior  councils,  who  shall  deter-
mine them.

VOL.  I.  U


290  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1475.

14.  The  decisions  of  the  conservators  are  to  be  obeyed,
without  any  appeals  whatsoever.

15.  The  allies  on both  sides  are  comprehended  in  this
truce,  if  they  have  a  mind  to  it,  and  if  they  intimate  the  same
in  due  time  ;  but  if  any  of  the  king's  allies  shall,  for  them-
selves, or  in  favour  of  him,  make  war  on  the  said  Duke  of
Burgundy,  he  is  free  to  oppose  them  with  his  arms,  and  the
king  is  to  give  them  no  manner  of  assistance,  without  making
an  infraction  of  the  truce : and  the  king is  in  the  same
position  in  respect  to  the  allies  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.

16.  The  king  shall  declare  himself  in  favour  of  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  against  the  Emperor  of  the  Romans,  the  citizens
of  Cologne,  and  all  that  shall  assist  them  ;  and  he  promises  to
give  them  no  manner  of  aid  against  the  duke  and  his- terri-
tories.

17.  Seeing  this  treaty  has  been  on  foot  since  the  month  of
May,  1474,  all  the  places  the  king  has  taken  since  that  time
from  the  duke  shall  be  restored.

18.  Narcy  and  Gerondenelles  shall  be  demolished,  if  that
be  not  already  done,  and  the  lands  remain  in  the  possession
of  the  rightful  owners.

19.  The  king,  in  consideration  of  this  truce,  and  in  order
to  a  perpetual  peace,  will  deliver  up  the  town  and  bailiwick
of  St.  Quentin  to  the  duke  or  his  commissaries,  only  the  king
is  to  take  away  the  artillery  he  brought  thither,  but  not  to
meddle  with  the  artillery  of  the  town,  nor  any  other  that  was
in  it  before  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  lost  the  possession  of  it ;
and  the  duke  may  appoint  persons to  make  an  inspection
hereof;  but  is  obliged  to  maintain  the  inhabitants  in  their
rights  and  privileges,  and  to  treat  them  as  good  subjects.

20.  As  to  all  other  things  and  places,  not  expressly  men-
tioned, they  are  to  remain  in  their  present  state  during  the
truce.

21.  Lastly,  if  the  king  does  not  deliver  up  St.  Quentin  as
aforesaid,  the  duke  is  not  obliged  to  the  observance  of  the
nine  years'  truce  any  longer  than  to  the  1st  of  May,  14?6.


1475.] CONFEDERACY AGAIXST THE CONSTABLE.  291


CH.  XII. — How  the  King  of  France  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  swore  the
Death  of  the  Constable,  who,  retiring  into  the  Duke's  Country,  was,  by
his  Command,  delivered  to  the  King,  and  publicly  executed — 1475.

IMMEDIATELY  upon  the  conclusion  of  the  truce,  they  pro-
ceeded in  their  designs  against  the  constable;  and,  to  shorten
the  process,  they  began  where  they  left  off  at  Bouvines,  and
the  agreement  in  writing  was  renewed  on  both  sides.  For
the  duke's  concurrence  in  this  affair,  it  was  stipulated  that
he  should  enjoy  St.  Quentin,  Ham,  Bohain,  and  whatever
else  the  constable  held  under  the  said  duke,  besides  all  the
constable's  moveable  goods,  wherever  they  could  be  found.*
In  the  next  place,  they  arranged  how  he  was  to  be  besieged
in  Ham,  where  at  that  time  he  was  ;  and  it  was  resolved,
that  whoever  of  the  two  should  have  the  fortune  to  take  him
first,  should  see  justice  executed  upon  him  within  eight  days,
or  surrender  him  to  the  other.  Everybody  began  immediately
to  have  some  suspicion  of  this  confederacy,  and  the  con-
stable's chief  servants  began  to  forsake  him,  as  for  instance,
Monsieur  de  Genly,  and  several  others  of  his  principal  com-
panions. The  constable  having  received  information  that
the  King  of  England  had  delivered  his  letters,  and  discovered
all  his  secret  practices,  and  knowing  they  were  his  enemies
who  had  promoted  the  truce,  grew  extremely  fearful  about
his  condition,  and  sent  a  message  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
that,  if  he  would  please  to  give  him  a  safe-conduct,  he  would
wait  on  his  highness,  and  impart  several  things  to  him  of
great  importance  concerning  his  own  affairs.  The  duke
hesitated  at  first,  but  at  last  he  sent  him  one.

In  the  meantime,  this  great  man  was  irresolute  and
wavering  in  his  mind,  and  could  not  tell  whither  he  should  fly
for  security :  for  he  had  received  information  from  all  hands
of  his  intended  ruin,  and  had  seen  copies  of  the  agreement
signed  against  him  at  Bouvines.  Sometimes  he  consulted
his  Lorraine  servants,  and  then  he  resolved  to  go  with  them
into  Germany,  and  (there  being  no  danger  of  travelling  that

*This  arrangement  was  made  by  letters  dated  September  13.  1475.
"  The  king  said  that  his  cousin  of  Burgundy  had  treated  the  constable
as  huntsmen  treat  a  fox  ;  for  like  a  wise  man,  he  had  taken  the  skin,  and
left  him  only  the  carcase,  which  was  worth  nothing."  Molinet,  i.  181.

u  2


292  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1475.

•way)  to  carry  such  a  sum  of  money  with  him  as  would  pur-
chase some  place  upon  the  Rhine,  where  he  might  live  se-
curely till  he  could  make  his  peace  either  with  the  king  or  the
Duke  of  Burgundy.  Another  time,  he  was  for  staying  in
the  fine  Castle  of  Ham,  which  he  had  been  at  vast  expense  in
fortifying,  on  purpose  to  defend  himself  in  such  a  case  of  ne-
cessity;  and  indeed  it  was  as  well  provided  with  ammunition
and  provision  as  any  castle  that  I  ever  knew  ;  but  he  had  no
soldiers  that  he  could  depend  on,  for  all  his  garrison  were
subjects  either  of  the  king  or  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  ;  and
perhaps  his  fear  was  so  great,  he  durst  not  discover  his  con-
dition to  them  ;  for  I  verily  believe  if  he  had,  he  would
have  been  deserted  only  by  a  very  few  j  nor  would  it  have
been  so  dangerous  for  him  to  have  been  besieged  by  both
princes  at  once  as  by  one,  for  it  would  have  been  impossible
for  their  two  armies  to  have  agreed.  At  last  he  resolved  to
put  himself  into  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  hands,  upon  the
strength  of  his  safe-conduct ;  and  accordingly,  attended  only
by  fifteen  or  twenty  horse,  he  went  *  directly  to  Mons,  in
Hainault,  of  which  the  Lord  of  Aimeries,  who  was  his  parti-
cular friend,  was  governor.  He  stayed  with  him  till  he  could
hear  further  from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  had  begun  a
war  against  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  for  sending  him  a  defiance
as  he  lay  in  his  trenches  before  Nuz,  and  for  the  ravages  and
devastations  he  had  committed  in  the  province  of  Luxem-
bourg.

The  king  having  received  information  of  the  constable's
departure,  resolved  to  attempt  some  action  that  might  pre-
vent his  reconciliation  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy;  where-
fore he  marched  with  all  expedition  towards  St.  Quentiu  f,

*  It  was  currently  believed  in  the  Netherlands  that  the  constable  went
to  Mons  by  order  of  the  king.  The  registers  of  Ypres  state  :  "  The
king  and  the  duke  agreed  on  an  expedient  to  obtain  possession  of  the
constable's  person.  The  king  proposed  to  him  to  go  onjm  emba><y  to
the  duke,  who  was  then  at  Luxembourg  about  certain  matters  ;  which  he
undertook.  The  duke  sent  orders  at  the  same  time  that  his  person
should  be  secured  as  soon  as  he  appeared  in  any  town  in  his  dominions.
Accordingly,  when  the  constable  arrived  at  Mons,  the  gates  of  the  town
were  shut  upon  him,  and  he  was  kept  there  a  month,  after  which  he  was
conducted,  under  a  strong  escort,  to  Peronne,  and  delivered  to  the  officers
of  the  King  of  France."  Gachard,  i.  277.

f  "  The  King  of  France,  being  informed  that  the  constable  was  treating


1475.] ARREST  OF  THE  CONSTABLE.  293

•with  a  detachment  of  700  or  800  men-at-arms,  whom  he
had  assembled  on  a  sudden,  being  privately  advised  of  what
number  of  troops  the  garrison  consisted.  Upon  the  king's
approach,  some  of  the  citizens  came  out  to  meet  his  ma-
jesty, and  submitted  themselves  to  him.  The  king  com-
manded me  to  enter  the  town,  and  order  the  garrison  to
evacuate  their  quarters,  which  I  did ;  and  our  men-at-arms
having  entered,  the  king  himself  followed,  and  was  well
received  by  the  inhabitants ;  upon  which  some  of  the  con-
stable's party  fled  after  him  into  Hainault.  As  soon  as  the
king  was  in  possession  of  St.  Quentin,  he  immediately  de-
spatched a  courier  with  the  news  of  it  to  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, to  let  him  understand  that  all  hope  of  recovering  it
by  the  constable's  interest  was  now  entirely  lost.  Upon
receiving  this  news,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  sent  his  com-
mands to  the  Lord  of  Aimeries  (his  grand  bailiffin  Hainault)
to  keep  such  guards  in  Mons  that  the  constable  might  not
escape,  and  in  the  meantime  to  confine  him  to  his  house.
The  bailiff  durst  not  disobey  the  duke's  orders,  yet  his  guards
were  not  so  strict  but  the  constable  might  have  escaped  if
he  had  pleased.

What  account  can  we  give  of  Fortune  in  this  place  ?  This
person  was  seated  between  the  territories  of  these  rival
princes ;  he  was  possessed  of  several  strong  castles,  had
400  men-at-arms  well  paid,  and  all  his  own  creatures,  under
liis  control,  and  had  had  the  command  of  them  a  dozen
years :  he  was  a  person  of  great  wisdom  and  valour,  was
very  rich,  and  had  great  experience ;  and  yet  none  of  all
these  powerful  advantages  could,  in  the  time  of  danger  and
distress,  either  afford  him  relief,  or  inspire  him  with  courage
enough  to  attempt  his  escape.  One  may  say  (and  not  with-
out reason)  that  deceitful  Fortune  had  assumed  another
air,  and  begun  to  regard  him  with  a  frowning  aspect :  but
alas  !  Fortune  is  nothing  but  a  poetical  fiction  ;  such  sur-
prising mysteries  as  these  are  far  above  her  power  to  effect;
and,  when  I  reflect  upon  what  has  already  been  said,  and
what  may  farther  be  urged,  I  cannot  help  thinking  but  that

for  the  surrender  of  St.  Quentin  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  marched  with
20,000  men  to  prevent  it,  and  entered  the  town  at  about  six  o'clock  in  the
evening  of  the  14th  September."  Molinct,  i.  179.

u  3


294  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1475.

God  had  forsaken  him  ;  and  if  it  were  no  offence  in  any  man
to  judge  (which  it  would  be,  and  especially  for  me),  I
should  maintain  that  the  most  probable  cause  of  all  his  mis-
fortunes, was  his  restless  endeavours  and  designs  to  foment
and  continue  the  war  between  the  king  and  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  upon  which  alone  his  authority  and  power  de-
pended ;  nor  indeed  was  this  very  difficult  to  accomplish,
upon  account  of  their  humours  and  dispositions,  which  were
naturally  in  themselves  so  vastly  different.

That  person  would  indeed  be  guilty  of  the  greatest
ignorance,  who  should  believe  Fortune  or  Chance  had  such
an  influence  over  human  affairs  as  to  force  a  man  of  his
experience  in  the  world,  to  incur  the  simultaneous  dis-
pleasure of  two  such  mighty  princes,  who  in  their  lives
never  agreed  in  any  one  point  but  his  ruin  and  destruction;
and  it  would  be  more  astonishing  still,  that  she  should  have
created  an  enmity  between  him  and  the  King  of  England,
who  had  married  his  niece*,  and  had  a  great  value  and
respect  for  all  his  wife's  relations,  and  particularly  for  those
of  the  house  of  St.  Paul.  To  speak  impartially  (neither  can
it  be  otherwise),  God  had  withdrawn  His  grace  from  him,  or
else  he  would  never  have  incensed  these  three  powerful
princes,  and  have  managed  his  affairs  so  ill  as  not  to  have
one  friend  left  that  would  give  him  a  night's  entertainment
in  his  distress;  so  that  God  Himself  was  the  Fortune  that
did  this  :  and  as  it  has  happened  formerly,  so  it  will  happen
to  many  hereafter,  who,  after  a  long  continuance  of  ease  and
prosperity,  must  expect  to  fall  into  great  misfortunes  and
adversity.

As  soon  as  the  king  was  informed  of  the  constable's  being
arrested  in  Hainault  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  order,  he  sent
to  require  the  duke  either  to  deliver  him  up  to  him,  or  perform
their  agreement.  The  duke  promised  he  would,  and  accord-
ingly he  caused  the  constable  to  be  removed  to  Peronne,  and
placed  a  strong  guard  upon  him.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy
had  made  himself  master  of  several  places  in  Lorraine  and
Barrois,  and  had  formally  invested  Nancyf,  which  made  a

*  Queen  Elizabeth  Woodville's  mother  was  Jacquetta  of  Luxem-
bourg, daughter  of  Pierre  de  Luxembourg,  the  constable's  father.

t  He  encamped  before  that  town  on  the  24th  of  October,  1475.
Lenglet,  ii.  218.


147o.]  SIEGE OF NANCY.  295

vigorous  defence.  The  king  had  a  considerable  army  in  Cham-
pagne, of  which  the  duke  was  extremely  afraid  ;  for  by  the  truce
he  had  no  liberty  to  invade  the  Duke  of  Lorraine's  territories,
who  had  put  himself  under  the  king's  protection.  The  Lord
du  Bouchage  and  the  other  ambassadors  strongly  pressed
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  to  perform  his  agreement.  The  duke
told  them  always  he  would,  and  yet  the  eight  days  (by  which
time  the  constable  was  to  be  either  executed  or  delivered
to  the  king)  were  expired  a  month  since.  At  last,  finding
himself  hard  pressed,  and  fearing  the  king  might  put  a  stop
to  his  conquests  in  Lorraine,  which  he  extremely  desired  to
complete,  in  order  to  open  a  passage  through  Luxembourg
into  Burgundy,  and  join  all  his  territories  together  (for  if
this  little  duchy  were  once  subdued,  he  might  go  from  Hol-
land almost  as  far  as  Lyons,  without  leaving  his  own  domi-
nions) ;  for  these  reasons  he  wrote  to  his  chancellor  and  to
the  Lord  of  Humbercourt(both  of  them  the  constable's  invete-
rate enemies)  immediately  to  repair  to  Peronne,  and  on  a  cer-
tain day  to  deliver  the  constable*  to  such  ambassadors  as  the
king  should  send  to  receive  him  (for  in  the  duke's  absence,
they  two  had  the  administration  of  all  his  affairs) ;  and  he
sent  the  Lord  of  Aimeries  orders  to  deliver  him  to  them.

In  the  meantime  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  vigorously
pushed  the  siege  of  Nancy,  in  which  town  there  was  a  strong
garrison  that  made  a  brave  defence.  One  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  captains,  called  the  Count  of  Campobasso  (born
in  Naples,  but  banished  that  kingdom  upon  account  of  his
having  espoused  the  interest  of  the  house  of  Anjou),  had
lately  entered  into  a  correspondence^  with  the  Duke  of  Lor-

*  The  duke  did  not  consent  to  deliver  the  constable  into  the  hands  of
the  king  until  the  latter  had  assured  to  him  the  complete  and  entire  con-
fiscation of  the  property  of  the  prisoner,  only  a  portion  of  which  had  been
assigned  to  him  by  the  treaty  of  the  13th  of  September,  1475.  Louis
XI.  therefore  issued  new  letters,  dated  12th  November,  1475,  by  which
he  not  only  ratified  his  former  engagements,  but  left  the  duke  his  choice
between  all  the  property  of  the  constable,  or  those  towns  in  Lorraine  of
which  Charles  the  Bold  had  taken  possession.  The  duke  chose  the
towns,  as  is  proved  by  the  king's  letters,  dated  18th  December,  1475,  in
which  he  promises  not  to  quarrel  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  for  his
choice.  Lenglet,  iii.  444 — 448.

f  Molinet  thus  states  the  reasons  which  induced  the  Count  of  Campo-
basso to  betray  his  master.  That  nobleman,  he  says,  "  was  captain  of

c  4


296  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1475.

raine  (a  near  relation  and  next  heir  to  the  house  of  Anjou,
after  the  death  of  King  Rene*,  his  maternal  grandfather),
and  promised  to  prolong  the  siege  by  not  providing  the  army
with  ammunition,  and  other  things  that  were  necessary  for
the  taking  of  the  town  by  force.  It  was  indeed  in  his  power,
for  he  was  then  a  person  of  the  greatest  influence  in  the  army,
and  therefore  his  villany  and  perficliousness  to  his  master
were  the  greater,  as  you  shall  hear  hereafter;  and  this  was
a  kind  of  earnest  of  all  the  misfortunes  that  happened  after-
wards to  the  duke.  I  really  believe  the  duke  expected  he
would  have  been  master  of  the  town  before  the  day  came
on  which  he  would  be  obliged  to  deliver  up  the  constable,
and  then  he  would  not  have  done  it.  Besides,  if  the  king
had  had  him  sooner,  his  majesty  would  have  attempted
something  more  in  favour  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  than  he
did ;  for  the  king  was  informed  of  his  intrigue  with  Cam-
pobasso.  But  the  king  would  not  engage  in  the  quarrel  be-
tween them,  though  he  was  not  bound  by  treaty  to  stand  still,
and  let  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  overrun  Lorraine.  Besides,  he
had  a  considerable  army  upon  the  frontiers,  but,  for  several
reasons  of  state,  he  thought  it  better  to  stand  neutral.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy  not  being  able  to  take  Nancyt
before  the  day  on  which  the  constable  was  to  be  delivered
up,  and  that  day  being  come,  those  who  were  commissioned
to  deliver  him  (being  the  constable's  mortal  enemies),  de-
livered him  willingly  at  the  gates  of  Peronne  into  the  hands
of  the  Bastard  of  Bourbon,  Admiral  of  France,  and  the  Lord
of  St.  Pierre,  who  conducted  him  to  Paris.  I  have  been
since  informed  by  several  persons,  that  within  three  hours
messengers  came  post  from  the  duke  with  orders  to  the
Lord  of  Aimeries  not  to  deliver  up  the  constable  till  after
the  taking  of  Nancy ;  but  they  arrived  too  late.  Imme-

400  lances,  which  he  had  brought  from  Italy  ;  but  on  New  Year's  Day,
Duke  Charles  gave  100  of  the  lances  to  Signer  Angelo,  the  count's  son,
to  command,  and  as  many  to  the  count's  younger  son,  at  which  the  said
Campobasso  was  greatly  displeased."  Molinet,  i.  77.  Oliver  de  la
Marche  (ii.  420)  says  it  was  because  the  duke  owed  him  money.

*  Rene,  surnamed  the  Good,  Duke  of  Anjou,  and  King  of  Sicily,  was
the  son  of  Louis  II.,  Duke  of  Anjou,  and  Yolande  of  Arragon.  He  died
on  the  10th  of  July,  1480.

•f  Nancy  surrendered  to  the  duke  on  Thursday,  November  30.  1475.


1475.]  EXECUTION OF THE CONSTABLE.  297

diately  upon  his  arrival  at  Paris  his  trial  began  *,  and  the
duke  sent  all  his  papers  and  whatever  he  thought  might  be
brought  in  evidence  against  him.  The  king  pressed  the  court
to  despatch,  and  persons  were  appointed  to  manage  his  trial:
so  that  upon  the  proofs  that  the  King  of  England  had  before
given  in  against  him,  and  those  that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
now  furnished,  the  constable  was  found  guilty,  condemned,
executed,  and  all  his  estates  confiscated.


CH.  XHL — A  Digression  concerning  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  Error  in
delivering  up  the  Constable  to  the  King,  contrary  to  the  Safe-conduct
which  he  had  given  him;  and  what  happened  to  him  afterwards. — 1475.

THE  whole  management  of  this  affair  was  very  strange.  I
do  not  speak  it  either  to  excuse  the  constable's  faults,  or  to
upbraid  the  duke  or  the  king,  for  both  of  them  had  been
sufficiently  injured  by  him:  but  there  was  no  necessity  for
the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  so  potent  a  prince  and  of
such  an  illustrious  and  honourable  family,  to  have  given  him
his  protection  in  order  to  imprison  him ;  and  without  dispute,
it  was  the  highest  act  of  injustice  and  severity  imaginable
to  deliver  him  up  to  a  person  who,  he  was  sure,  would  put
him  to  death,  especially  upon  the  account  of  avarice.  After
this  dishonourable  action  the  duke's  good  fortune  was
strangely  altered  ;  so  that  by  reflecting  upon  what  God  has
done  in  our  time,  and  does  still  every  day,  it  is  evident  He
will  not  let  injustice  go  long  unpunished,  and  that  all  these
strange  dispensations  proceed  solely  from  Him ;  for  these
sudden  chastisements  are  beyond  the  power  of  nature,
especially  when  they  are  inflicted  on  such  as  commit
violence  or  cruelty,  who  are  commonly  great  persons,  as
kings,  princes,  or  potentates.  The  house  of  Burgundy  had
been  in  a  very  prosperous  and  flourishing  condition  for  a
long  time,  and  for  a  hundred  years,  or  thereabouts,  four  of
that  family  had  reigned  in  as  great  splendour  and  reputation

*  The  trial  began  on  the  27th  November,  and  the  constable  was  ex-
ecuted on  the  19th  December,  1475.


298  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1175.

as  any  house  in  Christendom.  Others,  perhaps,  were  more
potent,  but  they  were  involved  in  wars  and  afflictions,  whilst
this  family  enjoyed  an  uninterrupted  career  of  peace  and
plenty.

The  first  great  person  of  this  family  was  Philip  the
Bold  *,  brother  to  Charles  V.,  King  of  France  f,  who  married
the  daughter  and  heiress  of  the  Earl  of  Flanders,  countess  of
that  country,  Artois,  Burgundy,  Nevers,  and  Rethel.  The
second  was  John.  The  third  was  Philip  the  Good,  who
annexed  to  his  hereditary  territories  the  duchies  of  Brabant,
Luxembourg,  Limbourg,  Holland,  Zealand,  Hainault,  and
iXamur.  The  last  was  Charles,  who  after  his  father's  death
was  reputed  to  be  one  of  the  richest  and  most  powerful
princes  in  Christendom,  and  possessed,  in  jewels,  plate,
household  stuff,  and  books,  more  than  any  other  three  houses
of  Europe  could  boast  of.  Of  ready  money  I  have  seen
more  elsewhere  (for  Duke  Philip  the  Good  had  levied  no
taxes  for  a  long  time),  and  yet  he  left  his  son  above
300,000  crowns  in  ready  cash,  and  at  peace  with  all  his
neighbours ;  but  that  was  of  no  long  continuance.  Yet
I  will  not  lay  the  beginning  of  the  wars  solely  to  his
charge,  for  there  were  other  persons  as  deeply  concerned  in
that  affair  as  himself.

Immediately  upon  the  death  of  his  father,  his  subjects,
upon  very  little  importunity,  willingly  granted  him  a
supply  for  ten  years,  each  country  by  itself;  which  could
not  amount  to  less  than  350,000  crowns  per  annum,
besides  the  revenue  of  Burgundy ;  and  at  the  time  of  the
constable's  being  delivered  up  to  the  king,  he  had  raided
an  additional  300,000  crowns,  and  had  by  him  in  his  coffers
300,000  more.  All  the  goods  he  could  obtain  of  the
constable's  were  not  worth  H0,000  crowns  (for  in  money
he  had  but  76,000),  and  yet  for  so  poor  and  inconsiderable
an  advantage,  he  committed  so  base  and  dishonourable  an
act.  But  he  paid  dearly  for  it ;  for  God  stirred  up  a  new

•Philip  the  Bold,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  born  on  the  15th  of  January,
1341,  was  the  son  of  John,  King  of  France,  and  Bonne  de  Luxembourg.
He  married  Marguerite,  Countess  of  Flanders,  and  died  on  the  27th  of
April,  1404.

f  Charles  V.,  born  on  the  21st  of  January,  1337,  married  Jeanne  de
Bourbon,  and  died  oil  the  1 6th  September,  1380.


1475.] TREACHEROUS  OFFER  OF  CAMPOBASSO. 299

enemy*  against  him,  who  was  impotent  and  inconsiderable
both  in  power,  years,  and  experience  ;  and  made  him  jealous
of  his  subjects,  and  suspicious  of  his  best  servants,  and  place
his  greatest  confidence  in  another  f,  who  constantly  betrayed
him.  And  are  not  these  the  same  steps  and  methods  in
which  God  Almighty  proceeded  in  the  Old  Testament  with
those  whose  fortunes  he  intended  to  change  from  better  to
worse,  from  prosperity  to  adversity?  Yet  the  duke's  heart
never  relented  :  but  to  the  end  he  imputed  all  his  success  to
his  own  wisdom  and  sagacity,  and  before  his  death  was  more
potent  and  in  greater  renown  than  any  of  his  predecessors.

Yet  before  the  surrendering  of  the  constable,  he  was
grown  very  diffident  and  distrustful  of  his  best  subjects,
and  seemed  to  hate  and  despise  them ;  for  he  had  sent
for  1000  Italian  lances,  and  had  numbers  of  them  in  his
army  before  Nuz,  The  Count  of  Campobasso  had  400
Italian  men-at-arms  under  his  command,  but  no  revenue
of  his  own ;  for,  as  I  said  before,  being  a  partisan  of
the  house  of  Anjou,  upon  account  of  the  wars  which  they
had  raised  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  he  was  banished,  and
having  lost  all  his  estate,  he  had  served  ever  since  either  in
Provence  or  Lorraine  under  Rene,  King  of  Sicily,  or
Nicholas  the  son  of  John,  Duke  of  Calabria ;  after  whose
death  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  entertained  most  of  his
servants,  and  particularly  all  the  Italians,  and  among  the
rest  this  count,  and  one  James  Galeot,  a  gentleman  of  great
courage,  honour,  and  loyalty.

When  this  Count  of  Campobasso  went  into  Italy  to  raise
his  men,  he  received  from  the  duke  40,000  crowns  by
way  of  advance.  Passing  by  Lyons,  he  accidentally  fell
into  the  acquaintance  of  a  certain  physician  called  Simon  of
Pavia,  by  whom  he  signified  to  the  king  that,  if  his  majesty
would  comply  with  his  demands,  at  his  return  he  would
betray  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  into  his  hands;  and  he  made
the  same  proposals  to  the  Lord  of  St.  Priest  J,  the  king's
ambassador  at  that  time  in  Piedmont.  When  he  came  back,


*  Rene  II.,  Duke  of  Lorraine,  who  was  at  that  time  twenty-five  years
of  ajre.

t  The  Count  of  Campobasso.

j  Louis,  Lord  of  St.  Priest,  knight,  chamberlain  of  the  king,  was  sent


300  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. ^1475.

and  was  quartered  with  his  forces  in  the  county  of  Marie,  he
offered  the  king,  upon  his  arrival  at  the  duke's  camp,  either
to  kill  him,  or  make  him  prisoner,  which  he  designed  to
execute  thus  :  — The  duke  was  accustomed  to  ride  about  the
camp  upon  a  little  amhling  nag,  attended  but  by  few  of  hi.s
guards,  which,  as  he  said  truly,  would  be  a  fair  opportunity
of  effecting  his  purpose.  If  this  was  disapproved  of,  he  had
another  offer  to  make,  which  was,  that  when  the  king  and
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  should  be  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle,
and  ready  to  engnge,  he  would  come  over  to  the  king's  side
with  his  whole  battalion,  upon  certain  conditions  which
he  stated.  But  the  king  utterly  abhorred  his  treachery*,
and  sent  the  Lord  of  Contay  very  generously  to  acquaint
the  duke  of  his  intentions  to  betray  him  ;  but  the  duke  was
so  far  from  believing  it,  that  he  looked  upon  it  as  an  artifice
of  the  king's,  and  showed  the  count  greater  favour  than
before.  From  whence  it  is  evident,  that  God  Almighty  had
infatuated  his  understanding,  in  not  suffering  him  to  believe
the  clear  proof  given  by  the  king.  But  though  Campobasso
was  treacherous  and  disloyal,  James  Galeot  was  quite  of
another  stamp  ;  and  having  acquired  great  reputation  in  the
world,  died  at  last  with  as  much  honour  as  he  had  lived.

by  that  prince  as  his  ambassador  to  Berne  on  the  2nd  of  August,  1474.
Lenglet,  iii.  337.

*  Louis  XL  had  nevertheless  attempted  to  induce  Campobasso  to  desert
the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  enter  his  service. See  Dupont,  i.  405.


1476.] THE DUKE RESOLVES  TO ATTACK THE SWISS, 301


BOOK  THE  FIFTH.


CH.  I. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  making  "War  upon  the  Swiss,  was
defeated  by  them  at  the  Foot  of  the  Mountains,  near  Granson. — 1476.

AFTER  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  conquered  all  Lorraine,
and  received  of  the  king  St.  Quentin,  Ham,  and  Bohain,  with
all  the  constable's  goods  which  could  be  found,  he  agreed  to
meet  the  king  at  Auxerre.  The  king  and  he  were  to  have
an  interview  upon  a  river,  with  a  bridge  built  over  it  after
the  same  manner  as  that  at  Picquigny  for  King  Louis  and
the  King  of  England ;  and  several  messengers  passed  and
repassed  continually  about  this  affair.  And  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  resolved  to  put  the  greatest  part  of  his  army,  that
had  been  much  fatigued  and  harassed  in  the  siege  of  Nuz
and  their  expedition  into  Lorraine,  into  quarters  of  refresh-
ment, and  to  canton  the  rest  in  such  towns  as  belonged  to
the  Count  of  Romont  and  others  near  to  Berne  and  Friburg  ;
upon  which  towns  he  had  resolved  to  make  war  for  their
insolent  behaviour  during  the  siege  of  Nuz,  for  their  having
assisted  the  enemy  in  taking  from  him  the  county  of  Fer-
rette,  and  for  their  usurpation  of  some  part  of  the  Count  of
Romont's  territories.  The  king  was  extremely  desirous  of
this  interview,  and  earnestly  entreated  the  duke  to  let  his
army  lie  still  in  their  quarters  of  refreshment,  and  not  to  at-
tempt anything  against  the  poor  Swiss.  Upon  the  approach
of  this  army,  the  Swiss  sent  ambassadors  to  the  duke,  and
oifered  to  restore  whatever  they  had  taken  from  the  Count
of  Roraont.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Count  of  Romont  pressed
him  to  come  in  person  to  his  assistance ;  and,  contrary  to
sober  counsel  and  what  all  declared  would  be  the  best,  con-


302  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1476.

sidering  the  season  and  the  shattered  state  of  his  army,  the
duke  resolved  to  march  against  them  himself;  it  being
agreed  between  the  king  and  him,  under  both  their  hands,
that  as  to  the  affair  of  Lorraine,  there  should  be  no  dispute
between  them.

With  this  shattered  and  fatigued  army  the  duke  marched
out  of  Lorraine  into  Burgundy,  where  the  ambassadors  of
the  old  German  leagues,  called  Swiss,  came  to  him,  and
offered,  besides  the  restitution  before  mentioned,  to  abandon
all  alliances  that  were  contrary  to  his  interest  (and  par-
ticularly that  with  the  King  of  France),  to  enter  into  alliance
with  him,  and  (for  a  small  sum  of  money)  to  serve  him  against
the  king  with  6000  men,  whenever  he  should  require
their  assistance.  But  the  duke  would  hearken  to  no  over-
tures, for  his  ruin  was  decreed.  The  new  allies  (as  they
term  them  in  those  parts),  namely,  Basle,  Strasburg,  and
other  imperial  towns  situated  near  the  head  of  the  Rhine,
had  heretofore  joined  with  Sigismund.  Duke  of  Austria,  f.t
the  time  when  he  was  at  war  with  the  Swiss  ;  but  now  a
confederacy  was  made  between  them  and  the  Swiss  for  ten
years,  at  the  solicitation  and  expense  of  the  King  of  France,
at  the  time  that  the  county  of  Ferrette  was  taken  from  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  his  Governor  Pierre  d'Archambault
(who  was  the  cause  of  all  his  misfortunes  afterwards)  put  to
death  at  Basle.  A  prince  ought  narrowly  to  observe  and
watch  the  conduct  of  those  per0ons  he  appoints  as  governors
over  his  new  conquests  ;  for,  instead  of  easing  his  subjects,
administering  justice,  and  treating  them  with  more  gentleness
than  before,  this  Archambault  proceeded  quite  otherwise  and
oppressed  them  with  all  mariner  of  violence  and  extortion,
and  was  the  occasion  of  great  mischief  both  to  himself,  his
prince,  and  abundance  of  brave  men  besides.  This  alliance
(which,  as  I  said  before,  was  to  be  ascribed  wholly  to  the
king's  management)  proved  afterwards  very  advantageous  to
his  majesty's  interest,  and  more  so  than  most  people  were  able
to  foresee,  for  I  esteem  it  as  one  of  the  wisest  and  most  im-
portant actions  of  his  reign,  and  the  most  pi'ejudicial  to  his
enemies  ;  for  if  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  affairs  were  once
in  a  low  condition,  there  would  be  none  left  to  cope  with
the  king,  or  oppose  him  in  any  of  his  designs  —  I  mean
of  his  subjects,  and  in  his  own  kingdom,  for  all  the  rest


1476.] SURRENDER  OF  GRANSON.  303

sailed  under  his  wind.  For  this  reason,  it  was  of  great  im-
portance to  combine  Duke  Sigismund  and  these  new  con-
federates in  an  alliance  with  the  Swiss,  between  whom  there
had  been  great  enmity  for  a  long  time  ;  but  it  put  his
majesty  to  the  expense  of  several  embassies  and  a  vast  sum
of  money.

All  hopes  of  an  accommodation  being  entirely  vanished,  the
Swiss  ambassadors  returned  to  acquaint  their  masters  with  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  absolute  refusal  of  their  propositions,  and
to  make  preparations  for  their  defence.  The  duke  marched
with  his  army  into  the  Pays  de  Vaud  (in  Savoy),  which  the
Swiss  had  taken  from  the  Count  of  Romont,  and  he  took
three  or  four  towns  belonging  to  Monsieur  de  Chasteau-
Guyon,  which  the  Swiss  had  seized  upon  but  defended  very
ill.  From  thence  he  advanced  to  besiege  a  place  called
Granson*  (which  also  belonged  to  Monsieur  de  Chasteau-
Guyon),  into  which  they  had  thrown  700  or  800  of  their
best  troops ;  and  because  it  was  near  them,  they  had  re-
solved to  defend  it  to  the  last  extremity.  The  duke's  army
was  mightily  increased,  for  he  daily  received  considerable
reinforcements  out  of  Lombardy  and  Savoy ;  and  he  enter-
tained strangers  rather  than  his  own  subjects,  of  whom  he
might  have  formed  a  sufficient  army  that  would  have  been
more  faithful  and  valiant :  but  the  death  of  the  constable
had  filled  him  with  strange  jealousies  of  them,  and  various
other  imaginations.  He  had  a  fine  train  of  artillery,  and  he
lived  in  great  pomp  and  magnificence  in  the  camp,  to  show
his  grandeur  and  riches  to  the  Italian  and  German  ambassa-
dors who  were  sent  to  him  ;  and  he  had  all  his  valuable
jewels,  plate,  and  rich  furniture  with  him:  besides,  he  had
great  designs  upon  the  duchy  of  Milan,  where  he  expected
to  find  a  considerable  party.  It  was  not  many  days  after  the
duke's  investing  Granson,  before  the  garrison  being  terrified
with  his  continual  battering  it  with  cannon,  surrendered  at

*  "The  duke  encamped  before  Granson  on  the  19th  of  February,  1476,
with  an  army  of  50,000  men  or  more,  of  all  languages  and  coun-
tries, with  a  quantity  of  cannon  and  other  engines  of  novel  construction,
and  tents  and  accoutrements  all  glittering  with  gold,  and  a  great  host  of
servants,  merchants,  and  courtezans."  Chronique  du  Chapitre  de  Neu-
chastel,  p.  386.


304  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP  DE COMBINES. [1476.

discretion,  and  were  all  put  to  the  sword.*  The  Swiss  were
assembled,  but  they  were  not  very  numeroust,  as  several  of
them  have  told  me  (for  that  country  produced  not  so  many
soldiers  as  was  imagined,  and  still  fewer  than  at  present,
because  of  late  many  of  them  have  left  their  husbandry,  and
followed  the  Avars),  and  of  their  confederate  troops  there
were  not  many,  because  they  were  obliged  to  hasten  at  short
notice  to  the  relief  of  their  friends  in  Granson  ;  and  when
their  army  was  ready  to  march,  they  received  advice  that  the
garrison  had  all  been  put  to  the  sword.

The  Duke  of  Burgundy,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  his
officers,  resolved  to  advance  and  meet  the  enemy  at  the
foot  of  the  mountains,  to  his  great  disadvantage ;  for  he
was  already  posted  in  a  place  much  more  proper  for  an
engagement,  being  fortified  on  one  side  with  his  artillery,
and  on  the  other  by  a  lake,  so  that  in  all  appearance  there  was
no  fear  of  his  being  injured  by  the  enemy.  He  had  detached
a  hundred  of  his  archers  to  secure  a  certain  pass  at  the
entrance  of  the  mountains;}:,  and  was  advancing  forward  him-
self, when  the  Swiss  attacked  him,  while  the  greatest  part  of
his  army  was  still  in  the  plain.  The  foremost  troops
designed  to  fall  back ;  but  the  infantry  that  were  behind,
supposing  they  were  running  away,  retreated  towards  their
camp,  and  some  of  them  behaved  themselves  handsomely
enough ;  but,  in  the  end,  when  they  arrived  in  their  camp,
they  wanted  courage  to  make  a  stand  and  defend  themselves,
and  they  all  fled,  and  the  Swiss  possessed  themselves  of  their
camp,  in  which  were  all  their  artillery,  a  vast  number
of  tents  and  pavilions,  besides  a  great  deal  of  valuable
plunder,  for  they  saved  nothing  but  their  lives.  §  The  duke
lost  all  his  finest  rings,  but  of  men,  not  above  seven  men-

*  "  All  the  garrison  were  given  over  to  the  provost-marshal,  who,  with-
out pity  or  mercy,  caused  them  to  be  hanged  on  the  nearest  trees  by
three  executioners,  to  the  number  of  400  or  thereabout,  and  the  rest  were
drowned  in  the  lake."  Molinet,  i.  191.

f  Three  hundred  men  of  Berne  and  a  hundred  of  Neufchatel  assem-
bled to  march  to  the  relief  of  Granson,  but  finding  it  impossible  to  pene-
trate the  Burgundian  lines,  they  "  returned  home  groaning."  Chronique
de  Neuchastel,  p.  387.

J  The  Castle  of  Bomacourt,  by  which  he  received  supplies  of  pro-
visions for  his  army.  Jlolinet,  i.  191.

§  This  rout  took  place  on  the  evening  of  the  3rd  of  March,  1476.


1476.J  DEFEAT  OP  THE  DUKE.  305

at-arms  ;  the  rest  fled,  and  the  duke  with  them.  It  may
more  properly  be  said  of  him,  "  That  he  lost  his  honour  and
his  wealth  in  one  day,"  than  it  was  of  King  John  of  France,
who,  after  a  brave  defence,  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle
of  Poictiers.

This  was  the  first  misfortune  that  ever  happened  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  in  his  whole  life  :  for  by  the  rest  of  his
enterprises  he  always  acquired  either  honour  or  advantage.
But  what  a  mighty  loss  did  he  sustain  that  day  by  his
perverseness  and  scorn  of  good  advice  !  How  greatly  did
his  family  suffer !  in  what  a  miserable  condition  it  is  at
present !  and  how  like  to  continue  so !  How  many  great
princes  and  states  became  his  enemies,  and  openly  declared
against  him,  who  but  the  day  before  the  battle  were  his
friends,  or  at  least  pretended  to  be  so  !  And  what  was  the
cause  of  this  war  ?  A  miserable  cart-load  of  sheep-skins  that
the  Count  of  Romont  had  taken  from  a  Swiss,  in  his  passage
through  his  estates.  If  God  Almighty  had  not  forsaken  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  it  is  scarce  conceivable  he  would  have
exposed  himself  to  such  great  dangers  upon  so  small  and
trivial  an  occasion ;  especially  considering  the  offers  the  Swiss
had  made  him,  and  that  his  conquest  of  such  enemies  would
yield  him  neither  profit  nor  honour ;  for  at  that  time  the
Swiss  were  not  in  such  esteem  as  now,  and  no  people  in  the
world  could  be  poorer.  A  gentleman,  who  had  been  one  of
their  first  ambassadors  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  told  me,
that  one  of  his  chief  arguments  to  dissuade  the  duke  from,
invading  them  was,  that  there  was  nothing  for  him  to  gain
from  them  ;  for  their  country  was  barren  and  poor,  and  he
believed  that,  if  all  his  countrymen  were  taken  prisoners,  all
the  money  they  could  raise  for  their  ransom  would  not  buy
spurs  and  bridles  for  his  army.

But  to  return  to  the  battle  ;  the  king  had  many  spies  and
scouts  abroad  about  the  country  (most  of  them  despatched
by  my  orders),  and  it  was  not  long  before  he  received  an
account  of  this  defeat,  at  which  he  was  extremely  pleased,
and  if  he  was  grieved  at  anything,  it  was  because  so  few  of
the  enemy  had  been  slain.  The  king,  for  his  better  in-
telligence, and  to  countermine  the  duke's  designs,  had  re-
moved to  Lyons ;  and  being  a  prince  of  great  wisdom  and
penetration,  he  was  afraid  lest  the  duke  should,  by  force  of

VOL.  I.  x


306  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1476.

arras,  annex  Switzerland  to  his  own  dominions.  The  house
of  Savoy  was  at  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  absolute  disposal.
The  Duke  of  Milan  was  his  ally.*  King  Rene  of  Sicily
intended  to  deliver  Provence  into  his  hands ;  so  that  if  his
affairs  had  been  crowned  with  success,  he  would  have  been
lord  of  all  the  countries  from  the  western  to  the  eastern  sea,
and  the  people  of  France  could  not  have  stirred  out  of  the
kingdom  by  land  without  the  duke's  permission,  if  he  had
possessed  Savoy,  Provence,  and  Lorraine.  To  every  one  of
these  princes  the  king  now  sent  ambassadors.  The  Duchess
of  Savoy  was  his  sisterf ,  but  in  the  duke's  interest;  the  King
of  Sicily  was  his  unclej,  yet  he  was  exceedingly  cautious  of
receiving  his  ambassadors,  and  when  he  did,  he  referred  all
to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.  The  king  also  sent  to  the
German  confederates,  but  with  some  difficulty;  for  the  roads
being  blocked  up,  he  was  forced  to  employ  mendicants,
pilgrims,  and  such  kind  of  people.  The  confederate  towns
replied  somewhat  haughtily,  "  Tell  your  king  (said  they),  if
he  does  not  declare  for  us,  we  will  patch  up  a  peace  with
the  duke,  and  declare  against  him !"  and  the  king  was
afraid  they  would  have  done  so.  §  However,  as  yet  he  had
no  inclination  to  declare  war  against  the  duke,  and  was
very  fearful  he  might  hear  of  his  secret  negotiations  with
these  countries.


*  A  treaty  between  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  Duke  of  Milan
had  been  concluded  at  Moncalier  on  the  30th  of  January,  1475.

f  Yolande  de  France,  sister  of  Louis  XL,  was  born  on  the  23rd  of  Sep-
tember, 1434,  married  AmadeusIX.,  Duke  of  Savoy,  in  1452,  became  a
widow  on  the  28th  of  March,  1472,  and  died  on  the  29th  of  August,
1478.

J  He  was  brother  of  Marie  of  Anjou,  the  mother  of  Louis  XI.

§  Louis  XL  had  made  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  the  emperor  and  the
electors  in  December,  1475.  He  confirmed  it  on  the  17th  of  April,  1470.
This  confirmation  is  probably  what  the  confederate  towns  now  de-
manded.


1476.] THE  DUKE'S  HUMBLE  MESSAGE  TO  THE  KING. 307


CH.  IT/ — How,  after  the  Defeat  near  Granson,  the  Duke  of  Milan,  Rene,
King  of  Sicily,  the  Duchess  of  Savoy,  and  others,  abandoned  their
Alliance  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy. — 1476.

BUT  let  us  now  take  a  view  of  the  sudden  alteration  of
affairs  after  this  battle,  how  negotiations  were  set  on  foot,
and  with  what  prudence  and  judgment  our  king  managed  Kis
affairs ;  for  it  may  serve  as  a  fair  example  to  such  young
princes  who  foolishly  undertake  enterprises,  without  any
foresight,  without  any  experience,  or  without  consulting
such  persons  as  are  capable  of  advising  them.  The  first  step
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  made,  was  to  despatch  the  Lord
of  Contay  to  the  king,  with  many  submissive  and  friendly
expressions,  contrary  both  to  his  temper  and  custom.  See
what  a  change  one  hour  had  made  in  him  !  He  entreated  the
king  not  to  break  the  truce,  excused  himself  for  not  having
met  his  majesty  at  Auxerre  according  to  the  agreement
between  them,  and  assured  the  king  that  in  a  little  time  he
would  attend  him  there,  or  at  any  other  place  that  his
majesty  might  be  pleased  to  name.  The  king  received  his
envoy  very  kindly,  and  promised  to  comply  with  his
demands  ;  for  he  thought  it  not  convenient  to  do  otherwise
at  that  juncture  of  time;  as  his  majesty  was  aware  of  the
loyalty  and  affection  of  the  duke's  subjects  towards  their
prince,  and  that  by  their  assistance  he  would  quickly  be
recruited* ;  and  therefore  he  had  a  mind  to  see  the  end  of
the  war,  without  giving  any  occasion  to  either  party  of
making  a  peace.  But  how  kindly  soever  the  Lord  of  Contay

*  His  subjects  were,  however,  beginning  to  reject  his  demands.  He
assembled  the  Estates  of  Franche-Comte  at  Salins,  and  stated  his  inten-
tion to  levy  an  army  of  40,000  men,  and  to  impose  a  tax  of  one-
fourth  of  their  property  on  his  subjects.  In  answer,  the  Estates  declared
that  all  they  could  oft'er  him  was  a  force  of  3000  men,  "  to  guard  the
country."  The  Estates  of  Burgundy  declared  at  Dijon  that  the  war  was
utterly  useless,  and  that  they  would  not  involve  themselves  in  a  ground-
less quarrel,  in  which  they  could  have  no  hope  of  success.  And  to
crown  all,  the  Flemings  wrote  to  him  that,  if  he  were  surrounded  by  the
Swiss  and  Germans,  and  had  not  men  enough  to  extricate  himself,  they
would  come  to  his  relief.  See  Michelet's  Louis  XL,  et  Charles  le  Temeraire,
pp.  129,  130.

x  2


303  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1476.

was  entertained  by  the  king,  the  people  treated  him  with
nothing  but  libels  and  lampoons  ;  and  ballads  were  publicly
sung  in  the  streets,  to  extol  the  courage  of  the  conquerors
and  to  jeer  at  the  conquered.

As  soon  as  Galeas,  who  was  Duke  of  Milan  at  that  time,
had  received  an  account  of  this  defeat,  he  was  extremely
pleased,  notwithstanding  his  alliance  with  the  duke ;  which
alliance  indeed  was  only  the  effect  of  fear,  upon  account  of
the  great  favour  and  interest  which  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
had  in  Italy.  The  Duke  of  Milan  immediately  sent  a  citizen
of  Milan  to  the  king  (  a  person  of  no  promising  aspect),  who
by  the  mediation  of  others,  was  directed  to  me,  and  brought
me  letters  from  his  master.  I  informed  the  king  of  his
arrival,  and  his  majesty  commanded  me  to  receive  his
instructions ;  for  he  was  not  yet  reconciled  to  the  Duke  of
Milan,  who  had  forsaken  his  alliance,  and  made  a  new  one
with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  though  he  and  the  king  had
married  two  sisters.*  The  design  of  his  embassy  was,
to  signify  to  the  king  that  his  master  the  Duke  of  Milan  was
informed  that  the  king  and  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had
agreed  upon  an  interview,  in  order  to  a  final  peace  and
alliance  between  them,  which  would  be  much  to  the  prejudice
of  the  duke  his  master ;  and  he  urged  several  arguments
(but  of  no  great  force)  against  it :  but  at  last,  in  the
conclusion  of  his  speech,  he  told  the  king  that,  if  he  would
promise  to  make  no  such  truce  or  treaty  with  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  the  Duke  of  Milan  would  pay  him  immediately
100,000  ducats.  After  the  king  had  heard  the  sub-
stance of  his  embassy,  he  ordered  him  to  be  brought  into
his  presence,  and  (there  being  nobody  there  but  myself)  his
majesty  spoke  thus  to  him  in  short:  "Here  is  Monsieur
d'Argenton,  who  has  told  me  so  and  so ;  pray  tell  your
master  I  will  have  none  of  his  money,  and  that  my  yearly
revenue  is  thrice  as  much  as  his.  As  for  war  or  peace,  I  will
act  as  I  please.  However,  if  he  repents  having  left  me  to
enter  into  a  league  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  I  am  content
our  old  alliance  shall  be  renewed  and  confirmed."  The

*  The  Duchess  of  Milan,  Bona  of  Savoy,  was  sister  of  Charlotte  of
Savoy,  the  second  wife  of  Louis  XI.  She  married  Galeas  Sforza,  on  the
9th  of  May,  1468,  and  died  in  1485,  after  a  widowhood  of  nine  years.


1476.]  DEFECTION  OF THE DUKE'S FRIENDS.  309

ambassador  returned  the  king  most  humble  thanks ;  and
concluded  by  his  answer  that  he  was  no  covetous  prince ;
and  entreated  his  majesty  that  he  would  cause  the  said
alliance  to  be  published  in  the  same  form  as  before,  for
he  was  sufficiently  empowered  to  promise  that  his  master
would  do  the  same.  The  king  consented,  and  after  dinner
it  was  proclaimed*,  and  an  ambassador  was  immediately
despatched  from  the  king  to  Milan,  where  it  was  proclaimed
with  great  pomp  and  solemnity.  This  was  one  of  the  Duke
of  Burgundy's  first  strokes  of  misfortune  :  and  this  was  the
first  great  man  that  abandoned  his  interest,  who  but  three
weeks  before  had  sent  a  magnificent  and  solemn  embassy  to
him  to  desire  his  alliance.

Rene,  King  of  Sicily,  had  a  design  to  make  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  his  heir,  and  to  put  Provence  into  his  hand ;  and
accordingly  the  Lord  of  Chasteau-Guyonf  (who  is  now  in
Piedmont),  and  several  other  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
officers,  were  sent  with  20,000  crowns  to  raise  soldiers
to  take  possession  of  Provence.  But  upon  the  news  of
this  defeat,  they  had  much  ado  to  escape  themselves,  and
the  Count  of  Bresse  seized  upon  their  money.  The  Duchess
of  Savoy  had  received  information  of  it  also,  and  sent
immediately  to  the  King  of  Sicily  to  extenuate  the  loss,  and
strengthen  him  in  his  alliance.  But  the  messengers,  who
were  natives  of  Provence,  were  apprehended,  and  by  that
means  the  treaty  between  the  King  of  Sicily  and  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  was  discovered.  The  king  our  master  im-
mediately sent  a  good  body  of  troops  towards  Provence,  and
despatched  ambassadors  to  the  King  of  Sicily,  to  invite  him
to  come  to  him,  and  to  assure  him  he  should  be  heartily
welcome ;  or  otherwise  his  majesty  would  be  obliged  to  provide
for  his  own  safety  by  force  of  arms.  The  King  of  Sicily
was  persuaded  to  visit  the  king  at  Lyons,  and  was  received

*Thls  treaty  between  Louis  XI.  and  the  Duke  of  Milan  was  concluded
on  the  9th  of  August,  1476.

f  Hugues  de  Chalon,  Lord  of  Chasteau-Guyon  and  Nozeroy,  was  the
son  of  Louis  de  Chalon.  Prince  of  Orange,  and  Leonore  d'Armagnac.
He  was  u  man  of  distinguished  bravery.  At  the  battle  of  Granson,
he  twice  dashed  amidst  the  enemy's  ranks  and  nearly  succeeded  in
taking  their  standard  ;  but  his  charge  was  unsupported,  and  there-
fore unavailing.

X  3


310  THE MEMOIUS OF PHILIP DE COJEXIINES. [1476.

with  great  honour  and  civility.  I  happened  to  be  present  at
his  arrival,  and  after  their  first  compliments  of  salutation,
John  Cosse  *,  Seneschal  of  Provence  (a  person  of  honour,
and  of  a  noble  family  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples),  addressed
himself  to  the  king  in  the  following  manner:  "Be  not
surprised,  sire,  if  the  king,  my  master  and  your  uncle,  has
offered  to  make  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  his  heir;  for  it  was
the  advice  of  his  council  (and  particularly  mine),  upon
this  ground,  that  notwithstanding  you  were  his  nephew  and
sister's  son,  yet  you  had  injuriously  taken  from  him  the
castles  of  Bar  and  Angers,  and  used  him  unhandsomely  in
all  his  otl  er  aff.iirs.  We  therefore  promoted  this  treaty  with
the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  that  your  majesty  being  informed  of
it,  might  thereby  be  the  better  inclined  to  do  us  justice,  and
be  put  in  mind  that  my  master  is  your  uncle.  But  we  never
intended  to  bring  that  treaty  to  a  conclusion."

The  king  took  his  speech  very  wisely  and  well ;  and  he
knew  it  was  true,  for  Monsieur  Cosse  was  the  person  that
managed  the  whole  affair.  In  a  few  days  after,  all  their
differences  were  adjusted;  the  King  of  Sicily  and  all  his
retinue  were  largely  presented  with  money  |  ;  and  the  king
entertained  him  among  the  ladies,  and  treated  him  in  every
respect  as  he  loved  to  be  treated ;  so  that  a  perfect  recon-
ciliation took  place  between  them,  and  no  mention  was  made
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  for  not  only  King  Rene  but  all  his
allies  had  abandoned  him  ;  and  this  was  another  misfortune
occasioned  by  his  defeat.  The  Duchess  of  Savoy},  who  for  a
long  time  had  been  suspected  to  be  her  brother's  enemy,
sent  a  private  messenger  (called  the  Lord  of  Montaigny),
who  addressed  himself  to  me,  to  endeavour  her  reconciliation,
and  to  represent  the  reasons  which  had  induced  her  to
abandon  the  interest  of  the  king  her  brother,  and  to  state  her
doubts  of  the  king.  However,  to  speak  impartially,  she  was
a  lady  of  great  wisdom,  and  my  master's  true  sister.  She
was  unwilling  to  proceed  to  an  open  rupture  with  the  Duke


*  Jean,  Lord  of  Cosse  in  Anjon,  was  one  of  the  councillors  and  cham-
berlains of  King  Rene,  and  Seneschal  of  Provence.

f  Louis  XL  undertook  to  pay  Rene  a  pension  of  60,000  francs  yearly
during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  Lenglet,  iii.  392.

+  Yolande  of  France,  Duchess  of  Savoy,  and  sister  to  Louis  XL


1476.]  SPOILS TAKEN  BY THE SWISS.  311

of  Burgundy,  but  seemed  desirous  to  temporise  and  to
renew  her  friendship  with  the  king.  And  she  continued  to
send  him  news  of  the  duke's  adventures,  that  the  king  might
treat  her  more  favourably  ;  'and  he  ordered  me  to  despatch
her  envoy  with  all  expedition,  to  give  her  good  encourage-
ment, and  to  invite  her  into  France.  Thus  another  of  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  confederates  fell  off  from  him,  and
endeavoured  to  abandon  his  alliance.  In  Germany  they
began  universally  to  declare  against  the  duke ;  and  several
towns  of  the  empire,  as  Nuremberg,  Frankfort,  and  others,
joined  in  a  confederacy  with  the  new  and  old  allies  of  Swit-
zerland against  him ;  and  it  seemed  that  whatever  mischief
could  be  done  to  him,  was  quite  pardonable.

The  poor  Swiss  were  mightily  enriched  by  the  plunder  of
his  camp.*  At  first  they  did  not  understand  the  value  of  the
treasure  they  were  masters  of,  especially  the  common  soldiers.
One  of  the  richest  and  most  magnificent  tents  in  the  world
was  cut  into  pieces.  There  were  some  of  them  that  sold
quantities  of  dishes  and  plates  of  silver  for  about  two  sous  of

*  The  following  is  a  list  of  the  spoil  taken  by  the  Swiss  at  Granson,
from  Peignot's  Amuseraens  Philologiques  : —

"  1.  Five  hundred  pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  with  a  quantity  of  ammu-
nition, and  abundance  of  provisions.

"  2.  Four  hundred  tents  of  great  richness,  fitted  with  silk  and  velvet,
and  with  the  duke's  arms  embroidered  thereon  in  gold  and  pearls.  Most
of  these  were  spoiled  by  the  Swiss,  who  made  them  into  clothes.

"  3.  Six  hundred  banners  and  standards ;  300  helmets  ;  300  cwt.
of  gunpowder ;  3000  sacks  of  barley  ;  2000  baggage  wagons  ;  2000
barrels  of  herrings,  and  a  quantity  of  other  dried  fish,  and  salted  meat,
geese  and  fowls  ;  and  abundance  of  sugar,  raisins,  figs,  almonds,  and
other  things  innumerable  ;  and  8000  spiked  clubs.

"  4.  Four  hundred  Ibs.  weight  of  silver  plate,  which  was  taken  to
Lucerne,  and  divided  among  the  Swiss,  to  say  nothing  of  that  which  was
carried  off  by  the  soldiers.

"  5.  Three  hundred  complete  services  of  magnificent  silver  plate  ;  and
so  great  a  quantity  of  coined  money  that  it  was  distributed  by  handfulls ;
four  wagon-loads  of  crossbows  and  strings ;  and  three  wagon-loads  of
bed-linen.

"  6.  The  coffer  containing  the  duke's  archives,  and  his  great  diamond.

"  7.  The  duke's  rosary,  with  the  apostles  in  massive  gold.

"  8.  The  duke's  sword,  adorned  with  seven  large  diamonds  and  as
many  rubies,  with  fifteen  pearls  of  the  size  of  a  bean,  and  of  the  finest
water  ;  160  pieces  of  cloth  of  gold  and  silk;  with  innumerable  relics

x  4


312  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1476.

our  money,  supposing  they  had  been  pewter.  His  great
diamond  (perhaps  the  largest  and  finest  jewel  in  Christen-
dom), with  a  large  pearl  fixed  to  it,  was  taken  up  by  a
Swiss,  put  up  again  into  the  case,  thrown  under  a  wagon,
taken  up  again  by  the  same  soldier,  and  after  all  offered  to  a
priest  for  a  florin,  who  bought  it,  and  sent  it  to  the  magis-
trates of  that  country,  who  returned  him  three  francs  as  a
sufficient  reward.*  They  took  also  three  very  rich  jewels,
called  the  Three  Brothers,  another  large  ruby  called  La
Hatte,  and  another  called  the  Ball  of  Flanders,  which  were
the  fairest  and  richest  in  the  world ;  besides  a  prodigious
quantity  of  other  goods,  which  has  since  taught  them  what
fine  things  may  be  purchased  for  money ;  for  their  victories,
the  esteem  the  king  had  of  their  service  afterwards,  and
the  presents  he  made  them,  have  enriched  them  prodigiously.
The  king  made  every  one  of  their  ambassadors  that  was
sent  in  the  first  embassy  to  his  majesty  very  considerable
presents  in  plate  or  money,  by  which  means  he  pacified  them
for  not  openly  declaring  and  entering  into  an  alliance  with
them ;  and  they  returned  with  their  purses  well  filled,
and  their  persons  clothed  in  silk,  besides  a  promise  of
a  pension  of  40,000  florins  of  the  Rhine  (which  he  paid
afterwards,  but  he  saw  the  event  of  a  second  battle  first),
20,000  to  the  towns,  and  20,000  to  the  governors  of
them.f  Nor  should  I  tell  an  untruth  in  saying,  that  from
the  battle  of  Granson  to  the  death  of  our  master,  their
towns  and  magistrates  received  of  his  majesty  above  a
million  of  Rhine  florins  ;  and  by  the  towns  I  mean  only  four,
Berne,  Lucerne,  Friburg,  Zurich,  and  their  cantons,  or

in  rich  shrines  ;  the  dake's  gilded  chair,  and  his  gold  ring,  and  the  ring
of  his  brother  Antony,  and  two  large  pearls  set  in  gold,  each  as  large  as
a  nut.

*  This  famous  diamond,  called  the  Sancy  diamond,  was  sold  by  the
last-mentioned  purchasers  to  M.  de  Diesbach,  for  5400  Rhine  florins  j
he  sold  it  to  a  Genevese  jeweller  for  7000  Rhine  florins  ;  it  v,ras  next  sold
to  the  Duke  of  Milan  for  11,000  ducats  ;  then  to  Tope  Julius  for  20,000
ducats  ;  and  in  1835,  it  was  purchased  by  Prince  Demidofffor  20,000?.
It  is  said  to  weigh  53^  grains.

j-  Of  this  sum,  9000  francs  were  given  to  certain  private  individuals,
and  the  remainder  was  thus  divided:  6000  francs  to  Berne,  3000  to
Lucerne,  and  2000  to  Zurich.  Lenglet,  iii.  379.


1476.]  THE DUKE RECRUITS HIS ARMY.  313

mountains.  Schwytz  also  is  another  of  their  cantons,  though
but  a  small  village ;  yet  I  have  seen  an  ambassador  of  that
village,  who,  though  he  was  in  a  mean  dress,  yet  gave  his
opinion  with  the  others.  The  other  cantons  are  Glaris  and
Underwald.


CH.  m. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  again  defeated  by  the  Swiss,
near  the  Town  of  Morat. — 1476.

BUT  to  return  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  affairs.  He
assembled  forces  on  all  sides,  and,  in  three  weeks'  time,
he  had  as  many  as  he  had  had  in  the  late  battle.  His
quarters  were  at  Losanne,  in  Savoy  *,  where  you,  my
Lord  of  Vienne,  attended  him  with  your  counsels  in  an
illness,  which  melancholy  and  vexation  for  the  dishonour  he
had  sustained,  had  occasioned ;  and  truly  I  am  of  opinion,
that  from  the  very  day  of  his  defeat,  his  understanding  was
never  so  good  as  it  had  been  before.  The  account  I  give
you  of  the  great  army  he  had  assembled  again,  I  received
from  the  Prince  of  Tarentof ,  who  in  my  presence  made  the
same  relation  to  the  king.  This  prince  had  come  to  the
duke's  court  about  a  year  before,  with  a  very  splendid  equi-
page, in  the  hope  of  marrying  his  daughter,  the  heiress  of
Flanders.  And,  indeed,  he  appeared  to  be  a  king's  son  by
the  gracefulness  of  his  person,  and  the  splendour  of  his
appearance  and  retinue  ;  for  his  father,  the  King  of  Naples^,
had  spared  no  cost  to  set  him  off.  The  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy did  but  dissemble  with  him  ;  for,  at  the  same  time,
he  was  in  treaty  with  the  Duchess  of  Savoy  for  her  son,
besides  others  elsewhere.  The  Prince  of  Tarento  (called

*  The  duke  reached  Lausanne  on  the  29th  of  April,  1476,  and  re-
mained there  until  the  27th  of  May.

f  The  principality  of  Tarentum  was  not  actually  conferred  on  Don
Frederic  of  Arragon  until  1485,  but  he  appears  to  have  enjoyed  the
titular  dignity  for  some  time  previously.  He  became  King  of  Naples  in
1496,  and  died  on  the  9th  of  November,  1504.

J  Ferdinand  L,  natural  son  of  Alphonso,  King  of  Naples,  succeeded
his  father  in  1458,  and  died  on  the  25th  of  January,  1494.


314  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE C05I3IINES. [1476.

Don  Frederic  of  Arragon)  and  his  council,  growing  weary
of  his  delays,  sent  a  herald,  who  was  a  clever  person,  to  our
king,  to  desire  his  majesty  to  grant  the  prince  a  passport  to
return  safely  through  his  dominions  into  his  own  country,
for  his  father  had  sent  for  him.  The  king  granted  it  very
willingly,  because  he  believed  it  would  redound  to  the  Duke
of  Burgundy's  dishonour,  and  would  lessen  his  interest
abroad.  However,  before  the  return  of  the  messenger,  the
German  confederates  had  taken  the  field,  and  lay  encamped
not  far  from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy.

The  prince  took  his  leave  of  the  duke  the  night  before  the
battle*,  in  obedience  to  his  father's  command ;  for  in  the
first  engagement  he  had  given  signal  proofs  of  his  valour.
There  are  some  (my  Lord  of  Vienne)  who  affirm,  that  he
left  the  army  by  your  advice ;  and  I  heard  him  say,  upon
his  arrival  at  court,  to  the  Duke  of  Astolyf,  called  the  Count
Julio,  and  to  several  others,  that  your  lordship  transmitted
an  account  into  Italy  of  all  that  happened  both  in  the  lirst
and  second  battles,  several  days  before  they  were  fought.±

At  the  prince's  departure,  the  confederates  (as  I  said
before)  were  encamped  near  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  with  a
design  to  give  him  battle,  and  raise  the  siege  of  Morat.  a
small  town  near  Berne,  belonging  to  the  Count  of  Romont.
The  confederates  (as  I  was-  informed  by  those  who  were
present  in  that  action)  might  be  about  30,000  foot,  all
choice  troops  and  well  armed :  that  is  to  say,  1 1,000
picked  men,  10,000  halberdiers,  and  10, 000  musketeers,  besides
a  body  of  4000  horse.  The  confederate  forces  were  not
all  arrived ;  so  that  only  those  mentioned  above  were  in
the  engagement,  and  they  were  more  than  was  necessary.
The  Duke  of  Lorraine  arrived  at  their  camp  also  with  a

*  On  the  21st  of  June,  1476.

•f  According  to  some  commentators,  the  person  here  referred  to  is  the
Duke  of  Ascoli,  but  as  the  name  of  that  nobleman  was  Orso  Orsino,  it
is  impossible  that  he  can  be  identical  with  "  Count  Julio,"  who,  as  Corn-
mines  tell  us,  possessed  the  dukedom  in  question.  It  'is  more  probable
that  our  author  alludes  to  Giulio  Antonio  Aquaviva,  Duke  of  Atri,  a
distinguished  statesman  and  warrior,  known  in  Neapolitan  history  as
"  Count  Giulio."  The  Duke  of  Atri,  moreover,  had  been  chosen  by
King  Ferdinand  to  accompany  Prince  Frederic  of  Arragon  on  his  visit
to  the  Court  of  Burgundy.

J  Angelo  Catto  was  celebrated  as  a  physician  and  astrologer.


1476.] DEFEAT  OF  THE  DUKE  AT  MORAT. 315

small  reinforcement,  winch  was  of  great  advantage  to  him
afterwards,  for  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  in  possession  of  his
whole  dukedom.  Nor  was  it  to  his  prejudice  that  our  court
began  to  grow  weary  of  him,  though  I  believe  he  was  never
conscious  of  it  himself.  But  when  a  great  person  has  lost
all,  those  that  support  and  maintain  him  soon  grow  weary  of
him.  The  king  gave  him  a  small  sum  of  money,  and  sent  a
strong  party  of  troops  with  him  through  the  duchy  of  Lor-
raine, to  conduct  him  safely  into  Germany,  and  then  to
return.  The  Duke  of  Lorraine  had  not  only  lost  that
country,  but  also  the  country  of  Vaudemont,  and  most  part
of  Barrois  (the  rest  being  secured  by  the  king,  so  that  all  was
gone) ;  and,  which  was  worse,  all  his  subjects,  and  even  his
domestics,  had  sworn  allegiance  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
and  that  voluntarily,  without  any  compulsion,  ;  so  that  his
condition  seemed  past  recovery.  However,  in  such  cases
God  always  remains  judge  and  arbitrator,  and  decides  such
affairs  according  to  His  own  pleasure.

When  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  had  passed  through  his  own
dominions,  after  several'  days'  march,  he  arrived  at  the
camp  of  the  confederates  not  many  hours  before  the  engage-
ment. Though  he  brought  but  few  men,  yet  his  arrival  was
much  to  his  honour  and  advantage,  for  otherwise  he  would
have  had  a  poor  reception.  Just  as  he  arrived,  both  armies
were  advancing  to  engage  ;  for  the  allies  had  lain  three  days
or  more  strongly  encamped  at  a  small  distance  from  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  whose  army,  after  some  small  resistance,
was  entirely  defeated  and  put  to  flight.*  Nor  did  he  escape
so  well  as  in  the  first  engagement :  for  the  Swiss  not  having
then  a  body  of  horse,  he  lost  not  above  seven  men-at-arms ;
but  at  this  battle  of  Morat  they  had  4000  good  horse,  who
pursued  the  Burgundians  a  great  way,  and  cut  off  a  con-
siderable number  of  them.  Beside*,  their  whole  body  of
infantry  was  engaged  with  the  duke's  foot,  who  were  very
numerous ;  for,  besides  his  own.  subjects,  and  a  considerable

*  Four  years  after  the  battle  a  chapel  was  erected  on  the  field  with
this  inscription  :  "  Deo  Optimo  Maximo.  Inclyti  etfortissimi  Burgundies
Duds  Exercitus,  Moratum  obsidens,  ab  Helvetiis  ccesus,  hoc  sui  Monu-
mentum  reliquit."  In  1822  a  handsome  stone  obelisk  was  set  up,  in  a
commanding  position  overlooking  the  lake,  also  in  commemoration  of
this  victory.


316  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [14-76.

body  of  English,  who  were  in  his  pay,  he  had  great  reinforce-
ments out  of  Piedmont  and  Milan,  as  I  said  before.  And
when  the  Prince  of  Tarento  was  with  the  king,  he  told  me
he  had  never  seen  a  finer  army  in  his  life  ;  for,  as  they
marched  over  a  bridge,  he  caused  them  to  be  numbered,
and  they  amounted  to  23,000  men  in  pay,  besides  those
that  belonged  to  the  train  of  artillery,  and  followed  the
camp.  To  me  this  seems  a  very  great  number,  yet  there  are
some  who  make  it  much  greater,  and  upon  very  slight
grounds  will  multiply  armies  prodigiously.

The  Lord  of  Contay  arrived  at  our  court  not  long  after
the  battle,  and  owned  in  my  presence,  that  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  lost  in  that  battle  8000  of  his  standing  forces,
besides  those  that  followed  the  camp ;  and,  by  the  best
information  I  could  get,  I  presume  that  the  number  of  the
slain  in  all,  might  amount  to  near  18,000  men ;  which
is  not  at  all  improbable,  if  we  consider  the  great  bodies
of  horse  that  the  princes  of  Germany  had  there,  and  the
vast  number  of  those  that  were  slain  in  the  duke's  camp
before  Morat.  The  duke  fled  himself  as  far  as  Burgundy,
in  great  disconsolateness,  and  not  without  reason ;  he
stopped  at  a  place  called  La  Riviere  *,  where  he  rallied  what
forces  he  could.  The  Germans  pursued  only  that  night,
and  then  gave  over  the  chase,  without  following  him  any
farther.


CH.  IV — How,  after  the  Battle  of  Morat,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  seized
upon  the  Duchess  of  Savoy,  and  how  she  was  delivered  by  our  King,
and  sent  hack  into  her  own  Country. — 1476.

THIS  defeat  drove  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  almost  to  despair ;
for  by  what  he  had  observed  since  his  first  loss  at  Granson,
he  perceived  all  his  friends  and  allies  were  resolved  to  aban-

*La  Riviere  is  a  small  town  in  the  arrondissement  of  Pontarlier,  in  the
department,  of  Doubs.  The  duke  arrived  there  on  the  22ud  of  July.
Lenglet,  ii.  220.


1476.]  SEIZURE OF THE DUCHESS OP SAVOY.  317

don  him  ;  and  his  defeat  at  Granson  happened  not  above
three  weeks  previously.*  In  this  apprehension,  by  the
advice  of  some  people,  he  caused  the  Duchess  of  Savoy  and
one  of  her  sons,  who  is  now  Duke  of  Savoy  t,  to  be  brought
into  Burgundy  by  force.  Her  eldest  son  at  that  time  was
saved  by  some  of  the  servants  belonging  to  the  family  ;  for
those  who  committed  this  act  of  violence  did  it  in  fear,  and
were  obliged  to  use  more  haste  than  was  convenient.  That
which  moved  the  duke  to  this  exploir,  was  a  suspicion  lest
she  should  retire  to  the  king  her  brother,  though,  as  he  pre-
tended, all  this  misfortune  was  caused  him  by  his  great
affection  to  the  house  of  Savoy.  The  duke  ordered  her  to  be
conducted  to  the  Castle  of  Rouvre  $,  near  Dijon,  and  placed
some  small  guard  about  her,  but  whoever  had  a  mind  had
liberty  to  visit  her.  Among  the  rest,  the  Lord  of  Chasteau-
Guyon  and  the  Marquis  of  Rotelin  came  to  wait  on  her
highness,  between  whom  and  two  of  her  daughters  the  duke
had  treated  of  marriage,  though  at  that  time  neither  of  them
had  been  concluded,  but  both  have  been  since.  Her  eldest  son
Philibert,  at  that  time  Duke  of  Savoy,  was  conveyed  to
Chambery  by  those  who  contrived  his  escape  §,  at  which
place  he  found  the  Bishop  of  Geneva,  who  was  a  son  of  the
house  of  Savoy,  but  a  very  headstrong  man,  and  governed
wholly  by  a  Commander  de  Ranvers.  |  With  this  bishop  and
his  governor,  the  Commander  de  Ranvers,  the  king  managed
affairs  so  artfully,  that  the  Duke  of  Savoy  and  a  younger


*  This  is  a  mistake  ;  the  battle  of  Granson  occurred  three  months  and
nineteen  days  before  that  of  Moral.  The  former  was  fought  on  the  3rd
of  March,  and  the  latter  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1476.

•f  Charles  I.,  born  on  the  29th  of  March,  1408,  succeeded  his  brother
Philibert  in  1482.  He  married  Blanche  of  Montferrat,  and  died  on  the
13th  of  March,  1489.

J  In  the  department  of  the  Cote-d'Or.  This  expedition  was  entrusted
to  Oliver  de  la  Marche,  who  had  to  answer  for  its  performance  with  his
head.  See  his  Memoirs,  ii.  417, 418.

§  "  Geotfroi,  Lord  of  Riverol,  a  Piedmontese  gentleman,  rescued  the
duke  from  the  hands  of  those  who  had  seized  him.  Louis  de  Villette,  a
gentleman  of  Savoy,  saved  his  brother."  Guichenon,  ii.  142.

||  Jean  de  Montchenu,  Commander  of  St.  Antoine  de  Ranvers,  be-
came Bishop  of  Agen  in  1477,  and  was  translated  to  the  see  of  Vivier  in
1478.  In  previous  editions,  he  has  been  erroneously  termed  a  Com-
mander of  Rhodes.


318 • THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PHILIP  DE  COMMINES. [1476.

brother  of  his  *,  called  the  Prothonotary,  with  the  Castles
of  Chambery  and  ]\Iontmeillan  t,  were  delivered  into  his
majesty's  hands  ;  and  he  already  had  another  castle  in  his  pos-
session, in  which  were  all  the  jewels  belonging  to  the  duchess.

As  soon  as  the  duchess  found,  upon  her  arrival  at  Rouvre,
that  she  was  attended  by  her  whole  train  of  maids  of  honour
and  a  host  of  other  servants,  as  I  said  before  ;  and  observed
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  wholly  intent  upon  raising  men,  and
that  her  guards  did  not  retain  that  dread  and  awe  of  their
master  which  they  formerly  had,  she  resolved  to  send  to  her
brother  the  king,  to  propose  a  peace  and  beg  his  assistance  ;
yet  she  would  have  been  unwilling  to  have  put  herself  into  his
power,  had  she  been  in  any  other  place  but  where  she  was,  for
there  had  been  a  great  long-standing  quarrel  between  them.
The  duchess  sent  a  gentleman  of  Piedmont,  named  Riverol  J,
who  was  steward  of  her  house,  and  had  instructions  to  apply
to  me.  As  soon  as  I  had  received  his  message,  and  com-
municated it  to  the  king,  his  majesty  ordered  him  to  be
introduced  into  his  presence ;  and  after  he  had  given  him
audience,  he  told  him  that  he  would  not  abandon  his  sister
in  this  extremity,  notwithstanding  the  differences  that  had
been  between  them ;  and  if  she  would  trust  to  him,  he  would
send  the  Governor  of  Champagne,  who  was  then  Charles
d'Amboise,  Lord  of  Chaurnont,  to  fetch  her.

Monsieur  Riverol  took  his  leave  of  ,the  king,  and  posted
with  all  speed  to  his  mistress  with  the  news.  The  duchess
was  overjoyed  to  hear  it,  yet  she  immediately  sent  another
agent  to  the  king,  to  desire  his  majesty  would  give  his  word
that  she  should  have  liberty  to  return  into  Savoy  whenever
she  pleased,  and  that  he  would  restore  to  her  not  only  the
duke  her  son  and  his  young  brother,  but  the  castles  and
places  which  he  had  seized  upon,  and  would  defend  and

*  Jacques  Louis  de  Savoie,  Count  of  Geneva  and  Marquis  de  Gcx.
He  died  at  Turin  on  the  27th  of  July,  1485,  without  issue.

•)•  "The  Bishop  of  Geneva  forced  the  Governor  of  Montmeillan  to  sur-
render the  place,  wherein  were  all  the  treasures  and  jewels  of  the  Regent."
Guichcnon,  ii.  143.  This  must,  therefore,  be  the  castle  to  which
Commines  refers  in  the  succeeding  paragraph.

J  Geoifroi  de  Riverol,  mentioned  in  a  preceding  note.  The  duchess
had  previously  sent  her  secretary  Cavorret  to  the  king  ;  but  Louis  XI.
had  put  him  in  arrest  because  he  was  dressed  in  the  Burgundiau  fashion.


1476.]  THE DUCHESS RESCUED BY THE KING.  319

maintain  her  authority  in  Savoy ;  and  then  she  would
renounce  all  other  alliances,  and  keep  herself  entirely  in  his
interest.  The  king  promised  to  grant  all  she  desired,  and
immediately  despatched  an  express  to  the  Lord  of  Chaumont
to  go  and  deliver  her;  which  was  well  attempted,  and  as  well
performed  ;  for  the  Lord  of  Chaumont,  with  a  strong  detach-
ment*, went  to  Rouvre,  without  the  least  disorder  or  damage
to  the  country  through  which  he  marched,  and  brought
away  the  Duchess  of  Savoy  and  her  whole  train  to  the  next
garrison  belonging  to  the  king.  When  the  king  despatched
this  last  message  to  the  Duchess  of  Savoy,  his  majesty  had
left  Lyons,  where  he  had  sojourned  full  six  months,  on  pur-
pose to  defeat  and  countermine  the  designs  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  without  violating  the  truce;  and  if  we  seriously
consider  the  posture  of  the  duke's  affairs,  we  shall  see  that
the  king  was  a  greater  enemy  to  him  in  not  oppo.-ing  him
openly,  but  creating  him  new  enemies  underhand,  than  if  he
had  declared  open  war  against  him  ;  for  upon  such  a  declara-
tion, the  duke  would  have  abandoned  his  rash  enterprises
and  designs,  and  that  would  not  have  occurred  which
happened  to  him  afterwards.

The  king  having  left  Lyons,  continued  his  journey  directly
to  Rouanne,  from  whence  he  came  down  the  River  Loire  to
Tours.  Upon  his  arrival  there,  his  majesty  received  the
news  of  his  sister's  deliverance,  at  which  he  was  extremely
pleased,  and  sent  an  express  immediately  to  direct  her  to
come  to  him,  and  ordered  a  sum  of  money  to  be  remitted  to
defray  the  expense  of  her  journey.  When  the  king  was
informed  of  her  approach,  he  sent  several  persons  of  quality
to  meet  her,  and  went  himself  as  far  as  the  gate  of  Plessis-
du-Parc,  where  he  received  her  with  abundance  of  tenderness
and  civility,  and  saluted  her  thus,  "  My  Lady  of  Burgundy,
you  are  heartily  welcome."  She  knew  well  by  his  counte-
nance that  he  was  in  a  merry  humour,  and  replied  very
prudently,  "  that  she  was  no  Burgundian,  but  a  true  French
woman,  and  ready  to  obey  him  in  whatever  he  might  com-
mand." The  king  conducted  her  to  her  apartment,  and
entertained  her  with  great  splendour;  but  the  truth  is  he

*  Oliver  de  la  Marche  says  that  the  Lord  of  Chaumont  took  with  him
200  lances.


320  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1476.

was  very  desirous  to  be  rid  of  her,  and  she  being  a  cunning
woman,  and  understanding  his  temper  perfectly  well,  was  even
more  desirous  to  be  gone  than  he  was  to  have  her  go.  The
management  of  this  whole  affair  was  committed  to  me,  and
the  king  ordered  me  to  supply  her  with  money  during  her
stay  at  court,  to  provide  for  her  return,  to  furnish  her  ward-
robe with  silks,  and  to  draw  up  the  form  of  their  alliance
for  the  time  to  come.  The  king  used  his  utmost  endeavours
to  break  off  the  matches  that  I  mentioned  before,  but  she
excused  herself,  and  pretended  that  the  affections  of  her
daughters  were  so  far  engaged,  that  it  would  be  impossible
to  break  them  off;  aud  when  the  king  found  that,  he  pressed
it  no  farther.

After  the  duchess  had  been  at  Plessis  about  seven  or
eight  days,  the  king  and  her  highness  entered  into  a  mutual
oath  of  amity  for  the  future,  and  instruments  to  that  purpose
were  interchangeably  delivered  *  :  after  which  she  took  her
leave,  and  the  king  ordered  her  to  be  conducted  safely  into
her  own  country  ;  and  her  children,  castles,  jewels,  and
whatever  belonged  to  her  besides,  were  punctually  restored
to  her.  Both  were  extremely  pleased  to  be  rid  of  one
another  upon  such  handsome  terms  ;  and  ever  after  they
continued  very  good  friends,  as  a  brother  and  sister  ought
to  do.


CH.  V. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  lived  in  a  solitary  manner  for  some
weeks  at  La  Riviere,  and  how  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  retook  Nancy  in
the  meantime. — 1476.

BUT  to  continue  the  chief  subject  of  these  Memoirs,  we  are
obliged  to  return  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who,  after  his
defeat  at  Morat  (in  the  year  1476),  had  fled  to  a  town  called
La  Riviere,  at  the  entrance  into  Burgundy,  where  he  lay  six
weeks,  under  pretence  of  raising  men  to  recruit  his  army  ;

*  These  papers  are  dated  on  the  2nd  of  November,  1476.  The  king
thereby  pledged  his  word  to  defend  and  support  his  sister  and  her  son
against  the  attacks  and  pretensions  of  Charles  of  Burgundy.


1476.]  MELANCHOLY STATE OP THE DUKE.  321

but  he  proceeded  very  slowly  in  that  affair,  and  instead
of  being  active  and  vigorous,  he  lived  like  a  hermit,  and
all  his  actions  seemed  rather  the  effect  of  sullenness  and
obstinacy  than  anything  else,  as  will  appear  by  what  fol-
lows.

His  concern  and  grief  for  his  first  defeat  at  Granson  was
so  great,  and  made  such  a  deep  impression  on  his  spirits,
that  it  threw  him  into  a  violent  and  dangerous  fit  of  sickness  ;
for  whereas  before,  his  choler  and  natural  heat  were  so  great
that  he  drank  no  wine,  but  only  in  a  morning  took  a  little
tisane,  and  ate  conserve  of  roses,  to  refresh  himself ;  this
sudden  melancholy  had  so  altered  his  constitution,  that  he
now  drank  the  strongest  wine  that  could  be  got,  without
any  water  at  all ;  and  to  reduce  the  rush  of  blood  to  his
heart,  his  physicians  were  obliged  to  apply  cupping-glasses
with  burning  tow  to  his  side.  But  this  (my  Lord  of  Vienne)
you  know  better  than  I,  for  your  lordship  attended  on  him
during  the  whole  course  of  his  illness,  and  it  was  by  your
persuasion  that  the  duke  was  prevailed  upon  to  cut  his
beard,  which  was  of  a  prodigious  length.  In  my  opinion
his  understanding  was  never  so  perfect,  nor  his  senses  so
sedate  and  complete,  after  this  fit  of  sickness,  as  before.  So
violent  are  the  passions  of  men  unacquainted  with  adver-
sity, who  never  seek  the  true  remedy  for  their  misfortunes,
especially  princes,  who  are  naturally  haughty  :  for  in  such
cases  our  best  method  is  to  have  recourse  to  God,  to  reflect
on  the  many  vile  transgressions  by  which  we  have  offended
His  Divine  goodness,  to  humble  ourselves  before  Him,  and  to
make  an  acknowledgment  of  our  faults  :  for  He  determines
all  things  as  it  seems  best  to  His  heavenly  wisdom,  and  who
dare  question  the  justness  of  His  dispensations,  or  impute
any  error  to  Him  ?  Jt  is  also  well  to  unbosom  ourselves  freely
to  some  intimate  friends,  not  to  keep  our  sorrows  concealed,
but  to  expatiate  on  every  circumstance  of  them,  without
being  ashamed  or  reserved  ;  for  this  mitigates  the  rigour  of
our  misfortunes,  revives  the  heart,  and  restores  their  usual
vigour  and  activity  to  our  dejected  spirits.  There  is  another
remedy  also,  and  that  is  labour  and  exercise  (for  as  we  are
but  men,  these  sorrows  cannot  be  dissipated  without  great
pains  and  application,  both  in  public  and  private),  which  is
a  much,  better  course  than  that  which  the  duke  took  in  hiding

VOL. I.  Y


322  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMUTES. [1476.

himself,  and  retiring  from  all  manner  of  company;  for  by
that  means  he  grew  so  terrible  to  his  own  servants,  that  none
of  them  durst  venture  to  come  near  him  to  give  him  either
counsel  or  comfort,  but  suffered  him  to  go  on  in  that  melan-
choly state  of  life,  fearing  lest  their  advising  him  to  the
contrary,  might  have  turned  to  their  destruction.

During  these  six  weeks  (or  thereabouts)  that  he  lay  at  La
Riviere  with  very  few  troops  (nor  was  it  to  be  wondered  at,
after  the  loss  of  two  such  great  battles  as  you  have  heard
before),  many  declared  themselves  openly  against  him,  his
friends  were  grown  cold,  his  subjects  were  defeated  and
rebellious,  and  began  (as  is  usual)  to  murmur  and  contemn
their  master  on  account  of  his  misfortunes.  He  lost  several
little  towns  in  Lorraine,  as  Vaudemont,  Espinal,  and  others.
All  the  neighbouring  states  began  to  make  preparations  to
invade  him  ;  and  the  vilest  and  most  insignificant  of  them
were  now  the  most  forward  in  doing  him  mischief.  The
Duke  of  Lorraine  (upon  this  report)  assembled  a  small
body  of  forces,  and  besieged  Nancy*  ;  the  small  towns  about
it  were  most  of  them  in  his  possession  already  ;  but  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  was  master  of  Pont-a-Mousson,  about  four
leagues  off.  Amongst  those  that  were  besieged  in  Nancy,
there  was  a  gentleman  of  the  house  of  Croy,  called  the  Lord  of
Bievresf,  a  good  officer,  and  a  person  of  honour,  whose  forces
were  made  up  out  of  several  countries.  There  was  also  an
Englishman  called  Colpin,  a  brave  soldier  (though  of  no
great  birth),  who  with  other  officers  belonging  to  the  gar-
rison of  Guynes,  had  entered  the  service  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy.  This  Colpin  had  the  command  of  about  300
English  in  the  town,  and  though  they  were  not  pressed
either  by  approaches  or  batteries  |,  they  began  to  be  uneasy  at


*  The  garrison  of  Nancy  consisted  of  about  1000  or  1200  Bunrun-
dian  troops.  Duke  Rene  laid  siege  to  the  town  on  the  15th  of  September,
1476.

|  Jean  de  Rubempre,  Lord  of  Bievre,  was  appointed  Bailiff  of  Hainault
in  1473,  and  created  a  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece  in  1475.  He  was
killed  in  the  battle  of  Nancy.

JMolinet  (i.  208.)  says:  "The  besieged  ran  so  short  of  provisions  that
they  were  glad  to  eat  horse-flesh.  The  townspeople  were  so  false  and
disloyal  to  them,  that  if  the  captains  had  made  a  sortie,  they  would  not
have  been  admitted  again  into  the  town.  And  furthermore,  two  b^m-


1476.] DISTRESS OF THE GARRISON OF NANCY.  323

the  duke's  slowness  in  marching  to  their  relief*:  and  indeed
he  was  highly  to  blame  ;  for  the  quarters  where  he  lay  were  at
so  great  a  distance  from  Lorraine,  that  he  could  do  them  no
service,  and  certainly  it  would  have  been  better  for  him  to
have  defended  what  was  left,  than  to  have  meditated  re-
venge on  the  Swiss  for  what  he  had  lost.  But  his  perverse-
ness  in  following  no  counsel  but  his  own,  turned  greatly  to
his  disadvantage  ;  for  notwithstanding  that  he  was  daily
pressed  to  relieve  that  place,  yet  he  continued  (without  any
necessity)  at  La  Riviere  full  six  weeks  ;  whereas  if  he  had
done  otherwise,  he  might  easily  have  raised  the  siege  of
Nancy,  for  the  Duke  of  Lorraine's  forces  were  not  nu-
merous f,  and  so  long  as  the  country  of  Lorraine  was  in  his
possession,  he  had  free  communication  between  his  other
territories  (through  Luxembourg  and  Lorraine)  into  Bur-
gundy ;  so  that  if  his  intellects  had  been  as  right  and  his
judgment  as  sound  as  they  were  formerly,  he  would  certainly
have  marched  with  greater  expedition  to  their  relief.

"Whilst  the  garrison  of  Nancy  lay  in  continual  expectation
of  being  relieved,  it  happened  that  the  above-mentioned
Colpin,  who  commanded  the  English  troops  in  the  town,  was
killed  by  a  cannon  ball;  his  death  was  a  vast  prejudice  to
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  concerns,  for  a  prince  very  often  is
preserved  from  great  inconveniences  by  the  management  of
one  single  person,  provided  he  has  wisdom  and  valour,  al-
though his  extraction  be  mean  ;  and  in  this  particular  I
knew  no  man  more  careful  than  our  master,  for  certainly
never  prince  was  more  fearful  of  losing  his  men  than  his

bards,  one  culverin;  and  several  serpentines,  were  continually  firing  on
them,  as  many  as  twenty-one  shots  a  day,  by  which  means  a  gate  was
broken  through,  and  the  dilapidated  wall  was  razed  to  the  ground. "

*  The  Lord  of  Fay,  Lieutenant  of  Luxembourg,  collected  a  body  of
forces,  and  marched  with  the  Count  of  Campobasso  to  the  relief  of
Nancy.  But  instead  of  proceeding  thither  at  once,  they  spent  a  consi-
derable time  in  deciding  on  the  route  they  should  take,  and  in  waiting
for  reinforcements.  This  delay  arose  chiefly  from  their  expectation  that
they  would  get  but  little  booty  in  Lorraine  ;  and  their  allegiance  to  Duke
Charles  had  been  greatly  shaken  by  his  defeats  at  Granson  and  Morat,
so  that,  says  Molinet,  "  their  succour,  which  should  have  been  prompt
and  zealous,  was  very  tardy  and  unwillingly  given."

f  According  to  Moliiiet  (i.  207.)  the  duke  had  10,000  Swiss,  horse
and  foot.

T  2


324  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP DE CO3DIINES.  [1476.

majesty.  Upon  the  death  of  Colpin,  the  English  under  his
command  began  to  murmur  and  despair  of  relief.  They
were  not  aware  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine's  weakness,  and  that
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  many  ways  of  reinforcing  his
army  ;  and  besides,  the  English,  not  having  been  abroad  for
a  long  time,  had  but  little  experience  in  foreign  wars,  and
were  wholly  ignorant  in  regard  to  a  siege.  In  short,  they
mutinied  for  a  composition,  and  plainly  told  the  governor,
Monsieur  cle  Bievres,  that  if  he  would  not  consent  to  a
capitulation,  they  would  make  one  without  him.  Though
Bievres  was  a  good  knight,  yet  he  wanted  courage  and  reso-
lution. He  remonstrated,  entreated,  and  begged  of  them  to
have  a  little  patience ;  whereas,  in  my  opinion,  if  he  had
hectored,  and  carried  matters  with  an  air  of  greater  au-
thority and  resolution,  he  had  succeeded  better ;  but  God
had  ordered  it  otherwise  :  for  had  they  held  out  but  three
days  longer,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  would  have  certainly
raised  the  siege.  But,  in  short,  the  governor  complied  with
the  English,  and  the  town  was  surrendered*  to  the  Duke  of
Lorraine,  upon  condition  of  saving  their  goods  and  sparing
their  persons.

The  next  day,  or  at  furthest  two  days  after  the  surrender,
the  Duke  of  Burgundy  appeared  with  a  very  good  army,
considering  his  condition,  for  several  of  his  own  subjects  had
marched  up  through  the  province  of  Luxembourg  to  join
him.  The  Duke  of  Lorraine  and  he  faced  one  anotherf,  but
no  action  of  importance  happened  between  them,  the  Duke
of  Lorraine  being  too  weak  to  attempt  anything.  The  Duke
of  Burgundy,  in  his  old  obstinate  way,  was  resolved  to  be-
siege Nancy  againj,  though  it  had  been  much  wiser  in  him
not  to  have  undertaken  it  at  that  time  ;  but  when  God  is
pleased  to  change  the  fortune  of  princes,  he  puts  these  ob-
stinate inclinations  into  them.  Had  the  Duke  of  Burgundy
been  persuaded  to  have  garrisoned  the  little  places  about
the  town,  as  he  was  advised,  he  Avould  quickly  have  reduced
it  to  great  straits,  and  would  have  forced  it  to  surrender  in
a  short  time,  for  it  was  but  ill  provided  with  provisions,  and

*  On  the  6th  of  October,  1476.

•f  On  the  10th  of  October  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  came  up  with  Duke
Rene  at  Pont-a-Mousson. Lenglet,  ii.  220.
J  On  the  22nd  of  October,  1476.


1476.] TREACHERY  OF  CAMPOBASSO.  325

the  multitude  in  the  town  would  have  presently  distressed
it ;  while  he  would  have  had  time  to  recruit  his  army,  and
put  them  into  quarters  of  refreshment ;  but  he  took  quite
another  course.


CH.  VI — Of  the  Count  of  Campobasso's  great  Treachery,  and  how  ho
prevented  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  from  hearing  a  Gentleman  who  would
have  revealed  it  to  him  before  his  Execution,  and  how  the  Duke  also
rejected  the  Information  that  was  sent  him  by  the  King 1476.

WHILST  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  pushing  on  the  siege  of
Nancy  (so  unfortunately  for  himself,  his  subjects,  and  many
others  who  were  not  at  all  concerned  in  his  quarrel),  many
of  his  own  party  began  to  enter  into  a  conspiracy  against
him,  and  new  enemies,  as  you  have  heard,  surrounded  and
invaded  him  on  all  sides.  Among  the  rest  there  was  the
Count  Nicolo  Campobasso,  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  who
had  been  banished  from  thence  for  espousing  the  interest  of
the  house  of  Anjou*,  and  whom,  after  the  death  of  Nicholas,
Duke  of  Calabria,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  entertained  in
his  service,  with  several  other  of  the  Duke  of  Calabria's  ser-
vants. This  count  was  very  poor,  both  in  money  and  lands ;
at  his  first  coming  to  him,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  gave
him  40,000  ducats  in  ready  money,  to  raise  a  troop  in
Italy,  which  was  to  consist  of  400  lances,  and  to  be  com-
manded and  paid  by  himself.  From  that  very  moment,
as  I  said  before,  he  began  to  form  designs  against  the  life  of
his  master,  and  continued  to  carry  on  his  secret  practices  to
the  time  of  which  I  am  now  speaking  ;  for,  finding  his
master's  power  declining,  he  began  to  practise  underhand
with  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  and  such  of  the  king's  officers
and  servants  in  Champagne  as  were  not  far  from  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  army.  His  first  proposal  to  the  Duke  of

*  The  pretensions  of  the  house  of  Anjou  to  the  kingdom  of  Naples
date  from  the  will  of  Joan  L,  Queen  of  Naples,  made  on  the  23rd  o  f
June,  1380,  in  favour  of  Louis  L,  Duke  of  Anjou,  and  brother  of  King
Charles  VL  of  France.

Y  3


326  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1476.

Lorraine  was,  to  delay  the  siege  of  Nancy,  by  not  taking  care
to  provide  a  sufficient  quantity  of  provisions  and  ammu-
nition, so  that  the  army  would  be  unable  to  carry  it  on  for
want  of  necessaries ;  and,  indeed,  it  was  no  hard  matter  for
him  to  do  this,  for  he  was  entrusted  with  this  charge,  and  had
the  greatest  influence  with  the  duke  his  master.  With  our
officers  he  dealt  more  freely,  and  promised  to  take  or  kill
the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  provided  he  were  continued  in  the
command  of  his  400  lances  upon  the  same  footing  as  before,
and  had  20,000  crowns  and  a  good  county  in  France
besides.

Whilst  he  was  driving  his  bargains  after  this  manner,
several  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine's  officers  attempted  to  throw
themselves  into  the  town  ;  some  of  them  got  in,  but  others
were  taken,  and  among  the  rest  one  Cifron*,  a  gentleman
of  Provence,  who  had  managed  the  whole  affair  between
Campobasso  and  the  Duke  of  Lorraine.  The  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy immediately  commanded  this  Cifron  to  be  hanged,
affirming  that  when  a  prince  had  once  invested  a  town,  and
erected  batteries  to  play  upon  it,  if  any  endeavoured  to  re-
inforce and  strengthen  the  garrison,  they  were  condemned
to  death  by  the  laws  of  war.  However,  this  was  not
practised  in  our  wars,  which,  in  other  respects,  are  much
more  cruel  than  those  of  Italy  or  Spain,  where  that
custom  prevails.  But,  right  or  wrong,  this  gentleman  was
to  die  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  express  order.  The  gen-
tleman, finding  that  his  death  was  inevitable,  sent  to  ac-
quaint the  duke  that,  if  he  pleased  but  to  admit  him  to  his
presence,  he  would  make  a  discovery  of  something  that
nearly  concerned  his  person.  Some  gentlemen  who  heard
his  proposal,  brought  the  news  of  it  to  the  duke  at  a  time
when  the  Count  of  Campobasso  was  with  him,  either  by
accident,  or  else  on  purpose,  having  intelligence  that  Cifron
was  taken,  and  fearing  he  would  discover  all  he  knew ;  for
he  knew  the  whole  intrigue  from  one  end  to  the  other,  and
that  was  the  secret  he  would  have  discovered  to  the  duke.

The  duke  answered  those  that  brought  him  this  message,
that  it  was  only  an  artifice  to  gain  time,  and  that  if  he  had
anything  to  discover,  he  might  tell  it  to  them.  The  Count

*  Saffron  de  Bachier,  councillor  and  steward  to  King  Rene.


1476.]  EXECUTION  OF CIFROX.  327

of  Campobasso  highly  applauded  this  answer,  there  being
only  himself,  who  was  the  chief  commander  in  the  army,
and  a  secretary  that  was  writing,  then  present.  The  prisoner
sent  word  again,  that  he  could  discover  it  to  nobody  but  the
duke  himself;  upon  which  the  duke  ordered  him  to  be  car-
ried to  execution  immediately,  and  his  orders  were  obeyed.
As  he  was  going  to  the  place  of  execution.  Cifron  entreated
several  to  intercede  with  the  duke  to  save  his  life,  and  he  would
discover  a  secret  that  was  of  greater  importance  to  him  than  the
best  province  in  his  dominions.  Several  of  his  acquaintance  had
compassion  on  him,  and  went  to  desire  the  duke  that,  for  their
sake,  he  would  vouchsafe  to  admit  him  into  his  presence ;  but  this
treacherous  count  stood  at  the  door  of  the  wooden  house  in
which  the  duke  lodged,  refused  them  entrance,  and  told  them,
"  The  duke  commands  that  he  be  immediately  executed,"  *
and  sent  messengers  on  purpose  to  hasten  the  provost ;  so
that  finally  poor  Cifron  was  hanged,  to  the  unspeakable  pre-
judice of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  for  whom  it  had  been
much  better  to  have  treated  this  unfortunate  gentleman
with  more  humanity,  and  heard  what  he  had  to  say ;  for
then,  perhaps,  he  might  have  been  alive  to  this  day,  and
his  house  in  a  more  flourishing  condition,  considering  what
occurrences  have  happened  since  in  this  kingdom.

But  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  God  had  otherwise
ordained  it,  as  a  punishment  for  his  late  disloyalty  to  the
Count  of  St.  Paul,  Constable  of  France,  of  which  you  have
heard  elsewhere  in  these  Memoirs ;  how  he  seized  upon  his
person,  contrary  to  his  solemn  promise  and  engagement,
delivered  him  to  the  king  to  be  put  to  death,  and  sent  all  his
letters  and  contracts  to  serve  as  an  evidence  against  him  at
his  trial.  And  though  the  duke  had  just  reason  to  bear  a
mortal  hatred  against  the  constable,  and  to  pursue  him  even  to
death,  yet  he  should  have  done  it  without  breaking  his  faith;
nor  can  all  the  reasons  that  could  be  alleged  in  this  case
extenuate  the  crime,  or  cover  the  dishonour  that  will  always
be  a  stain  and  blot  on  the  duke's  character ;  for  notwith-


*  According  to  the  Chronicle  of  Lorraine,  Campobasso  acted  in  just
the  opposite  way.  He  undertook  the  defence  of  Suffron  so  strenuously
that  the  duke,  "  who  was  armed,  and  had  his  gauntlets  on,  raised  hia
hand,  and  knocked  the  count  down."  Calmet,  vii.  118.

T  4


328  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1476.

standing  the  safe-conduct  and  protection  that  he  granted  the
constable,  he  yet  seized  upon  him  afterwards,  and  sold  him
for  covetousness,  not  only  to  obtain  the  town  of  St.  Qaentin
and  other  fortresses,  inheritances  and  moveables  belonging  to
the  constable,  but  also  in  the  hope  of  taking  Nancy  the  first
time  he  besieged  it;  for  after  many  excuses  and  dissimula-
tions he  delivered  up  the  constable,  for  fear  that  the  king's
army  in  Champagne  might  interrupt  his  enterprise ;  his
majesty  having  threatened  to  do  so  by  his  ambassadors,
unless  he  should  perform  his  articles,  by  which  the  first  that
took  the  constable  was  obliged  to  deliver  him  up  within
eight  days,  or  to  see  him  executed  himself.  But  the  duke
had  deferred  his  surrender  for  several  days  longer  than  was
agreed  upon  between  them  ;  and  the  fear  of  being  called  to
account  for  this,  and  of  being  interrupted  in  the  siege  of
Nancy,  prevailed  with  him  to  deliver  up  the  constable,  as
you  have  heard.

And  it  is  worthy  of  our  observation,  that  as,  in  his  first
siege  of  Nancy,  he  was  guilty  of  that  dishonourable  action
towards  the  constable ;  and  in  his  second,  he  ordered  Cifron
to  be  hanged  (for  he  would  not  hear  him,  like  a  person
whose  understanding  was  infatuated,  and  his  ears  stopped  to
his  own  ruin)  —  so,  in  the  same  place  he  was  deceived  and
betrayed  himself  by  the  very  person  in  whom  he  reposed
most  confidence  (and  not  altogether  unjustly,  if  we  reflect
upon  what  has  been  said  before),  both  in  regard  to  the  con-
stable and  Nancy.  But  the  determination  of  such  events
depends  only  upon  God ;  and  I  have  given  my  opinion  only
to  illustrate  my  proposition,  that  a  good  prince  ought  never
to  consent  to  such  a  base  and  ignominious  action,  whatso-
ever plausible  reasons  may  be  urged  in  vindication  of  it ;
for  it  often  happens  that  those  who  give  their  advice  in  such
an  affair  do  it  either  out  of  flattery,  or  fear  of  contradicting
their  prince,  though,  when  the  thing  is  done,  they  are
heartily  sorry  for  it,  knowing  how  liable  they  are  to  be
punished  in  this  world  and  the  next ;  however,  such  coun-
sellors as  these  are  better  far  off,  than  near  any  prince.

Thus  you  have  seen  how  God,  the  sole  Governor  of  human
affairs,  raised  up  the  Count  of  Campobasso  to  be  the  instru-
ment of  His  vengeance  in  the  case  of  the  constable,  in  the
same  place,  and  after  the  same  manner,  but  with  more  cir-


1476.] GENEROUS  CONDUCT  OP  THE  KING. 329

cumstances  of  cruelty  ;  for  he  betrayed  the  very  person  who
had  entertained  him  in  his  service  when  he  was  old,  poor,
and  friendless,  and  had  given  him  an  annual  sum  of
10,000  ducats,  with  which  to  pay  his  soldiers,  besides
other  posts  of  great  advantage.  And,  when  he  first
began  his  conspiracy  he  was  on  his  journey  into  Italy  with
40,000  ducats  to  raise  his  regiment ;  and  yet,  in  that  very
journey,  he  made  overtures  in  two  several  places,  first,
to  a  physician  at  Lyons,  called  Simon  of  Pavia,  next,  to
another  person  in  Savoy,  as  you  have  already  heard  ;  and  at
his  return  with  his  regiment,  being  quartered  in  certain
small  towns  in  the  county  of  Marie  in  Lannois,  he  fell  to  his
old  practices,  and  offered  to  deliver  up  all  the  towns  he  held;
or,  if  that  were  not  sufficient,  if  the  king  would  but  face  his
master,  and  pretend  to  give  him  battle,  when  they  were
drawn  up,  and  ready  to  engage,  upon  a  signal  to  be  agreed
on  between  the  king  and  him,  he  would  come  over  to  him
and  join  his  majesty's  army  with  the  troops  under  his  com-'
mand  ;  but  the  king  was  not  pleased  with  this  last  overture
by  any  means.  He  offered,  likewise,  the  first  time  his  master
lay  in  the  field,  either  to  take  him  prisoner,  or  kill  him,  as
he  was  reviewing  his  army;  and  indeed  he  might  easily  have
done  it ;  for  the  duke's  custom  was,  as  soon  as  he  was  alighted
from  his  horse,  at  the  place  where  his  army  was  to
encamp,  to  pull  off  the  rest  of  his  armour,  and  with  his
cuirass  only,  to  mount  upon  a  little  palfrey,  and,  attended
only  by  eight  or  ten  archers  on  foot,  or  two  or  three  gentle-
men of  his  bedchamber,  to  ride  about  the  army,  and  see  that
it  was  strongly  enclosed ;  so  that  with  a  small  party  of  ten
horse,  the  count  might  have  performed  this  execrable  action
without  much  difficulty.  The  king,  observing  the  restless
malice  of  this  man  against  his  master,  and  that  he  was  con-
spiring against  him  even  during  the  time  of  the  truce
between  them,  and  being  not  well  informed  of  the  object  of
these  overtures,  resolved  upon  showing  a  singular  piece
of  friendship  and  generosity  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and
sent  him  in  writing,  by  the  Lord  of  Contay  (whom  I  have  so
often  mentioned  in  these  Memoirs),  the  whole  progress  of
the  count's  conspiracy.  I  was  present  at  the  delivery  of  the
letter?,  and  I  am  sure  the  Lord  of  Contay  acquitted  himself
faithfully  to  his  master  ;  but  the  duke  would  give  no  credit


330  THE  MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES.  [1477.

to  his  information,  and  said,  that  if  there  was  any  truth  in  it,
the  king  would  never  have  communicated  it.  This  was  long
before  the  duke's  arrival  before  Nancy,  and  I  verily  believe
he  never  took  any  notice  of  it  to  the  count,  for  he  continued
his  old  practices  afterwards.


CH.  VTI. — How  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  with  a  powerful  Army  of  Germans
took  the  field,  and  encamped  at  St.  Nicholas,  whilst  the  Duke  of
Burgundy  lay  before  Nancy  ;  and  how  the  King  of  Portugal,  who  was
in  France  at  that  time,  paid  a  visit  to  the  Duke  in  his  Camp  before
that  Town.— 1477.

BUT  now  to  proceed  with  our  principal  subject.  You
must  know  that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  besieged  Nancy
in  the  depth  of  winter,  with  a  small  army  which  was  ill
provided  and  ill  paid.  Several  of  his  officers  had  entered
into  a  conspiracy  against  him,  and  there  was  a  general
mutiny  among  the  common  soldiers,  who  censured  and
despised  all  his  enterprises;  which,  as  I  have  observed  at
large  before,  is  the  common  fate  in  times  of  adversity ;  but
nobody  practised  against  his  person  and  dominions  except
the  Count  of  Campobasso,  for  his  subjects  were  all  loyal
to  him.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  being  in  this  miserable
condition,  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  treated  with  the  old  and
new  allies*  (whom  I  have  mentioned  before)  for  a  supply  of
troops  to  enable  him  to  give  the  duke  battle,  and  raise  the
siege  of  Nancy.  They  all  readily  consented,  and  every  town
furnished  him  with  a  body  of  troops,  so  that  now  his  only
want  was  money  for  their  subsistence.  The  king  by  his
ambassadors  in  Switzerland  encouraged  him  extremely  in
this  enterprise,  and  remitted  him  400,000  francs  to  pay
his  Swiss :  and  the  Lord  of  Craon,  the  king's  lieu-

*  Oliver  de  laMarche  (ii.  420.)  also  states  that  "the  Duke  of  Lorraine
intrigued  with  the  Swiss  to  induce  them  to  come  to  Nancy;  and  the
King  of  France  secretly  furnished  him  with  money  to  obtain  their  assist-
ance, that  they  might  do  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  that  which  he  did
not  dare  to  undertake  himself."


1477.]  DESIGNS OF THE KIXG OP PORTUGAL.  331

tenant  in  Champagne,  was  quartered  in  Barrois  with
a  body  of  700  or  800  lances  and  frank-archers,  com-
manded by  experienced  officers.  The  Duke  of  Lorraine,
by  help  of  the  king's  favour  and  money,  assembled  a  good
body  of  Swiss,  both  horse  and  foot ;  for,  besides  the  troops
that  were  in  his  own  pay,  they  furnished  him  with  some  at
their  own  expense.  He  had  also  many  French  volunteers,
and  the  king's  army  (as  you  have  already  heard)  was
quartered  in  Barrois,  not  with  a  design  to  commit  any  act  of
hostility,  but  only  to  wait  the  issue  of  a  battle,  which  was
every  day  expected ;  for  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  had  marched
with  his  Germans  to  St.  Nicholas*,  not  far  from  Nancy.

The  King  of  Portugal  J  had  now  been  in  France  for  nine
months  or  thereabouts  ;  for  our  king,  being  in  an  alliance
with  him  against  the  King  of  Castile  |,  the  King  of  Portugal
flattered  himself  that  he  would  assist  him  with  a  powerful
army  to  make  war  upon  his  adversary  on  the  side  of  Biscay
or  Navarre,  for  he  had  several  towns  in  Castile,  upon  the
frontiers  of  Portugal,  and  some  upon  our  borders,  as  the
Castle  of  Burgos,  and  others  ;  so  that  I  am  of  opinion,  if  our
king  had  assisted  him,  as  he  was  sometimes  inclined  to  do,
the  King  of  Portugal  might  have  succeeded  in  his  designs ;
but,  by  degrees,  the  king's  mind  changed,  and  the  King  of
Portugal  was  amused  Avith  fair  words,  and  fed  with  hopes,
for  a  year  or  more.

In  the  meantime  the  King  of  Portugal's  affairs  in  Castile
began  to  decline :  for,  when  he  came  into  France,  almost  all
the  nobility  of  Castile  were  in  his  interest ;  but  his  long
stay  in  France  tired  their  patience,  and  they  began  to  grow
weary,  and  made  their  peace  with  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,

*  "  On  Saturday,  the  4th  of  January,  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  arrived  at
St.  Nicholas  with  10,500  Swiss."  Molinet,  i.  231.

•f  Alphonso  V.,  surnamed  the  African,  was  the  son  of  Duarte  I.,  King
of  Portugal,  and  Eleanor  of  Arragon.  He  was  born  in  1432,  and  suc-
ceeded his  father  in  1438.  He  married  his  cousin  Isabella,  the  daughter
of  Don  Pedro  ;  and  he  died  on  the  28th  of  August,  1481.  He  was  the
first  King  of  Portugal  who  possessed  a  private  library.

|  Ferdinand  V.,  surnamed  the  Catholic,  was  the  son  of  John,  King  of
Navarre  and  Arragon,  and  Juana  Henriquez.  He  was  born  on  the  10th
of  March,  1452,  and  ascended  the  throne  of  Spain  in  1474.  His  first
wife  was  the  celebrated  Isabella  of  Castile.  He  died  on  the  23rd  of
January,  1516.


332  THE  MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMBINES.  [1477-

who  now  reign.  The  King  of  France  indeed  had  promised
to  assist  him,  but  he  excused  himself  afterwards  upon
account  of  the  war  in  Lorraine,  pretending  that  if  the  Duke
of  Burgundy  prevailed,  he  feared  that  he  would  afterwards
invade  his  dominions.  The  King  of  Portugal,  who  was  a
very  good  and  just  prince,  took  a  fancy  to  pay  a  visit  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  his  cousin-german*,  and  to  try
whether  his  good  offices  could  effect  a  pacification  between
the  king  and  the  duke,  supposing  that  when  this  obstacle
was  removed,  the  king  would  certainly  assist  him  ;  for  he
was  ashamed  to  return  into  Portugal  or  Castile  without
having  been  successful  in  his  solicitations  at  our  court,
especially  after  coming  thither  in  so  imprudent  a  manner,
and  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  greatest  part  of  his
council.

With  this  design  the  King  of  Portugal  began  his  journey
towards  the  latter  end  of  the  winter,  and  being  arrived  at
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  camp  before  Nancy  f,  he  began  to
discourse  with  him  about  what  the  king  had  told  him  in
relation  to  a  peace  :  but  he  found  it  would  be  no  easy  matter
to  accommodate  things  between  them,  their  demands  ran  so
high  ;  and  therefore  he  stayed  but  two  days,  before  he  took
his  leave  of  his  cousin,  and  returned  to  Paris.  The  Duke  of
Burgundy  pressed  him  to  stay,  and  command  the  body  of
troops  that  were  to  defend  the  pass  at  Pont-a-Mousson,  near
Nancy,  for  he  had  received  intelligence  that  the  German
army  was  posted  at  St.  Nicholas.  The  King  of  Portugal
excused  himself,  by  saying  that  he  was  neither  armed  nor
provided  for  such  an  enterprise  ;  and  upon  this  he  returned
to  Paris,  Avhere  he  had  resided  so  long  already.  At  last  the
King  of  Portugal  grew  suspicious  of  the  King  of  France,
and  fancied  his  majesty  had  a  design  to  seize  on  him,  and
deliver  him  up  to  his  enemy  the  King  of  Castile.  Upon  the
strength  of  this  imagination  he  put  himself  into  a  disguise,
and  with  two  more  in  his  company,  resolved  to  go  to  Rome,
and  enter  some  religious  house  :  but  he  was  taken  in  that

*  The  mother  of  Duke  Charles,  Isabella  of  Portugal,  was  aunt  to  King
Alphonso  V.

•f  He  arrived  at  tha  camp  before  Nancy  on  the  29th  of  December,
lienglet,  ii.  221.


1477.] ESCAPE  OF  THE  KING  OP  PORTUGAL. 333

disguise  by  a  Norman  called  Robinetle  Beuf  *;  at  which  our
king  was  extremely  concerned,  and  being  ashamed  of  what
had  passed,  ordered  several  ships  to  be  equipped  on  the
coast  of  Normandy,  and  gave  the  command  of  them  to  Master
George  le  Grecf,  with  orders  to  conduct  him  safe  into  Por-
tugal, which  he  performed  accordingly.

The  occasion  of  his  war  against  the  King  of  Castile  was
in  favour  of  his  sister's  daughter  ^,  which  sister  was  wife  to
Don  Henry,  late  King  of  Castile  §,  and  had  a  beautiful
daughter  still  living  (but  unmarried),  in  Portugal :  but
Queen  Isabella  ||,  who  was  sister  to  the  said  King  Henry,
disputed  the  young  lady's  right  of  succession  to  the  crown  of
Castile,  pretending  she  was  illegitimate,  and  born  in  adul-
tery. Many  others  were  of  the  same  opinion,  objecting  im-
potence in  King  Henry,  and  proving  it  by  arguments,  which
for  certain  reasons  I  shall  here  omit.  However  this  may  be,
and  though  the  young  lady  was  born  in  wedlock,  and  under
the  veil  of  marriage,  yet  the  crown  of  Castile  was  enjoyed
by  Queen  Isabella  of  Castile,  and  her  husband  the  King  of
Arragon  and  Sicily,  who  now  reigns.  The  King  of  Por-
tugal was  very  ambitious  of  making  a  match  between  his
niece  and  our  King  Charles  VIIL,  who  is  now  reigning ;
and  indeed  that  was  the  great  design  of  his  journey  into

*  Kobinet  le  Beuf,  a  Norman  knight,  from  the  neighbourhood  of
Evreux,  was  valet  cle  chambre  to  Louis  XL  in  1466.  In  1471  he  was  ap-
pointed one  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  king's  household,  and  held  that  office
until  1488,  when  he  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Saint- Aubin-du-Cormier.

fin  the  letters  of  naturalization  granted  to  this  person  by  Louis  XL
in  1477,  he  is  designated  a?  "George  de  Bicipat,  surnamed  the  Greek,
Knight,  native  of  Greece,  Captain  of  our  great  ship  and  of  our  town  and
Castle  of  Touque,  and  our  well-beloved  and  trusty  councillor  and
chamberlain."  Pierre  de  Lailly  mentions  him  as  George  Paleologo  de
Bicipat.  In  previous  editions  of  Commines  he  is  erroneously  called  George
Leger.

f  Juana,  daughter  of  Henry  IV.,  King  of  Castile,  and  Juana,  Infanta
of  Portugal,  was  born  in  1462.  She  was  twice  betrothed,  first  to  the
Duke  of  Guienne,  and  afterwards  to  her  uncle,  Alphonso  V.  On  the
loth  of  November,  1480,  she  took  the  vows  in  the  convent  of  Santa
Clara  at  Santarem,  and  she  died  at  Alcacova  in  1530.

§  He  died  in  1474.

||  Isabella  of  Castile,  daughter  of  Juan  H  ,  and  Isabella  of  Portugal,
was  born  on  the  23rd  of  April,  1451.  In  14G9.  s':e  married  Ferdinand  the
Catholic,  King  of  Arragon,  and  she  died  oa  the  20th  of  November,!  504.


334  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477.

France,  which  turned  so  much  to  his  disadvantage,  for  not
long  after  his  return  into  Portugal  lie  died.  Wherefore  (as
I  have  already  observed  in  the  beginning  of  these  Memoirs),
it  highly  concerns  a  prince  to  be  very  careful  in  the  choice
of  persons  qualified  to  be  sent  on  embassies  to  foreign  courts  ;
for  if  those  ambassadors  that  came  to  our  king  from  the  King
of  Portugal  upon  the  above-mentioned  proposal  (at  which  I
was  present  by  deputation  from  our  king),  had  been  as  wise
as  they  ought,  they  would  have  informed  themselves  better
of  our  affairs  before  they  advised  their  master  to  undertake  a
journey  which  proved  so  disadvantageous  and  dishonourable
to  him.


CH.  VIII. — How  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  by  rejecting  the  Counsel  of
several  of  his  Officers,  was  defeated  and  slain  in  a  Battle  between  him
and  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  not  iarfrom  Nancy. — 1477.

I  COULD  willingly  have  omitted  this  relation  of  the  King  of
Portugal's  aifairs,  had  it  not  been  to  show,  that  one  prince
ought  not  rashly  to  put  himself  into  the  power  of  another,
nor  go  in  person  to  solicit  his  own  supplies.  But  to  pro-
ceed with  my  history : — The  King  of  Portugal  had  not  left
the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  camp  above  a  day,  before  the  Duke
of  Lorraine  and  his  army  of  Germans  broke  up  from  St.
Nicholas,  and  advanced  towards  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
with  a  resolution  to  give  him  battle.  The  Count  of  Cam-
pobasso  joined  them  that  very  day,  and  carried  off  with  him
about  eight  score  men-at-arms ;  and  it  grieved  him  much
that  he  could  do  his  master  no  greater  mischief.  The  gar-
rison of  Nancy  had  intelligence  of  his  design,  which  in  some
measure  encouraged  them  to  hold  out ;  besides,  another
person*  had  got  over  the  works,  and  assured  them  of  relief,
otherwise  they  were  just  upon  surrendering,  and  would  have
capitulated  in  a  little  time,  had  it  not  been  for  the  treachery
of  this  count;  but  God  had  determined  to  finish  this
mystery.

*  His  name  was  Thierry,  a  draper  in  the  town  of  Mirecourt. Calmer,
Vii.  122.


1477.]  OBSTINACY OF THE DUKE.  335

The  Duke  of  Burgundy,  having  intelligence  of  the  ap-
proach of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine's  army,  called  a  kind  of
council,  contrary  to  his  custom,  for  generally  he  followed  his
own  will.  It  was  the  opinion  of  most  of  his  officers  that  his
best  way  would  be  to  retire  to  Pont-a-Mousson,  which  was
not  far  off,  and  dispose  his  army  in  the  towns  about  Nancy ;
affirming,  that  as  soon  as  the  Germans  had  thrown  a  supply
of  men  and  provisions  into  Nancy,  they  would  march  off
again  ;  and  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  being  in  great  want  of
money,  it  would  be  a  great  while  before  he  would  be  able  to
assemble  such  an  army  again;  and  that  their  supplies  of
provisions  could  not  be  so  great  but  before  half  the  winter
•was  over,  they  would  be  in  the  same  straits  as  they  were
now  ;  and  that  in  the  meantime  the  duke  might  raise  more
forces,  and  recruit  himself :  for  I  have  been  told  by  those
who  ought  to  know  best,  that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
army  did  not  then  consist  of  full  4000  men*,  and  of
that  number  not  above  1200  were  in  a  condition  to  fight.
Money  he  did  not  want ;  for  in  the  Castle  of  Luxem-
bourg (which  was  not  far  off),  there  were  in  ready  cash  450,000
crowns,  which  would  have  raised  men  enough.  But  God
was  not  so  merciful  to  him  as  to  permit  him  to  take  this
wise  counsel,  or  discern  the  vast  multitude  of  enemies
who  on  eveiy  side  surrounded  him.  Therefore  he  chose
the  worst  plan,  and  like  a  rash  and  inconsiderate  madman,
resolved  to  try  his  fortune,  and  engage  the  enemy  with  his
weak  and  shattered  army  f,  notwithstanding  the  Duke  of
Lorraine  had  a  numerous  force  of  Germans,  and  the  king's
army  was  not  far  off.

*  Oliver  de  La  llarche  (ii.  420.)  says  he  had  not  2000  fighting
men.

f  Before  the  battle,  says  Molinet  (i.  229.)  he  inquired  how  many  men
there  were  in  his  army.  "  The  Count  of  Chimay,  a  very  eloquent,  wise,
and  discreet  man,  told  him  in  gentle  and  amiable  language,  that  the
captains  had  made  inquiries,  and  that  there  were  not  more  than  3000
men  in  a  condition  to  fight.  '  I  deny  what  you  say,'  replied  the
duke,  in  great  anger  ;  '  but  if  I  were  to  fight  alone  I  would  fight  all  the
same.  You  are  what  you  are,  and  show  clearly  that  you  are  sprung
from  the  house  of  Vaudemont.'  The  count  prudently  and  gently  re-
plied, that  his  deeds  should  show  that  he  was  sprung  from  an  honourable
line,  and  that,  although  he  saw  no  chance  of  overcoming  the  enemy,  he
would  remain  faithful  to  the  duke."


336  THE MEMOIRS OF  PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1477.

As  soon  as  the  Count  of  Campobasso  arrived  in  the  Duke
of  Lorraine's  army,  the  Germans  sent  him  word  to  leave  the
camp  immediately,  for  they  would  not  entertain  such  traitors
among  them.  Upon  which  message  he  retired  with  his
party  to  Conde*,  a  castle  and  passf  not  far  off,  where  he
fortified  himself  with  carts  and  other  things  as  well  as  he
could,  in  hopes,  that  if  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  were  routed,
he  might  have  an  opportunity  of  coming  in  for  a  share  of  the
plunder,  as  he  did  afterwards.  Nor  was  this  practice  with
the  Duke  of  Lorraine  the  most  execrable  action  that  Campo-
basso  was  guilty  of;  but,  before  he  left  the  army,  he  conspired
with  several  other  officers  (finding  it  was  impracticable  to
attempt  anything  against  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  person)
to  leave  him  just  as  they  came  to  the  charge ;  for,  at  that  time,
he  supposed  it  would  put  the  army  into  the  greatest  terror
and  consternation  ;  and  if  the  duke  fled,  he  was  sure  he
could  not  escape  alive,  for  he  had  ordered  thirteen  or
fourteen  sure  men,  some  to  run  as  soon  as  the  Germans
came  up  to  charge  them,  and  others  to  watch  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  and  kill  him  in  the  rout;  which  was  well  enough
contrived,  for  I  myself  have  seen  two  or  three  of  those
who  were  thus  employed  to  kill  the  duke.  Having  thus
settled  his  conspiracy  at  home,  he  went  over  to  the  Duke  of
Lorraine  upon  the  approach  of  the  German  army ;  but,
finding  they  would  not  entertain  him,  he  retired  to  Conde,
as  I  said  before.

The  German  army  marched  forward,  and  with  them  a
considerable  body  of  French  horse,  whom  the  king  had  given
leave  to  be  present  in  that  action.  Several  parties  lay  in
ambush  not  far  off,  that  if  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  were
routed,  they  might  surprise  some  person  of  quality,  or  take
some  considerable  booty.  By  this  every  one  may  see  into
what  a  deplorable  condition  this  poor  duke  had  brought
himself,  by  his  contempt  of  good  counsel.  Both  armies
being  joined,  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  forces,  which  had  been
twice  beaten  before,  and  were  weak  and  ill-provided  besides,
were  quickly  broken  and  entirely  defeated.  Many  saved

*  Conde-Northcn,  or  Contghen,  in  the  arrondissement  of  Metz,  and
department  of  Moselle.

f  At  the  Pont  de  la  Bussiere,  half  a  league  from  Nancy.  Molinet,  i.
233.


1477.]  DEATH OF CHARLES THE BOLD.  337

themselves  by  flight ;  the  rest  were  either  taken  or  killed  *  ;
and  among  them  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  himself  was  killed
on  the  spot.f  Not  having  been  in  the  battle  myself,  I  will
say  nothing  of  the  manner  of  his  death  ;  but  I  was  told  by
some,  that  they  saw  him  beaten  down,  but,  being  prisoners
themselves,  were  not  able  to  assist  him ;  yet,  whilst  they
were  in  sight,  he  was  not  killed,  but  a  great  body  of
men  coming  that  way  afterwards,  they  killed  and  stripped
him  in  the  throng,  not  knowing  who  he  was.  This  battle
was  fought  on  the  5th  of  January,  1476,  upon  the  eve  of
Twelfth-day.


The  Epitaph  of  Charles,  the  last  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who
was  killed  before  Nancy,  in  Lorraine,  in  the  year  1476,
on  Twelfth-eve.

CAKOLTJS  hoc  busto  Burgnndae  gloria  gentis

Conditur,  Europae  qui  fuit  ante  timor.
Ganda  rebellatrix  hoc  plebs  domitore,  cremata

Post  patrire  leges  perpete  pressa  j  ugo  est.
Nee  minus  hunc  sensit  tellus  Leodina  cruentum,

Cum  ferro  et  flammis  urbs  populata  fuit.
Monte  sub  heritio  Francas  cum  rege  cohorte?,

In  pavidam  valido  truserat  ense  fugam.
Hostibus  expulsis  Eduardum  in  regna  locavit

Anglica,  primeevo  restituens  solio.
Bella  ducum,  regumque,  et  Coasaris  omnia  spernens

Totus  in  effuso  sanguine  laetus  erat.

*  "  la  that  battle  were  slain,  among  others,  the  Lord  of  Bievre,  the
Lord  of  Verun,  and  the  Lord  of  Contay ;  and  among  the  prisoners
were  the  Lord  Anthony,  Bastard  of  Burgundy,  and  his  brother  Baldwin  ;
Philip  de  Croy,  Count  of  Chimay  ;  the  Count  of  Nassau,  and  the  Count
of  Challane ;  the  Lord  Josse  de  Lalain,  Sir  Oliver  de  la  Marche,  the
Lord  of  Croy,  the  eldest  son  of  the  Lord  of  Contay,  the  eldest  sou  of  the
Lord  of  Montagu,  and  other  noblemen."  Molinet,  i.  236.

•f "  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  knocked  off  his  black  horse,  and  fell
into  a  ditch  near  St.  Jean."  Lenglet,  iii.  493.  "A  knight  named
Claude  de  Bausemont,  came  up  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  gave
him  a  lance  thrust ;  others  then  charged  him  suddenly,  and  he  was  put  to
death  in  a  meadow  near  St.  Jean."  Calmet,  vii.  133.  "A  page  came

VOL. I.  Z


338  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1477.

Denique  dura  solitis  fidit  temerarius  armis,

Atque  Lotharingo  cum  duce  bella  movet,
Sanguineam  vomuit  media  inter  praelia  vitam,

Aureaque  hostili  vellera  liquit  humo.
Ergo  triumphator  longaeva  in  ssecla  renatus,

Palmnm  de  tanto  principe  victor  habet.
0  tibi  qui  terras  quassisti  (Carole)  coelum

Det  Deus,  et  spretas  antea  pacis  opes.
Nunc  die  Nanceios  cernens  ex  sethere  muros,

A  clemente  ferox  hoste  sepulchror  ibi.
Discite  terrenis  quid  sit  confidere  rebus,

Plic  toties  victor  denique  victus  adest.

At  the  foot  of  the  tomb  are  engraven  the  following  verses :

Dux  jacet  hie  Carolus  Belgarum  ilia  ignea  virtus

Cui  Mavors  dederat  bella  gerenda  pater :
Quern  timuit  subditis  animosus  Gallus  in  armis,

Cuique  Alemannorum  terga  dedere  duces,
Quique  animum  Hesperias  bellis  agitabat  in  urbes,

Sed  subito  invertit  sors  temulenta  viam  :
Nam  cum  Ranerium  bello  sibi  provocat  hostem,

Occubuit  fuso  milite  stratus  humi :
Et  ne  tanta  viri  laus  intestata  jaceret,

Hoc  victor  victi  condidit  ossa  loco.

ECCE  LEO  CF.CTDIT,  IAM  PAX

QILESITA  VIGEBIT.

NOCTE  BEGUM  SUCCUBUIT

CABOLUS.


to  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  and  being  interrogated,  declared  plainly  that
he  had  seen  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  thrown  from  his  horse,  and  killed  in  a
certain  place  which  he  was  ready  to  point  out.  On  the  following  morn-
ing the  page,  with  many  notable  personages,  went  to  the  field,  and  found
the  body  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  quite  naked,  lying  on  the  ground
among  other  corpses  ;  and  he  had  received  three  mortal  wounds,  one  in
the  head  from  a  halberd,  which  clove  his  skull  in  two,  another  with  a
pike  in  the  groin,  and  a  third  in  the  buttock."  Molinet,  i.  234.  By
enter  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  the  body  was  buried  with  great  magnifi-
cence in  St.  George's  Church  at  Nancy.


1477.] CHARACTER  OF  CHARLES  THE  BOLD. 339


Cn.  IX. — A  Digression  concerning  the  Virtues  of  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy, and  the  Time  oi  his  House's  Prosperity.

I  SA\V  a  seal-ring  of  his,  after  his  death,  at  Milan,  with  his
arms  cut  curiously  upon  a  sardonyx  that  I  have  often  seen
him  wear  in  a  riband  at  his  breast,  which  was  sold  at  Milan
for  two  ducats,  and  had  been  stolen  from  him  by  a  varlet
that  waited  on  him  in  his  chamber.  I  have  often  seen  the
duke  dressed  and  undressed  in  great  state  and  formality,  and
by  very  great  persons  ;  but,  at  his  last  hour,  all  this  pomp
and  magnificence  ceased,  and  both  he  and  his  family  perished
(as  you  have  heard  already)  on  the  very  spot  where  he  had
delivered  up  the  constable  not  long  before,  out  of  a  base  and
avaricious  motive ;  but  may  God  forgive  him !  I  have
known  him  a  powerful  and  honourable  prince,  in  as  great
esteem  and  as  much  courted  by  his  neighbours  (when  his
affairs  were  in  a  prosperous  condition),  as  any  prince  in
Europe,  and  perhaps  more  so ;  and  I  cannot  conceive  what
should  have  provoked  God  Almighty's  displeasure  so  highly
against  him,  unless  it  was  his  self-love  and  arrogance,  in
attributing  all  the  success  of  his  enterprises,  and  all  the
renown  he  ever  acquired,  to  his  own  wisdom  and  conduct,
without  ascribing  anything  to  God  :  yet,  to  speak  truth,  he
was  endowed  with  many  good  qualities.  No  prince  ever
had  a  greater  desire  to  entertain  young  noblemen  than  he  ;
or  was  more  careful  of  their  education.  His  presents  and
bounty  were  never  profuse  and  extravagant,  because  he  gave
to  many,  and  wished  everybody  should  taste  of  his  generosity.
No  prince  was  ever  more  easy  of  access  to  his  servants  and
subjects.  Whilst  I  was  in  his  service  he  was  never  cruel,
but  a  little  before  his  death  he  became  so,  which  was  an.
infallible  sign  of  the  shortness  of  his  life.  He  was  very
splendid  and  pompous  in  his  dress,  and  in  everything  else,
and,  indeed,  a  little  too  much.  He  paid  great  honours  to
all  ambassadors  and  foreigners,  and  entertained  them  nobly.
His  ambitious  desire  of  glory  was  insatiable,  and  it  was  that
which  more  than  any  other  motive  induced  him  to  engage
eternally  in  wars.  He  earnestly  desired  to  imitate  the  old
kings  and  heroes  of  antiquity,  who  are  still  so  much  talked

z  2


340  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMUTES. [1477.

of  in  the  world,  and his  courage  was  equal  to  that  of  any
prince  of  his  time.

But  all  his  designs  and  imaginations  were  vain,  and  turned
afterwards  to  his  own  dishonour  and  confusion,  for  it  is  the
conquerors  and  not  the  conquered  that  win  renown.  I  can-
not easily  determine  towards  whom  God  Almighty  showed
his  anger  most,  whether  towards  him  who  died  suddenly,
without  pain  or  sickness  in  the  field  of  battle,  or  towards  his
subjects,  who  never  enjoyed  peace  after  his  death,  but  were
continually  involved  in  wars  against  which  they  were  not
able  to  maintain  themselves,  upon  account  of  the  civil  dis-
sensions and  cruel  animosities  that  arose  among  them  ;  and
that  which  was  the  most  insupportable  was,  that  the  very
people  to  whom  they  were  now  indebted  for  their  defence
and  preservation,  were  the  Germans,  who  were  strangers,
and  not  long  since  had  been  their  enemies.  In  short,  after
the  duke's  death,  there  was  not  a  man  who  wished  them  to
prosper,  whoever  defended  them.  And  by  the  management
of  their  affairs,  their  understanding  seemed  to  be  as  much
infatuated  as  their  master's  was  just  before  his  death;  for
they  rejected  all  good  counsel,  and  pursued  such  methods  as
directly  tended  to  their  destruction ;  and  they  are  still  in
great  danger  of  a  relapse  into  calamity,  and  it  will  be  well
if  it  turn  not  in  the  end  to  their  utter  ruin.

I  am  partly  of  the  opinion  of  those  who  maintain  that  God
gives  princes,  as  He  in  His  wisdom  thinks  fit,  to  punish  or
chastise  their  subjects  :  and  He  disposes  the  affections  of  sub-
jects to  their  princes,  as  He  has  determined  to  exalt  or  depress
them.  Just  so  it  has  pleased  Him  to  deal  with  the  house
of  Burgundy  ;  for  after  a  long  series  of  riches  and  prosperity,
and  six-score  years'*  peace  under  three  illustrious  princes,
predecessors  to  Duke  Charles  (all  of  them  of  great  prudence
and  discretion),  it  pleased  God  to  send  this  Duke  Charles,
who  continually  involved  them  in  bloody  wars,  as  well  winter
as  summer,  to  their  great  affliction  and  expense,  in  which
most  of  their  richest  and  stoutest  men  were  either  killed  or
taken  prisoners.  Their  misfortunes  began  at  the  siege  of
Nuz,  and  continued  for  three  or  four  battles  successively,  to

*  A  hundred  and  four  years  only,  as  Philip  the  Bold  was  created
Dirks  of  Burgundy  in  1363,  and  Philip  the  Good  died  in  1467.


1477.]  FORMER  PROSPERITY OF BURGUNDY.  341

the  very  hour  of  his  death  ;  so  much  so,  that  at  the  last,  the
whole  strength  of  the  country  was  destroyed,  and  all  were
killed  or  taken  prisoners  who  had  any  zeal  or  affection  for
the  house  of  Burgundy,  or  power  to  defend  the  state  and
dignity  of  that  family ;  so  that  in  a  manner  their  losses
equalled,  if  they  did  not  overbalance,  their  former  prosperity ;
for  as  I  had  seen  these  princes  puissant,  rich  and  honourable,
so  it  fared  with  their  subjects :  for  I  think  I  have  seen  and
known  the  greatest  part  of  Europe,  yet  I  never  knew  any
province  or  country,  though  of  a  larger  extent,  so  abounding
in  money  *,  so  extravagantly  fine  in  their  furniture,  so  sump-
tuous in  their  buildings,  so  profu?e  in  their  expenses,  so  luxu-
rious in  their  feasts  and  entertainments,  and  so  prodigal  in
all  respects,  as  the  subjects  of  these  princes  in  my  time  ;  and
if  any  think  I  have  exaggerated,  others  who  lived  in  my  time,
will  be  of  opinion  that  I  have  rather  said  too  little.

But  it  pleased  God,  at  one  blow,  to  subvert  this  great  and
sumptuous  edifice,  and  ruin  this  powerful  and  illustrious
family,  which  had  maintained  and  bred  up  so  many  brave
men,  and  had  acquired  such  mighty  honour  and  renown  far
and  near,  by  so  many  victories  and  successful  enterprises,
as  none  of  all  its  neighbouring  states  could  pretend  to  boast
of.  A  hundred  and  twenty  years  it  continued  in  this
flourishing  condition,  by  the  grace  of  God  ;  all  its  neighbours
having,  in  the  meantime,  been  involved  in  troubles  and
commotions,  and  all  of  them  applying  to  it  for  succour  or
protection  :  to  wit,  France,  England,  and  Spain,  as  you
have  seen  by  experience  of  our  master  the  King  of  France,
who  in  his  minority,  and  during  the  reign  of  Charles  VII.,
his  father,  retired  to  this  court,  where  he  lived  six  years,  and
was  nobly  entertained  all  that  time  by  Duke  Philip  the
Good.  Out  of  England  I  saw  there  also  two  of  King  Ed-
ward's brothers,  the  Dukes  of  Clarence  and  Gloucester  (the
last  of  whom  was  afterwards  called  King  Richard  the  Third);
and  of  the  house  of  Lancaster,  the  whole  family  or  very
near,  with  all  their  party.  In  short,  I  have  seen  this  family

*  "  Philip  the  Good  left  his  son  400,000  crowns  of  gold  in  cash,  72,000
marks  of  silver  in  plate,  not  to  mention  rich  tapestries,  splendid  jewels,
gold  plate  adorned  with  precious  stones,  and  his  large  and  valuable
library ;  besides  which,  he  died  worth  2,000,000  gold  pieces  in  furniture
alone."  Oliver  de  la  Marche,  ii.  267.

z  3


342  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COM3IIXES. [1477.

in  all  respects  the  most  flourishing  and  celebrated  of  any  in
Christendom  :  and  then,  in  a  short  space  of  time,  it  was
quite  ruined  and  turned  upside  down,  and  left  the  most
desolate  and  miserable  of  any  house  in  Europe,  as  regards
both  prince  and  subjects.  Such  changes  and  revolutions  of
states  and  kingdoms,  God  in  His  providence  has  wrought
before  we  were  born,  and  will  do  again  when  we  are  dead  ;
for  this  is  a  certain  maxim,  that  the  prosperity  or  adversity
of  princes  depends  wholly  on  His  Divine  disposal.


CH.  X. — How  the  King  of  France  received  intelligence  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  last  Defeat,  and  managed  his  Affairs  after  the  Duke's
Death. — 1477.


BUT  to  proceed  with  my  history.  The  king  having  esta-
blished posts  *  in  all  parts  of  his  kingdom  (which  before
never  had  been  done),  it  was  not  long  ere  he  received  the
news  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  defeat ;  and  he  was  in
hourly  expectation  of  the  report,  for  letters  of  advice  had
reached  him  before,  importing,  that  the  German  army  was
advancing  towards  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's,  and  that  a
battle  was  expected  between  them.  Upon  which  many
persons  kept  their  ears  open  for  the  news,  in  order  to  carry  it
to  the  king.  For  his  custom  was  to  reward  liberally  any
person  who  brought  him  the  first  tidings  of  any  news  of
importance,  and  to  remember  the  messenger  besides.  His
majesty  also  took  great  delight  in  talking  of  it  before  it
arrived,  and  would  say,  "  I  will  give  so  much  to  any  man
who  first  brings  me  such  and  such  news."  The  Lord  du
Bouchage  and  I  being  together,  happened  to  receive  the
first  news  of  the  battle  of  Morat,  and  we  went  with  it
to  the  king,  who  gave  each  of  us  200  marks  of  silver.
The  Lord  du  Lude,  who  lay  without  the  Plessis,  had  the
first  news  of  the  arrival  of  the  courier,  with  the  letters


*  The  ordinance  instituting  this  postal  service  is  dated  at  Luxies  (now
Lucheux)  near  Doullens,  on  the  19th  day  of  June,  1464. Duclos,  v.  2:20.


1477.]  THE  KING'S  DESIGNS.  343

concerning  the  battle  of  Nancy  ;  he  commanded  the  courier
to  deliver  him  the  packet,  and  as  he  was  a  great  favourite  of
the  king's,  he  durst  not  refuse  him.  By  break  of  day  the
next  morning,  the  Lord  du  Lude  knocked  at  the  door  next
to  the  king's  chamber,  and  it  being  opened,  he  delivered  in,
the  packet  from  the  Lord  of  Craon  and  other  officers.  But
none  of  the  first  letters  gave  any  certainty  of  the  duke's
death;  they  only  stated  that  he  was  seen  to  run  away,  and
that  it  was  supposed  he  had  made  his  escape.

The  king  was  at  first  so  transported  with  joy  at  the  news,
he  scarce  knew  how  to  behave  himself:  however,  his  majesty
was  still  in  some  perplexity.  On  one  hand,  he  was  afraid
that  if  the  duke  should  be  taken  prisoner  by  the  Germans,
by  means  of  his  money,  of  which  he  had  great  store,  he
would  make  some  composition  with  them.  On  the  other,  he
was  doubtful,  if  the  duke  had  made  his  escape,  though  defeated
for  the  third  time,  whether  he  should  seize  upon  his  towns  in
Burgundy  or  not*;  which  he  judged  not  very  difficult  to
do,  since  most  of  the  brave  men  of  that,  country  had  been
slain  in  those  three  battles.  As  to  this  last  point,  he  came
to  this  resolution  (which  I  believe  few  were  acquainted  with
but  myself,)  that  if  the  duke  were  alive  and  well,  he  would
command  the  army  which  lay  ready  in  Champagne  and
Barrois  to  march  immediately  into  Burgundy,  and  seize
upon  the  whole  country  whilst  it  was  in  that  state  of  terror
and  consternation  ;  and  when  he  was  in  possession  of  it,  he

*  The  king's  first  design  was  to  seize  them,  as  is  proved  by  the  sub-
joined letter,  addressed  to  the  Lord  of  Craon  :  —  "  My  Lord  Count,  my
Friend — I  have  received  your  letters,  and  heard  the  good  news  which  you
tell  me,  for  which  I  thank  you  as  much  as  I  am  able.  Now  it  is  time  to
employ  all  your  five  senses  so  as  to  get  the  duchy  and  county  of  Bur-
gundy into  my  hands ;  and  with  that  view,  with  your  band  and  the
Governor  of  Champagne  (if  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  is  really  dead)  throw
yourself  into  that  country,  and  as  you  love  me,  take  care  that  your  men,
of  war  keep  as  good  order  as  if  you  were  in  Paris,  and  tell  them  that  I  wish
to  treat  them  and  keep  them  better  than  any  of  my  own  kingdom  ;  and
that  with  regard  to  our  god-daughter,  I  intend  to  complete  the  marriage
which  I  have  already  negotiated  between  the  daupnln  and  her.  My
lord  count,  I  do  not  intend  that  you  should  enter  the  country  or  mention
what  I  have  stated  above,  unless  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  is  dead ;  and  in
that  case,  I  beg  you  to  serve  me  according  to  the  confidence  I  have  in
you.  Farewell.  Written  at  Plessis  du  Pare,  on  the  9th  of  January.
Signed  Louis,  and  countersigned  De  Chaumont."  Mohnet,  ii.  2.

z  4


344  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1477.

would  inform  the  duke,  that  the  seizure  he  had  made  was
only  to  preserve  it  for  him,  and  secure  it  against  the  Ger-
mans, because  it  was  held  under  the  sovereignty  of  the
crown  of  France,  and  therefore  he  was  unwilling  it  should
fall  into  their  hands  ;  and  whatever  he  had  taken  should  be
faithfully  restored :  and  truly,  I  am  of  opinion  his  majesty
would  have  done  it,  though  many  people  who  are  ignorant
of  the  motives  that  guided  the  king,  will  not  easily  believe
it.  But  this  resolution  was  altered  as  soon  as  he  was
certain  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  death.

Upon  the  king's  receiving  the  above-mentioned  first  letter,
(which  gave  no  account  of  the  duke's  death),  he  immediately
sent  to  Tours,  to  summon  all  his  captains  and  other  great
personages  to  attend  him.  Upon  their  arrival,  he  com-
municated his  letters  to  them.  They  all  pretended  great  joy;
but  to  such  as  more  narrowly  observed  their  behaviour,  it
was  easy  to  be  discerned  that  most  of  them  did  but  feign  it ;
and,  notwithstanding  all  their  outward  dissimulation,  they
had  been  better  pleased  if  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  had  been
successful.  The  reason  of  this  might  be,  because  the  king
was  greatly  feared,  and  now  if  he  should  find  himself  clear
and  secure  from  his  enemies,  they  were  afraid  they  would
be  reduced,  or  at  least  their  offices  and  pensions  retrenched  ;
for  there  were  several  present  who  had  been  engaged  against
him  with  his  brother  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  in  the  con-
federacy called  the  Public  Good.  After  his  majesty  had
discoursed  with  them  for  some  time,  he  went  to  mass,  and
then  ordered  dinner  to  be  laid  in  his  chamber,  and  made
them  all  dine  with  him ;  there  being  with  him  his  chan-
cellor*, and  some  other  lords  of  his  council.  The  king's
discourse  at  dinner-time  was  about  this  affair,  and  I  well
remember  that  myself  and  others  took  particular  notice  how
those  who  were  present  dined  ;  but  to  speak  truth  (whether
for  joy  or  sorrow,  I  cannot  tell),  there  was  not  one  of  them
that  half  filled  his  belly;  and  certainly  it  could  not  have  been
from  modesty  or  bashfulness  before  the  king,  for  there  was
not  one  amongst  them  but  had  dined  with  his  majesty  many
times  before.

As  soon  as  the  king  rose from  table,  he  retired,  and

*  Pierre  d'Oriolle. See  a  previous  note.


1477.]  ABBEVILLE SUBMITS TO THE KING.  345

distributed  to  some  persons  certain  lands  belonging  to  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  as  though  he  had  been  dead.  He
despatched  the  Bastard  of  Bourbon,  Admiral  of  France,  and
myself,  into  those  parts,  with  full  power  to  receive  the
homage  of  all  such  as  were  willing  to  submit  and  become  his
subjects.  He  ordered  us  to  set  out  immediately,  and  gave
us  commission  to  open  all  his  letters  and  packets  which  we
might  meet  by  the  way,  that  thereby  we  might  ascertain
whether  the  duke  was  dead  or  alive.  We  departed  with  all
speed,  though  it  was  the  coldest  weather  I  ever  felt  in  my
life.  We  had  not  ridden  above  half  a  day's  journey,  when  we
met  a  courier,  and  commanding  him  to  deliver  his  letters,  we
learned  by  them  that  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  slain,  and
that  his  body  had  been  found  among  the  dead,  and  recognised
by  an  Italian  page  that  attended  him,  and  by  one  Monsieur
Louppe,  a  Portuguese*,  who  was  his  physician,  and  who
assured  the  Lord  of  Craon  that  it  was  the  duke  his  master,
and  the  Lord  of  Craon  notified  the  same  at  once  to  the  king.


Cii.  XT.  —  How  the  King  of  France  seized  upon  Abbeville  after  the  Death
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  and  the  Answer  he  received  from  the  In- %
habitants  of  Arras.  —  1477.


receiving  this  news  we  rode  directly  to  the  suburbs
of  Abbeville,  and  were  the  first  that  announced  the  intel-
ligence to  the  duke's  adherents  in  those  parts.  We  found
the  inhabitants  of  the  town  in  treaty  with  the  Lord  of  Torcy,
for  whom  they  had  held  a  great  affection  for  a  long  time.
The  soldiers  and  officers  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  negotiated
with  us,  by  means  of  a  messenger  whom  we  had  sent  to  them
beforehand  ;  and  in  confidence  of  success,  they  dismissed
400  Flemings  who  were  then  quartered  in  the  town.  The
citizens,  laying  hold  of  this  opportunity,  opened  the  gates

*  In  the  list  of  the  duke's  household,  this  physician  is  named  Master
Lope  de  la  Garde.  With  reference  to  the  page,  one  of  the  manuscripts
of  these  Memoirs  speaks  of  him  as  "  a  Spaniard,  named  Don  Diego  ;"
other  authorities  state  that  he  was  an  Italian,  of  the  house  of  Colonna.


346  TUE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477.

immediately  to  the  Lord  of  Torcy,  to  the  great  prejudice
and  disadvantage  of  the  captains  and  officers  of  the  garrison,
— for  there  were  seven  or  eight  of  them  to  whom,  by  virtue
of  the  king's  authority,  we  had  promised  money,  and  pen-
sions for  life  ;  but  they  never  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  that
promise,  because  the  town  was  not  surrendered  by  them.
Abbeville  was  one  of  the  towns  that  Charles  VII.  delivered
up  by  the  treaty  of  Arras  in  the  year  1435,  which  towns
were  to  return  to  the  crown  of  France  upon  default  of  issue
male ;  so  that  their  admitting  us  so  easily  is  not  so  much  to
be  wondered  at.

From  thence  we  marched  to  Dourlans,  and  sent  a  summons
to  Arras,  the  chief  town  in  Artois,  and  formerly  part  of  the
patrimony  of  the  Earls  of  Flanders,  which  for  want  of
heirs  male  always  descended  to  the  daughters.  The  Lord  of
Eavestein  and  the  Lord  des  Cordes,  who  were  in  the  town
of  Arras,  offered  to  enter  into  a  treaty  with  us  at  Mount  St.
Eloy*,  and  to  bring  some  of  the  chief  citizens  with  them.
It  was  concluded  that  I  and  some  others  should  meet  them
in  the  king's  behalf;  but  the  admiral  refused  to  go  himself,
because  he  presumed  they  would  not  consent  to  grant  all  our
demands.  I  had  not  been  long  at  the  place  of  appointment,
when  the  two  above-mentioned  Lords  of  Ravestein  and  Des
Cordes  arrived,  attended  by  several  persons  of  quality,  and
by  certain  commissioners  on  the  part  of  the  city ;  one  of
whom  was  their  pensionary,  named  Monsieur  John  de  la
Vaquerief,  whom  they  appointed  to  be  their  spokesman,  and
who  since  that  time  has  been  made  first  president  of  the
Parliament  of  Paris.  We  demanded  in  the  king's  name  to
have  the  gates  immediately  opened,  and  to  be  received  into
the  town,  for  both  the  town  and  the  whole  country  belonged
to  the  king  by  right  of  confiscation  ;  and  if  they  refused  to
obey  this  summons,  they  would  be  in  danger  of  being
besieged,  and  compelled  to  submit  by  force,  since  their  duke
was  defeated,  and  his  dominions  utterly  unprovided  with

*  An  abbey  of  regular  canons  of  the  Augustinian  order,  at  about  five
miles  to  the  north-west  of  Arras.

t  Jean  de  la  Vacquerie,  a  native  of  Picardy,  was  admitted  a  councillor
of  the  Parliament  of  Paris  on  the  12th  of  November,  1470  ;  he  became
fourth  president  of  that  body  on  the  30th  of  May,  1480,  and  first  presi-
dent on  the  27th  of  February,  1481.  He  died  in  July,  1497.


1477.]  CONDITION OF ARTOIS.  347

means  of  defence,  upon  account  of  their  irrecoverable  losses
in  the  three  late  battles.  The  lords  returned  answer  by
their  speaker  Monsieur  John  de  la  Vaquerie,  that  the  county
of  Artois  belonged  to  the  Lady  of  Burgundy,  daughter  of
Duke  Charles,  and  descended  to  her  in  a  right  line  from
Margaret,  Countess  of  Flanders*,  Artois,  Burgundy,  Nevers,
and  Rethel,  who  was  married  to  Philip  I.,  Duke  of  Burgundy,
son  of  King  John  of  Francef ,  and  younger  brother  to  King
Charles  V.  ;  wherefore  they  humbly  entreated  the  king,  that
he  would  observe  and  continue  the  truce  that  had  existed
between  him  and  the  late  Duke  of  Burgundy  her  father.
Our  conference  was  but  short,  for  we  expected  to  receive
this  answer ;  but  the  chief  design  of  my  going  thither  was  to
have  a  private  conference  with  some  persons  that  were  there,
to  try  if  I  could  bring  them  over  to  the  king's  interest.
I  made  overtures  to  some  of  them,  who  soon  afterwards  did
his  majesty  signal  service.  We  found  the  whole  country  in
a  state  of  very  great  consternation,  and  not  without  cause ;
for  in  eight  days'  time  they  would  scarce  have  been  able  to
raise  eight  men-at-arms,  and  for  other  soldiers  there  were
not  in  the  whole  country  above  1500  (reckoning  horse  and
foot  together)  that  had  escaped  from  the  battle  in  which  the
Duke  of  Burgundy  was  slain  ;  and  they  were  quartered
about  Namur  and  Hainault.  Their  former  haughty  lan-
guage was  much  altered  now,  and  they  spoke  with  more
submission  and  humility ;  not  that  I  would  upbraid  them
with  excessive  arrogance  in  times  past,  but  to  speak  impar-
tially, in  my  time  they  thought  themselves  so  powerful,  that
they  spoke  neither  of  nor  to  the  king  with  the  same  respect
as  they  have  done  since;  and  if  people  were  wise,  they
would  always  use  such  moderate  language  in  their  days  of
prosperity,  that  in  the  time  of  adversity  they  would  not  need
to  change  it.

I  returned  to  the  admiral,  to  give  him  an  account  of  our
conference;  and  there  I  was  informed  that  the  king  was

*  Margaret  of  Flanders,  daughter  of  Louis  II.,  Count  of  Flanders,  and
Margaret  of  Brabant,  was  born  in  April,  1350,  and  married  Philip  the
Bold,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  on  the  12th  of  April,  1369.  She  died  on  the
16th  of  March,  1405.

f  John,  surnamed  the  Good,  was  son  of  Philip  VI.  of  France,  and
Joan  of  Burgundy.  He  died  on  the  8th  of  April,  1364.


348  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. Q14T7.

coming  towards  us,  and  that  upon  receiving  the  news  of  the
duke's  death,  he  immediately  set  out,  having  despatched
several  letters  in  his  own  and  his  officers'  names,  to  send
after  him  what  forces  could  presently  be  assembled,  with
which  he  hoped  to  reduce  the  provinces  I  have  just  men-
tioned to  his  obedience.


CH.  XII. — A  Digression  (not  altogether  foreign  to  my  principal  Design)
concerning  the  King's  Joy  at  being  delivered  from  most  ot  his
Enemies,  and  of  the  Error  his  Majesty  committed  in  the  Reduction
of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  Countries. — 1477.

THE  king  was  overjoyed  to  see  himself  rid  of  all  those
whom  he  hated,  and  who  were  his  chief  enemies  ;  on  some  of
them  he  had  been  personally  revenged,  as  on  the  constable  of
France,  the  Duke  of  Nemours,  and  several  others.  His
brother,  the  Duke  of  Guienne,  was  dead,  and  his  majesty
came  to  the  succession  of  the  duchy.  The  whole  house  of
Anjou  was  extinct ;  both  Rene,  King  of  Sicily,  John  and  Ni-
cholas, Dukes  of  Calabria,  and  since  them  their  cousin,  the
Count  du  Maine,  afterwards  made  Count  of  Provence.*  The
Count  d'Armagnac  had  been  killed  at  Lestore,  and  the  king
had  got  the  estates  and  moveables  of  all  of  them.  But  the
house  of  Burgundy,  being  greater  and  more  powerful  than
the  rest,  having  maintained  war  with  Charles  VIL,  our
master's  father,  for  two  and  thirty  years  together  without
any  cessation,  by  the  assistance  of  the  English  ;  and  having
their  dominions  bordering  upon  the  king's,  and  their  subjects
always  inclinable  to  invade  his  kingdom  ;  the  king  had  rea-
son to  be  more  than  ordinarily  pleased  at  the  death  of  that
duke,  and  he  triumphed  more  in  his  ruin  than  in  that  of  all
the  rest  of  his  enemies,  as  he  thought  that  nobody,  for  the

*  Charles  of  Anjou,  King  of  Naples,  Count  of  Maine,  Guise  and  Pro-
vence, was  the  son  of  Charles  of  Anjou  and  Isabella  of  Luxembourg.  In
1480,  he  succeeded  to  all  the  estates  and  dominions  of  Rene,  Count  of
Provence  and  King  of  Naples  and  Sicily.  He  appointed  Louis  XI.  his
heir  by  a  will  dated  on  the  10th  of  December,  1481,  and  he  died  on  the
day  following.  Anselme,  i.  236.


1477.]  INJUDICIOUS CONDUCT OF THE KING.  349

future,  either  of  his  own  subjects,  or  his  neighbours,  would
be  able  to  oppose  him,  or  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  his  reign.
He  was  at  peace  with  England*,  as  you  have  heard,  and
made  it  his  chief  business  to  continue  so :  yet,  though  he
was  freed  in  this  manner  from  all  his  apprehensions,  God
did  not  permit  him  to  take  such  courses  in  the  manage-
ment of  his  aiFairs  as  were  most  proper  to  promote  his  own
interests  and  designs.  And  certainly  although  God  Almighty
has  shown,  and  does  still  show,  that  His  determination  is  to
punish  the  family  of  Burgundy  severely,  not  only  in  the
person  of  the  duke,  but  in  their  subjects  and  estates ;  yet  I
think  the  king  our  master  did  not  take  right  measures  to
gain  his  end.  For,  if  he  had  acted  prudently,  instead  of  pre-
tending to  conquer  them,  he  should  rather  have  endeavoured
to  annex  all  those  large  territories,  to  which  he  had  no  just
title,  to  the  crown  of  France  by  some  treaty  of  marriage ;
or  to  have  gained  the  hearts  and  affections  of  the  people,  and
so  have  bi  ought  them  over  to  his  interest,  which  he  might,
without  any  great  difficulty,  have  effected,  considering  how  their
late  afflictions  had  impoverished  and  dejected  them.  If  he  had
acted  after  that  manner,  he  would  not  only  have  prevented
their  ruin  and  destruction,  but  extended  and  strengthened
his  own  kingdom,  and  established  them  all  in  a  firm  and  lasting
peace.  He  might  by  this  means  have  eased  his  own  country
of  its  intolerable  grievances,  and  particularly  of  the  marches
and  countermarches  of  his  troops,  which  are  commanded
continually  up  and  down  from  one  end  of  the  kingdom  to  the
other,  sometimes  upon  very  slight  occasions.

In  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  life-time  the  king  often  talked
with  me  about  this  affair,  and  told  me  what  he  would  do  if
he  should  ouilive  the  duke,  and  his  discourse  at  that  time
was  very  rational  and  wise:  he  told  me  he  would  propose  a
match  between  his  son  (our  present  king)  and  the  Duke  of
Burgundy's  daughter  (who  has  since  become  Duchess  of
Austria),  and  if  she  would  not  consent  to  that,  on  the  ground
that  the  dauphin  was  too  young,  he  would  then  endeavour  to
marry  her  to  some  young  princef  of  his  kingdom,  by  which

*By  a  treaty  concluded  on  the  29th  of  'August,  1475.  See  book  iv.
chap.  viii.  of  these  Memoirs.

f  In  the  third  chapter  of  his  sixth  book,  Commines  especially  men-
tions the  Count  of  Angouleme.


350  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1477.

means  he  might  keep  her  and  her  subjects  in  amity,  and
obtain,  without  war,  what  he  intended  to  lay  claim  to  for
himself;  and  this  was  his  resolution  not  more  than  a  week
before  he  heard  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  death  ;  but  the
very  day  he  received  that  news,  his  mind  began  to  change,
and  this  wise  counsel  was  laid  aside  when  the  admiral  and  I
were  despatched  into  those  provinces  :  however,  the  king
spoke  little  of  what  he  intended  to  do,  —  only  to  some  few
that  were  about  him,  he  promised  sundry  of  the  duke's  lord-
ships and  possessions.


Cir.  XIII. — Of  the  Delivery  of  Han,  Bohain,  St.  Quentin,  and  Peronne,
to  the  King,  and  how  he  sent  his  Barber,  Monsieur  Oliver,  to  treat
with  the  Citizens  of  Ghent. — 1477.

As  the  king  was  upon  the  road  towards  us,  he  received  from
all  parts  the  welcome  news  of  the  delivering  up  the  castles  of
Han  and  Bohain,  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Quentin  had
secured  that  town  for  him  themselves,  and  opened  their
gates  to  their  neighbour,  the  Lord  of  Mouy.  He  was  certain
of  Peronne,  which  was  commanded  by  Master  William  Bische.
and,  by  the  overtures  that  we  and  several  other  persons  had
made  him,  he  was  in  great  hopes  that  the  Lord  des  Cordes
would  strike  in  with  his  interest.  To  Ghent  he  sent  his
barber,  Master  Oliver*,  born  in  a  small  villagef  not  far  off;
and  other  agents  he  sent  to  other  places,  with  great  expec-
tations from  all  of  them ;  and  most  of  them  promised  him
very  fair,  but  performed  nothing.  Upon  the  king's  arrival

*  This  personage  will  be  familiar  to  all  who  have  read  Sir  Walter
Scott's  novel  of  Quentin  Durward.  Oliver  le  Mauvais  was  valet  de
chambre  and  chief  barber  to  Louis  XL  ;  in  October,  1474,  he  received
letters  of  nobility  from  that  prince,  authorizing  him  to  change  his  name
of  Mauvais  to  that  of  Le  Dain.  On  the  19th  of  November,  1 477,  the  king
conferred  the  estates  of  the  deceased  Count  of  Meulant  on  Oliver  le
l)ain  and  his  heirs ;  and  to  this  gift  he  added  the  Forest  of  Senart  in
October,  1482.  On  the  21st  of  May,  1484,  Oliver  was  hanged  "for
various  great  crimes,  offences,  and  malt-factions."

f  The  village  of  Thielt.


1477.]  THE KIXG DISPLEASED WITH COMMINES.  351

near  Peronne,  I  went  to  wait  on  his  majesty,  and  at  the  same
time  William  Bische  and  others  brought  him  the  surrender
of  the  town  of  Peronne,  with  which  he  was  extremely
pleased.  The  king  stayed  there  that  day,  and  I  dined  with
him,  according  to  my  usual  custom,  for  it  was  his  humour  to
have  seven  or  eight  always  with  him  at  tahle,  and  sometimes
many  more.  After  dinner  he  withdrew,  and  seemed  not  to
be  at  all  pleased  with  the  admiral's  little  exploit  and  mine ;
he  told  us  he  had  sent  his  barber,  Master  Oliver,  to  Ghent,
and  he  doubted  not  but  he  would  persuade  that  town  to  sub-
mit to  him  ;  and  Robinet  Dodenfort*  to  St.  Omer,  as  he  had
great  interest  there;  and  these  his  majesty  extolled  as  fit  persons
to  manage  such  affairs,  to  receive  the  keys  of  great  towns,
and  to  put  garrisons  of  his  troops  into  them.  He  also  men-
tioned others  whom  he  had  employed  in  the  same  negotiation
in  other  places;  and  with  this  he  upbraided  me,  by  the  Lord
du  Lude  and  others.  It  was  contrary  to  my  duty  to  argue
or  expostulate  with  him;  only  I  told  his  majesty  I  had  great
reason  to  fear  that  Master  Oliver,  and  the  others  whom  he
had  named,  would  not  be  able  to  reduce  those  towns  to  his
obedience  so  easily  as  they  proposed.

That  which  occasioned  the  king  to  speak  to  me  after
this  manner  was,  that  he  had  changed  his  mind,  and  the
success  which  had  crowned  the  beginning  of  his  affairs,
flattered  him  with  the  hopes  of  a  speedy  surrender  of  all  the
towns  in  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  territories :  and  his
majesty  was  advised  by  some  persons  (who  found  his  incli-
nations lean  that  way)  to  root  out  and  destroy  that  family
quite,  and  make  a  distribution  of  their  territories  among  his
servants.  Upon  which  he  began  to  declare  openly  for  whom
he  designed  them.  Namur  and  Hainault,  which  border
upon  the  frontiers  of  his  kingdom,  he  bestowed  on  his  own
subjects ;  Brabant  and  Holland,  being  larger  and  at  a
greater  distance,  he  intended  for  certain  princes  of  Germany,
who,  by  that  means,  would  be  obliged  to  espouse  his  interest,
and  to  assist  him  in  all  his  enterprises.  He  was  pleased  to
impart  all  his  designs  to  me,  because  I  had  formerly  recom-
mended another  method,  and  his  majesty  was  desirous  that

*  The  name  of  Robinet  d'Edinfort  or  DC  Dampfort  occurs  in  the  list
of  gentlemen  of  the  king's  household  for  the  years  1471  and  1474.


352  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1477.

I  should  be  thoroughly  informed  of  all  the  reasons  that
induced  him  to  the  contrary,  and  endeavoured  to  convince
me  that  his  design  was  far  more  advantageous  for  the  in-
terest of  his  kingdom,  which  had  formerly  suffered  great
troubles  on  account  of  the  exorbitant  power  of  the  house  of
Burgundy,  and  the  vast  extent  of  their  territories.  And
certainly,  in  respect  to  this  world,  there  was  great  plausi-
bility in  what  he  said ;  but,  as  to  matter  of  conscience,  I
thought  it  quite  otherwise.  However  the  king's  policy  and
penetration  were  such,  that  neither  I  nor  any  of  his  council,
could  see  so  far  into  his  affairs  as  himself;  for,  without
dispute,  he  was  one  of  the  wisest  and  most  subtle  princes  of
his  age ;  but  the  hearts  of  kings  being  in  the  hands  of  God
Almighty  alone,  He  disposes  them  in  such  important  affairs
as  is  most  proper  for  the  events  which  He,  in  His  heavenly
wisdom,  has  determined  to  bring  to  pass.  For,  certainly,
had  it  been  His  Divine  pleasure  that  our  king  should  have
continued  in  the  resolution  which  he  had  formed  before  the
Duke  of  Burgundy's  death,  the  wars  which  have  since
occurred,  and  still  continue,  would  never  have  happened.
But  we  were  not  worthy  on  either  side  to  receive  so  lasting
a  peace  as  was  prepared  to  our  hands  ;  and  that  was  the
true  cause  of  the  great  oversight  of  which  our  king  was
guilty,  and  not  any  defect  in  his  judgment  or  understanding;
for,  as  I  said  before,  he  was  a  prince  of  consummate  wisdom,
and  experience.  I  have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  this  subject,
to  show  how  necessary  it  is,  at  the  beginning  of  any  action
of  importance,  to  debate  and  deliberate  seriously  upon  its
consequences,  in  order  that  the  most  proper  way  of  effecting
it  may  be  chosen,  but  especially  that-  the  whole  affair  be
recommended  to  God,  and  that  in  our  prayers  He  be  solemnly
entreated  to  direct  us,  for  from  Him  all  events  proceed,  as  is
evident,  both  by  Scripture  and  experience.

My  design  is  not  to  upbraid  or  reflect  the  least  upon  the
king,  when  I  say  he  was  mistaken  in  this  business  ;  for,  per-
haps, others  of  a  greater  judgment  than  myself  were,  and
still  are,  of  his  opinion.  However,  this  affair  was  not
debated  either  with  us,  or  anywhere  else.  Chroniclers  com-
monly write  nothing  but  what  redounds  to  the  prais  >  and
honour  of  those  princes  whose  actions  they  record,  and  they
omit,  and  often  ignore  many  occurrences  that  ore  absolutely


1477.]  EMBASSY OP COMBINES.  353

necessary  to  the  illustration  of  the  truth  ;  but,  for  my  part,
I  am  resolved  to  state  nothing  but  what  I  can  prove  to  be
matter  of  fact,  either  upon  my  own  knowledge,  or  the  testi-
mony of  such  persons  whose  veracity  and  honour  are  un-
questionable, without  the  least  regard  to  the  praises  of  any
man  ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  thought  there  is  any  prince  so  wise,
but  he  must  sometimes  err,  and,  if  he  lives  long,  often ;  and
so  it  will  be  found  perpetually,  if  one  may  be  allowed  to
speak  the  truth.  The  greatest  senates,  and  the  greatest
governments  in  the  world,  have  erred,  and  will  err,  as  is
known  by  daily  experience.

The  king  having  sojourned  for  some  time  in  a  village  near
Peronne,  resolved  the  next  morning  to  make  his  entry  into
that  town,  which  (as  I  said  before)  had  surrendered  to  him.
As  all  things  were  ready  for  his  departure,  the  king  took  me
aside,  and  despatched  me  into  Poictou  and  the  frontiers  of
Bretagne,  whispering  me  in  my  ear,  that  if  Master  Oliver
failed  in  his  design,  and  the  Lord  des  Cordes  did  not  come
over  to  him,  he  was  resolved  to  destroy  with  fire  and  sword
all  that  part  of  Artois  which  borders  upon  the  Lys,  and  is
called  La  Levee  *,  and  afterwards  retire  to  Touraine.  I
recommended  some  persons  who,  by  my  means,  had  already
come  over  to  his  party,  upon  promise  of  pensions  and  other
advantages  from  him ;  he  set  down  their  names  in  writing,
and  honourably  performed  the  promises  I  had  made  them  ;
and  so  I  took  my  leave  of  him  for  that  time.

As  I  was  just  taking  horse,  the  Lord  du  Lude  happened
to  be  near  ;  he  was  a  person  in  some  things  very  acceptable
to  the  king,  but  he  was  too  much  addicted  to  covetousness,
and  scrupled  not  to  abuse  or  delude  any  man,  and,  being  easy
and  credulous  himself,  he  was  often  imposed  upon.  He  had
been  educated  with  the  king  in  his  youth,  and  knew  very
well  how  to  humour  his  majesty,  for  he  was  a  jocose  man  ;
he  said  to  me,  in  a  jesting  manner  (though  the  counsel  was
solid  enough),  "  How  no\v,  sir,  are  you  leaving  the  court,
when  you  should  now  make  your  fortune,  or  never  ?  Do  not  you
see  what  great  things  fall  daily  into  the  king's  hands,  which

*  Allouagne,  in  the  arrondissement  of  Bethune  and  department  of  the
Pas  de  Calais.  The  Lys  rises  near  Bcthuiie,  and  falls  into  the  Scheldt,  a&
Ghent.

VOL.  I.  A  A.


354-  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1477.

will  enable  him  to  advance  and  recompense  his  favourites  ?
As  for  my  part,  I  expect  to  be  Governor  of  Flanders,  and  to
be  made  up  of  nothing  but  gold."  He  laughed  all  the  while
he  was  speaking  to  me,  but  I  had  no  such  inclination,  for  I
was  airaid  it  had  come  from  the  king  :  I  replied,  "  That  I
should  be  very  glad  of  any  good  fortune  that  befell  him,  and
hoped  the  king  would  not  forget  me  ;"  and  so  I  departed.

Not  above  half  an  hour  before  my  departure,  a  person  of
some  quality  came  to  me  out  of  Hainault,  and  brought  me
news  from  several  to  whom  I  had  written  to  persuade  them
to  enter  into  the  king's  service.  This  gentleman  and  I  are
nearly  related  ;  but  he  is  still  living,  and  therefore  1  shall  not
mention  his  name,  nor  the  names  of  any  of  the  rest.  He
immediately  made  offers  to  surrender  all  the  chief  towns  and
fortresses  in  Hainault ;  I  waited  at  once  on  the  king,  and
acquainted  him  with  this  overture :  his  majesty  ordered  the
gentleman  to  be  admitted  to  his  presence,  but  told  me,  that
neither  he  nor  those  he  came  from,  were  persons  whom  he  had
occasion  to  make  use  of.  One  he  did  not  like  upon  one
account,  and  another,  upon  another ;  all  their  offers  appeared
to  him  inconsiderable,  and  he  was  of  opinion  he  should
gain  greater  advantages  without  their  assistance ;  so  I  left
him,  and  he  ordered  the  gentleman  to  confer  farther  with
the  Lord  du  Lude.  The  gentleman  highly  resented  it,  and
left  the  court  immediately,  without  any  farther  treaty,  for
the  Lord  du  Lude  and  he  would  never  have  agreed  :  for  he
had  undertaken  the  journey  in  hopes  of  advancing  himself,
and  raising  his  own  fortune,  and  the  first  question  that  the
Lord  du  Lude  asked  him  when  he  came  in,  was,  "  What  the
towns  would  give  him  to  intercede  with  the  king  in  their
behalf?"  Wherefore  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  king's  refusing
to  hearken  to  the  overtures  that  were  made  him  by  these
gentlemen,  was  God's  own  doing  ;  for  I  have  since  known
that  he  would  have  refused  no  honour  or  employment  to
have  gained  them  over  to  his  side  ;  but  perhaps,  God  would
not  suffer  him  to  be  successful  in  all  places,  for  the  reasons
above  mentioned  ;  or  else  He  did  not  think  fit  to  permit
him  to  usurp  the  country  of  Hainault  (which  is  a  fief  of
the  Empire),  both  because  his  title  was  not  just,  and  by
reason  of  the  ancient  oaths  and  alliances  between  the  em-
perors and  the  kings  of  France.  And  he  seemed  after-


1477.]  THE  KES'G'S  MESSAGE  TO  THE  LADY  OF  BURGUNDY.  355

wards  to  acknowledge  as  much  ;  for  when  he  had  possessed
himself  of  Cambray,  Quesnoy,  and  Bouchain,  in  Hainault,
he  delivered  up  Bouchain*,  and  restored  Cambray  to  a  con-
dition of  neutralityt,  as  it  is  an  imperial  town.  It  is  true,
I  was  not  upon  the  spot,  yet  I  was  well  informed  of  all  that
occurred,  and  could  easily  understand  it  by  my  acquaintance
and  education  in  both  countries,  and  I  have  since  been
assured  of  all  tin's  by  those  very  persons  who  were  chiefly
employed  in  the  affair.


CH.  XIV. — How  Master  Oliver,  the  King's  Barber,  not  succeeding  in  his
Designs  upon  Ghent,  found  out  a  way  to  secure  Tournay  for  the  King.
—1477.

MASTER  OLIVER  (as  you  have  already  heard)  was  despatched
by  the  king's  orders  to  Ghent,  with  letters  to  the  Lady  of
Burgundy,  Duke  Charles's  daughter,  and  full  power  to
make  certain  secret  overtures  to  her,  if  she  would  put  her-
self under  the  king's  protection.  This  was  not  the  main
design  of  his  errand,  for  he  knew  it  would  be  a  difficult
thing  to  have  a  private  conference  with  the  young  lady
alone ;  and,  if  he  had  one,  it  would  be  no  less  difficult  to
persuade  her  to  do  what  he  wanted.  His  chief  business  was
to  bring  about  some  innovation  in  the  city  of  Ghent,  know-
ing it  had  been  always  inclinable  to  change,  and  had  been
kept  in  subjection  under  Dukes  Philip  and  Charles  by  means
of  fear,  for  the  citizens  had  lost  many  of  their  privileges  in

*  Bouchain  was  surrendered  about  the  20th  of  Mar.

•f  On  his  first  visit  to  Cambray,  Louis  XI.  had  effaced  the  imperial
Arms  from  the  public  buildings  of  the  town,  and  substituted  the  arms  of
France  in  their  stead  ;  but  he  afterwards  directed  the  authorities  to  re-
store the  holy  imperial  eagle,  saying,  "  We  wish  you  to  be  neurral,  and
to  continue  in  your  former  condition.  We  are  viscount  of  your  city,
and  intend  to  maintain  our  jurisdiction  and  rights  over  it.  But  in  re-
gard to  our  arms,  you  may  take  them  down  some  evening,  and  put  up
your  bird  again,  and  you  may  say  it  had  flown  away  for  a  time,  but  re-
turned to  its  place  just  like  the  swallows  which  return  with  the  spring."
Molinet,  ii.  154.

A  A  2


356  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1477.

their  wars  with  Duke  Philip*,  by  the  articles  of  peace ;
besides,  another  of  their  privileges  was  taken  from  them  by
Duke  Charles  (and  that  was  about  the  election  of  their
magistrates),  upon  occasion  of  an  offence  they  committed  on
the  first  day  of  his  entrance  into  their  town  as  duke.  As  I
have  mentioned  this  already,  I  shall  say  no  more  about  it
in  this  place.  These  passages  added  much  confidence  to
Master  Oliver  the  barber,  who,  following  his  instructions,
tampered  with  some  persons  whom  he  judged  most  tractable,
and  offered  them  not  only  that  all  their  old  privileges  should
be  restored,  but  that  new  ones  should  be  added.  These
overtures  were  not  made  in  their  Town-hall,  nor  publicly,
but  in  private,  as  I  said  before,  for  he  had  a  mind  to  try
first  what  he  could  do  with  the  young  princess  ;  but  they
guessed  his  design.

After  Master  Oliver  had  been  some  days  in  Ghent,  he
was  conducted  to  his  audience  in  the  best  garb  he  could
possibly  procure ;  and  he  delivered  his  credentials.  The
Lady  of  Burgundy  was  in  her  chair  of  state,  the  Duke  of
Cleves  on  one  hand,  the  Bishop  of  Liege  on  the  other,  and
several  other  persons  of  quality  attending  her.  After  the
lady  had  read  his  credentials,  she  bade  him  deliver  his  mes-
sage ;  his  answer  was,  that  his  instructions  were  to  deliver
it  only  in  private.  They  replied,  that  was  a  custom  never
practised  among  them,  and  certainly  could  not  be  introduced
now  with  a  young  lady  that  was  fit  for  marriage.  He  per-
sisted in  saying,  that  by  his  orders  he  could  communicate
his  business  to  nobody  else.  Upon  which  they  threatened  to
compel  him  by  force,  and  put  him  into  a  terrible  conster-
nation. I  fancy  when  he  delivered  his  letters,  he  had  not
provided  himself  with  a  speech,  for,  indeed  (as  you  have
heard)  that  business  was  only  secondary ;  however  it  may
be,  Master  Oliver  left  the  assembly  without  any  farther  con-
ference. Some  of  the  council  had  a  very  contemptible
opinion  of  him,  both  in  respect  of  the  meanness  of  his  pro-
fession, and  the  uncomeliness  of  his  demeanour  and  lan-
guage; but  more  especially  the  citizens  of  Ghent  (because  he
was  born  in  a  pitiful  village  near  that  city),  put  many

*  First  of  all  by  the  treaty  of  Gavre  in  1453,  and  afterwards  in  1467.
Sec  book  ii.  chap.  iv.


1477.] FLIGHT OF MASTER  OLIVER TO TOURNAY.  357

affronts  upon  him,  in  consequence  of  which  he  took  to  flight
suddenly  ;  for  lie  was  informed  that  if  he  had  stayed  a  little
longer,  they  would  have  thrown  him  into  the  river :  and
truly  I  am  of  opinion  that  would  have  been  his  destiny.

This  Master  Oliver  assumed  the  title  of  Count  de
Meulant,  which  is  a  small  town  near  Paris,  of  which  he
was  captain.  "When  he  had  made  his  escape  out  of  Ghent,
he  fled  to  Tournay,  which  town,  though  neutral,  bore  a
great  affection  to  the  king,  for  it  had  formerly  belonged
to  his  predecessors,  and  paid  him  6000  Parisian  livres  a
year:  in  all  other  respects  it  was  free,  entertaining  all
comers,  and  it  is  a  fair  and  strong  town,  as  everybody  in
those  countries  knows  very  well.  All  the  revenues  of  both
their  clergy  and  townsmen  lie  in  Hainault  and  Flanders,  for
it  borders  upon  those  two  countries ;  and  upon  that  account
in  the  wars  between  Charles  VII.  and  Duke  Philip  of
Burgundy,  they  paid  constantly  10,000  livres  per  annum
to  the  said  duke,  and  I  have  known  them  give  an  equal
sum  to  Duke  Charles ;  but  at  this  time,  when  Master  Oli-
ver came  to  them,  they  paid  nothing,  but  enjoyed  great
quiet  and  repose.

Though  the  management  of  the  affair  which  was  com-
mitted to  Master  Oliver's  discretion  was  far  beyond  his
capacity,  yet  certainly  he  was  not  so  much  to  be  blamed  as
those  who  employed  him  in  it ;  for  though  his  success  was
such  as  might  have  been  easily  presaged,  yet  he  gave  proof
both  of  courage  and  conduct  in  what  he  did ;  for  knowing
that  the  town  of  Tournay  lay  so  nearly,  as  I  said,  between
those  two  provinces  that  it  would  be  easy  to  make  inroads
into  either,  if  he  could  contrive  to  put  a  French  garrison
into  it  (to  which  the  townsmen  were  always  averse,  having
all  along  preserved  their  neutrality,  and  connected  them-
selves neither  with  the  one  nor  the  other),  he  sent  privately
to  Monsieur  de  Mouy  (whose  son*  was  bailiff  of  the  town,
but  not  resident  there)  to  come  to  him  at  a  certain  hour  with
what  forces  he  could  draw  out  of  St.  Quentin,  and  whatever
other  troops  he  could  assemble.  Monsieur  de  Mouy  came  to
the  gate  at  the  appointed  hour,  where  he  found  thirty  or

*  Jacques,  Lord  and  Baron  of  Mouy,  councillor  and  chamberlain  of
the  kiny,  Master  of  the  Waters  and  Forests  of  Normandy  and  Picardy,
and  Captain  of  St.  Quentin  and  Ribemont.

A  A3


358  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477.

forty  men,  and  Master  Oliver  at  the  head  of  them,  who
boldly  commanded  the  barrier  to  be  opened,  and  partly  for
love,  and  partly  for  fear,  they  obeyed  him.  Monsieur  de
Mouy  marched  with  his  detachment  into  the  town,  with  which
the  people  were  well  enough  satisfied ;  but  the  magistrates
were  not  pleased  with  it,  of  whom  seven  or  eight  were  im-
mediately sent  to  Paris,  and  never  dared  to  return  during
our  king's  reign.*

As  soon  as  these  forces  had  made  themselves  masters  of
Tournay,  a  more  considerable  body  was  sent  to  reinforce  the
garrison,  and  many  barbarous  incursions  were  made  into
Hainault  and  Flanders,  in  which  many  fine  houses  and
villages  were  plundered  and  burnt,  more  to  the  prejudice
of  the  inhabitants  of  Tournay  than  of  anybody  else ;  and
these  cruelties  they  continued  so  long,  that  at  last  the
Flemings  rose  up  in  arms,  released  the  Duke  of  Guelders
out  of  prison,  where  he  had  been  confined  by  Duke  Charles,
made  him  their  captain,  and  invested  Tournay j  ;  but  they
did  not  continue  the  siege  long,  for  they  retired  suddenly  in
great  disorder  and  confusion,  and  the  Duke  of  Guelders
undertaking  to  secure  the  rear,  and  not  being  timely
supported,  was  defeated,  many  of  his  men  slain,  and  he
among  the  rest,  of  which  I  shall  give  you  a  more  particular
account  in  another  place.f  And  thus  far  the  king's  affairs
were  crowned  with  success,  and  his  enemies  over-reached  by
Master  Oliver's  management ;  and  perhaps  a  man  of  greater
rank  and  penetration  could  not  have  managed  them  with  so
much  success.  But  I  have  said  enough  already  of  so  politic
a  prince's  employing  so  inconsiderable  a  person  to  conduct

*  This  is  a  mistake.  At  the  end  of  May,  1483,  three  months  before  the
death  of  Louis  XL,  the  Governor  of  the  Bastille,  in  obedience  to  the
king's  orders,  sent  the  prisoners  home,  after  having  required  them  to
swear  that  they  would  do  nothing  to  the  prejudice  of  his  majesty.
Gachard's  Analectes  Belgiques,  i.  472.

f  With  700  or  800  horse.

j  "  Fran£ois  de  la  Sauvagiere,  a  very  valiant  man-at-arms,  charged  the
Duke  of  Guelders  so  roughly  with  a  lance,  as  he  was  drawing  off  his
men,  that  he  bore  him  to  the  ground.  Notwithstanding  this,  he  defended
himself  as  best  he  could,  like  a  bold  and  valiant  knight,  full  of  virtuous
courage  ;  but  it  was  of  no  avail.  He  received  two  wounds  in  his  head,
and  another  in  his  throat,  and  finally  his  death  blow.  Then  he  shouted,
'  Guelders  !'  and  spoke  never  a  word  more."  Molinct,  ii.  68.  This  was
in  June  or  July,  1477.


1477.] EMBASSY FROM THE LADY OF BURGUNDY.  359

so  important  an  affair  ;  and  certainly  God  had  infatuated  his
understanding  at  that  time;  1'or,  as  I  said  before,  had  he  not
looked  upon  everything  as  likely  to  be  easily  executed,  and
given  too  great  a  loose  to  his  passion  and  vindictiveness
u<rainst  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's  family,  there  is  no  question
but  all,  or  the  greater  part,  of  their  dominions  had  been  at
this  day  under  his  power  and  government.


Cn.  XV. — Of  the  Ambassadors  whom  the  Lady  of  Burgundy,  Duke
Charles's  Daughter,  sent  to  the  King,  and  of  the  Delivering  up  of
Arras,  Hesdin,  Boulogne,  and  the  City  of  Arras,  to  the  King  by  the
Assistance  of  the  Lord  des  Cordes. — 1477.

THE  king  being  in  possession  of  Peronne,  which  was  sur-
rendered to  him  by  Master  William  Bisches  (a  person
of  obscure  parentage,  born  in  Molins-Engilbert,  in  Niver-
nois,  but  enriched  and  advanced  afterwards  by  Charles
Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  had  given  him  the  command  of
that  town,  because  it  was  near  a  house  called  Clery,  which
the  said  Bisches  had  purchased,  and  fortified  very  strongly)  ;
the  king,  I  say,  in  tins  very  town  received  an  embassy  from
the  Lady  of  Burgundy,  consisting  of  the  principal  personages
of  her  court.  In  my  opinion,  it  was  not  prudently  done  to
employ  so  many,  and  send  them  all  together ;  but  their  terror
and  consternation  were  so  great,  they  knew  not  what  they
did.  The  chief  of  the  ambassadors  were  one  Messire
William  Hugonet*,  the  chancellor  (a  wise  and  notable  man,
who  had  gained  a  considerable  fortune  and  vast  reputation
under  Duke  Charles),  and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt,  whom
we  have  frequently  mentioned  in  these  Memoirs,  a  person  of
such  consummate  prudence  and  dexterity  in  the  management
of  great  affairs,  that  I  do  not  remember  any  man  who
exceeded  him.  There  were  likewise  the  Lord  de  la  Verej

*  'William  Hugonec,  Lord  of  Saillans,  Epoisses,  and  Lys,  and  Viscount
of  Ypres,  was  beheaded  at  Ghent  on  the  3rd  of  April,  1477.  He  had
been  appointed  Chancellor  of  Burgundy  on  the  22nd  of  May,  1471.

f  Wolfert  de  Burselen,  Lord  of  La  Weer,  in  Holland,  Count  of  Grand-
Pre,  chamberlain  of  Louis  XL,  and  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece.  He

A A 4


360  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1477.

a  great  man  in  Zealand,  the  Lord  of  Gruthuse,  and  several
other  noblemen,  besides  ecclesiastics  and  burgesses  of  great
towns.*  Before  they  were  admitted  to  an  audience,  either
public  or  private,  the  king  tampered  with  them,  and  tried  all
manner  of  ways  to  bring  them  over  to  his  party.  They  all  of
them  returned  him  very  humble  and  respectful  answers,  as
became  people  under  affliction  ;  but  those  whose  estates  were
remote,  and  out  of  danger  from  the  king,  refused  to  gratify  him
in  anything,  unless  a  marriage  were  first  concluded  between
the  Dauphin  and  the  Lady  of  Burgundy.  The  chancellor  and
the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  having  been  long  in  authority,
and  desiring  to  continue  to  possess  it,  and  having  their
estates  near  the  king's  dominions  (one  in  the  duchy  of
Burgundy  and  the  other  in  Picardy,  near  Amiens)  were
inclined  to  accept  the  king's  offers,  upon  condition  the
said  marriage  proceeded,  which  they  would  endeavour  to
promote  with  all  their  power  and  interest,  and,  when  it  was
consummated,  would  engage  themselves  entirely  in  his
service.  Though  this  was  certainly  the  better  method  for
the  king,  yet  he  was  mightily  dissatisfied,  because  they  did
not  join  themselves  immediately  to  his  party ;  but  he  dis-
sembled this  feeling  as  much  as  he  could,  intending  to  make
use  of  them  in  other  affairs.  The  king  already  held  a
correspondence  with  the  Lord  des  Cordes,  who  advised  his
majesty  to  press  the  ambassadors  to  send  orders  to  him
as  Governor  of  Arras,  to  deliver  up  that  which  they  called
the  city  of  Arras,  between  which  and  the  town  there  were
walls,  ditches,  and  gates,  which  were  formerly  kept  shut
against  the  city ;  but  now  the  case  was  altered,  and  the  city
shut  out  the  town.  After  many  arguments  and  difficulties
had  been  started  by  the  ambassadors,  being  at  last  convinced
it  would  be  for  the  best,  and  contribute  much  to  the  hastening
of  a  peace,  they  consented,  especially  the  chancellor  and  the
Lord  of  Humbercourt ;  and  letters  were  immediately  des-

married  1.  Mary  of  Scotland  ;  and  2.  Charlotte  of  Bourbon  ;  and  he  died
in  1487.

*  To  those  mentioned  by  Commines,\ve  may  add  the  Bishop  of  Tournay,
the  Bishop  of  Arras,  the  chief  Echevin  of  Ghent,  the  High  Bailiff  of
Ypres,  and  the  son  of  the  Burgomaster  of  Bruges.  The  ambassadors  set
out  at  the  beginning  of  February,  and  returned  towards  the  end  oi'  the
month.


1477.] DELIVERY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  ARRAS  TO  THE  KING. 361

patched  to  tlie  Lord  des  Cordes  to  discharge  him  of  his  trust
and  command  him  to  deliver  up  the  city  to  the  king.  As
soon  as  the  king  had  got  possession  of  it*,  he  threw  up
works  before  the  gate  of  the  town,  and  such  other  places  as
he  thought  would  be  convenient ;  upon  which  the  Lord  des
Cordes  marched  with  his  garrison  out  of  town,  and  every
man  went  whither  he  pleased,  and  took  what  side  he  liked
best.

The  Lord  des  Cordes  looking  upon  himself  to  be  free
from  the  service  of  his  mistress,  by  virtue  of  the  discharge
which  the  ambassadors  had  sent  him,  resolved  to  swear
allegiance  to  the  king,  and  enter  into  his  service  for  the
future,  since  his  name  and  arms  were  taken  from  a  place
on  this  side  of  the  Somme,  not  far  from  Beauvais  ;  for  his
name  was  Philip  de  Crevecoeur,  second  brother  to  the  Lord
of  Crevecoeur ;  and  indeed  the  territories  which  the  house
of  Burgundy  had  possessed  upon  the  Somme  in  the  time  of
Dukes  Philip  and  Charles  returned,  of  course,  to  the  king  in
pursuance  of  the  treaty  of  Arras,  by  which  they  were  then
entailed  upon  the  said  dukes  and  their  heirs  male  only,
and  Duke  Charles  had  left  only  this  daughter.  By  that  means
the  Lord  des  Cordes  became  the  king's  subject  immediately,
and  would  not  have  been  to  blame  in  putting  himself  and
all  that  belonged  to  him  into  the  king's  service,  had  he  not
taken  a  new  oath  to  be  true  to  the  young  Lady  of  Burgundy .f
I  know  there  are  various  reports  of  this  affair,  and  it  is  a
matter  of  contest  to  this  very  day,  and  therefore  I  will  say
no  more  about  it ;  only  this  I  can  affirm,  that  he  was  educated,
advanced,  and  put  into  places  of  great  trust  and  power  by
Duke  Charles :  his  mother^  had  some  share  in  the  education
of  the  young  Lady  of  Burgundy ;  and  he  was  Governor  of
Picardy,  Seneschal  of  Ponthieu,  Captain  of  Crotoy,  Governor
of  Peronne,  Montdidier,  and  Roye,  and  Captain  of  Boulogne

*  He  entered  the  city  on  Tuesday,  the  4th  of  March,  1477  ;  and  the
town  capitulated  on  the  4th  of  May.  Lenglet,  ii.  141.

t  The  young  duchess  had  confirmed  him  in  all  his  estates  and  offices,  and
furthermore  bestowed  on  him  the  captaincy  of  Hesdin.  But  at  a  chapter  of
the  order  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  held  at  Bois-le-Duc  on  the  8th  of  May,
1481,  he  was  expelled  the  order,  "on  account  of  his  crimes,  demerits,
falsity,  treason,  and  disloyalty."

J  Margaret  de  la  Treinouille.


362  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477-

and  Hesdin  for  the  duke  when  he  died ;  and  at  this  present
time  he  holds  the  same  governments  for  the  king,  in  the
same  manner  and  form  as  our  master  confirmed  them  to  him.

After  the  king  had  added  some  new  fortifications  to  the
city  of  Arras,  he  marched  to  besiege  Hesdin,  carrying  the
Lord  des  Cordes  with  him,  who  had  been  the  governor  of  it
but  three  days  before,  and  the  garrison  consisted  of  none
but  his  own  soldiers.  At  first,  they  declared  they  would
keep  it  for  the  young  princess,  alleging  that  they  were  bound
to  do  so  by  their  oath  of  allegiance,  and  they  fired  their  guns
upon  us  for  several  days ;  but  at  last  they  were  prevailed
upon  by  their  old  master  (for  to  speak  plainly,  there  was  a
very  good  understanding  between  them),  and  the  town  was
delivered  to  the  king,  who  marched  from  thence  to  Boulogne,
where  his  success  was  the  same,  though,  perhaps,  it  did  not
surrender  so  soon  by  a  day.  However,  this  had  been  a  very
dangerous  way  of  proceeding,  had  those  that  held  the  towns
for  the  young  princess  been  able  to  have  assembled  any  forces
in  the  country  (and  the  king,  in  the  relation  he  afterwards
gave  me  of  this  affair,  admitted  as  much  himself) ;  for  there
were  some  in  Boulogne  who,  perceiving  the  juggle,  en-
deavoured to  throw  a  body  of  troops  into  the  town,  and  if
they  had  succeeded  in  their  design,  they  would  have  defended
it  in  earnest.

Whilst  the  king  lay  before  Boulogne  (which  was  about  five
or  six  days),  the  townsmen  of  Arras,  finding  they  were  de-
ceived, and  enclosed  on  all  sides  with  great  numbers  of
soldiers  and  abundance  of  artillery,  laboured  to  procure
forces  if  possible,  that  might  garrison  the  town ;  to  which
purpose  they  wrote  letters  to  Lisle  and  Douay.  At  Douay
there  were  some  few  horse  commanded  by  the  Lord  of
Vergy*,  and  others,  whom  I  have  forgotten,  who  had  escaped
from  the  battle  of  Nancy,  and  were  returned  thither.  These
gentlemen  resolved  to  throw  themselves  into  Arras,  and  in

*  Guillaume  de  Vergy,  Baron  of  Bourbon-Lancy.  Louis  XL  ap-
pointed him  his  councillor  and  chamberlain,  and  gave  him  the  Castle  of
Vergy  and  the  estate  of  St.  Dizier.  He  held  the  commission  of  captain
of  fifty  lances  in  the  standing  army  of  Charles  VIII.  After  the  death  of
that  monarch,  he  entered  the  service  of  the  Emperor  Maximilian,  who
appointed  him  Marshal  of  Burgundy  in  1498.  Philip  of  Spain  made
him  lieutenant  and  captain-general  of  Guelders  and  Zutphen  in  1 504,
and  he  died  in  1520.


1477.]  SIEGE OF THE TOWN OF ARRAS.  363

order  to  effect  it,  assembled  a  body  of  about  200  or  300
horse,  good  and  bad,  and  about  500  or  600  foot.  The
inhabitants  of  Douay,  having  at  that  time  more  pride  than
sense,  forced  this  party  to  march  at  noon-day,  in  spite  of  their
unwillingness,  and  all  that  could  be  urged  to  the  contrary :
•which  certainly  was  a  great  piece  of  folly  and  indiscretion,
and  the  design  failed  accordingly ;  for  the  country  between
Douay  and  Arras  is  as  flat  as  one's  hand,  and  not  above  five
leagues,  so  that  if  they  had  deferred  their  march  till  night,
they  had  certainly  effected  their  design.  When  they  were
in  the  midst  of  their  march,  those  who  were  left  in  the  city
(to  wit,  the  Lord  du  Lude,  John  du  Fou*,  and  the  troops  of
the  Marshal  de  Loheac),  having  intelligence  of  their  motion,
resolved  to  sally  out,  and  rather  venture  an  engagement,
than  suffer  them  to  get  into  the  town ;  for  they  knew  that  if
once  this  reinforcement  got  into  the  town,  they  would  never
be  able  to  defend  the  city.  Their  enterprise  was  bold  and
perilous,  but  they  performed  it  bravely,  and  the  whole  party
from  Douay  was  defeated,  most  of  them  killed,  or  taken
prisoners  f,  and  the  Lord  of  Vergy  was  among  the  latter.

The  next  day  the  king  arrived  at  Arras  in  person,  and
was  highly  pleased  with  their  victory ;  he  took  the  pri-
soners into  his  own  custody,  and  caused  several  of  the
footmen  to  be  put  to  death  as  a  terror  to  the  rest,  who  he
knew  were  not  numerous  in  those  parts.  The  Lord  of
Vergy  was  kept  prisoner  a  long  time,  as  he  could  not  be  in-
duced to  swear  allegiance  to  the  king,  though  he  was  kept  in
irons,  and  confined  very  closely ;  at  length,  at  the  impor-
tunity of  his  mother,  after  he  had  been  a  prisoner  a  year
or  more,  he  submitted  to  the  king's  good  pleasure,  and  I
think  he  acted  very  prudently,  for  the  king  restored  to  him
all  his  own  lands,  and  all  that  he  had  any  pretensions  to,
gave  him  a  revenue  of  above  10,000  livres  a  year,  and
other  considerable  employments  besides.  Those  few  that
escaped  in  this  action,  got  into  the  town.  The  king  caused
his  artillery  (of  which  he  had  a  very  fine  and  large  train)
to  be  brought,  with  which  he  fired  briskly  upon  the  town  ;  and

*  Jean  du  Fou,  councillor  and  chamberlain  of  the  King  of  France,
Captain  of  Cherbourg,  and  chief  cup-bearer  to  Louis  XI.

f  Molinet  (ii.  25.)  says  there  were  400  or  500  prisoners,  including
several  men  of  rank.


364  THE MEMOIRS  OP PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [14-77.

the  walls  and  fortifications  being  very  weak,  and  scarce  any
soldiers  in  garrison,  his  batteries  did  the  town  considerable
damage,  and  threw  the  inhabitants  into  terrible  consterna-
tion. The  Lord  des  Cordes  had  a  party  in  the  town,  and
after  the  delivering  up  of  the  city,  it  was  impossible  to  think
of  defending  the  town  any  longer.  Upon  this  consideration
they  capitulated,  and  surrendered  upon  terms*,  but  their
articles  were  not  performed,  for  which  the  Lord  du  Lucle  was
partly  to  blame ;  for  several  citizens  and  other  persons  of
quality  were  put  to  deathf  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  du
Lude  and  of  Monsieur  William  de  Cerisay|  (which  was
much  to  their  private  advantage) ;  for  the  Lord  du  Lude  told
me  himself  he  got  at  that  time  20,000  crowns,  besides  rich
furniture  and  furs,  and  the  poor  town  was  fined  60.000
crowns  more  to  the  king,  which  was  an  excessive  tax  ;  but
I  suppose  this  was  remitted,  for  the  citizens  of  Cambray
lent  the  king  40,000,  which  was  repaid  punctually  after-
wards ;  wherefore  I  presume  all  these  taxes  were  restored  or
remitted.


CH.  XVI. — How  the  Citizens  of  Ghent,  having  usurped  Authority  over
their  Princess  upon  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  her  Father,
sent  Ambassadors  to  the  King  of  France  in  the  Name  of  the  Three
Estates  of  then:  Country. — 1477.

DURING  the  siege  of  Arras,  the  Princess  of  Burgundy  was  at

*  It  surrendered  on  the  4th  of  May.  The  king  entered  Arras  on
horseback,  not  by  the  gate,  but  by  the  breach  in  the  wall.  He  rode  to
the  market-place,  where  he  thus  addressed  the  citizens :  "  You  have
been  very  uncourteous  to  me,  but  I  pardon  you.  If  you  are  good  subjects
to  me,  I  will  be  a  good  lord  to  you."  Molinet,  ii.  26.

f  Three  days  after  his  arrival,  the  king  inquired  who  had  been  most
hostile  to  him  in  Arras  during  the  siege.  Some  envious  person  named
Pierchon  du  Chastel,  who  was  thereupon  beheaded,  together  with  ::a
archer  who  had  taken  aim  at  the  king,  and  would  have  shot  him,  h:ul
not  a  butcher  prevented  him.  MoLinet,  ii.  26.  The  king  changed  the
name  of  the  town  from  Arras  to  Franchise,  and  colonised  it  with  arti-
ficers from  other  towns.  See  Vaissette,  v.  53.

J  Guillaume  de  Cerisay  was,  in  1475,  prothonotary  and  secretary  to
the  king,  and  clerk  of  his  court  of  Parliament.  la  1479,  he  was  ap-
pointed Mayor  of  Angers.


1477.]  REBELLION OF THE GANTOIS.  365

Ghent,  in  the  power  of  a  rash  and  inconsiderate  people,
which  proved  much  to  her  disadvantage,  but  greatly  ad-
vanced the  king's  interest  ;  for  there  is  no  losing  without
somebody  being  the  gainer.  As  soon  as  the  Gantois  were
informed  of  the  death  of  Duke  Charles,  they  thought  them-
selves fairly  delivered  from  their  subjection,  and  seizing
upon  their  magistrates*  (who  were  in  all  twenty-six),  they
put  most  of  them  to  death,  under  pretence  of  revenging  the
death  of  a  person  whom  the  day  before  the  magistrates  had
caused  to  be  beheaded  :  not  but  that  the  person  deserved  it,
if  they  had  had  power  to  have  done  it ;  but  the  duke  being
dead,  who  gave  them  their  power,  their  authority,  of  course,
expired  with  him.  They  also  put  to  death  several  sub-
stantial citizens  besides,  and  others  who  had  been  friends
or  favourers  of  the  duke's  interest,  of  which  number  there
were  some  in  my  time,  who,  in  my  presence,  used  their
utmost  endeavours  to  dissuade  Duke  Charles  from  destroying  a
great  part  of  Ghent,  which  the  duke  otherwise  would  have  done.
These  tumultuous  citizens  forced  the  young  princess  to  re-
store and  confirm  their  ancient  privileges!,  which  Duke
Philip  had  taken  away  in  the  peace  of  Gavre,  and  also  those
that  Duke  Charles  had  deprived  them  of  afterwards.  They
made  no  other  use  of  their  privileges,  but  as  a  cause  of
quarrel  with  their  prince,  and  their  chief  inclination  was  to

*  A  short  time  after  the  death  of  Duke  Charles,  the  citizens  of  Ghent
rose  in  arms,  and  seized  several  notable  burghers,  to  wit,  Roland  Van
Wedergraet,  who  had  been  chief  echevin  of  the  city;  John  Serssanders,
who  had  been  second  echevin ;  Peter  Hurribloc,  one  of  the  lords  of  the
council-chamber  of  Flanders,  Peter  Boudins,  Oliver  de  Grave,  and  John
Vander  Poucke;  which  six.  persons  were  condemned  and  beheaded.
The  reason  of  this  was,  that  they  had  been  connected  with  the  govern-
ment of  the  city  during  the  year  1468,  when  peace  was  made  with  Duke
Charles,  on  occasion  of  the  excesses  committed  by  the  Gantois  against
the  duke  on  the  day  on  which  he  made  his  joyful  entry  into  their  city
..."  and  had  granted  letters  under  the  great  seal  of  Ghent,  that  if  in
future  any  persons  should  attempt  to  excite  any  sedition  or  tumult  in
the  town,  they  should  be  mulcted  of  life  and  fortune,  and  their  children
be  deprived,  in  perpetuity,  of  the  freedom  of  the  guild  to  which  they  had
belonged."  See  the  Bulletins  de  1' Academic  Royale  de  Bruxelles,  vol.
vi.  part  ii.  p.  227.

•f  The  letters-patent  by  which  the  Princess  Mary  restored  their
privileges  to  the  Flemings  are  dated  at  Ghent  on  the  llth  of  February,
1477.


366  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [H77.

encroach  upon  and  weaken  him.  During  the  minority  of
their  princes,  and  before  they  are  fit  to  manage  affairs  of
state,  they  are  extremely  fond  of  them  ;  but  when  once  they
are  in  possession  of  the  government,  they  hate  them  ts
mortally.  Thus  it  happened  to  this  young  princess,  whom
they  guarded  very  carefully,  and  loved  very  tenderly,  till  she
came  to  the  government.  Had  not  the  citizens  of  Ghent  pre-
ferred their  own  seditious  designs  before  the  public  interest,
it  may  be  easily  presumed  they  would  have  bethought  them-
selves of  defending  their  country,  and  put  a  strong  garrison
immediately  into  Arras,  and  perhaps  into  Peronne,  upon  the
death  of  their  master;  but  they  could  think  of  nothing  but
contriving  tumults  and  innovations  at  home.  However,  as
the  king  lay  before  Arras,  ambassadors*  came  to  him  in  the
name  of  the  three  Estates  of  the  provinces  belonging  to  the
said  princess,  for  there  were  certain  deputies  of  the  three
Estates  at  Ghent ;  but  the  citizens,  having  the  young  princess
in  their  power,  managed  matters  as  they  pleased.  The  king
admitted  them  to  an  audience ;  and  among  other  things,  they
told  his  majesty  that  the  overtures  which  they  made  tended  to
a  peace,  and  proceeded  from  the  sincere  desire  of  the  princess
herself,  who  was  resolved  to  be  entirely  guided  by  the  advice
and  consent  of  the  three  Estates  of  her  country ;  and  they
desired  that  the  king  would  desist  from  his  hostilities  in
both  Burgundy  and  Artois  :  that  a  day  might  be  appointed,  on
which  they  might  meet  to  treat  about  an  accommodation ;
and  that,  in  the  meantime,  all  warfare  might  cease  on  both
sides.

The  king  now  thought  he  had  entirely  gained  his  point,
and  supposed  his  affairs  would  have  taken  a  much  better
turn  than  they  did.  He  had  certain  information  that  a  great
part  of  their  best  soldiers  were  killed  or  dispersed,  and  many
others  had  revolted  from  the  princess,  and  in  particular  the
Lord  des  Cordes,  for  whom  his  majesty  had  a  great  esteem,

*  These  ambassadors  were,  for  Brabant,  the  Lord  de  Berssele,  the
Mayor  of  Louvain,  and  the  Pensionary  of  Brussels;  for  Flanders,  the
Abbot  of  St.  Peter's  at  Ghent,  the  Lord  of  Moldeghem,  M.  de  Dudzeele,
and  the  Pensionary  of  Ghent  ;  for  Artois,  the  Abbot  of  St.  Berlin,  Jean
dc  Beaumont,  and  Louis  Lemire  ;  for  Hainault,  the  Lord  of  Ligne,  and
the  Pensionary  of  Mons.  They  set  out  on  their  mission  towards  the  end
of  February,  1477.


1477.]  EMBASSY FROM TIIE GAXTOIS.  367

and  not  without  reason,  for  he  would  not  have  been  able  by
force  to  have  got  that  in  a  long  time  which,  as  you  have
heard,  he  got  in  a  few  days,  by  holding  correspondence  with
him.  Upon  this  account  he  did  not  much  regard  the  re-
quests and  demands  of  the  ambassadors;  besides,  he  was
informed,  and  well  knew  himself,  that  the  Gantois  were  a
people  of  so  turbulent  and  seditious  a  temper,  that  they  would
so  trouble  and  confound  their  rulers  that  no  orders  or  direc-
tion could  be  given  for  carrying  on  the  war  against  him ;
for  no  man  of  sense,  or  any  that  had  borne  authority  under
their  former  princes,  was  consulted  in  anything,  but  rather
persecuted,  and  in  danger  of  being  killed.  But  their  hatred
•was  most  bitter  against  the  Burgundians,  on  account  of  the
great  power  they  had  exercised  in  former  times.  Besides,
it  was  not  unknown  to  the  king  (whose  foresight  in  state-
affairs  was  as  great  as  any  man's  in  his  kingdom)  what  the
custom  of  the  Gantois  had  been  in  all  ages,  and  how  desirous
they  are  to  lessen  the  power  of  their  princes,  provided  it
brings  no  inconvenience  upon  themselves  ;  for  these  reasons,
the  king  resolved  to  foment  and  encourage  the  divisions
which  existed  amongst  them  already ;  for  the  persons  with
whom  he  had  now  to  deal  were  brutes,  and  townsmen  for  the
most  part,  who  had  not  the  least  acquaintance  or  knowledge
of  state-affairs.  Our  king  knew  well  enough  how  to  take
advantage  of  their  ignorance,  and  did  whatever  was  proper  to
advance  his  own  object,  and  destroy  his  enemies.

The  king  took  hold  of  that  expression  of  the  ambassadors,
where  they  said,  "  That  the  young  princess  was  resolved  to
do  nothing  without  the  advice  and  approbation  of  the  three
Estates  of  her  country;"  and  told  them  that  they  were  misin-
formed, not  only  of  her  resolution,  but  of  that  of  other
people  ;  for  he  was  assured  she  intended  to  manage  her  affairs
by  means  of  certain  persons,  who  had  no  inclination  to  peace,
and  that  what  they  proposed,  he  knew  would  be  disowned  by
the  princess.  The  ambassadors  were  extremely  concerned  at
this,  and  as  persons  not  used  to  manage  such  important
affairs,  replied  with  some  warmth,  that  they  were  certain  of
what  they  said,  and  if  it  were  necessary,  would  produce  their
instructions.  It  was  answered,  that  if  the  king  pleaded,
letters  could  be  produced  under  such  a  hand  as  they  would
not  dispute,  importing  that  the  princess  would  commit  the


368  THE MEMOIRS  OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1477.

administration  of  her  affairs  to  no  more  than  four  persons ;
they  persisted  in  stating  the  contrary.  Upon  which  the
king  caused  a  letter  to  be  produced  (which  the  Chancellor  of
Burgundy  and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  had  brought  to
him  when  he  was  at  Peronne),  part  of  it  written  by  the  hand
of  the  young  princess,  part  by  the  Duchess  Dowager  of
Burgundy*  (widow  of  Duke  Charles,  and  sister  to  Edward,
King  of  England),  and  part  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord  of  Ra-
vestain,  brother  to  the  Duke  of  Cleves,  and  nearly  related  to
the  said  princess.  Though  this  letter  was  under  three  several
hands,  yet  it  ran  only  in  the  name  of  the  young  princess,  and
had  been  so  contrived,  to  give  it  greater  weight.  The  contents
of  the  letter  were  to  recommend  the  chancellor  and  the  Lord
of  Humbercourt,  and  their  whole  negotiation,  to  the  king ;  to
let  him  know  that  the  intention  of  the  princess  was  to  have
her  affairs  wholly  governed  by  four  persons  only — to  wit,  the
duchess  dowager  her  mother-in-law,  the  Lord  of  Ravestain,
the  chancellor,  and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt ;  and  to  desire
the  king  that  what  affairs  soever  he  should  be  pleased  to
communicate  to  her,  might  pass  through  their  hands,  and  be
addressed  to  nobody  else.

When  the  Gantois  and  the  rest  of  the  ambassadors  had
seen  this  letter,  they  were  highly  incensed,  and  the  king's
commissioners  well  understood  how  to  improve  and  take
advantage  of  their  passion.  Finally,  the  letter  was  given
into  their  hands,  and  they  were  despatched  without  any
other  material  answer ;  nor  did  they  indeed  desire  any  other,
for  their  thoughts  were  so  wholly  fixed  upon  their  domestic
divisions,  and  the  reconstruction  of  their  whole  system,  that
they  had  no  leisure  to  think  of  anything  so  foreign  as  the
loss  of  Arras,  though  that,  in  my  opinion,  ought  to  have
concerned  them  more  nearly.  But  they  were  for  the  most
part  citizens,  as  I  observed  before,  and  unacquainted  with
public  affairs.  They  returned  immediately  to  Ghent,  where
they  found  the  young  princess,  and  with  her  the  Duke  of
Cleves,  her  near  kinsman  by  the  mother's  side.  He  was
very  old,  and  had  been  educated  in  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
court,  and  for  a  long  time  had  enjoyed  a  pension  of  6000
Rhine  florins,  so  that  he  as  often  waited  on  the  princess  to

*  Margaret  of  York.


1477.] THE  BISHOP  OF  LIEGE  AND  DE  LA  MARCK.  369

receive  his  annual  allowance,  as  out  of  cousinly  affection.
The  Bishop  of  Liege  and  several  other  great  persons  were
with  her  at  the  same  time,  to  advance  their  particular
affairs.  The  Bishop  of  Liege's  business  was  to  get  off  the
payment  of  a  tribute  of  30,000  florins,  or  thereabouts,  which
his  subjects  had  to  pay  to  Duke  Charles  by  agreement  between
them  after  the  wars,  which  I  have  mentioned  before;  all  which
wars  having  been  undertaken  in  the  behalf  and  quarrel  of
the  said  bishop,  there  was  no  necessity  that  he,  whose
interest  doubtless  it  was  to  keep  the  Liegeois  poor  and
humble,  should  solicit  that  favour  for  them  ;  for  though  his
country  was  rich  and  extensive,  he  had  nothing  but  some
little  demesnes  of  his  own  and  his  ecclesiastical  revenue  to
maintain  him.  This  bishop  (who  was  brother  to  the  two
reigning  Dukes  of  Bourbon,  John  II.  and  Peter  II.)  being  a
man  addicted  wholly  to  pleasure  and  a  luxurious  way  of
living,  and  scarce  able  to  distinguish  good  from  bad,  took
into  his  councils  Master  William  de  la  Marck*,  a  noble
gentleman  and  a  brave  soldier,  but  a  man  of  a  cruel  and
malicious  temper,  who  favoured  the  citizens  of  Liege  f,  and
had  been  always  an  enemy  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy's
family,  and  to  the  bishop  himself.  The  Princess  of
Burgundy  gave  this  De  la  Marck  15,000  Rhine  florins,
partly  on  the  bishop's  account,  and  partly  to  induce  him  to

*  William  de  la  Marck,  surnamed  William  with  the  Beard  and  the
Wild  Boar  of  Ardennes,  was  Count  of  Aremberg,  Lord  of  Aigremont
and  Seraing,  sovereign  mayor  of  Liege,  and  prime  minister  of  the  Bishop
of  Liege,  Louis  de  Bourbon.  He  obtained  his  surnames  from  peculiarities
in  his  personal  appearance;  for  he  endeavoured,  by  the  length  and
growth  of  his  beard,  to  conceal  the  circumstance  that  had  originally
procured  him  the  denomination  of  the  Wild  Boar.  This  was  an  unusual
thickness  and  projection  of  the  mouth  and  upper  jaw,  which,  with  the
huge  projecting  side-teeth,  gave  that  resemblance  to  the  brute  creation
which,  joined  to  the  delight  that  De  la  Marck  had  in  haunting  the
forest  so  called,  originally  earned  him  the  title  of  the  Boar  of  Ardennes.
He  afiected  to  delight  in  this  surname,  and  endeavoured  to  deserve  it  by
the  unvarying  cruelty  and  ferocity  of  his  life;  and  to  complete  the  re-
semblance, he  usually  wore  over  his  shoulders  a  strong  surcoat  of  dressed
boar-skin.  He  was  beheaded  on  the  18th  of  June,  1485.  Readers  of
"Qucntin  Durward"  will  remember  Sir  Walter  Scott's  admirable  de-
scription of  this  monster  and  his  crimes.

•j-  He  had  excited  the  Liegeois  to  revolt  against  Duke  Charles  of
Burgundy  and  the  Bishop  of  Liege  in  1468.

VOL. I.  B B


370  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES.  [14-77.

espouse  her  interest ;  but  it  was  not  long  before  he  openly
declared  both  against  her  and  his  master  the  bishop,  and  by
the  assistance  and  favour  of  our  king  would  have  made  his
own  son*  Bishop  of  Liege;  after  which  he  encountered,
defeated,  and  with  his  own  hands  slew  the  bishop  in  battlef,
and  ordered  his  body  to  be  thrown  into  the  river,  where  it
was  found  three  days  after.

The  Duke  of  Cleves  also  was  at  Ghent,  soliciting  a  marriage
between  his  son  J  and  the  young  princess,  which  he  thought
might  be  convenient  for  many  reasons ;  and  truly  I  think
it  might  have  succeeded,  had  the  young  gentleman  found
favour  in  his  person  with  the  young  princess  and  her
ministers;  for  he  was  of  her  own  family,  held  his  duchy  of
the  Dukes  of  Burgundy,  and  had  been  educated  in  their


*  John  de  la  Marck,  Lord  of  Luman.  After  the  death  of  Louis  de
Bourbon,  three  candidates  were  nominated  to  the  vacant  bishopric  of
Liege  by  the  electors.  One  of  these  candidates  was  John  de  la  Marck.
Pope  Sextus  IV.  decided  against  him,  but  directed  that  the  successful
candidate  shoiild  allow  him  a  pension  of  1800  golden  crowns  a  year.

f  The  bishop's  murder  took  place  in  1482.  In  the  months  of  August
and  September  of  that  year,  La  Marck  entered  into  a  conspiracy  with
the  discontented  citizens  of  Liege  against  him,  and  was  aided  therein
with  considerable  sums  of  money  by  the  King  of  France.  By  this  means,
and  by  the  assistance  of  many  murderers  and  banditti,  who  thronged  to
him  as  to  a  leader  befitting  them,  La  Marck  assembled  a  body  of  troops,
whom  he  dressed  in  scarlet  uniform,  with  a  boar's  head  on  the  left
s-leeve.  With  this  little  army  he  approached  the  city  of  Liege.  Upon
this  the  citizens,  who  were  engaged  in  the  conspiracy,  came  to  their
bishop,  and,  offering  to  stand  by  him  to  the  death,  exhorted  him  to
march  out  against  these  robbers.  The  bishop,  therefore,  put  himself  at
the  head  of  a  few  troops  of  his  own,  trusting  to  the  assistance  of  the
people  of  Liege.  But  as  soon  as  they  came  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  the
citizens,  as  before  agreed,  fled  from  the  bishop's  banner,  and  he  was
left  with  his  own  handful  of  adherents.  At  this  moment,  La  Marck
charged  at  the  head  of  his  banditti  with  the  expected  success.  The
bishop  was  brought  before  the  profligate  knight,  who  first  cut  him  over
the  face,  saying,  "  Louis  de  Bourbon,  I  strove  long  to  obtain  your  favour,
but  you  would  not  receive  me;  now  I  have  found  you;"  then  murdered
him  with  his  own  hand,  and  caused  his  body  to  be  exposed  naked  in
the  great  square  of  Liege,  in  front  of  St.  Lambert's  Cathedral.

J  John  II.,  surnamed  the  Clement,  born  on  the  23rd  April,  1458;
married  Matilda,  daughter  of  Henry  III.,  Landgrave  of  Hesse;  and  died
on  the  15th  May,  1521.  He  is  said  to  have  had  sixty-three  illegitimate
children  ;  an  enormous  number  even  in  those  licentious  times !


1477.] THE  PRINCESS'S  LETTER  MADE  PUBLIC.  371

court ;  but  perhaps  the  knowledge  and  character  they  had
received  of  him  caused  his  rejection.


CH.  XVII. — How  the  People  of  Ghent,  upon  the  Eeturn  of  their  Arabas-
dors,  put  the  Chancellor  Hugonet  and  the  Lord  of  Humbereourt  to
Death,  against  their  Princess's  Consent ;  after  which  they,  in  con-
junction with  some  other  Flemish  Troops,  were  defeated  before
Tournay,  and  the  Duke  of  Guelders,  who  commanded  them,  was  slain  ;
and  the  Duchy  of  Burgundy  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  King  of
France. — 1477.

As  soon  as  the  commissioners  returned  to  Ghent,  a  council
was  called,  the  Princess  of  Burgundy  was  placed  in  her
chair  of  state,  with  her  servants  attending  her,  to  receive
their  report.  They  began  with  repeating  their  instructions
from  her  highness,  and  insisted  chiefly  upon  what  they
thought  would  serve  their  own  turns  best.  They  told  her
that,  as  they  were  giving  his  majesty  an  account  of  her
highness's  resolution  to  be  wholly  advised  and  directed  by
the  counsel  of  the  three  Estates,  the  king  had  made  answer
that  he  was  positively  assured  of  the  contrary,  and  offered  to
show  letters  from  her  to  that  purpose.  The  princess  was
extremely  surprised  and  angry ;  and,  presuming  her  letter
had  not  been  seen,  strenuously  denied  it ;  upon  which  the
person  that  spoke  (who  was  the  Pensionary  either  of  Ghent
or  Brussels)  put  his  hand  into  his  bosom,  produced  the  letter
publicly,  and  delivered  it  to  the  council,  by  which  he  showed
himself  to  be  a  person  of  no  honour  or  conscience,  to  have
treated  a  lady  of  her  rank  and  quality  in  such  a  rude  and
disrespectful  manner ;  for,  granting  she  had  committed  an
error,  she  ought  not  to  have  been  vilified  or  confronted  with
it  in  a  public  assembly.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  but  she
was  strangely  confounded,  for  she  had  professed  the  con-
trary to  everybody.  There  were  present  at  the  same  time
the  duchess  dowager,  the  Lord  of  Ravestain,  the  Lord  of
Humbercourt,  and  the  chancellor.

The  Duke  of  Cleves  and  others  had  been  hitherto  enter-
tained and  amused  with  hopes  of  marriage,  but,  upon  this
B  B  2


372  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1477.

discovery,  all  of  them  were  highly  incensed,  and  dissensions
began  now  to  break  out  and  discover  themselves.  The
Duke  of  Cleves  had  all  along  taken  the  Lord  of  Humber-
court  to  be  his  friend,  and  believed  him  willing  to  promote
his  marriage  with  the  princess  ;  but  this  letter  convinced  him
to  the  contrary,  and  made  him  entirely  become  his  enemy.
The  Bishop  of  Liege  had  a  quarrel  with  him  before,  for
what  he  had  done  against  him  at  Liege  (where  the  Lord  of
Humbercourt  had  been  governor),  and  William  de  la  Marck
was  his  adversary  also.  The  young  Count  of  St.  Paul*,
son  to  the  Constable  of  France,  mortally  hated  both  him  and
the  chancellor,  upon  account  of  their  having  delivered  his
father  into  the  king's  hands  at  Peronne,  as  you  have  already
been  informed.  The  Gantois  had  a  spite  against  them,  not
that  they  had  ever  injured  them  in  the  least,  but  merely  on
account  of  the  great  authority  which  they  had  borne ;  and
certainly  they  were  as  deserving  of  the  power  they  exercised
as  any  ministers  of  state  that  ever  had  the  administration  of
affairs  in  their  time,  having  always  discharged  their  trust
faithfully  and  honestly,  as  good  and  loyal  servants  to  their
master.

In  short,  the  letter  having  been  shown  in  the  morning,
the  very  same  nightf  the  chancellor  and  the  Lord  of  Hum-
bercourt were  arrested  by  the  people  of  Ghent ;  and  although
they  had  been  informed  of  their  design,  they  had  no  power
to  attempt  making  their  escape,  as  it  often  happens  in
such  cases.  I  question  not  but  the  Duke  of  Cleves  and
their  other  enemies,  whom  I  mentioned  before,  were  very
active  and  instrumental  in  seizing  them.  With  them  they
also  secured  Monsieur  William  de  Clugny^:,  Bishop  of
Therouenne  (who  died  afterwards  Bishop  of  Poictiers),  and
put  them  all  three  together  into  custody.  The  people  of
Ghent,  contrary  to  their  old  method  of  revenge,  proceeded
legally,  as  they  pretended,  against  them,  and  appointed
lawyers  to  interrogate  them,  one  of  whom  was  of  the  house

*  Pierre  de  Luxembourg,  Count  of  St.  Paul,  Marie,  and  Soissons,  was
created  a  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece  in  1478,  and  died  on  the  25th  of
October,  1482.

f  On  the  19th  of  March,  1477.

|  William  de  Clugny  was  at  this  time  suffragan  to  Henry  of  Lorraine,
Bishop  of  Terouenne.


1477.]  CHARGES AGAINST HTJMBERCOURT.  373

of  La  Marck*,  a  mortal  enemy  to  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt.
Their  first  question  was,  why  they  had  commanded  the  Lord
des  Cordes  to  deliver  up  Arras  ?t  but  that  they  did  not
much  insist  on,  though  indeed  they  had  committed  no  other
action  that  was  criminal ;  but  their  rage  did  not  stop  here,
for  the  citizens  were  not  in  the  least  concerned  to  see  their
prince  divested  of  such  a  town,  nor  were  their  prudence  and
penetration  so  great  as  to  foresee  the  ill  consequences  that
would  attend  the  loss  of  so  important  a  place.  They  insisted
more  particularly  upon  two  points ;  the  one  was,  certain
bribes,  which  it  was  urged  they  had  lately  taken  in  a  certain
cause  between  a  private  person  and  the  city  of  Ghent,  upon
account  of  which  the  chancellor  had  given  judgment  for  the
city  ;  but  to  that  charge  of  bribery  they  made  a  good  defence,
by  alleging  that  their  cause  was  good,  and  their  judgment
was  fair  and  just:  and  as  for  money,  they  had  never  de-
manded it,  or  ordered  it  to  be  demanded,  but  the  townsmen
had  offered  it  of  their  own  accord,  and  they  had  accepted  it.
The  second  article  of  their  charge  was,  that  during  their
tenure  of  authority  under  their  late  master  Duke  Charles,
they  had  done  many  things  contrary  to  the  privileges  and
statutes  of  the  town  of  Ghent,  and  whoever  did  so,  was  con-
demned to  die  by  their  charter.  But  this  charge  was  of  no
force  nor  validity  against  them,  for  they  being  neither  sub-
jects nor  natives  of  that  cityj,  were  not  bound  by  their  pri-
vileges ;  and  if  Duke  Charles  or  his  father  had  infringed  or
encroached  upon  those  said  privileges,  it  was  by  their  own

*  Everard  de  la  Marck,  Lord  of  Aremberg  and  Neufchatel,  a  younger
brother  of  the  Wild  Boar  of  Ardennes.

f  The  convention  in  pursuance  of  which  Louis  XL  occupied  Arras
was  not  the  work  of  Hugonet  and  Humbercourt  only,  but  of  the  embassy
of  which  they  were  members ;  and  their  conduct  had  been  not  only
justified,  but  highly  praised  by  the  States-General,  who,  on  hearing  their
report,  sent  other  envoys  to  thank  Louis  XI.  for  the  suspension  of
hostilities  which  the  said  ambassadors  had  obtained  by  means  of  the  said
convention.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  Gantois  should  have
laid  little  stress  on  this  charge.  See  some  valuable  remarks  on  this
subject  by  M.  Gachard,  in  the  sixth  volume  of  the  Bulletins  de  1' Aca-
demic Royale  de  Bruxelles.

t  The  chancellor  was  a  Burgundian,  and  Humbercourt  a  native  of
Picardy.  They  were,  therefore,  quite  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Gantois.

B  B  3


374  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1477-

act  and  deed,  and  they  had  consented  to  it  by  articles  of
agreement  that  had  been  drawn  up  between  them,  after
numerous  wars  and  dissensions  ;  and  the  remaining  privi-
leges which  were  confirmed  to  them  (which,  indeed,  were
greater  than  was  necessary  for  their  advantage)  were  still
preserved  inviolably,  without  the  least  diminution.  Not-
withstanding the  defence  of  these  two  worthy  and  eminent
persons  to  the  two  charges  that  were  brought  against  them
(for  the  chief  one,  which  I  have  mentioned  before,  was  not
insisted  on),  they  were  both  condemned  to  death  by  the  ma-
gistrates of  the  city  of  Ghent,  assembled  in  their  Town-hall,
for  infringement  of  their  civic  privileges  and  receiving
bribes.  After  judgment  was  given,  the  two  lords  were
astonished  at  their  cruel  sentence,  and  not  without  reason,
for  being  in  their  enemies'  hands,  there  was  no  possibility  of
escaping.  However,  they  thought  fit  to  appeal  to  the  King
of  France  in  his  court  of  Parliament  at  Paris,  hoping  at  least
it  would  defer  their  execution  for  some  time,  and,  in  the
meanwhile,  give  their  friends  an  opportunity  of  exerting
themselves  to  save  their  lives.  Before  sentence  was  passed,
they  had  been  put  upon  the  rack,  contrary  to  all  law  and
justice.  In  six  days'  time  their  whole  process  was  finished,
and  when  sentence  was  given,  in  spite  of  their  appeal,  they
allowed  them  but  three  hours  for  confession  and  the  settle-
ment of  their  temporal  affairs,  upon  expiration  of  which
they  were  brought  upon  the  scaffold*,  which  had  been  erected
in  the  market-place.

As  soon  as  the  Princess  of  Burgundy  (since  Duchess  of
Austria)  had  received  the  news  of  their  condemnation,  she
came  herself  in  person  to  the  Town-hall  to  beg  their  lives  ;
but,  finding  she  could  not  prevail,  she  ran  into  the  market-
place, where  all  the  people  were  assembled  together  in  arms,
and  saw  the  two  prisoners  upon  the  scaffold.  The  young
princess  was  in  mourning,  with  her  head  dressed  merely  with
a  simple  kerchief,  on  purpose  to  move  pity  and  compassion,
and,  in  this  posture,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  and  her  hair
dishevelled,  she  begged  and  estreated  the  people  to  have  pity
upon  her  two  servants,  and  restore  them  to  her  again.  A
great  part  of  the  people  would  fain  have  complied  with  her

*  They  were  beheaded  on  the  3rd  of  April,  1477.


1477.] EXECUTION  OF  HUMBERCOURT.  375

request,  and  were  willing  they  should  be  saved,  but  others
violently  opposed  it,  and  they  were  at  push  of  pike  one  with
another.  At  last,  those  who  were  for  the  execution,  being
the  stronger  party,  called  out  to  the  executioners  to  do  their
office,  and  immediately  both  their  heads  were  struck  off,  and
the  poor  princess  returned  to  her  palace  very  sad  and  discon-
solate for  the  loss  of  the  two  persons  in  whom  she  chiefly
confided.

After  the  Gantois  had  committed  this  exploit,  they  re-
moved from  about  the  Princess  the  Lord  of  liavestain  and
the  duchess  dowager,  Duke  Charles's  widow,  because  both
of  them  were  mentioned  in  the  letter  which  the  chancellor
and  the  Lord  of  Humbercourt  had  delivered  to  the  king,  as
you  have  heard;  so  that  the  citizens  had  now  the  sole  autho-
rity and  management  of  the  poor  young  princess ;  and  well
may  she  be  called  poor,  not  only  in  respect  of  her  great  loss
of  the  important  towns  which  had  been  taken  from  her,  which
were  irrecoverable  by  force,  by  reason  of  the  great  power
and  strength  of  the  king,  who  was  now  in  possession  of  them
(though  by  favour,  friendship,  or  composition,  she  might  still
hope  to  have  them  restored) ;  but  her  greatest  misfortune  was
that  she  was  in  the  power  of  the  mortal  and  inveterate
enemies  of  her  family.  Their  actions,  however,  in  the  main
proceeded  rather  from  folly  than  cunning,  the  generality  of
them  being  stupid  and  heavy  mechanics,  who  have  the  sole
power  and  administration  of  affairs  among  the  Gantois,  though
they  be  persons  of  no  experience  in  politics,  and  no  know-
ledge in  the  government  of  a  state.  Their  cunning  consists
chiefly  in  two  points;  one  is  always  to  desire  and  endeavour
to  weaken  and  retrench  the  power  of  their  prince;  the  other
is,  that  when  they  have  been  guilty  of  the  least  false  step,
and  find  themselves  not  able  to  defend  it,  never  any  persons
seek  peace  with  so  much  humility  and  submission  as  they  do,
nor  give  more  liberally  to  purchase  it ;  for  this  I  will  say
of  them,  never  any  people  understood  better  how  to  make
their  applications,  and  where  to  place  their  bribes,  than  the
Gantois.

Whilst  the  king  was  busy  in  subduing  the  towns  and
places  above  mentioned  in  the  marches  ofPicardy,  his  army
was  in  Burgundy,  under  the  command,  apparently,  of  the

B  B  4


376  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMINES. [1477.

Prince  of  Orange*  (who  is  still  reigning),  a  native  and  subject
of  the  county  of  Burgundy,  but  one  who  had  recently,  for  the
second  time,  become  an  enemy  of  Duke  Charles,  so  that  the
king  made  use  of  him,  because  he  was  a  powerful  noble  in  both
the  county  and  duchy  of  Burgundy,  and  was  likewise  well
connected  and  greatly  beloved.  But  the  Lord  of  Craon  was
the  king's  lieutenant,  and  had  the  real  charge  of  the  army,
and  was  the  person  in  whom  the  king  reposed  most  con-
fidence ;  for  he  was  a  man  of  great  wisdom,  and  thoroughly
devoted  to  his  master,  though  somewhat  too  fond  of  gain.
This  Lord  of  Craon,  when  he  drew  near  Burgundy,  sent  for-
ward the  Prince  of  Orange  and  others  to  Dijon,  to  use
persuasion,  and  require  the  people  to  render  obedience  to  the
king ;  and  they  managed  the  matter  so  adroitly,  principally
by  means  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  that  the  city  of  Dijon  and
all  the  other  towns  in  the  duchy  of  Burgundy,  together  with
many  in  the  county,  gave  their  allegiance  to  the  king.  But
Aussonne  and  some  other  strongholds  held  out  for  the  Prin-
cess Mary.

Large  estates  were  promised  to  the  Prince  of  Orange  for
that  service,  and  furthermore,  that  all  the  towns  in  the
county  of  Burgundy  should  be  placed  in  his  hands,  which
came  to  him  in  succession  from  the  Prince  of  Orange  his
grandfather^,  and  concerning  which  he  was  in  litigation  with
his  uncles,  the  Lords  of  Chasteau-guyon^:,  who  he  said  had
been  favoured  by  the  late  Duke  Charles.  For  their  cause
had  been  solemnly  argued  before  him  for  several  days  §,  and
the  duke,  by  advice  of  many  learned  clerks,  gave  judgment

*  John  II.,  Prince  of  Orange,  son  of  William  VII.,  Prince  of  Orange,
and  Catherine,  daughter  of  Richard  de  Bretagne,  Count  of  Etarapes.  He
succeeded  his  father  in  1475.  Having  abandoned  the  cause  of  Louis
XL,  and  joined  the  Duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  King  of  France  issued  a
decree  against  him,  on  the  7th  of  September,  1477,  by  which  he  was
declared  guilty  of  high  treason,  and  banished  the  realm.  He  died  on
the  25th  of  April,  1502.

f  Louis  de  Chalon,  Prince  of  Orange,  son  of  Jean  de  Chalon,  Baron
of  Arlay,  and  Marie  de  Baux.  He  died  on  the  13th  of  December,  1463,
aged  seventy-five.

J  Louis  and  Hugh  de  Chalon,  Lords  of  Chasteau-guyon,  were  children
of  the  above-mentioned  Louis  de  Chalon,  by  Eleanor  of  Armagnac.

§  This  cause  had  already  been  argued  by  his  father,  William  VJtt.  of
Orange,  before  Duke  Philip  the  Good.


1477.] THE  GANTOIS  PERSECUTE  THE  BTJRGUNDIANS. 377

against  the  prince,  at  least  so  he  stated ;  for  which  cause
he  left  the  duke's  service,  and  joined  the  king.  But  notwith-
standing his  promises,  when  the  Lord  of  Craon  found  himself
in  possession  of  the  places  above  mentioned,  and  had  in  his
hands  all  the  towns  and  estates  to  which  the  prince  laid  claim
as  part  of  his  grandfather's  succession,  he  would  not  give  them
up  to  the  Prince  of  Orange  for  all  the  solicitation  he  could
make.  Wherefore  the  king  wrote  to  him  on  several  occasions
without  any  dissimulation,  for  he  knew  well  that  the  Lord  of
Craon  was  on  bad  terms  with  the  Prince  of  Orange  ;  but  the
king  was  afraid  of  displeasing  the  Lord  of  Craon,  for  he
had  all  the  country  under  his  control ;  and  his  majesty  did
not  think  the  Prince  of  Orange  would  have  courage  to  stir
up  Burgundy  to  revolt,  as  he  afterwards  did  to  a  very  great
extent.  But  for  the  present,  I  will  leave  this  subject  till  a
more  convenient  place.*

After  the  Gantois  had  taken  the  government  of  the  young
princess  into  their  hands,  and  caused  her  two  favourites  to  be
beheaded,  and  removed  such  persons  from  the  court  as  they
thought  obnoxious  to  them,  they  began  to  assume  the  power
of  appointing  and  displacing  all  officers,  both  civil  and  mili-
tary ;  and  they  plundered  and  banished  all  such  as  had
served  the  house  of  Burgundy  in  any  remarkable  way,
without  any  respect  to  their  merit  or  character ;  and  their
malice  being  more  particularly  aimed  at  the  Burgundians,
they  banished  them  all,  as  if  they  had  laboured  and  studied  as
much  to  force  them  into  the  king's  service  as  his  majesty  did
to  allure  them  ;  and  he  used  all  the  ways  of  fair  words,  great
presents,  and  large  prbmises,  besides  the  terror  of  his  forces,
which  were  very  numerous  in  their  country,  to  gain  them
over  to  his  interest.  To  begin  their  authority  with  a  piece
of  novelty,  they  released  the  Duke  of  Guelders  out  of
prison,  who  had  been  committed  by  Duke  Charles,  and
endured  a  long  confinement  for  reasons  previously  mentioned.
The  towns  of  Bruges,  Ghent,  and  Ypres,  having  assembled
an  army  among  themselves,  they  made  the  Duke  of  Guelders
general  of  it,  and  sent  him  with  orders  to  burn  and  demolish

*  In  previous  editions,  the  two  preceding  paragraphs  have  been
placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  book.  They  are  here  restored  to
the  position  they  occupy  in  the  manuscripts  and  in  the  original  French
editions  of  these  Memoirs.


378  THE MEMOIRS OP PHILIP DE COMMINES.  [1477.

the  suburbs  of  Tournay  ;  but  that  enterprise  proved  little  to
his  advantage.  It  had  been  better  for  him  and  themselves,
too,  if  they  had  sent  a  body  of  200  men  to  have  reinforced
the  besieged  garrison  of  Arras,  or  10,000  francs  to  have
paid  those  troops  that  were  there  already  (provided  they
had  arrived  in  time),  than  ten  such  armies,  though  it  con-
sisted of  12,000  or  14,000  well-paid  men  ;  because,  all  they
could  hope  for  by  this  expedition,  was  to  burn  a  few  pitiful
houses  of  no  importance  to  the  king,  as  they  paid  him  no
tax  ;  but  their  knowledge  in  state  affairs  was  not  deep.

The  Duke  of  Guelders  having  invested  Tournay,  ordered
the  suburbs  to  be  set  on  fire.  There  were  in  the  town  about
300  or  400  men-at-arms,  who  sallied  out  and  fell  upon  the  rear
of  the  besiegers,  and  they  at  once  began  to  fly.  The  Duke  of
Guelders,  being  a  valiant  prince,  thought  to  restore  the
fight  and  give  his  men  opportunity  to  retreat ;  but,  not
being  vigorously  sustained,  he  was  knocked  off  his  horse,
and  himself,  with  a  good  number  of  his  men,  slain,  though
in  the  action  there  were  not  many  of  the  king's  soldiers
engaged  ;  and  therefore  with  this  loss  the  rest  of  the  Flemish
army  retreated.  The  Princess  of  Burgundy  (according  to
report)  was  very  well  pleased  with  their  misfortune,  and  so
were  all  those  who  had  any  kindness  for  her ;  for  she  was
credibly  informed,  that  the  Gantois  had  resolved  to  force
her  to  a  marriage  with  the  Duke  of  Guelders ;  being  as-
sured, that  by  fair  means  they  could  never  have  prevailed
with  her,  for  the  reasons  mentioned  in  a  previous  part  of
these  Memoirs.


CH.  XVin. — A  Digression,  serving  to  demonstrate  that  Wars  and  Divi-
sions are  permitted  by  God  for  the  Punishment  of  wicked  Princes  and
People,  with  various  Arguments  and  Instances  which  happened  in  the
Author's  Life-time,  chiefly  intended  for  the  Instruction  of  Princes.

I  CANNOT  understand  why  God  has  preserved  the  city  of
Ghent  so  long,  which  has  occasioned  so  much  mischief,  and
which  is  no  good  either  to  the  public,  or  the  country  wherein
it  is  seated,  and  much  less  to  its  prince.  It  is  not  like
Bruges,  which  indeed  is  a  place  of  trade,  and  of  great  resort


1477.] ON  THE  BALANCE  OF  POWER.  379

for  foreigners  of  all  nations,  in  which  more  commodities  and
merchandise  are  disposed  of  than  in  any  other  town  in
Europe,  so  that  to  have  had  that  town  destroyed,  would
have  been  an  irreparable  loss ;  but  it  seems  to  me,  that
God  has  not  made  any  created  being  in  this  world,  neither
man  nor  beast,  nor  anything  else,  but  He  has  set  up  some
other  thing  in  opposition  to  it,  to  keep  it  within  just  bounds
of  fear  and  humility.  In  this  respect  Ghent  is  admirably
well  situated,  for  certainly  the  countries  round  about  it  are
the  most  luxurious,  the  most  splendid,  and  the  most  addicted
to  those  pleasures  to  which  man  is  inclined,  of  any  country
in  Christendom ;  yet  they  are  good  Christians,  and  to  out-
ward appearance  God  is  religiously  honoured  and  served.
But  it  is  not  the  house  of  Burgundy  alone  that  has  a  thorn
in  its  side ;  France  has  England  as  a  check :  England  has
Scotland  ;  and  Spain,  Portugal  (I  will  not  mention  Granada*,
for  they  are  enemies  to  the  true  faith,  though  otherwise
Granada  has  given  the  kingdom  of  Castile  much  trouble  to
this  very  day.)  The  princes  of  Italy,  who  generally  have
no  other  title  to  their  territories  but  what  they  derive  from
Heaven  (and  of  that  we  can  have  no  certain  knowledge),
and  who  rule  their  subjects  with  cruelty,  violence,  and
oppression  in  respect  to  their  taxes,  are  curbed  and  kept  in
check  by  the  commonwealths  and  free  states  in  Italy,
namely,  Venice,  Florence,  Genoa,  Bologna,  Sienna,  Pisa,
Lucca,  and  others  ;  which  are  in  a  great  many  respects  dia-
metrically opposite,  they  to  the  princes,  and  the  princes  to
them  ;  and  all  keep  a  watchful  eye  over  one  another,  that
neither  of  them  may  grow  too  powerful  for  his  neighbour.
But  to  come  to  particulars  in  relation  to  the  state  of  Italy.
The  house  of  Arragon  has  that  of  Anjou  to  curb  it ;  the
Visconti  Dukes  of  Milan  have  the  house  of  Orleans,  and
though  they  be  feeble  abroad,  their  subjects  hold  them  in
great  dread.  The  Venetians  (as  I  said  before)  have  the
princes  of  Italy,  but  more  especially  the  Florentines,  in
opposition  against  them;  and  the  Florentines,  the  neigh-

*  Granada  was  at  this  time  a  Moorish  kingdom.  At  the  beginning  of
the  eighth  century,  the  Saracens  invaded  Spain,  and  maintained  their
footing  there  until  1492,  wheu  they  were  finally  expelled  by  Ferdinand
and  Isabella.


380  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477.

bouring  commonwealths  of  Sienna  and  Genoa.  The  Ge-
noese are  sufficiently  plagued  with  their  own  bad  govern-
ment and  treachery  towards  each  other,  not  to  mention  their
factions  and  parties,  the  Fregosi,  the  Adorni,  the  Dorias,  and
others  ;  but  this  everybody  knows  so  well,  that  I  shall  insist
no  longer  on  it.

In  Germany  you  are  well  acquainted  with  the  animosity
that  rages  between  the  houses  of  Austria  and  Bavaria,  and
how  the  house  of  Bavaria  is  subdivided  within  itself.  The
house  of  Austria  again  has  the  Swiss  for  its  enemy,  upon
the  account  only  of  a  small  village  called  Switz  (not  able  to
raise  600  men),  but  now  the  whole  country  takes  its  deno-
mination from  it,  and  is  so  increased  in  power  and  riches
that  two  of  the  best  towns  belonging  to  the  house  of  Austria
are  Zurich  and  Fribourg,  both  of  which  are  in  Switzerland.
Be&ides,  they  have  won  several  memorable  battles,  and  slain
several  of  the  Dukes  of  Austria  in  the  field.  There  are  also
many  other  factions  and  private  animosities  in  Germany ;
the  house  of  Cleves  against  the  house  of  Guelders,  and  the
Dukes  of  Guelders  against  the  Dukes  of  Juliers.  The
Easterlings  (that  remote  people  in  the  north)  withstand  the
Kings  of  Denmark ;  and,  to  speak  in  general  of  all  Germany,
there  are  so  many  fortified  places,  and  so  many  people  in
them  ready  for  all  manner  of  mischief  (as  plundering,
robbing,  and  killing)  upon  every  trivial  occasion,  that  it  is  a
wonder  to  think  of  it.  A  private  person,  with  only  one
servant  to  wait  on  him,  will  defy  a  whole  city,  and  declare
war  against  a  duke,  that  he  may  have  a  pretence  to  rob  and
plunder  him ;  especially  if  he  has  a  little  castle,  perched
upon  a  rock,  to  retreat  to,  where  he  can  keep  twenty  or
thirty  horse,  to  scour  the  country,  and  plunder  according  to
his  directions.  Robbers  of  this  kind  are  seldom  punished
by  the  German  princes,  who  employ  them  upon  all  occasions;
but  the  towns  and  free  states  punish  them  severely  whenever
they  catch  any  of  them,  and  have  often  besieged  and  blown
up  their  castles,  for  which  purpose  they  have  generally  a
certain  number  of  forces  in  pay,  who  are  always  in  readiness
to  defend  them.  So  that  these  princes  and  towns  in  Ger-
many are  placed  in  this  opposition  and  discord,  that  no  one
may  encroach  upon  his  neighbour  —  which  is  absolutely
necessary,  not  only  in  Germany,  but  all  the  world  over.


1477.] ON THE ADVANTAGES OF KNOWLEDGE.  381

I  have  spoken  only  of  Europe,  for  of  the  affairs  of  Asia
and  Africa  I  am  not  sufficiently  informed,  though  I  have
heard  they  are  not  exempted  from  factions  and  wars,  which
are  carried  on  even  more  mechanically  than  ours  ;  for  I
myself  have  known,  that  in  some  places  in  Africa  they  have
sold  one  another  to  the  Christians  ;  as  Portugal  can  witness,
which  has  had,  and  still  has,  abundance  of  slaves  of  that
nature.  But  I  think,  we  have  little  reason  to  object  on  this
account  against  the  Saracens,  for  there  are  some  places  in
Christendom  where  Christians  practise  the  same  thing,  but
they  are  either  situated  under  the  Turk's  dominion,  or  else
bordering  upon  it,  as  in  some  parts  of  Greece.

It  may  seem,  therefore,  that  these  factions  and  parties
which  prevail  everywhere,  are  necessary  for  the  world,  and
that  these  contradictions  and  oppositions  which  God  has
set  up  against  all  states,  and  almost  against  every  private
person,  are  so  many  pricks  and  spurs  to  enforce  them  to  be
just.  For  my  own  part,  it  seems  so  to  me  (who  am  a  person
but  of  indifferent  learning,  and  will  not  hold  any  opinion
that  is  not  obvious  to  every  one's  capacity),  and  that  chiefly
upon  account  of  the  brutishness  of  some  princes,  and  the
wickedness  of  others,  who  have  judgment  and  experience
enough,  but  choose  to  pervert  it ;  for  a  prince,  or  any  man
else,  who  has  power  and  authority  over  those  with  whom  he
resides,  and  has  seen  of  read  more  than  other  people,  must
of  necessity  be  greatly  improved,  or  rendered  worse  by  his
conversation  with  men  and  books ;  for  wicked  men  grow
the  worse  for  their  knowledge,  but  the  good  improve
extremely.  However,  it  is  probable  that  learning  does
more  good  than  harm  to  the  persons  that  are  possessed  of  it,
for  being  conscious  within  themselves  when  they  act  con-
trary to  their  reason,  it  deters  them  from  doing  wrong,  or
at  least  from  doing  it  so  often  as  perhaps  they  otherwise
would ;  and  though  they  be  not  really  good,  it  makes
them  unwilling  to  appear  bad,  or  be  thought  to  do  injustice  to
any  one.  Of  this  I  have  seen  many  instances  among  great  per-
sons, where  learning  has  restrained  them  from  putting  in
practice  their  mischievous  intentions ;  and  sometimes  men  are
deterred  by  the  prospect  and  dread  of  God's  judgments,  of
which  they  have  a  greater  idea  than  the  ignorant,  who  have
neither  observed  nor  read  anything.  This,  therefore,  I  will


382  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMTNES. [1477.

venture  to  say,  that  those  princes  who  do  not  know  themselves,
and  for  want  of  a  right  education,  or  perhaps  through  some
defect  in  their  constitution,  are  indiscreet  and  rash,  cannot
have  any  true  knowledge  how  far  God  has  extended  the
power  and  dominion  which  He  has  given  them  over  their
subjects :  for  they  have  neither  read  nor  learned  it  them-
selves, nor  conversed  with  any  but  fawning  sycophants,  who
know  nothing  of  the  matter,  and  if  they  did,  would  be
afraid  to  instruct  and  admonish  them,  for  fear  they  should
incur  their  royal  displeasure  :  and  if  any  bold-spirited  men
venture  to  remonstrate,  they  are  so  far  from  being  en-
couraged in  it,  that  they  are  at  best  looked  upon  as  fools,
and  many  times  their  good  intentions  are  misinterpreted.

It  is  therefore  to  be  concluded,  that  neither  natural  reason,
nor  our  own  knowledge,  nor  the  fear  of  God,  nor  love  of  our
neighbour,  nor  anything  else,  is  always  sufficient  to  restrain
us  from  doing  violence  to  one  another,  or  to  withhold  us
from  retaining  what  we  have  got  already,  or  to  hinder  us
from  usurping  the  possessions  of  other  people  by  all  possible
ways.  For  if  great  princes  once  get  possession  of  any
towns  or  castles,  though  they  belong  to  their  nearest  rela-
tions or  neighbours,  all  the  reasons  above  mentioned  will
not  prevail  with  them  to  restore  them ;  and  after  they  have
once  published  some  artful  reasons  or  specious  pretence  for
keeping  them,  everybody  applauds  their  reasons,  especially
those  who  are  nearest  about  them,  and  desirous  of  being  in
their  favour.  I  am  not  speaking  here  of  disputes  between
inferior  persons,  for  they  have  superiors  above  them  who
sometimes  do  them  justice  ;  at  least,  if  a  man's  cause  be  at  all
good,  his  pockets  full,  and  he  willing  to  part  with  his  money,
and  unless  the  court  (that  is  the  prince  under  whose  autho-
rity he  lives)  opposes  him.  So  that  it  would  seem  probable
that  God  is  as  it  were  constrained  to  show  many  signs,  and  to
chastise  us  with  many  rods  for  our  indolence  and  perverse-
ness  ;  but  the  brutishness  and  ignorance  of  princes  are  very
dangerous  and  dreadful,  because  the  happiness  or  misery  of
their  subjects  depends  wholly  upon  them.  Wherefore,  if  a
prince  who  is  powerful  and  has  a  large  standing  army,  by
the  help  of  which  he  can  raise  money  to  pay  his  troops,  or
to  spend  in  a  luxurious  way  of  living,  or  in  anything  that
does  not  directly  tend  to  the  advancement  of  the  common


1477.]  ON THE TYRANNY OF PRINCES.  383

good,  and  if  he  will  not  retrench  his  outrageous  extrava-
gances himself,  and  those  courtiers  that  are  about  him
rather  endeavour  to  flatter  and  applaud  him  in  everything
he  does,  than  to  dissuade  him  from  doing  ill  (for  fear  of
incurring  his  displeasure),  who  can  apply  any  remedy  in
this  case  but  God  alone  ?

God  indeed  does  not  now  converse  with  mankind  after  the
same  manner  as  He  did  of  old,  nor  are  there  any  prophets
to  declare  His  pleasure,  but  His  word  is  sufficiently  known
and  declared,  and  clear  enough  to  any  that  are  willing  to
understand  it ;  so  that  there  will  be  none  excused  for  igno-
rance, especially  if  they  have  had  time  and  natural  sense  to
consider  these  matters.  How,  then,  shall  those  great  princes
escape  who  keep  their  people  in  such  subjection,  that  they
raise  what  taxes  they  please  by  force,  by  which  they  compel
their  subjects  to  obedience,  and  enforce  the  least  of  their
commands  with  penalty  of  life  ?  Some  of  them  punish  under
pretence  of  justice  and  have  those  about  them  who  are
always  ready  to  comply  with  their  wishes,  and  make  a  capital
crime  of  what  in  itself  is  a  venial  offence.  If  they  want
sufficient  evidence  to  condemn  a  man,  they  have  ways  of
multiplying  interrogatories,  and  falsifying  the  examinations
of  the  witnesses,  to  weary  the  defendant,  and  destroy  him
with  expenses,  delaying  his  trial,  and  by  that  means  giving
encouragement  to  any  that  will  bring  a  fresh  information
against  him.  If  that  will  not  do,  and  answers  not  their
intentions,  they  have  a  shorter  method,  by  stating  the  case
as  they  please  themselves,  and  giving  out  it  was  necessary
the  culprit  should  be  made  an  example  of.  To  others  that
are  of  a  higher  quality,  and  depend  upon  them,  they  say,
"  You  have  disobeyed  and  done  contrary  to  the  duty  and
allegiance  you  owe  me  :"  and  upon  that  bare  pretence  and
allegation  they  proceed,  if  they  can,  to  seize  upon  their
estates  by  force,  and  reduce  them  to  extreme  poverty  and
distress.  If  they  have  a  neighbour  that  is  of  a  martial  tem-
per, they  will  be  sure  not  to  disturb  him  :  but  if  his  kingdom
is  in  a  poor  weak  condition,  he  will  never  be  left  at  rest :
they  will  assert  he  has  assisted  their  enemies,  or  levied  con-
tributions on  their  countries ;  or  else  they  will  excite  quar-
rels to  give  them  occasion  to  ruin  him.  If  that  will  not  do,
they  will  support  their  enemies  secretly  against  him,  and


384  THE  MEMOIRS  OP  PHILIP  DE COMMIXES.  [1477.

will  supply  them  with  troops.  They  think  their  own  sub-
jects live  too  long,  though  they  have  served  their  predeces-
sors never  so  faithfully,  and  will  displace*  them  to  make
room  for  new  creatures  of  their  own.  They  will  molest  and
quarrel  with  the  clergy  upon  the  score  of  their  benefices,  in
order  to  extort  compositions  for  the  enriching  of  some
person  recommended  to  them  by  such  as  are  subservient  to
their  looser  pleasures,  and  who  often  have  great  influ-
ence upon  them.  They  exhaust  their  nobility  in  preparations
for  war,  which  they  undertake  at  their  pleasure,  without
consulting  their  council,  or  such  as  they  ought  to  advise
with  before  they  enter  upon  action,  though  they  have  em-
ployed both  their  persons  and  estates  to  enable  them  to  un-
dertake it.  To  the  common  people  they  leave  little  or
nothing,  though  their  taxes  be  greater  than  they  ought ;  nor
do  they  take  any  care  to  restrain  the  licentiousness  of  their
soldiers,  who  are  constantly  quartered  throughout  the  country
without  paying  anything  ;  and  commit  all  manner  of  excesses
and  insolencies,  as  everybody  knows  ;  for  not  contented  with
the  ordinary  provisions  for  which  they  are  paid,  they  beat
and  abuse  the  poor  country  people,  and  force  them  to  buy
bread,  wine,  and  other  dainties,  on  purpose  for  their  eating  ;
and  if  the  good  man's  wife  or  daughter  happens  to  be  hand-
some, his  wisest  course  is  to  keep  them  out  of  their  sight.
And  yet,  where  money  is  plenty,  it  would  be  no  hard  matter
to  prevent  this  disorder  and  confusion,  by  paying  them  every
two  months  at  farthest,  which  would  obviate  their  pretence
of  want  of  pay,  and  leave  them  without  excuse,  and
cause  no  inconvenience  to  the  prince,  because  his  money  is
raised  punctually  every  year.  I  speak  this  in  compassion
to  this  kingdom,  which  certainly  is  more  oppressed  and
harassed  in  quartering  soldiers  than  any  in  all  Europe ;  nor
can  anything  but  the  wisdom  of  a  king  redress  these  injuries.
But  neighbouring  countries  have  other  modes  of  punish-
ment.


*  As  Louis  XI.  did  after  the  death  of  his  father,  Charles  VII.


1477.] PRINCES DEPENDENT UPON THEIR  SUBJECTS. 385


CH.  XIX. — On  the  Character  of  the  French  People,  and  the  Govern-
ment of  their  Kings,  with  Reflections  on  the  Misfortunes  which  occur
to  both  great  and  smalL

BUT  to  proceed  in  my  design.  Is  there  any  king  or  prince
upon  earth  who  has  power  to  raise  one  penny  of  money,
except  on  his  own  demesnes,  without  the  consent  of  the  poor
subject  who  is  to  pay  it,  unless  it  be  by  tyranny  and  violence  ?
It  may  be  objected,  that  there  are  some  times  in  which  the
assembling  of  great  councils  cannot  be  waited  for,  and  that
their  debates  would  be  too  tedious.  The  preparations  and
beginnings  of  war  are  never  so  sudden  but  kings  have  time
enough  to  consider  of  it  ;  and  when  it  is  begun  with  the  con-
sent and  concurrence  of  his  subjects,  the  prince  is  always
more  strong  and  formidable  to  his  enemy.  If  it  be  a  de-
fensive war,  the  storm  is  seen  afar  off,  especially  if  it  be  an
invasion,  and  then  the  good  subject  cannot  complain,  or
refuse  anything  that  is  demanded  :  nor  can  any  case  happen
so  suddenly,  but  some  important  persons  may  be  called  to-
gether, to  show  the  necessity  of  the  war,  which  is  much  better
than  to  commence  hostilities  arbitrarily  and  feignedly,  with  a
design  only  to  raise  money.  Money,  I  am  sensible,  is  necessary
at  all  times  to  secure  the  frontiers,  in  times  of  peace  as  well  as
war,  that  they  may  not  be  surprised  ;  but  all  should  be  done
with  moderation,  and  depends  much  upon  the  wisdom  of  the
prince;  for  if  he  be  a  good  man  he  knows  what  God  is,  what
the  world  is,  what  he  ought  to  do,  and  what  he  ought  to
avoid.  In  my  opinion,  of  all  the  countries  in  the  world  with
which  I  was  ever  acquainted,  the  government  is  no  where
so  well  managed,  the  people  no  where  less  obnoxious  to
violence  and  oppression,  nor  their  houses  less  liable  to  be
destroyed  and  demolished  by  war  than  in  England,  for  there
the  calamities  fall  only  upon  the  authors  of  them.

Of  all  the  kings  in  the  world  our  sovereign  has  the  least
reason  to  use  this  expression,  "  I  have  the  privilege  to  raise
what  money  I  please  upon  my  subjects  ;"  for  that  is  a
power  neither  he  nor  any  prince  else  has  ;  and  they  do  him
no  honour  who  say  so  in  order  to  make  him  appear  greater,
for  they  make  him  only  more  terrible  and  odious  to  his

VOL. I.  C C


386  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477.

neighbours,  who  would  never  consent  to  live  under  his
government.  But,  if  our  king  or  his  courtiers,  who  are
desirous  of  augmenting  his  reputation  and  grandeur,  were  to
say  thus :  "  My  subjects  are  so  good  and  loyal,  that  they
refuse  me  nothing  I  ask  them ;  1  am  the  most  feared,  best
obeyed,  and  best  served  by  my  subjects  of  any  prince  in  the
world;  my  subjects  are  the  most  patient  under  injury  and
affliction,  and  most  forgetful  of  all  past  sufferings;"  this,  in
my  judgment,  is  more  honourable  (and  I  am  sure  it  is  true)
than  to  say,  "  I  take  what  I  will ;  I  have  privilege  to  do
it,  and  I  will  keep  it."  Our  late  King  Charles  V.  used  no
such  expression  ;  nor  indeed  did  I  ever  hear  it  from  any
king ;  but  I  have  heard  it  from  their  servants,  who  thought
they  had  done  their  masters  great  service  thereby;  but  they
either  mistook  the  interest  of  their  master,  or  spoke  thus  to
show  their  devotion  to  his  power;  if  otherwise,  they  did  not
know  what  they  said.

As  an  instance  of  the  affections  of  the  French  to  their
prince,  we  need  look  no  further  back  than  our  own  times.  At
the  meeting  of  the  three  Estates  at  Tours*,  upon  the  death  of
our  good  master  Louis  XI.  (whom  God  pardon  !),  who  died
in  1483,  that  assembly  in  such  a  juncture  might  be  thought
dangerous ;  and  some  there  were  (but  considerable  neither
for  their  quality  nor  virtue)  who  said  then,  and  have  often
repeated  it  since,  that  it  was  a  diminution  of  the  king's
prerogative,  and  no  less  than  treason  against  him  to  talk  of
assembling  the  Estates  ;  but  it  is  such  as  these  who  commit
treason  against  God,  the  king,  and  their  country ;  and  those
who  use  these  expressions  are  in  undeserved  authority  and
reputation,  and  are  wholly  unfit  for  anything  but  flattery,
whispering  lies  and  stories  into  the  ears  of  their  masters,
which  make  them  afraid  of  these  assemblies,  lest  they  should
take  notice  of  them  and  their  manners,  and  call  them  to  an
account  for  their  villanous  practices.  This  kingdom  was
at  that  time  accounted  very  weak  by  all  people,  having
endured  for  twenty  years  and  upwards,  such  great  and  hor-
rible taxes  as  exceeded  all  precedent  by  above  3,000,000  of

*  The  first  session  of  the  Estates,  at  their  meeting  at  Tours  in  1483,  was
held  on  the  14th  of  January  ;  their  last  occurred  on  the  14th  of  March
following.


1477.] ON  THE  OBEDIENCE  OP  THE  FRENCH. 387

francs  per  annum.  For  Charles  VII.  never  in  any  one  year
raised  above  1,800,000  francs;  and  his  son,  Louis  XL,  in  the
very  year  of  his  death,  raised  4,700,000  francs,  besides  what
was  raised  for  the  artillery  and  ammunition  j  and  certainly
it  was  a  sad  thing  to  see  and  hear  of  the  poverty  of  the
people.  But  one  thing  was  very  commendable  in  our  master;
he  hoarded  up  none,  but  employed  all  he  raised  in  building
citadels,  castles,  or  fortifications  for  the  defence  of  his  king-
dom; which  he  performed  with  more  judgment  and  profusion
than  any  of  his  predecessors.  He  was  likewise  very  liberal
to  the  church,  and  in  some  respects  more  than  was  necessary;
for  he  robbed  the  poor  to  give  to  the  rich  :  but  in  this  world
no  one  can  arrive  at  perfection.

And  yet,  in  this  weak,  oppressed,  and  impoverished  king-
dom, upon  the  death  of  our  king,  was  there  any  sedition
among  the  people  against  the  prince  who  now  reigns  ?  Did
either  nobles  or  commons  take  arms  to  oppose  him?  Was
there  any  one  else  whom  they  desired  to  place  on  the
throne  ?  Did  they  endeavour  either  to  deprive,  or  so  much
as  to  restrain  him  in  his  authority,  that  he  should  not  have
the  power  of  a  king?  Not  at  all !  and  indeed  if  any  had
been  so  conceited  as  to  say  yes,  they  would  have  had  none  to
help  them,  for  his  subjects  acted  quite  contrary ;  and  all  the
nobility,  gentry,  commons,  and  citizens,  obeyed  his  summons,
made  their  personal  appearance  before  him,  recognised  his
power,  and  swore  allegiance  to  him.  The  princes  and  nobles
delivered  in  their  petitions  humbly  upon  their  knees,  and  a
council  of  twelve  were  appointed  to  take  them  into  con-
sideration, and  according  to  the  advice  of  that  council,  the
king  (being  then  but  thirteen  years  old)  did  either  grant  or
refuse  them.  In  the  assembly  of  the  Estates,  the  king  and  his
council  being  present,  some  requests  and  remonstrances  were
made  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom,  with  all  possible  humility
and  deference  to  the  good  pleasure  of  the  king  and  his
council.  Whatever  was  desired  they  granted  ;  and  whatever
was  made  appear  by  written  calculation  to  be  necessary  for
the  king's  expense,  they  complied  with  without  the  least
opposition.  The  sum  was  2,500,000  francs  (enough  in  all
conscience,  and  rather  too  much,  unless  some  new  occasion  of
expense  happened);  but,  lest  that  should  not  be  sufficient
the  Estates  entreated,  that  at  the  end  of  two  years  they

c  c  2


388  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1477.

might  be  convened  again,  and  in  case  he  should  be  in  want
of  money,  they  would  furnish  him  with  as  much  as  he  pleased  ;
and  if  he  were  invaded,  or  in  any  way  affronted,  they  would
be  ready  with  their  lives,  as  well  as  fortunes,  to  support  him,
and  would  refuse  nothing  that  he  should  demand.

Is  it  to  such  obedient  subjects  as  these  that  the  king
should  insist  upon  his  prerogative,  and  take  at  his  pleasure
what  they  are  so  ready  and  liberal  to  give  ?  Would  it  not
be  more  just,  both  towards  God  and  the  world,  to  raise
money  this  way,  than  by  violence  and  disorder  ?  For  there
is  no  prince  who  can  raise  money  any  other  way,  unless  it
be  by  tyranny,  and  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  church ;  but
many  are  so  stupid  as  not  to  know  what  rights  they  have  in
this  respect.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  people  in  the
world  who  affront  and  provoke  their  princes,  neither  obeying
their  commands,  nor  supplying  their  wants,  but  mutinying,
rebelling,  and  contemning  their  authority,  wherein  they  act
contrary  to  both  their  allegiance  and  their  duty.

When  I  say  kings  and  princes,  I  mean  themselves  or  their
deputies  ;  when  subjects,  I  mean  such  as  are  magistrates  and
bear  any  rule  or  authority  under  them.

The  greatest  misfortunes  proceed  from  the  most  powerful ;
for  those  who  are  weak  are  patiently  contented.  When  I
speak  of  great  powers,  I  mean  women  *  as  well  as  men  ;  for
sometimes  they  are  placed  in  authority,  either  by  the  over-
fondness  of  their  husbands,  or  fer  the  administration  of  their
own  or  their  children's  affairs,  or  when  any  territory  accrues
by  them  on  their  marriage.  I  f  I  should  treat  of  the  inferior
states  and  conditions  of  human  life,  I  should  be  too  tedious,
and  therefore  I  shall  confine  myself  to  the  greater,  since  by
those  the  power  and  justice  of  God  are  more  visibly  made
known  ;  for  if  calamities  befall  a  poor  man,  they  are  im-
puted to  his  poverty  and  imprudence,  and  nobody  cares  about
him ;  if  he  breaks  his  neck,  or  is  drowned,  it  was  because
he  had  nobody  with  him,  and  none  will  give  themselves  any
farther  trouble  about  it.  Bui  when  an  accident  happens  to
any  great  city  it  is  otherwise ;  yet  even  that  is  not  so  much

*  The  author  in  this  reflection  on  the  exorbitant  power  of  women,
seems  to  point  at  the  Princess  Anne,  Countess  of  Beaujeu,  sister  of
Charles  VIII.,  and  Regent  of  France  during  his  minority.


1477.]  ON  WANT OF FAITH IN GOD.  389

spoken  of  as  anything  which  happens  to  princes.  The  rea-
son therefore  why  the  power  of  God  is  more  conspicuous
against  princes  and  great  men,  is,  because  the  poor  and
such  as  are  in  distress  have  enough  to  punish  them  when-
ever they  offend  ;  and  are  frequently  chastised  when  they
are  innocent,  either  as  a  terror  to  other  people,  or  for  the
forfeiture  of  their  estates,  or  not  improbably  by  the  wicked-
ness of  the  judge.  But  if  the  offenders  are  great,  as  princes,
princesses,  governors,  or  counsellors  of  any  rebellious  town
or  state,  let  their  exorbitance  be  never  so  enormous,  who
will  dare  to  inquire  into  their  faults?  who  will  inform
against  them  ?  who  will  question  them?  who  will  punish
them  ?  I  speak  of  the  bad,  not  the  good  ;  for  of  good  there
are  but  few  to  be  met  with.  And  what  are  the  motives  that
induce  great  persons  to  commit  these  enormities,  and  many
more  (which  for  brevity's  sake  I  have  not  mentioned)  with-
out the  least  regard  or  consideration  of  God's  divine  power
and  justice?  In  men  of  learning  it  is  want  of  faith,  in
ignorant  persons,  it  is  want  of  knowledge  and  faith  also  ;  but
principally  of  faith,  from  whence  (in  my  opinion)  all  the
mischiefs  that  are  incident  to  mankind  do  spring,  and  more
especially  the  mischiefs  of  those  who  complain  of  being
injured  and  oppressed  by  such  as  are  powerful  and  strong;
for  whether  a  man  be  rich  or  poor,  if  he  puts  his  trust  in
God,  and  is  firmly  convinced  that  the  pains  of  hell  are  such
as  they  really  are  ;  if  he  is  conscious  of  any  injury  that  he
has  done  to  his  neighbour,  or  that  his  grandfather  or  father
came  wrongfully  by  anything  that  he  now  enjoys  (let  it  be
what  it  will,  whether  a  duchy,  a  county,  a  town,  a  castle,
moveable  goods,  a  meadow,  a  pool,  a  mill,  or  anything  else)  ;
and  if  he  firmly  believes,  as  we  all  ought  to  believe,  "I  shall
never  enter  into  Paradise,  if  I  do  not  do  what  I  ought,  and
restore  all  that  I  hold  wrongfully  from  other  people,"  it  is  not
to  be  supposed  that  any  prince  or  princess,  or  in  short,  any
person  of  what  condition  soever,  would  detain  anything  from
his  subject  or  neighbour,  or  condemn  any  innocent  person  to
death,  keep  him  in  prison,  or  impoverish  one  to  enrich
another,  or  do  anything  dishonourable  to  their  parents  and
relations,  to  gratify  themselves  in  their  pleasures  with  wo-
men or  otherwise.  Certainly  not :  it  is  incredible.  If,
therefore,  men  had  firm  faith,  and  believed  what  God  and

c  c  3


390  r THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477.

the  church  have  commanded  under  pain  of  damnation,  know-
ing that  our  life  is  but  short,  and  the  horrible  pains  of  hell
eternal  and  without  intermission,  they  would  never  act  as
they  do.  We  may  safely  conclude  therefore,  that  the  want
of  faith  is  (he  source  of  all  mischiefs  and  villany.

But  to  illustrate  this  idea  by  an  example  : — When  a  king
or  prince  happens  to  be  taken  prisoner,  and  is  apprehensive
of  continuing  so  all  the  days  of  his  life,  is  there  anything  so
dear  to  him  in  the  world  that  he  would  not  give  to  purchase
his  liberty?  He  will  part  not  only  with  his  own  property,
but  that  of  his  subjects  too,  for  his  redemption  ;  as  you  may
remember  in  the  case  of  King  John  of  France,  who  was
taken  prisoner  by  the  Prince  of  Wales*  at  the  battle  of
Poictiers.  This  King  John  paid  3,000,000  of  francs,
gave  away  all  Aquitaine  (at  least  all  that  he  held  of  it),
besides  other  territories  and  towns,  to  the  extent  of  a  third
part  of  his  dominions  (by  which  means  he  so  impoverished
the  kingdom,  that  for  a  long  time  after,  the  current  coin  of  it
was  nothing  but  round  bits  of  leather  with  a  silver  nail  in

*  Edward  the  Black  Prince,  son  of  Edward  III.,  King  of  England.
The  battle  of  Poictiers  was  fought  on  the  19th  of  September,  1356  ;  it
was  one  of  the  most  glorious  achievements  in  English  history,  and  one
of  the  most  splendid  exploits  in  the  life  of  its  illustrious  hero.  The
Black  Prince  was  a  man  of  whom  his  country  was  justly  proud,  and  his
early  death  has  only  served  to  add  additional  lustre  to  the  brilliancy  of
his  life.  His  character  is  thus  eloquently  summed  up  by  an  old  writer  :
"  And  thus  fell  this  victorious  prince,  in  whose  fall  the  hopes  of  all  Eng-
land seemed  to  be  cast  down ;  while  he  lived,  they  feared  no  invasion,
they  doubted  no  warlike  encounter.  He  never  marched  against  any
whom  he  overcame  not,  never  besieged  any  city  which  he  took  not.  All
nations,  both  heathen  and  Christian,  dreaded  his  fortune  and  conduct  in
war,  as  of  another  Hector  ;  nor  did  his  wisdom  any  way  come  short  of
his  courage,  both  which  were  equalled  by  his  exemplary  justice,  clemency,
liberality,  piety,  and  moderation — virtues  but  seldom  sincerely  embraced
by  persons  of  high  condition.  He  was  a  prince  of  whom  we  never  heard
any  ill,  nor  received  any  other  note  than  of  goodness,  and  the  noblest
performances  that  magnanimity,  generosity,  courage,  and  wisdom  could
ever  show,  insomuch  as  what  praise  can  be  given  unto  virtue  is  due  unto
him.  He  was  of  so  obliging  a  character  that  he  won  the  hearts  of  all
mankind,  especially  of  those  who  delighted  in  martial  performances ;
and  in  general  he  was  a  prince  of  such  excellent  demeanour,  so  valiant,
wise,  and  politic  in  his  doings,  that  the  very  perfect  image  of  knighthood
appeared  most  lively  in  his  person."  Barnes's  History  of  Edward  III.,
pp.  883,  884.


1477.]  ON THE PUNISHMENT OF OPPRESSORS.  391

the  middle*)  ;  all  which  was  given  by  King  John  and  by  his
son  Charles  the  Wise  for  the  ransom  of  his  father;  though
the  English  would  not  have  put  him  to  death  if  they  had
given  nothing,  hut  at  worst  would  only  have  made  his  confine-
ment more  severe  ;  but  even  if  they  had  put  him  to  death,
the  pains  of  the  execution  would  not  have  been  any  way  equal
to  the  torments  of  hell.  Why  then  did  he  yield  what  he  did,
to  the  ruin  and  impoverishment  both  of  his  children  and  sub-
jects, unless  because  he  believed  what  he  saw,  and  imagined
there  was  no  other  way  of  obtaining  his  liberty?  But  per-
haps when  he  committed  that  sin  which  brought  down  this
judgment  upon  himself,  his  children  and  subjects,  he  had  no
steadfast  belief  that  the  doing  of  it  was  an  offence  against
God's  will  and  commandments.  Now,  though  King  John
gave  all  these  territories  and  towns  to  his  enemies,  to  redeem
himself  from  captivity ;  yet  there  is  not  one  prince  (or  at
least  very  few  princes),  who,  having  any  town  or  province
that  belongs  to  their  neighbours  in  their  possession,  will
restore  it  upon  consideration  of  God's  justice,  or  to  avoid  the
torments  of  hell.  I  say,  therefore,  that  it  is  want  of  faith.

I  accordingly  asked  the  question  before,  Who  would  inform
against  great  persons  ?  who  would  accuse  them  to  the  judge  ?
and  where  would  a  judge  be  found  to  punish  them  ?  The
information  that  will  be  brought  against  them  shall  be  the
cries  and  clamours  of  the  people  whom  they  have  in  so  many
•ways  injured  and  oppressed,  without  the  least  pity  or  com-
passion ;  and  the  mournful  complaints  of  widows  and  or-
phans, whose  husbands  and  parents  they  have  unjustly  put
to  death  to  their  utter  ruin  and  destruction :  and  in  short,
the  lamentations  of  all  those  whom  they  have  tortured  or
persecuted  either  in  their  persons  or  estates.  These  with
their  sighs,  their  piteous  tears,  and  their  groans,  shall  be  an
information  against  them  before  our  Saviour,  the  true  Judge

*  "  The  statement  of  Commines  with  regard  to  the  leather  money  cur-
rent in  France  after  the  payment  of  the  king's  ransom  appears  to  me
very  erroneous  ;  as  it  is  certain  that  the  king,  on  his  return  from  Eng-
land, coined  so  much  gold  and  silver  money  that  the  silver  mark  was
worth  only  five  livres,  and  the  gold  mark  sixty  livres;  which  would  have
been  impossible  if  there  had  been  so  great  a  dearth  of  those  two  metals
in  France  as  Commines  would  have  us  believe."  Leblanc's  Traite  des
Mounaies,  p.  277.

'c  c  4


392  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP  DE COMMIXES. [1477.

of  the  world,  who  perhaps  will  not  defer  their  punishment
till  the  next  world,  but  do  them  justice  in  this  ;  which
punishment,  as  I  said  before,  will  proceed  from  their  want
of  faith,  and  a  firm  trust  and  belief  in  God's  commandments.
It  must  be  acknowledged,  therefore,  that  God  is  forced  to
show  tokens  and  examples,  that  princes  and  the  rest  of  the
world  may  be  convinced,  that  the  enormity  of  their  actions
and  the  weakness  of  their  faith  have  drawn  those  heavy
judgments  upon  them ;  and  that  they  may  understand  that  it
is  God  who  exercises  His  power  and  justice  to  punish  them,
because  their  offences  are  above  any  other  cognizance  but
His.  But  the  judgments  of  God,  at  first,  seldom  produce
any  amendment,  how  great  or  how  lasting  soever  they  may
be.  However,  they  never  fall  upon  any  prince,  minister  of
state,  or  magistrate,  but  the  consequences  are  very  dangerous
and  dreadful  for  the  subject.  When  I  speak  of  misfortunes,
I  mean  only  such  as  are  detrimental  to  the  subject ;  for,  if  a
prince  falls  from  his  horse,  breaks  his  leg,  or  falls  into  a
violent  fever,  he  is  cured  again,  and  it  makes  him  wiser  for
the  future.  I  call  them  misfortunes,  when  God  is  so  highly
provoked  that  He  can  endure  no  longer,  but  will  manifest  His
Divine  justice  and  power,  and  then  His  method  is  first  to  in-
fatuate their  understanding  (which  is  a  great  punishment
where  it  is  inflicted),  then  He  visits  their  family,  and  suffers
murmurs  and  dissensions  to  arise  in  it ;  then  the  prince  him-
self is  so  far  abandoned  and  given  over  by  God  that,  in  the
height  of  his  indignation  and  folly,  he  shuns  and  despises  the
counsels  and  conversation  of  wise  men,  and  consults  none
but  irrational  fiery  upstarts  without  either  merit,  virtue,  or
estate,  but  who  will  flatter  him  and  comply  with  whatever
he  say?.  If  he  proposes  to  raise  one  penny,  they  say  two :
if  the  prince  threatens  a  man,  they  advise  him  to  hang  him  ;
and  so  in  everything  else,  spurring  him  still  on  to  make
himself  feared,  and  behaving  themselves  in  the  meantime
proudly  and  insolently,  in  hopes  to  strike  awe  and  terror  into
the  people,  as  if  authority  had  been  their  inheritance.  Those
whom  such  princes,  by  the  advice  of  such  evil  counsellors,
have  deprived  of  their  posts  and  employments,  after  having
served  in  them  a  long  time,  and  contracted  friendship  and
acquaintance  in  their  dominions,  are  very  much  disgusted,
and  all  their  relations  and  well-wishers  are  equally  dis-


1477.]  OX THE JUDGMENTS OF GOD.  393

satisfied ;  and  perhaps  they  are  pressed  so  far  as  to  stand
upon  their  defence,  or  else  enter  into  the  service  of  some
neighbouring  prince,  who  possibly  may  be  at  enmity  with
him  that  discarded  them,  by  which  means  the  dissatisfaction
within  the  country  may  give  opportunity  to  bring  in  a
foreign  army.  Is  there  any  plague  or  persecution  so  horrible
as  war  between  friends  that  are  provoked  ?  or  is  any
hatred  so  mortal  and  pitiless  ?  Foreign  enemies  are  easily
repelled  when  a  nation  is  unanimous  at  home,  because  the
invaders  want  intelligence  and  correspondence.  Can  you
imagine  that  an  imprudent  prince,  surrounded  with  such
silly  advisers,  can  foresee  calamities  that  are  remote,  when
he  cannot  discern  domestic  divisions,  nor  comprehend  how
they  can  hurt  him,  nor  conceive  they  proceed  from  God?
His  table  is  as  well  served,  he  sleeps  as  well  as  ever  in  his
bed,  his  stables  and  his  wardrobe  are  the  same,  and  the  pomp
and  splendour  of  his  court  is  much  increased  ;  for  he  attracts
persons  by  promises,  divides  among  them  the  spoils  and
estates  of  those  whom  he  has  banished,  and  lavishes  away
abundance  of  his  own  to  increase  his  renown.  But,  when
he  thinks  least  of  it,  God  will  raise  him  up  an  enemy  whom
perhaps  he  never  heard  of:  then  melancholy  thoughts  will
arise,  and  suspicions  of  those  whom  he  has  offended,  and  he
will  be  afraid  even  of  his  very  friends  ;  yet  will  he  not  make
God  his  refuge,  but  will  have  recourse  to  arms.


CH.  XX. — Examples  of  Misfortunes  that  have  happened  to  Princes,  and
Revolutions  that  have  been  brought  to  pass  in  States  by  the  Judgment
of  God.

HAVE  we  not  seen  in  our  own  days  such  examples  among
our  neighbours  ?  Have  we  not  seen  King  Edward  IV.
of  England,  the  head  of  the  house  of  York,  supplant  the
house  of  Lancaster,  under  which  his  father  and  he  had
lived  a  long  time  :  and  though  he  had  actually  sworn  al-
legiance to  Henry  VI.,  who  was  of  the  Lancastrian  line,  yet
afterwards  this  Edward  kept  King  Henry  a  prisoner  for
many  years  in  the  Tower  of  London  (the  metropolis  of  that
kingdom),  and  at  last  put  him  to  death?


394  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1477.

Have  we  not  seen  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  the  chief  manager
of  all  King  Edward's  affairs  (after  having  put  all  his  ad-
versaries to  death,  and  particularly  the  Dukes  of  Somerset),
at  length  turn  rebel  against  his  master  King  Edward,  marry
his  daughter  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  son  to  King  Henry  VI. ;
endeavour  to  restore  the  house  of  Lancaster ;  and  return
into  England,  where  he  was  defeated,  and  slain  in  battle
himself,  his  brothers,  and  relations ;  besides  many  others  of
the  nobility  of  England,  who  not  long  before  had  vanquished
and  put  to  death  their  adversaries  ?  Afterwards,  times
changed,  and  the  children  revenged  the  destruction  of  their
parents.  It  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  such  judgments  pro-
ceeded from  anything  but  the  Divine  justice.  But  (as  I
observed  before)  England  enjoyed  this  peculiar  mercy
above  all  other  kingdoms,  that  neither  the  country,  nor  the
people,  nor  the  houses,  were  wasted,  destroyed,  or  demolished;
but  the  calamities  and  misfortunes  of  the  war  fell  only  upon
the  soldiers,  and  especially  on  the  nobility,  of  whom  they  are
more  than  ordinarily  jealous  ;  for  nothing  is  perfect  in  this
world.

As  soon  as  King  Edward  had  settled  his  affairs  in  this
kingdom,  he  received  of  our  master  50,000  crowns  a  year*,
constantly  paid  him  in  the  Tower  of  London,  and  was  grown
as  rich  as  his  ambition  could  desire,  on  a  sudden  he  diedf
(and  as  was  supposed)  of  melancholy  for  our  present  king'sj
marriage  with  Margaret§,  the  Duke  of  Austria's  daughter
(his  distemper  seizing  him  upon  the  news  of  it),  for  then  he


*By  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  the  29th  of  August,  1475.  See  note,
book  iv.  chap.  viii.

f  On  the  9th  of  April,  1483,  "  he  died  of  apoplexy,  say  some  ;  but
others  say  that  he  was  poisoned  by  drinking  some  good  wine  of  Challuau,
which  Louis  XI.  had  given  him."  Lenglet,  ii.  1 69.

J  Charles  VIIL  of  France.

§  Margaret  of  Austria,  daughter  of  the  Emperor  Maximilian  and
Mary  of  Burgundy,  was  born  at  Brussels  on  the  10th  of  January,  1470.
In  July,  1483,  she  was  married  to  the  Dauphin,  afterwards  Charles  VIIL
at  Amboise.  After  having  been  considered  Queen  of  Trance  for  ten
years,  she  was  sent  back  to  her  father  on  the  12th  of  June,  1493.  She
afterwards  married  John,  Infante  of  Castile,  in  1 497,  and  Philibert,  Duke
of  Savoy,  in  1501.  She  died  on  the  1st  of  December,  1530,  after  a
widowhood  of  twenty-six  years.


1477.]  CONCERNING ENGLISH AFFAIRS.  395

found  himself  outwitted  as  to  his  own  daughter*,  to  whom
he  had  given  the  title  of  Dauphiness.  Upou  this  marriage
the  pension,  which  he  called  tribute,  was  stopped,  though
indeed  it  was  neither  pension  nor  tribute,  as  I  have  de-
clared before.  King  Edward  left  his  wife  with  two  sons
(one  called  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  the  other  the  Duke  of
York)  and  two  daughters.  The  Dnke  of  Gloucester,  King
Edward's  brother,  took  upon  him  the  protectorship  of  his
nephew,  the  Prince  of  Wales  (who  was  then  about  ten  years
old),  swore  allegiance  to  him  as  his  sovereign,  and  brought
him  to  London,  pretending  to  crown  him  ;  but  his  design
was  only  to  entice  the  Duke  of  York  out  of  the  sanctuary!,
where  he  was  at  that  time  with  his  mother,  who  had  con-
ceived some  suspicion  of  his  intentions.  In  short,  the  con-
clusion was  this;  by  the  assistance  of  the  Bishop  of  BathJ,
(who  had  been  formely  King  Edward's  chancellor,  but  falling
afterwards  into  disgrace,  had  been  removed  from  his  place,
thrown  into  prison,  and  paid  a  round  sum  for  his  ransom),
he  executed  his  designs,  as  you  shall  hear  by  and  by.

This  bishop  discovered  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  that
his  brother  King  Edward  had  been  formerly  in  love  with  a
beautiful  young  lady§,  and  had  promised  her  marriage,  upon

*  The  Princess  Elizabeth.

f  Westminster  Abbey.

I  Robert  Stillington  was  appointed  chancellor  on  the  20th  of  June,
1467.  He  appears  to  have  been  of  humble  origin,  but  he  gained  a  great
name  at  Oxford,  where  with  much  applause  he  took  the  degree  of
Doctor  of  Laws.  He  was  a  zealous  legitimist,  and  on  the  succession  of
Edward  IV.  he  was  a  special  favourite  with  that  prince,  who  successively
made  him  Archdeacon  of  Taunton,  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  Keeper
of  the  Privy  Seal,  and  finally  Lord  Chancellor.  He  held  this  last  office
for  six  years,  with  the  exception  of  the  few  months  when  Edward  was
obliged  to  fly  the  kingdom,  and  the  sceptre  was  again  put  into  the  feebel
hands  of  Henry  VI.  He  resigned  the  chancellorship  from  ill  health  on
;he  8th  of  June,  1473.  After  the  coronation  of  Henry  VII.,  Stillington
showed  his  never-dying  enmity  to  the  house  of  Lancaster,  by  taking  up
the  cause  of  Lambert  Simnel ;  but  being  detected  in  this  conspiracy,  and
expecting  no  mercy  from  the  king,  he  fled  for  refuge  to  Oxford.  The
university  consented  to  deliver  him  up  on  condition  that  his  life  should
be  spared;  and  he  was  conducted  to  Windsor,  where  he  remained  a  pri-
soner till  his  death,  in  June,  1491.  See  Lord  Campbell's  Lives  of  the
Chancellors,  vol.  i.  pp.  385 — 391.

§  Habington  mentions  two  ladies  whom  public  rumour  indicated  as
aving  been  seduced  by  the  king,  Lady  Elizabeth  Lucy  and  Lady


396  THE MEMOIRS OK PHILIP DE COMMIXES. [1477.

condition  he  might  lie  with  her  ;  the  lady  consented,  and,  as
the  bishop  affirmed,  he  married  them  when  nobody  was
present  but  they  two  and  himself.  His  fortune  depending
upon  the  court,  he  did  not  discover  it,  and  persuaded  the
lady  likewise  to  conceal  it,  which  she  did,  and  the  matter
remained  a  secret.  After  this  King  Edward  married  the
daughter  of  an  English  gentleman,  called  the  Lord  Rivers ;
this  lady  was  a  widow,  and  had  two  sons.  The  Bishop  of
Bath,  as  I  said  before,  discovered  this  matter  to  the  Duke  of
Gloucester,  and  gave  his  assistance  in  the  execution  of  the
barbarous  designs  of  the  duke,  who  murdered  his  two
nephews,  and  made  himself  king,  by  the  name  of  Richard
III.*  He  caused  the  two  daughters  to  be  declared  il-
legitimate by  parliament!,  took  their  coats,  of  arms  from
them,  and  put  all  his  brother's  faithful  servants  to  death,  at
least  all  he  could  get  into  his  power.  But  his  cruel  reign
did  not  last  long ;  for,  being  at  the  height  of  his  pride,  in
greater  pomp  and  authority  than  any  King  of  England  for
a  hundred  years  before,  when  he  had  beheaded  the  Duke  of
Buckingham^,  and  assembled  a  numerous  army  under  his  own
command,  God  Almighty  raised  him  up  an  enemy  that  de-
stroyed him,  and  that  was  the  Earl  of  Richmond,  a  person  of
no  power,  and  one  who  had  been  long  prisoner  in  Bretagne ;
but  he  is  now  King  of  England,  and  is  of  the  house  of  Lan-
caster, though,  as  I  am  informed,  not  the  next  heir  to
the  crown.

This  Earl  of  Richmond  told  me,  riot  long  before  his  de-
parture from  this  kingdom,  that  from  the  time  he  was  five

Eleanor  Butler.  Lord  Campbell  indignantly  denies  the  charge  brought
against  Stillington  by  Commines,  bnt  has  adduced  no  evidence  in  sup-
port of  his  denial.

*  Richard  III.  was  proclaimed  king  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1483.

f  The  English  parliament,  at  a  meeting  held  at  "Westminster,  on  the
23rd  of  January,  1484,  declared  that  the  marriage  of  Edward  IV.  with
Elizabeth  Woodville  had  been  effected  in  contravention  of  the  customs
of  the  Anglican  Church,  seeing  that,  by  a  previous  contract,  the  King  had
plighted  his  troth  to  Lady  Eleanor  Butler,  and  that  consequently,  Edward
and  Elizabeth  had  lived  in  adultery,  and  their  children  were  evidently
bastards,  and  as  such  unable  to  inherit  the  crown.

{  Henry,  Duke  of  Buckingham,  was  son  of  Humphry,  Earl  of  Staf-
ford, and  Margaret,  daughter  of  Edmund,  Duke  of  Somerset.  He  mar-
ried Catharine,  daughter  of  Richard  Woodville,  Earl  of  Rivers.  Being


1477.]  CONCERNING ENGLISH AFFAIRS.  397

years  old  he  had  been  always  a  fugitive  or  a  prisoner.  He
had  endured  an  imprisonment  of  fifteen  years  or  thereabouts
in  Bretagne,  by  the  command  of  the  late  Duke  Francis,  into
whose  hands  he  fell  by  extremity  of  weather,  as  he  was
escaping  out  of  France  with  his  uncle  the  Earl  of  Pembroke.*
I  was  at  Duke  Francis's  court  at  the  time  when  they  were
seized  ;  the  duke  treated  them  very  handsomely  for  prisoners,
and  at  King  Edwai'd's  death,  supplied  the  Earl  of  Rich-
mond liberally  both  with  men  and  ships ;  and  having  in-
telligence with  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  (who  died  for  it
afterwards)  he  sent  him  to  land  his  forces  in  England;  but,
meeting  with  foul  weather  and  contrary  winds,  he  was
driven  into  Dieppe,  and  from  thence  went  back  by  land
into  Bretagne.  Being  returned  into  Bretagne,  he  was
afraid,  having  500  English  in  his  train,  of  becoming  burden-
some to  the  duke,  and  feared  he  might  thereby  induce  him
to  make  some  agreement  with  King  Richardf,  to  his  preju-
dice and  disadvantage,  for  he  had  some  intimation  that  there
•were  secret  practices  on  foot  to  that  purpose ;  and  therefore,
he  and  his  whole  retinue  went  away  privately,  without
taking  leave  of  the  duke.  Not  long  after,  our  present  king
paid  for  the  passage  of  3000  or  4000  men,  gave  him  and
his  companions  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  and  some
pieces  of  artillery,  and  sent  him  out  of  Normandy  to  land  in
some  part  of  Wales,  where  he  was  born.  King  Richard
marched  immediately  to  fight  him,  but  an  English  gentleman,
called  the  Lord  Stanley,  who  had  married  the  Earl  of  Rich-
mond's mother,  joined  the  earl  with  26,000  men.  They  came
to  a  battlej,  and  the  issue  was,  King  Richard  was  slain,  and
the  Earl  of  Richmond  crowned  King  of  England  on  the  field
of  battle,  with  the  crown  that  King  Richard  had  brought
along  with  him.  Will  you  say  this  is  fortune  ?  Certainly

detected  in  a  conspiracy  against  Richard  III.,  he  was  beheaded  at  Salis-
bury on  All  Saints'  Day,  1483.

*  Jasper,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  afterwards  Duke  of  Bedford,  was  the  son
of  Owen  Tudor,  and  Catharine  of  France,  widow  of  Henry  V.,  King  of
England.  He  married  Catharine,  the  widow  of  the  Duke  of  Bucking-
ham, and  died  on  the  21st  of  December,  1495.

f  Pierre  Landais,  the  treasurer  and  favourite  of  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,
had  made  overtures  to  Richard  III.  for  the  surrender  of  the  Earl  of
Richmond.

I  The  Battle  of  Bosworth  Field,  fought  on  the  22nd  of  August,  1485.


398  THE MEMOIRS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES. [1477.

it  is  the  just  judgment  of  God.  But,  to  make  it  the  more
evident,  not  long  after  the  murder  of  his  nephews,  as  you
have  heard,  he  lost  his  wife*,  (some  say  he  made  her  away) ;
he  had  but  one  son,  and  he  died  presently  after.  This  would
have  come  in  more  properly  hereafter  when  I  shall  have  to
speak  of  King  Edward's  death  (for  he  was  alive  at  the  time
of  the  occurrences  of  this  chapter),  yet  I  thought  it  not  un-
seasonable here,  as  being  pertinent  to  my  discourse.

In  like  manner,  it  is  not  many  years  since  we  have  seen
as  strange  revolutions  in  Spain,  upon  the  death  of  the  late
King  Henry  of  that  kingdom,  who  was  married  to  the  late
King  of  Portugal's  sister,  and  by  her  had  a  beautiful  daughter;
yet  that  daughter  was  not  suffered  to  succeed  to  the  throne,
but  was  deprived  of  the  crown  under  pretence  of  illegitimacy.
But  this  business  did  not  pass  over  without  controversy  and
blood  ;  for  the  King  of  Portugal,  assisted  by  several  of  the
nobility  of  Castile,  took  part  with  his  niece :  but  King
Henry's  sister  carried  the  kingdom  in  spite  of  all  their  op-
position, and  enjoys  it  to  this  very  day,  having  married  the
son  of  John,  King  of  Arragon;  so  that  this  judgment  and
decree  was  made  in  heaven,  where  many  of  the  same  nature
are  undoubtedly  made.

You  have  seen  likewise,  not  many  years  since,  the  King
of  Scotlandt  at  war  with  his  sonj,  who  was  not  above  thir-
teen or  fourteen  years  of  age.  The  son  won  the  buttle,  and
the  king  was  killed  upon  the  spot.  This  king  was  accused
of  having  caused  the  death  of  his  brother  and  several  other

*  Anne  Neville,  daughter  of  the  great  Earl  of  Warwick.

f  James  III.,  son  of  James  II.,  King  of  Scotland,  and  Mary  of  Guel-
ders,  ascended  the  throne  of  Scotland  in  1460,  at  the  age  of  seven  years.
He  married  Margaret,  daughter  of  Christian  I.,  King  of  Denmark.  He
surrounded  himself  by  ministers  sprung  from  the  lower  ranks  of  the
people,  and  the  Scottish  barons,  in  indignation,  hanged  the  unworthy
favourites  upon  the  bridge  of  Lauder,  in  1482.  In  1488,  they  rebelled
again,  gave  the  king  battle  at  Sauchie,  and  slew  him  in  his  flight  on  the
llth  of  June,  1488.

J  James  IV.  succeeded  his  father,  at  fifteen  years  of  age.  He  made
terms  with  the  Scottish  nobles,  and  married  Margaret,  daughter  of
Henry  VII.,  King  of  England.  He  thereby  secured  peace  and  tran-
quillity for  his  country  for  many  years  ;  but  Henry  VIII.  forced  him  into
an  alliance  with  France,  war  was  renewed  between  England  and  Scot-
land, and  James  IV.  fell  on  the  battle-field  of  Flodden  on  the  9th  of
September,  1515.


1477.]  ON DIVINE CHASTISEMENTS.  399

persons  of  quality.  You  see  also  the  duchy  of  Guelilers  out
of  the  right  line,  and  you  have  heard  of  tlie  late  duke's  un-
natural usage  of  his  father.  I  could  instance  many  other
cases  of  the  like  nature,  that  might  easily  be  known  to  be
Divine  chastisements,  which  are  the  sources  of  war,  and
from  whence  proceed  mortality  and  famine  ;  and  all  evils
arise  from  want  of  faith.  It  must  therefore  be  acknowledged
(considering  the  wickedness  of  mankind,  and  especially  of
great  persons,  who  neither  know  themselves,  nor  believe
there  is  a  God)  that  there  is  a  necessity  that  every  prince
or  great  lord  should  have  an  adversary  to  restrain  and  keep
him  in  humility  and  fear,  or  else  there  would  be  no  living
under  them,  nor  near  them.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
