The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte, Vol. 2 (Auguste Comte (Harriet Martineau, trans.), 1853)
==========================================================
Vol. 2 of Martineau's landmark translation - completes the English Positive Philosophy. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

THE  LIBRARY

OF

THE  UNIVERSITY

OF  CALIFORNIA

LOS  ANGELES


FROM  THE  LIBRARY  OF
ERNEST  CARROLL  MOORE


BOHN'S   PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARY

THE    POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY    OF
AUGUSTE   COMTE

VOL.   II.


GEORGE    BELL  &    SONS

LONDON  :  YORK  STREET,  COVKNT  CiAKDEN
AND  NEW  YORK,  66,  FIFTH  AVENUE
CAMBRIDGE  :       DETGHTON,      BELL      &      CO.


THE

POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY


OF


AUGUSTE    COMTE

FREELY   TRANSLATED  AND  CONDENSED   BY

HARRIET    MARTINEAU

WITH   AN   INTRODUCTION    BY

FREDERIC    HARRISON
IN  THREE  VOLUMES

VOL.   II.


LONDON

GEORGE    BELL   &    SONS

1896


CHISWICK    PRESS  : — CHARLES    WHITTINGHAM    AND  CO.
TOOKS   COURT,    CHANCERY    LANE,    LONDON.


College
Library


CONTENTS.

BOOK   V.

BIOLOaY.

CHAPTER  I.

GENERAL  VIEW  OF  BIOLOGY.

PAGE

Opposite  starting-points  in  philosophy 1

Starting-point  of  Physiology    . 2

Its  present  imperfection 3

Its  field 3

Relation  to  Medicine 3

Its  object 5

Idea  of  Life 5

De  Blainville's  definition 7

Definition  of  Biology         . 9

Means  of  investigation 11

Observation 12

Artificial  a^jparatus  . 12

Chemical  exploration 13

Experiment 13

By  affecting  the  organism 14

By  alt'ecting  the  Medium 14

Comparative  experiment .15

Pathological  investigation        . 16

Comparison 18

Five  kinds  of  comparison 21

Comparison  of  jiarts  of  the  same  organism       ....  22

Of  phases  of  the  same  organism 23

Of  difi'erent  organisms 23

Relation  of  Biology  to  other  sciences 26

To  Chemistry 26

To  Physics 28

To  Astronomy 29

To  Matliematics 33

Use  of  scientific  fictions 37


1569S99


VI  CONTENTS.

PAGE

Condition  and  prospects  of  the  science 38

Requisite  Education 39

Art  of  Classification 40

Influence  of  Biology  upon  the  Positive  Spirit ....  41

Distribution  of  the  science        .......  44

Where  to  begin 46


CHAPTER  II.

ANATOMICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


Development  of  Statical  biology
Process  of  discovery  of  the  tissues    .
Combination  with  Comparative  anatomy
Elements  and  Products     .
Vitality  of  the  organic  fluids     .
Classification  of  the  tissues
Organic  :  Cellular  tissue
Dermous  tissue  ....

Sclerous  tissue

Kystous  tissue  .....
Animal  :  Muscular  and  ner\  ous  tissues
Limitation  of  the  inquiry


48
48
50
50
53
55
55
56
57
57
57
58


CHAPTER   III.


BIOTAXIC  PHILOSOPHY.

Comparative  anatomy  of  vegetables  and  animals

Animal  anatomy  our  subject    .

Division  of  the  Natural  Method

Natural  groups ....

Co-ordination  of  them

Three  laws  of  co-ordination

Question  of  permanence  of  organic  species

Two  logical  conditions  of  the  study

Subordination  of  characteristics

Piofpdure,  in  use  of  the  Natural  Method

Division  of  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom

Hierarchy  of  the  animal  kingdom

Attribute  of  symmetry

Division  of  Duplicate  animals  .

Division  of  Articulated  animals

Consideration  of  the  envelope  .

Natural  Method  applied  to  the  Vegetable  Kingdom

Difficulty  of  co-ordination         .....


60
61
61
61
62
6.S
64
68
6S
6!  I
7(»
71
72
73
73
73
74
74


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  IV.

OEGANIC  OR  VEGETATIVE  LIFE.


Condition  of  Dynamical  Biology

Vital  phenomena  :  their  division

Theory  of  Organic  Media

Exterior  conditions  of  Life

Mechanical  conditions  :  Weight

Pressure    .

Motion  and  rest

Thermological  action

Light,  Electricity,  etc.

Molecular  conditions

Air  and  water   .

Study  of  Specifics

History  of  Physiology

Philosophical  character  of  Physiology

Division  of  the  study

Two  functions  of  the  organic  life

Results  of  organic  action  .

State  of  composition  and  decomposition

Vital  heat  .....

Electrical  state  ....

Production  and  development  of  living  hodies

Decline  of  the  organism    ....


CHAPTER  V.

THE   ANIMAL   LIFE.

Transition  from  the  inorganic  to  the  organic

Primitive  nervous  properties     .

Relation  of  the  animal  to  the  organic  life

To  inorganic  philosophy   .

Properties  of  tissue  .

Sensihility

Irritability

Present  state  of  analysis  of  animality

Movement

Exterior  Sensation    .

Interior  Sensation

Mode  of  action  of  animality

Intermittence    .

Sleep  ....

Hal)it         ....

Need  of  activity

Association  of  the  animal  function>


Vlll  CONTENTS,

CHAPTER  VI.

INTELLECTUAL   AND   MORAL  OR   CEREBRAL  FUNCTIONS.

PAGE

Short-comin2:  of  Descartes        .        .        .        .        ,        .        .113

History  till  Gall's  time      .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .114

Positive  theory  of  Cerebral  functions        .....     115

Its  proper  place         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .115

Vices  of  Psychological  systems         .         .         .         .         .         .115

Method:  Interior  Observation 116

Doctrine  :  Relation  between  the  Affective  and  Intellectual
faculties         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .118

Brutes  and  Man 119

Theory  of  the  / 119

Reason  and  Instinct  ........     120

Basis  of  Gall's  doctrine     ........     122

Divisions  of  the  brain        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .123

Subdivision 125

Objections  ..........     126

Necessity  of  human  actions 126

Answered  ...........     127

Hypothetical  distribution  of  faculties 128

Needed  improvements       ........     129

Anatomical  basis 129

Physiological  analysis  of  faculties    .         .         .         .         .         .1.30

Examination  of  historical  cases        ......     131

Pathological  and  Comparative  analysis 132

Laws  of  action  ..........     134

Intennittence  and  continuity 1.34

Association        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .134

Unity  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system    .         .         .         .         .1,35

Imperfect  state  of  Phrenology  .         .         .         .         .         .         .     1 36

Present  state  of  Biology 1.36

Retrospect  of  Natural  Philosophy 137


BOOK    VI.
SOCIAL   PHYSICS.
CHAPTER  I.

NECESSITY  AND  OPPORTUNENESS  OF  THIS  NEW  SCIENCE.


Propo.sal  of  the  subject     .
Conditions  of  Order  and  Progress
The  theolo<acal  jiolity
(Criterion  of  social  doctrine
Failure  of  the  Theological  polity


139
140
143
144
144


CONTENTS.

The  Metaphysical  polity  .

Becomes  obstructive

Dogma  of  Liberty  of  Conscience

Dogma  of  Equality  ....

Dogma  of  the  Sovereignty  of  the  People.

Dogma  of  National  Independence    .

Inconsistency  of  the  jNIeta^jhysical  doctrine

Notion  of  a  state  of  Nature

Adhesion  to  the  worn-out

Recurrence  to  war    ....

Principle  of  Political  C^entralization

The  Stationary  doctrine   .

Dangers  of  the  critical  period  .

Intellectual  anarchy

Destruction  of  i>ublic  morality

Private  morality        ....

Political  corruption  ....

Low  aims  of  political  questions

Fatal  to  Progress      ....

Fatal  to  Order

Incompetence  of  political  leaders

Advent  of  the  Positive  Philosophy  .

Logical  coherence  of  the  doctrine

Its  effect  on  Order    ....

Its  effect  on  Progress

Anarchical  tendencies  of  the  scientific  class

Conclusion


IX
PAGE

148
150
151
155
156
156
157
157
159
160
160
164
167
167
169
171
173
176
177
178
179
182
183
184
187
191
192


CHAPTER  11.


PRINCIPAL   PHILOSOPHICAL   ATTEMPTS  TO  CONSTITUTE  A
SOCIAL  SCIENCE.

History  of  Social  Science 194

Aristotle's  "  Politics  " 197

Montesquieu 198

Condorcet  ..........  201

Political  economy 203

Growth  of  historical  study 208


CHAPTER  in.

CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE   POSITIVE  METHOD  IN  ITS  APPLICATION
TO  SOCIAL  PHENOMENA.

Infantile  state  of  s.icial  scieiifc 211

The  Relative  superseding  the  Absolute 213

Presuniptuous  character  of  the  existing  political  spirit  .         .  214

Previsi(jn  of  social  jjlienomena 217


V


X  CONTENTS.

Spirit  of  Social  Science     .

Statical  study  .....

Social  Organization  ....

Political  and  social  concurrence

Interconnection  of  the  social  organism

Order  of  statical  study

Dynamical  study

Social  continuity

Produced  by  natural  laws

Notion  of  Human  perfectibility

Limits  of  political  action  .

Social  phenomena  modifiable    .

Order  of  modifying  influences  .

Means  of  Investigation  in  Social  Science

Direct  Means    .

Observation

Experiment

Comparison

Comparison  with  inferior

Comparison  of  co-existing

Comp.arison  of  consecutive  states

Promise  of  a  fourth  method  of  investigation


animals    .
tates  of  society


.'AGE

218
219
220
221
223
226
227
228
228
232
234
235
237
241
241
241
245
247
248
249
251
256


CHAPTER  IV.

RELATION    OF  SOCIOLOGY  TO   THE  OTHER   DEPARTMENTS   OF
POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.


Relation  to  Biology  .

Relation  to  Inorganic  ijhilosophy

Man's  action  on  the  external  world

Necessary  Education

Mathematical  jireparation

Pretended  theory  of  chances

Reaction  of  Sociology

As  to  doctrine  .

As  to  Method   .

Speculative  rank  of  Sociology


259
263
2ti6
266
267
268
269
270
271
274


CHAPTER  V.


SOCIAL  STATICS,  OR   THEORY  OF   THE  SPONTANEOUS  ORDER  OF
HUMAN  SOCIETY,

Three  aspects 275

1.  Tlie  Individual 275

2.  The  Family 281

Tlie  Sexual  relation 283

The  Parental  relation       ...  ,         ...  286


CONTENTS.


3.  Society

Distribution  of  employments    .
Inconveniences .....
Basis  of  the  true  theory  of  government
Elementary  subordination
Tendency  of  society  to  government .


XI

PAGE

289
291
293
294
295
297


SOCIAL   DYNAMICS  :


CHAPTER  VI.

OR  THEORY  OF  THE  NATURAL  PROGRESS
OF   HUMAN  SOCIETY.


Scientific  view  of  Human  Progression
Course  of  Man's  social  development
Eate  of  progress
Ennui        .....

Duration  of  human  life     .

Increase  of  Population

The  order  of  evolution

Law  of  the  Three  Periods

The  Theological  i)eriod

Intellectual  influence  of  the  Theological  philosophy

Social  influences  of  the  Theological  philosophy

Institution  of  a  speculative  class

The  Positive  stage    ......

Attempted  union  of  the  two  philosophies
The  Metaphysical  Period  ....

Co-existence  of  the  three  Periods  in  the  same  mind

Corresponding  material  development

Primitive  military  life

Primitive  Slavery     ....

The  Military  regime  provisional
Affinity  between  the  Theological  and  Military  regime
Affinity  between  the  Positive  and  Industrial  spirit
Intermediate  regime


299
300
301
302
303
305
307
309
310
312
316
317
319
320
323
.325
326
326
327
328
329
331
332


THE   POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY  OF
AUGUSTE    COMTE.

BOOK   V.

BIOLOGY.

CHAPTEE  I.

GENERAL    VIEW    OF    BIOLOGY.

THE  study  of  the  external  world  aud  of  Opposite
Man  is  the  eternal  business  of  philo-  starting-
sophy  ;  and  there  are  two  methods  of  pro-  points  in
ceeding ;  by  passing  from  the  study  of  Man  plulosopliy.
to  that  of  external  nature,  or  from  the  study  of  external
nature  to  that  of  Man.  Whenever  philosophy  shall  be
perfect,  the  two  methods  will  be  reconciled  :  meantime,
the  contrast  of  the  two  distinguishes  the  opj^osite  philo-
sophies,— the  theological  and  the  positive.  We  shall  see
hereafter  that  all  theological  and  metajjhysical  philosophy
proceeds  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  the  external  world
from  the  starting-point  of  our  consciousness  of  human
phenomena  ;  whereas,  the  positive  philosophy  subordinates
the  conception  of  Man  to  that  of  the  eternal  world.  All
the  multitude  of  incompatibilities  between  the  two  philo-
sophies proceed  from  this  radical  opposition.  If  the  con-
sideration of  Man  is  to  prevail  over  that  of  the  universe,
all  jjhenomena  are  inevitably  attributed  to  iviU, — first
natural,  and  then  outside  of  nature ;  and  this  constitutes
the  theological  system.  On  the  contrary,  the  direct  study
of  the  universe  suggests  and  developes  the  great  idea  of

II.  B


2  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

the  laws  of  nature,  wliich  is  the  basis  of  all  positive  philo-
sophy, and  capable  of  extension  to  the  whole  of  phenomena,
including  at  last  those  of  Man  and  Society.  The  one  point
of  agreement  among  all  schools  of  theology  and  meta-
physics, which  otherwise  differ  without  limit,  is  that  they
regard  the  study  of  Man  as  primary,  and  that  of  the
universe  as  secondary, — usually  neglecting  the  latter  en-
tirely. Whereas,  the  most  marked  characteristic  of  the
positive  School  is  that  it  founds  the  study  of  Man  on  the
prior  knowledge  of  the  external  world.

.  This  consideration  affects  jDhysiology  fur-

of  I^h\"fol'o''fv  ^^*^^  than  by  its  bearing  on  its  encyclo-
pedical rank.  In  this  one  case  the  character
of  the  science  is  affected  by  it.  The  basis  of  its  positivity
is  its  subordination  to  the  knowledge  of  the  external  world.
Any  multitude  of  facts,  however  well  analysed,  is  useless
as  long  as  the  old  method  of  philosophizing  is  persisted  in,
and  physiology  is  conceived  of  as  a  direct  study,  isolated
fi'om  that  of  inert  nature.  The  study  has  assumed  a  scien-
tific character  only  since  the  recent  period  when  vital
phenomena  began  to  be  regarded  as  subject  to  general
laws,  of  which  they  exhibit  only  simple  modifications.
This  revolution  is  now  irreversible,  however  incomplete
and  however  imperfect  have  been  the  attempts  to  establish
the  positive  character  of  our  knowledge  of  the  most  com-
])lex  and  individual  of  physiological  phenoniena ;  especially
that  of  the  nei'ves  and  brain.  Yet,  unquestionable  as  is  the
basis  of  the  science,  its  culture  is  at  present  too  like  that  to
which  men  have  been  always  accustomed,  pursued  inde-
])endently  of  mathematical  and  inorganic  philosophy,  which
are  the  only  solid  foundations  of  the  i>ositivity  of  vital
studies.

There  is  no  science  with  regard  to  which  it  is  so  neces-
sary to  ascertain  its  true  nature  and  scope ;  because  we
have  not  only  to  assign  its  place  in  the  scale,  but  to  assert
its  originality.  On  the  one  hand,  metaphysics  strives  to
retain  it ;  and  on  the  other,  the  inorganic  philosophy  lays
hold  of  it,  to  make  it  a  mere  outlying  portion  of  its  scien-
tific domain.  For  more  than  a  centiu'v,  diu-ing  which
biology  has  endeavoured  to  take  its  ])lace  in  the  hierarch}
of  fundamental  sciences,  it  has  been  bandied  between  meta-


THE   DOMAIN    OF   PHYSIOLOGY.  S

physics  and  physics ;  and  the  strife  can  be  ended  only  by
the  decision  of  positive  philosojjhy,  as  to  what  position
shall  be  occupied  by  the  study  of  living  bodies.

The  present  backwardness  of  the  science  is
explained  by  the  extreme  complexity  of  its  imperfection
phenomena,  and  its  recent  date.  That  com-
plexity forbids  the  hope  that  biological  science  can  ever
attain  a  perfection  comparable  to  that  of  the  more  simple
and  general  parts  of  natural  philosophy :  and,  from  its
recent  date,  minds  which  see  in  every  other  province  the
folly  of  looking  for  first  causes  and  modes  of  production
of  phenomena,  still  carry  these  notions  into  the  study  of
living  bodies.  For  more  tlian  a  century  intelligent  students
have  in  physics  put  aside  the  search  after  the  mystery  of
weight,  and  have  looked  only  for  its  laws  ;  yet  they  reproach
physiology  with  teaching  us  nothing  of  the  nature  of  life,
i;onsciousness,  and  thought.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  phy-
siology may  thus  be  supposed  to  be  far  more  imperfect
than  it  is  ;  and  if  it  be,  from  unavoidable  circumstances,
more  backward  than  the  other  fundamental  sciences,  it  yet
includes  some  infinitely  valuable  conceptions,  and  its  scien-
tific character  is  far  less  inferior  than  is  commonly  supposed.

We  must  first  describe  its  domain.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  gradual  develojD-  j     ^  , ,

ment  of  human  intelligence  would,  in  course
of  time,  lead  us  over  from  the  theological  and  metaphysical
state  to  the  positive  by  a  series  of  logical  conceptions.  But
such  an  advance  would  be  extremely  slow  ;  and  we  see,  in
fact,  that  the  process  is  much  quickened  by  a  special
stimulus  of  one  sort  or  another.  Our  historical  experience,
which  testifies  to  every  great  advance  having  been  made  in
this  way,  shows  that  the  most  common  auxiliary  influence
is  the  need  of  ajjtplication  of  the  science  in  question.  Most
philosophers  have  said  that  every  science  springs  from  a
corresponding  art ; — a  maxim  which,  amidst  much  exaggera-
tion, contains  solid  truth,  if  we  restrict  it,  as  we  ought,
to  the  sepai'ation  of  each  science  from  the  theological  and
metaphysical  philosophy  which  was  the  natural  pi'oduct  of
early  human  intelligence.  In  this  view  it  is  -p  i  •
true  that  a  double  action  has  led  to  the  in-  Med?ch"e^*^
stitution  of  science,  the  arts  furnishing  posi-


4  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

tive  data,  and  then  leading  specula.tive  researches  in  the
direction  of  real  and  accessible  questions.  But  there  is
another  side  to  this  view.  When  the  science  has  once
reached  a  certain  degree  of  extension,  the  progress  of
speculative  knowledge  is  checked  by  a  too  close  connec-
tion of  theory  with  practice.  Our  power  of  speculation,
limited  as  it  is,  still  far  surpasses  our  capacity  for  action  :
so  that  it  would  be  radically  absurd  to  restrict  the  progress
of  the  one  to  that  of  the  other.  The  rational  domains  of
science  and  art  are,  in  general,  perfectly  distinct,  though
philosophically  connected  :  in  the  one  we  learn  to  know,
and  therefore  to  foreknow  ;  in  the  other  to  become  capable,
and  therefore  to  act.  If  science  springs  from  art,  it  can
be  matured  only  when  it  has  left  art  behind.  This  is
palpably  true  with  regard  to  the  sciences  whose  character
is  clearly  recognized.  Archimedes  was,  no  doubt,  deeply
aware  of  it  when  he  apologized  to  posterity  for  having  for
the  moment  applied  his  genius  to  pi-actical  inventions.  In
the  case  of  mathematics  and  astronomy  we  have  almost  lost
sight  of  this  truth,  from  the  remoteness  of  their  formation  ;
but,  in  the  case  of  physics  and  of  chemistry,  at  whose
scientific  birth  we  may  almost  be  said  to  have  been  present,
we  can  ourselves  testify  to  their  dependence  on  the  arts  at
the  outset,  and  to  the  rapidity  of  their  j^rogress  after  their
sej)aration  from  them.  The  first  series  of  chemical  facts
were  furnished  by  the  labours  of  art ;  but  the  prodigious
recent  development  of  the  science  is  certainly  due,  for  the
most  part,  to  the  speculative  character  that  it  has  assumed.
These  considerations  are  eminently  applicable  to  physio-
logy. No  other  science  has  been  closely  connected  with  a
corresponding  art,  as  biology  has  with  medical  art, — a  fact
accounted  for  by  the  high  importance  of  the  art  and  tht'
complexity  of  the  science.  But  for  the  growing  needs  of
practical  medicine,  and  the  indications  it  affords  about  the
chief  vital  phenomena,  physiology  would  have  probably
stopped  short  at  those  academical  dissertations,  half
literary,  half  metaphysical,  studded  with  episodical  adoi'n-
ments,  which  constituted  what  was  called  the  science  little
more  than  a  century  ago.  The  time  however  has  arrived
when  biology  must,  like  the  other  sciences,  make  a  fresh
start   in   a   purely    s^^eculative    direction,  free    from    all


RELATION    OF   PHYSIOLOGY   TO   MEDICINE.  5

entanglement  with  medical  or  any  other  art.  And  when
this  science  and  the  others  shall  have  attained  an  abstract
completeness,  then  will  arise  the  further  duty,  as  I  have
indicated  before,  of  connecting  the  system  of  the  arts  with
that  of  the  sciences  by  an  intermediate  order  of  rational
conceptions.  Meanwhile  such  an  operation  would  be  pre-
mature, because  the  system  of  the  sciences  is  not  completely
formed  ;  and,  with  regard  to  physiology  especially,  the  first
necessity  is  to  separate  it  from  medicine,  in  order  to  secure
the  originality  of  its  scientific  character,  by  constituting
organic  science  as  a  consequence  of  inorganic.  Since  the
time  of  Haller  this  process  has  gone  on  ;  but  with  extreme
uncertainty  and  imperfection  ;  so  that  even  now  the  science
is,  with  a  few  valuable  exceptions,  committed  to  physicians,
who  are  rendered  unfit  for  such  a  charge  both  by  the
eminent  importance  of  their  proper  business,  and  by  the
profound  imperfection  of  their  existing  education.  Phy-
siology is  the  only  science  which  is  not  taken  possession  of
by  minds  exclusively  devoted  to  it.  It  has  not  even  a  regu-
larly assigned  place  in  the  best-instituted  scientific  corpo-
ratioiis.  This  state  of  things  cannot  last,  the  importance
and  difiiculty  of  the  science  being  considered.  If  we  would
not  confide  the  study  of  astronomy  to  navigators,  we  shall
not  leave  physiology  to  the  leisure  of  physicians.  Such  an
organization  as  this  is  a  suificient  evidence  of  the  prevalent
confusion  of  ideas  about  physiological  science ;  and  when
its  pursuit  has  been  duly  provided  for,  that  reaction  for
the  benefit  of  art  will  ensue  which  should  put  to  flight  all
the  fears  of  the  timid  about  the  separation  of  theory  from
practice.  We  have  seen  before  how  the  loftiest  tniths  of
science  concur  to  put  us  in  possession  of  an  art ;  and  the
verification  of  this  truth,  which  physics  and  chemistry
have  afforded  before  our  eyes,  will  be  repeated  in  the  case
of  physiology  when  the  science  has  advanced  as  far.

Having  provided  for  a  speculative  view  of  j,     1  •    t

physiology,  we  must  inquire  into  its  object ;
and,  as  the  vital  laws  constitute  the  essential  subject  of
biology,  we  must  begin  by  analysing  the  fundamental  idea
of  life.

Before  the  time  of  Bichat,  this  idea  was      j .       r  t  -r
wrapped  in  a  mist  of  metaphysical  abstrac-


6  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

tions  ;  aud  Bicliat  himself,  after  having  perceived  that  a
definition  of  life  could  be  founded  on  nothing  else  than  a
general  view  of  phenomena  proj^er  to  living  bodies,  so  far
fell  under  the  influence  of  the  old  philosophy  as  to  call  life
a  struggle  between  dead  nature  and  living  nature.  The
irrationality  of  this  conception  consists  especially  in  its
suppressing  one  of  the  two  elements  whose  concurrence  is
necessary  to  the  general  idea  of  life.  This  idea  supposes,
not  only  a  being  so  organized  as  to  admit  of  the  vital  state,
but  such  an  arrangement  of  external  influences  as  will  also
admit  of  it.  The  harmony  between  the  living  being  and
the  corresjjonding  medium  (as  I  shall  call  its  environment)
evidently  characterizes  the  fundamental  condition  of  life  ;
whereas,  on  Bichat's  supposition,  the  whole  environment
of  living  beings  tends  to  destroy  them.  If  certain  pertur-
bations of  the  medium  occasionally  destroy  life,  its  in-
fluence is,  on  the  whole,  j)reservative  ;  and  the  causes  of
injury  and  death  proceed  at  least  as  often  from  necessary
and  spontaneous  modifications  of  the  organism  as  from  ex-
ternal influences.  Moreover,  one  of  the  main  distinctions
between  the  organic  and  the  inorganic  regions  is  that  inor-
ganic phenomena,  from  their  greater  simplicity  and  gene-
rality, are  produced  under  almost  any  external  influences
which  admit  of  their  existence  at  all ;  while  organic  bodies
are,  from  their  comj^lexity,  and  the  variety  of  actions  always
preceding,  very  closely  dependent  on  the  influences  around
them.  And  the  higher  we  ascend  in  the  ranks  of  organic
bodies,  the  closer  is  this  dei^endence,  in  proportion  to  the
diversity  of  functions  ;  though,  as  Ave  must  bear  in  mind,
the  power  of  the  organism  in  modifying  the  influences  of
the  medium  rises  in  proportion.  The  existence  of  the  being
then  requires  a  more  complex  aggregate  of  exterior  circum-
stances ;  but  it  is  compatible  with  wider  limits  of  variation
in  each  influence  taken  by  itself.  In  the  lowest  rank  of
the  organic  hierarchy,  for  instance,  we  find  vegetables  and
fixed  animals  which  have  no  efl^ect  on  the  medium  in  which
they  exist,  and  which  would  therefore  perish  by  the  slightest
changes  in  it,  but  for  the  very  small  number  of  distinct
exterior  actions  required  by  their  life.  At  the  other  ex-
tremity we  find  Man,  who  can  live  only  by  the  concurrence
of  the  most  complex  exterior  conditions,  atmospherical  and


DEFINITION    OF   LIFE.  7

terrestrial,  iiuder  various  physical  and.  chemical  aspects  ;
but,  by  an  indispensable  compensation,  he  can  endure,  in
all  these  conditions,  much  wider  differences  than  inferior
organisms  could  support,  because  he  has  a  superior  power
of  reacting  on  the  surrounding  system.  However  great
this  power,  it  is  as  contradictory  to  Bichat's  view  as  his  de-
pendence on  the  exterior  world.  But  this  notion  of  Man's
independence  of  exterior  nature,  and  antagonism  to  it,  was
natural  in  Bichat's  case,  when  physiological  considerations
bore  no  relation  to  any  hierarchy  of  organisms,  and  when
Man  was  studied  as  an  isolated  existence.  However,  the
radical  vice  of  such  a  starting-point  for  such  a  study  could
not  but  impair  the  whole  system  of  Bichat's  physiological
conceptions  ;  and  we  shall  see  how  seriously  the  effects
have  made  themselves  felt.

Next  ensued  the  abuse,  by  philosophers,  and  especially
ia  Grermany,  of  the  benefits  disclosed  by  comparative
anatomy.  They  generalized  extravagantly  the  abstract
notion  of  life  yielded  by  the  study  of  the  aggregate  of
organized  beings,  making  the  idea  of  life  exactly  equiva-
lent to  that  of  spontaneous  activity.  As  all  natural  bodies
are  active,  in  some  manner  and  degree,  no  distinct  notion
could  be  attached  to  the  term ;  and  this  abuse  must
evidently  lead  us  back  to  the  ancient  confusion,  which
arose  from  attributing  life  to  all  bodies.  The  inconve-
nience of  having  two  terms  to  indicate  a  single  general
idea  should  teach  us  that,  to  prevent  scientific  questions
from  degenerating  into  a  contest  of  words,  we  must  care-
fully restrict  the  term  life  to  the  only  really  living  beings,
— that  is,  those  which  are  organized, — and  not  give  it  a
meaning  which  would  include  all  possible  organisms,  and
all  their  modes  of  vitality.  In  this  case,  as  in  all  primitive
questions,  the  philosophers  would  have  done  wisely  to
respect  the  rough  but  judicious  indications  of  popular
good  sense,  which  will  ever  be  the  true  starting-point  of
all  wise  scientific  speculation.

I  know  of  no  other  successful  attempt  to  ••n  • .

define    life   than    that  of  M.  de  Blainville,   ^gfinitjon
proposed  in  the  introduction  to  his  treatise
on   Comparative  Anatomy.     He   characterizes  life  as  the
double  interior  motion,  general  and  continuous,  of  com-


8  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

position  and  decomposition,  which  in  fact  constitutes  its
true  universal  nature.  I  do  not  see  that  this  leaves  any-
thing to  be  desired,  unless  it  be  a  more  direct  and  explicit
indication  of  the  two  correlative  conditions  of  a  deter-
minate organism  and  a  suitable  medium.  This  criticism
however  applies  rather  to  the  formula  than  to  the  con-
ception ;  and  the  conditions  are  implied  in  the  conception,
— the  conditions  of  an  organism  to  sustain  the  renovation,
and  a  medium  to  minister  to  the  absorption  and  exhala-
tion ;  yet  it  might  have  been  better  to  express  them.
With  this  modification,  the  definition  is  unexceptionable,
— enunciating  the  one  phenomenon  which  is  common  to
all  living  beings,  and  excluding  all  inert  bodies.  Here  we
have,  in  my  view,  the  first  elementary  basis  of  true  bio-
logical philosophy.

It  is  true,  this  definition  neglects  the  eminent  dis-
tinctioxT  between  the  organic  and  the  animal  life,  and
relates  solely  to  the  vegetative  life  ;  and  it  appears  to
violate  the  general  principle  of  definitions, — that  they
should  exhibit  a  phenomenon  in  the  case  in  which  it  is
most,  and  not  in  that  in  which  it  is  least  developed.  But
the  proposed  definition  is  shown,  by  these  very  objections,
to  rest  upon  a  due  estimate  of  the  whole  biological  hier-
archy :  for  the  animal  life  is  simply  a  complementary
advancement  upon  the  organic  or  fundamental  life,  adapted
to  procure  materials  for  it  by  reaction  upon  the  external
world,  and  to  prepare  or  facilitate  its  acts  by  sensations,
locomotion,  etc.,  and  to  preserve  it  from  unfavourable
influences.  The  higher  animals,  and  Man  especially,  are
the  only  ones  in  which  this  relation  is  totally  subverted, —
the  vegetative  life  being  destined  to  sujiport  the  animal,
wliich  is  erected  into  the  chief  end  and  preponderant  cha-
racter of  organic  existence.  But  in  Man  himself,  this  admir-
able inversion  of  the  usual  order  becomes  comprehensible
only  by  the  aid  of  a  remarkable  development  of  intelligence
and  sociality,  which  tends  more  and  more  to  transform  the
species  artificially  into  a  single  individual,  immense  and
eternal,  endowed  with  a  constantly  progressive  action  upon
external  nature.  This  is  the  only  just  view  to  take  of  this
subordination  of  the  vegetative  to  the  animal  life,  as  the
ideal  tyj^e  towards  which   civilized  humanity  incessantly


VEGETATIVE   AND   ANIMAL   LIFE.  y

tends,  though  it  can  never  be  fully  realized.  We  shall
hereafter  show  how  this  conception  is  related  to  the  new
fundamental  science  which  I  propose  to  constitute  :  but  in
pure  biology,  the  view  is  unscientific,  and  can  only  lead  us
astray.  It  is  not  with  the  essential  properties  of  humanity
that  biology  is  concerned  ;  but  Avith  the  individual  in  his
relation  to  other  organic  beings ;  and  it  must  therefore
rigorously  maintain  the  conception  of  animal  life  being
subordinated  to  the  vegetative,  as  a  general  law  of  the
organic  realm,  and  the  only  ajiparent  exception  to  which
forms  the  special  object  of  a  wholly  different  fundamental
science.  It  should  be  added  that,  even  where  the  animal
life  is  the  most  developed,  the  organic  life,  besides  being  the
basis  and  the  end,  remains  common  to  all  the  tissues,  while,
at  the  same  time,  it  alone  proceeds  in  a  necessarily  con-
tinuous manner, — the  animal  life,  on  the  contrary,  being
intermittent.  These  are  the  grounds  on  which  M.  de  Blain-
ville's  definition  of  life  must  be  confirmed,  Avhile,  never-
theless, we  may  regard  the  consideration  of  animality,  and
even  of  humanity,  as  the  most  important  object  of  biology.

This   analvsis   of  the  phenomenon  of  life      -r^  ,.   .,.        ^

mil         *     ,  1  T   £    -x-  £    J.^  Denmtion  or

help   us   to   a   clear   definition  of   the      Biolo"-v

science  which  relates  to  it.  We  have  seen
that  the  idea  of  life  supposes  the  mutual  relation  of  two
indispensable  elements, — an  organism,  and  a  suitable
medium  or  environment.  It  is  from  the  reciprocal  action
of  these  two  elements  that  all  the  vital  phenomena  pro-
ceed ; — not  only  the  animal,  but  also  the  organic.  It
immediately  follows  that  the  great  problem  of  positive
biology  consists  in  establishing,  in  the  most  general  and
simple  manner,  a  scientific  harmony  between  these  two
inseparable  powers  of  the  vital  conflict,  and  the  act  which
constitutes  that  conflict :  in  a  word,  in  connecting,  iu  both
a  general  and  special  manner,  the  double  idea  of  organ  and
medium  with  that  of  function.  The  idea  of  function  is,  in
fact,  as  double  as  the  other ;  and,  if  we  were  treating  of
the  natural  history  of  vital  beings,  we  must  expressly  con-
sider it  so :  for,  by  the  law  of  the  equivalence  of  action
and  reaction,  the  organism  must  act  on  the  medium  as
much  as  the  medium  on  the  organism.  In  treating  of  the
human  being,  and  especially  in  the  social  state,  it  would


10  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

be  necessary  to  use  the  term  function  in  this  larger  sense :
but  at  present  there  will  be  little  inconvenience  in  adopting
it  in  its  ordinary  sense,  signifying  organic  acts,  indepen-
dently of  their  exterior  consequences.

Biology,  then,  may  be  regarded  as  having  for  its  object
the  connecting,  in  each  determinate  case,  the  anatomical
and  the  physiological  point  of  view ;  or,  in  other  words,
the  statical  and  dynamical.  This  perpetual  relation  con-
stitutes its  true  philosophical  character.  Placed  in  a  given
system  of  exterior  circumstances,  a  definite  organism  must
always  act  in  a  necessarily  determinate  manner ;  and,  in-
versely, the  same  action  could  not  be  precisely  produced  by
really  distinct  organisms.  We  may  then  conclude  inter-
changeably, the  act  from  the  subject,  or  the  agent  from
the  act.  The  surrounding  system  being  always  supposed
to  be  known,  according  to  the  other  fundamental  sciences,
the  double  biological  problem  may  be  laid  down  thus,  iu
the  most  mathematical  form,  and  iu  general  terms :  Given,
the  organ  or  organic  'modification,  to  find  the  function  or  the
act;  and  reciprocally.  This  definition  seems  to  me  to
fulfil  the  chief  philosoj^hical  conditions  of  the  science  ;  and
especially  it  provides  for  that  rational  prevision,  which,  as
has  been  so  often  said,  is  the  end  of  all  true  science ;  an
end  which  aVjides  through  all  the  degrees  of  imperfection
which,  in  any  science,  at  present  prevents  its  attainment.
It  is  eminently  important  to  keep  this  end  in  view  in  a
science  so  intricate  as  this,  in  which  the  multitude  of
details  tempts  to  a  fatal  dispersion  of  efforts  upon  desul-
tory researches.  No  one  disputes  that  the  most  perfect
])ortions  of  the  science  are  those  in  which  prevision  has
been  best  realized;  and  this  is  a  sufficient  justification  of
the  proposal  of  this  aim,  whether  or  not  it  shall  ever  be
fully  attained.  My  definition  excludes  the  old  division
between  anatomy  and  physiology,  because  I  believe  that
division  to  have  marked  a  very  early  stage  of  the  science,
and  to  be  no  longer  sustainable.  It  was  by  the  simple  and
easy  considerations  of  anatomy  that  the  old  metaphysical
view  was  discredited,  and  positivity  first  introduced  into
biology :  but  that  service  once  accomplished,  no  reason
remains  for  the  separation ;  and  the  division,  in  fact,  is
growing  fainter  every  day.


DEFINITION    OF    BIOLOGY.  11

Not  only  does  my  definition  abstain  from  separating
anatomy  from  physiology ;  it  joins  to  it  another  essential
part,  the  nature  of  which  is  little  known.  If  the  idea  of
life  is  really  inseparable  from  that  of  organization,  neither
can  be  severed,  as  we  have  seen,  from  that  of  a  medium  or
environment,  in  a  determinate  relation  with  them.  Hence
arises  a  third  elemeutaiy  aspect ;  viz. ,  the  general  theory
of  organic  media,  and  of  their  action  upon  the  organism,
abstractedly  regarded.  This  is  what  the  Grerman  philo-
sophers of  our  day  confusedly  asserted  in  their  notion  of
an  intermediate  realm, — of  air  and  water, — uniting  the
inorganic  and  organic  worlds :  and  this  is  what  M.  de
Blainville  had  in  view  in  what  he  called  the  study  of  ex-
terior modifiers,  general  and  special.  Unhappily,  this
portion  which,  after  anatomy  proper,  is  the  most  indis-
])ensable  preliminary  of  biology,  is  still  so  obscure  and
imperfect  that  few  physiologists  even  suspect  its  exis-
tence.

The  definition  that  I  have  proposed  aids  us  in  de-
scribing not  only  the  object  or  nature  of  the  science,  but  its
subject,  or  domain:  for,  according  to  this  formula,  it  is
]iot  in  a  single  organism,  but  in  all  known,  and  even  pos-
!^ible  organisms,  that  biology  must  endeavour  to  establish
a  constant  and  necessary  harmony  between  the  anatomical
])oint  of  view  and  the  physiological.  This  unity  of  subject
is  one  of  the  chief  philosophical  beauties  of  biology ;  and,
in  order  to  maintain  it,  we  must  here  avow  that  in  the
midst  of  an  almost  infinite  diversity,  the  study  of  Man
must  always  prevail,  and  rule  all  the  rest,  whether  as
starting-point  or  aim.  Our  hope,  in  studying  other  orga-
nisms, is  to  arrive  at  a  more  exact  knowledge  of  Man  :  and
again,  the  idea  of  Man  is  the  only  possible  standard  to
which  we  can  refer  other  organic  systems.  In  this  sense,
and  in  this  only,  can  the  point  of  view  of  the  antiquated
philosophy  be  sustained  by  the  deeper  philosophy  which  is
taking  its  place.  Such  is,  then,  the  necessary  consolidation
of  all  the  parts  of  biological  science,  notwithstanding  the
imposing  vastness  of  its  rational  domain.

As  for  the  means  of  investigation  in  this
science,- — -the  first  observation  that  occurs  is       testi<^ation^
that  it  affords  a  striking:  confirmation  of  the


12  POSITIVE    rillLOSOPllY.

pbilosoi:)liical  law  before  laid  down,  of  the  inevitable  in-
crease of  our  scientific  resources  in  proportion  to  the  com-
plication of  the  phenomena  in  question.  If  biological
phenomena  are  incomparably  more  complex  than  those  of
any  preceding  science,  the  study  of  them  admits  of  the
most  extensive  assemblage  of  intellectual  means  (many  of
them  new)  and  developes  human  faculties  hitherto  inactive,
or  known  only  in  a  rudimentary  state.  The  logical  re-
sources which  are  thus  obtained  will  be  exhibited  here-
after. At  j^resent,  we  must  notice  the  means  of  direct
exploration  and  analysis  of  phenomena  in  this  science.
Q  .  First,  Observation  acquires  a  new  exten-

sion. Chemistry  admitted  the  use  of  all  the
five  senses  ;  but  biology  is,  in  this  respect,  an  advance  upon
chemistry.  We  can  here  employ  an  artificial  apparatus  to
perfect  the  natural  sensations,  and  especially  in  the  case  of
sight.  Much  needing  precaution  in  the  use,  and  very
subject  to  abuse,  as  is  this  resource,  it  Avill  always  be
.    .,  .  .  eagerly  emjDloyed.    In  a  statical  view,  such  an

i)aratus'  apparatus  helps  us  to  a  much  better  estimate

of  a  structure  whose  least  perceptible  details
may  acquire  a  primary  importance,  in  various  relations :
and,  even  in  the  dynamical  view,  though  much  less  favour-
able, we  ai'e  sometimes  enabled  by  these  artificial  means
to  observe  directly  the  elementary  play  of  the  smallest
organic  parts,  which  are  the  ordinary  basis  of  the  princij^al
vital  phenomena.  Till  recently,  these  aids  were  limited  to
the  sense  of  sight,  which  here,  as  everywhere  else,  is  the  chief
agent  of  scientific  observation.  But  some  instruments  have
been  devised  in  our  day  to  assist  the  hearing ;  and,  though
invented  for  pathological  investigations,  they  are  equally
fit  for  the  study  of  the  healthy  organism.  Though  rough
at  present,  and  not  to  be  compared  to  microscopic  appa-
ratus, these  instruments  indicate  the  improvements  that
may  be  made  hereafter  in  artificial  heai'ing.  Moreover,  they
suggest,  by  analogy,  that  the  other  senses,  not  excepting
even  touch,  may  admit  of  such  assistance,  hinted  to  the
restless  sagacity  of  explorers  by  a  better  theory  of  the
corresponding  sensations.

Next,  the  biologist  has  an  advantage  over  the  chemist  in
being  able  to  employ  the  whole  of  chemical  procedures,  as


MEAKS   OF   IxNVESTIGATION.  13

a  sort  of  new  power,  to  perfect  the  j^reliminary  „.  .  .
exploration  of  the  subject  of  his  researches,  pioration
according  to  the  evident  rule  of  philosophy
that  each  docti-ine  may  be  converted  into  a  method  with
regard  to  those  that  follow  it  in  the  scientific  hierarchy  ;  but
never  with  regard  to  those  which  precede  it.  lu  anatomical
observations,  especially,  as  might  be  foreseen,  a  happy  use
is  made  of  chemical  procedure,  to  characterize  with  pre-
cision the  different  elementary  tissues,  and  the  chief  pro-
ducts of  the  organism.  lu  phj^siological  observations  also,
though  they  are  less  favourable  to  the  use  of  such  means,
they  are  of  real  and  notable  efficacy, — always  supposing,  in
both  cases,  that  they  are  used  under  the  guidance  of  soiind
philosophy,  and  not  overcharged  with  the  minute  numeri-
cal details  which  too  often  burden  the  chemical  analyses  of
the  organic  tissues.  One  more  resource  may  be  mentioned,
which  was  often  employed  by  Bichat  to  make  up  for  the
absence  or  impei'fection  of  chemical  tests  ;  the  examination
of  alimentary  effects, — ^the  substances  which  immediately
compose  organized  bodies  being,  usually,  by  their  nature,
more  or  less  fit  for  nutrition.  In  an  anatomical  view  this
study  may  become  a  useful  complement  of  the  other  means
of  investigation.

Proceeding  to  the  second  class  of  means, —  Fvpfftatfxt
Experiment  cannot  but  be  less  and  less  de-
cisive, in  proportion  to  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena
to  be  explored :  and  therefore  we  saw  this  resource  to  be
less  effectual  in  chemistry  than  in  physics ;  and  we  now
find  that  it  is  eminently  useful  in  chemistry  in  comparison
with  physiology.  In  fact,  the  nature  of  the  phenomena
seems  to  offer  almost  insurmountable  impediments  to  any
extensive  and  prolific  application  of  such  a  procedure  in
biology.  These  phenomena  require  the  concurrence  of
so  large  a  numV)er  of  distinct  influences,  external  and
internal,  which,  however  diverse,  are  closely  connected  with
each  other,  and  yet  within  narrow  limits,  that,  however
easy  it  may  be  to  disturb  or  suspend  the  process  under
notice,  it  is  beyond  measure  difficult  to  effect  a  determinate
}>erturbation.  If  too  powerful,  it  would  obviate  the  phe-
nomenon :  if  too  feeble,  it  would  not  sufficiently  mark  the
artificial  case.     And,  on  the  other  hand,  tliough  intended


14  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

and  directed  to  modify  one  only  of  the  phenomena,  it  must
presently  affect  several  others,  in  virtue  of  their  mutual
sympathy.  Thus,  it  reqviires  a  highly  philosophical  spirit,
acting  with  extreme  circumspection,  to  conduct  physio-
logical exj)eriments  at  all ;  and  it  is  no  v^^onder  if  such
experiments  have,  with  a  few  happy  exceptions,  raised
scientific  difficulties  greater  than  those  proposed  to  be
solved, — to  say  nothing  of  those  innumerable  experiments
which,  having  no  definite  aim.  have  merely  encumbered  the
science  with  idle  and  unconnected  details.

In  accordance  with  what  has  been  said  of  the  mutual
relations  of  the  organism  and  its  environment,  we  must
bear  in  mind  that  experiments  in  physiology  must  be  of
two  kinds.  We  must  introduce  determinate  perturbations
into  the  medium  as  well  as  the  organism ;  whereas  the
.  latter  process  has  alone  been  commonly  at-

fhe  oroanlm     tempted.    If  it  is  objected  that  the  organism
^  '    must  itself  be  disturbed  by  such  affection  of

the  medium,  the  answer  is  that  the  study  of  this  reaction
is  itself  a  part  of  the  experiment.  It  should  be  remarked
that  experimentation  on  the  organism  is  much  the  less
rational  of  the  two  methods,  because  the  conditions  of  ex-
periment are  much  less  easily  fulfilled.  The  first  rule,  that
the  change  introduced  shall  be  fully  compatible  with  the
existence  of  the  phenomenon  to  be  observed,  is  rendered
often  impi'acticable  by  the  incompatibility  of  life  with
much  alteration  of  the  organs  :  and  the  second  rule, — that
the  two  compared  cases  shall  differ  under  only  one  j^oint
of  view, — is  baffled  by  the  mutual  sympathy  of  the  organs,
which  is  very  different  from  their  harmony  with  their
environment.  In  both  lights,  nothing  can  be  imagined
more  futile  in  the  way  of  experiment  than  the  practice  of
vivisection,  which  is  the  commonest  of  all.  Setting  aside
the  consideration  of  the  cruelty,  the  levity,  and  the  bad
moral  stimulus  involved  in  the  case,  it  must  be  pronounced
absurd ;  for  any  positive  solution  is  rendered  impossible
by  the  induced  death  of  a  system  eminently  indivisible,
and  the  universal  distiirbance  of  the  organism  under  its
approach.

Fiy  affectiiij;-  The  second  class  of  jihysiological  experi-

the  Mecliuiii.      ments  appears  to  me  much  more  promising  ;


EXPERIMENT.  15

— that  in  which  the  system  of  exterior  circumstances  is
modified  for  a  determinate  purpose.  Scarcely  anything
has  been  done  in  this  direction  beyond  some  incomplete
researches  into  the  action  of  artificial  atmospheres,  and
the  comparative  influence  of  different  kinds  of  alimen-
tation. We  are  here  better  able  to  circumscribe,  with
scientific  precision,  the  artificial  perturbation  we  jjroduce ;
we  can  control  the  action  upon  the  organism,  so  that  the
general  disturbance  of  the  system  may  affect  the  observa-
tion very  slightly  ;  and  we  can  suspend  the  process  at
pleasure,  so  as  to  allow  the  restoration  of  the  normal  state
before  the  organism  has  undergone  any  irreparal:»le  change.
It  is  easy  to  see  how  favourable,  in  comparison,  these  con-
ditions are  to  i-ational  induction.  And  to  these  considera-
tions may  be  added  the  one  more,  that  under  this  method
we  can  observe  varying  states  in  one  individual ;  whereas,
under  the  practice  of  vivisection,  we  have  to  observe  the
normal  state  in  one  individual,  and  the  artificial  in  another.
Thus  we  are  justified  in  our  satisfaction  that  the  least
violent  method  of  experimentation  is  the  most  instructive.

As  to  the  ajjplication  of  experiment  in  the
various  degrees  of  the  biological  scale  ; — it  is  ^omparative
easiest  in  the  lower  order  of  organisms,
because  their  organs  are  simpler  and  fewer,  their  mutual
sympathy  is  less,  and  their  environment  is  more  definite
and  less  complex;  and  these  advantages,  in  my  opinion,
more  than  compensate  for  the  restriction  of  the  field  of
experiment.  It  is  true,  we  are  remote  from  the  human
type,  which  is  the  fundamental  unity  of  biology ;  and  our
judgment  is  thus  impaired,  especially  with  regard  to  the
phenomena  of  animal  life :  but,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are
all  the  nearer  to  the  scientific  constitution  proper  to  in-
organic physics,  which  I  consider  to  be  the  ultimate
destination  of  the  art  of  experiment.  The  advantages  at
the  other  end  of  the  scale  are  that  the  higher  the  organism,
t!ie  more  is  it  susceptible  of  modification,  both  from  its
own  complexity  and  from  the  greater  variety  of  external
influences  involved  ; — every  advantage  bringing  with  it,  as
we  have  seen,  an  increase  of  difiiculty.

No  one  will  suppose,  I  trust,  that  from  anything  I  have
said  I  have  the  slightest  desire  to  undervalue  the  use  of


16  rOSlTIYE    PHILOSOPHY.

experiment  in  biology,  or  to  slight  such  achievements  as
Harvey's  experiments  on  circulation  ;  Haller's  on  irrita-
bility ;  part  of  Spallauzani's  on  digestion  and  generation ;
Bichat's  on  the  triple  harmony  between  the  heart,  the
brain,  and  the  lungs  in  the  sujDerior  animals  ;  those  of
Legallois  on  animal  heat ;  and  many  analogous  efforts
w^hich,  seeing  the  vast  difficulty  of  the  subject,  may  rival
the  most  perfect  investigations  in  physics.  My  object  is
simply  to  rectify  the  false  or  exaggerated  notions  of  the
caj^acity  of  the  experimental  method,  misled  by  its  appa-
rent facility  to  suppose  it  the  best  method  of  physiological
research ;  which  it  is  not.  One  consideration  remains  in
this  connection;  the  consideration  of  the  high  scientific
destination  of  pathological  investigation,  regarded  as  offer-
ing, in  biology,  the  real  equivalent  of  expei'imentation,
properly  so  called.

.  Precisely  in  the  case  in  which  artificial  ex-

Investi'^ation  perimentation  is  the  most  difficult,  nature
fulfils  the  conditions  for  us ;  and  it  would
surely  be  mistaking  the  means  for  the  end  to  insist  on
introducing  into  the  organism  perturbations  of  our  own
devising,  when  we  may  find  them  taking  place  without  that
additional  confusion  which  is  caused  by  the  use  of  artificial
methods.  Physiological  phenomena  lend  themselves  re-
markably to  that  spontaneous  experimentation  which
results  from  a  comj^arison  of  the  normal  and  abnormal
states  of  the  organism.  The  state  of  disease  is  not  a
radically  different  condition  from  that  of  health.  The
pathological  condition  is  to  the  physiological  simply  a  pro-
longation of  the  limits  of  variation,  higher  or  lower,  proper
to  each  phenouienon  of  the  normal  organism  ;  and  it  can
never  produce  any  entirely  new  phenomenon.  Therefore,
the  accurate  idea  of  the  physiological  state  is  the  indis-
pensable ground  of  any  sound  pathological  theory  ;  and
therefore,  again,  must  the  scientific  study  of  pathological
phenomenon  be  the  best  way  to  perfect  our  investigations
into  the  normal  state.  The  gradual  invasion  of  a  malady,
and  the  slow  passage  from  an  almost  natural  condition  to
one  of  fully  marked  disease,  are  far  from  being  useless
preliminaries,  got  rid  of  by  the  abrujjt  introduction  of
what  may  be  called  the  violent  malady  of  direct  experi-


PATHOLOGICAL    INVESTIGATION.  17

ment :  they  offer,  on  the  contrary,  inestimable  materials
to  the  biologist  able  to  put  them  to  use.  And  so  it  is  also
in  the  happy  converse  case,  of  the  return,  spontaneous  or
contrived,  to  health,  which  presents  a  sort  of  verification
of  the  primitive  analysis.  Moreover,  the  direct  examina-
tion of  the  chief  phenomenon  is  not  obscured,  but  much
elucidated,  by  this  natural  process.  And  again,  it  may  be
applied  directly  to  Man  himself,  without  prejudice  to  the
pathology  of  animals,  and  even  of  vegetables.  We  mav
enjoy  our  power  of  turning  our  disasters  to  the  profit  of
our  race :  and  Ave  cannot  but  deplore  the  misfortune  that
our  great  medical  establishments  are  so  constituted  as  that
little  rational  instruction  is  obtained  from  them,  for  want
of  complete  observations  and  duly  prepared  observers.

Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  distinction  holds  of  the  pheno-
mena belonging  to  the  organism  or  to  tlie  medium  ;  and
here,  as  before,  we  find  the  maladies  produced  from  without
the  most  accessible  to  inquiry.  Pathological  inquiry  is
also  more  suitable  than  experimental,  to  the  whole  bio-
logical series  :  and  thus  it  answers  well  to  extend  our  obser-
vations through  the  entire  hierarchy,  though  our  object
may  be  the  study  of  Man  ;  for  his  maladies  may  receive
much  light  from  a  sound  analysis  of  the  derangements  of
other  organisms, — even  the  vegetable,  as  we  shall  see  when
we  treat  of  the  comparative  process.

Again,  pathological  analysis  is  applicable,  not  only  to  all
organisms,  but  to  all  phenomena  of  the  same  organism  ;
whereas  dii'ect  experimentation  is  too  disturbing  and  too
abrupt  to  be  ever  applied  with  success  to  certain  phenomena
which  require  the  most  delicate  harmony  of  a  varied  system
of  conditions.  For  instance,  the  observation  of  the  numer-
ous maladies  of  the  nervous  system  offers  us  a  special  and
inestimable  means  of  improving  our  knowledge  of  the  laws
of  intellectual  and  moral  phenomena,  imperfect  as  are  yet
our  qualifications  for  using  them.  There  remains  one  other
means  of  knowledge  under  this  head ;  the  examination  of
exceptional  organizations,  or  cases  of  monstrosity.  As
might  be  anticipated,  these  organic  anomalies  were  the
last  to  pass  over  from  the  gaze  of  a  barren  curiosity  to
the  investigation  of  science ;  but  we  are  now  learning  to
refer  them  to  the  laws  of  the  regular  organism,  and  to  sub-

II.  c


18  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

ject  them  to  pathological  procedures,  regarding  such  ex-
ceptions as  true  maladies,  of  a  deeper  and  more  obscure
origin  than  others,  and  of  a  more  incurable  nature ;— con-
siderations which,  of  course,  reduce  their  scientific  value.
This  resource  shares  with  pathology  the  advantage  of
being  applicable  through  the  whole  range  of  the  biological
system.

It  is  still  necessary  to  insist  that,  in  either  method  of
experimentation,  direct  or  indirect,  artificial  or  natural,  the
elementary  rules  should  be  kept  in  view  ;  first,  to  have  a
determinate  aim  ;  that  is,  to  seek  to  illustrate  an  organic
jjhenomenon,  under  a  special  aspect ;  and,  secondly,  to
understand  beforehand  the  normal  state,  and  its  limits  of
variation.  In  regard  to  the  more  advanced  sciences,  it
would  seem  puerile  to  recommend  such  maxims  as  these ;
but  we  must  still  insist  on  them  in  biology.  It  is  through
neglect  of  them  that  all  the  observations  yet  collected  on
the  derangements  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  phenomena
have  yielded  scarcely  any  knowledge  of  their  laws.  Thus,
whatever  may  be  the  value  of  the  most  suitable  method  of
experimentation,  we  must  ever  remember  that  here,  as
elsewhere,  and  more  than  elsewhere,  pure  observation  must
always  hold  the  first  rank,  as  casting  light,  primarily,  on
the  whole  subject,  which  it  is  proposed  to  examine  after-
wards, as  a  special  study,  with  a  determinate  view,  by  the
method  of  experimentation.
f^ .„..,^..  In  the  third  place,  we  have  to  review  the

l^OMPAKISON.  ,iTc/^  •  I-,-  -n

method  ot  Comparison,  which  is  so  specially
adapted  to  the  study  of  living  bodies,  and  by  which,  above
all  others,  that  study  must  be  advanced.  In  Astronomy,
this  method  is  necessarily  inapplicable :  and  it  is  not  till
we  arrive  at  Chemistry  that  this  third  means  of  investiga-
tion can  be  used ;  and  then,  only  in  subordination  to  the
two  others.  It  is  in  the  study,  both  statical  and  dynamical,
of  living  bodies,  that  it  first  acquires  its  full  development ;
and  its  use  elsewhere  can  be  only  through  its  apislication
here.

The  fundamental  condition  of  its  use  is  the  unity  of  the
princi})al  subject,  in  combination  with  a  great  diversity  of
actual  modifications.  According  to  the  definition  of  life,
this  combination  is  eminently  realized  in    the   study   of


COMPARISON.  19

biological  phenomena,  however  regarded.  The  whole  system
of  biological  science  is  derived,  as  we  have  seen,  from  one
great  philosophical  conception ;  the  necessary  correspon-
dence between  the  ideas  of  organization  and  those  of  life.
There  cannot  be  a  more  perfect  fundamental  unity  of
subject  than  this ;  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  insist  upon  the
almost  indefinite  variety  of  its  modifications, — statical  and
dynamical.  In  a  purely  anatomical  view,  all  possible
organisms,  all  the  parts  of  each  organism,  and  all  the
different  states  of  each,  necessarily  present  a  common  basis
of  structure  and  of  composition,  whence  proceed  successively
the  different  secondary  organizations  which  constitute
tissues,  organs,  and  systems  of  organs,  more  or  less  com-
plicated. In  the  same  way,  in  a  physiological  view,  all
living  beings,  from  vegetable  to  man,  considered  in  all  the
acts  and  periods  of  their  existence,  are  endowed  with  a
(Certain  common  vitality,  which  is  a  necessary  basis  of  the
innumerable  phenomena  which  characterize  them  in  their
degrees.  Both  these  aspects  present  as  most  important,
and  really  fundamental,  what  there  is  in  common  among
all  the  cases ;  and  their  particularities  as  of  less  conse-
quence ;  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  great  prevalent
law,  that  the  more  general  phenomena  overrule  the  less.
Thus  broad  and  sound  is  the  basis  of  the  comparative
method,  in  regard  to  biology.

At  the  first  glance  the  immensity  of  the  science  is  over-
whelming to  the  understanding,  embracing  as  it  does  all
organic  and  vital  cases,  which  it  appears  impossible  ever  to
reduce  within  the  compass  of  our  knowledge  :  and  no  doubt,
the  discouragement  hence  arising  is  one  cause  of  the  back-
wardness of  biological  philosophy.  Yet  the  truth  is  that
this  very  magnitude  affords,  not  an  obstacle,  but  a  facility
to  the  pei'fecting  of  the  science,  by  means  of  the  luminous
comparison  which  results  from  it,  when  once  the  human
mind  becomes  familiar  enough  with  the  conditions  of  the
study  to  dispose  its  materials  so  as  to  illustrate  each  other.
The  science  could  make  no  real  progress  while  Man  was
studied  as  an  isolated  subject.  Man  must  necessarily  be
the  type ;  because  he  is  the  most  complete  epitome  of  the
whole  range  of  cases  :  Man,  in  his  adult  and  normal  state,
is  the  representative  of  the  great  scientific  unity,  whence


20  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

the  successive  terms  of  the  great  biological  series  recede,
till  they  terminate  in  the  simplest  organizations,  and  the
most  imperfect  modes  of  existence.  But  the  science  would
remain  in  the  most  defective  state  in  regard  to  Man  him-
seK,  if  it  were  not  pursued  through  a  perpetual  comparison,
under  all  possible  aspects,  of  the  first  term  with  all  inferior
ones,  till  the  simplest  was  reached:  and  then,  back  again,
through  the  successive  complications  which  occur  between
the  lowest  type  and  the  highest.  This  is  the  most  general,
the  most  certain,  the  most  effectual  method  of  studying
physiological  as  well  as  anatomical  phenomena.  Not  only
is  there  thus  a  greater  number  of  cases  known,  but  each
case  is  much  better  understood  by  their  approximation.
This  would  not  be  the  case,  and  the  pi'oblem  would  be
embarrassed  instead  of  simplified,  if  there  were  not  a  fun-
damental resemblance  among  the  whole  series,  accompanied
by  gradual  modifications,  always  regulated  in  their  course  :
and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  comparative  method  is
appropriate  to  biology  alone,  of  all  the  sciences,  except,
as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  in  social  jihysics.

Complete  and  spontaneous  as  this  harmony  really  is,  no
philosopher  can  contemplate  without  admiration  the  emi-
nent art  by  which  the  human  mind  has  been  aided  to  con-
vert into  a  potent  means  what  appeared  at  first  to  be  a
formidable  difficulty.  I  know  no  stronger  evidence  of  the
force  of  human  reason  than  such  a  transformation  affords.
And  in  this  case,  as  in  every  other  in  which  primordial
scientific  powers  are  concerned,  it  is  the  work  of  the  whole
race,  gradually  developed  in  the  course  of  ages,  and  not  the
original  product  of  any  isolated  mind, — however  some
moderns  may  be  asserted  to  be  the  creators  of  comparative
biology.  Between  the  primitive  use  that  Aristotle  made  of
this  method  in  the  easiest  cases, — as  in  comparing  the
structure  of  Man's  upper  and  lower  limbs, — to  the  most
profoimd  and  abstract  aj^proximations  of  existing  biology,
we  find  a  very  extensive  series  of  intermediate  states,  con-
stantly progressive,  among  which  history  can  point  out
individually  only  labours  which  prove  what  had  been  the
advance  in  the  spirit  of  the  comparative  art  at  the  corre-
sponding period,  as  manifested  by  its  larger  and  more
effectual  application.     It  is  evident  that  the  comparative


KINDS   OF   COMPARISON.  21

method  of  biologists  was  no  more  the  invention  of  an  indi-
vidual than  the  experimental  method  of  the  physicists.

There  are  five  principal  heads  under  which    Five  kinds  of
biological  comparisons  are  to  be  classed.  comparison.

1.  Comparison  between  the  different  parts  of  the  same
organism.

2.  Comparison  between  the  sexes.

3.  Compai'ison  between  the  various  phases  presented  by
the  whole  of  the  development.

4.  Comparison  between  the  different  races  or  varieties  of
each  species.

5.  Lastly,  and  pre-eminently,  Comparison  between  all
the  organisms  of  the  biological  hierarchy.

It  must  be  understood  that  the  organism  is  always  to  be
supposed  in  a  normal  state.  When  the  laws  of  that  state
are  fully  established,  we  may  pass  on  to  pathological  com-
parison, which  will  extend  the  scope  of  those  laws :  but
we  are  not  yet  advanced  enough  in  oitr  knowledge  of
normal  conditions  to  undertake  anything  beyond.  More-
over, though  comparative  pathology  would  be  a  necessary
application  of  biological  science,  it  cannot  form  a  part  of
that  science,  but  rather  belongs  to  the  future  medical
science,  of  which  it  must  form  the  basis. — Again,  biological
comj)arison  can  take  place  only  between  the  organisms,  and
not  between  them  and  their  medium.  When  such  com-
parison comes  to  be  instituted,  it  will  be,  not  as  biological
science,  but  as  a  matter  of  natural  history.

The  spirit  of  biological  comparison  is  the  same  under  all
forms.  It  consists  in  regarding  all  cases  as  radically
analogous  in  respect  to  the  proposed  investigation,  and  in
representing  their  differences  as  simple  modifications  of  an
abstract  type ;  so  that  secondary  differences  may  be  con-
nected with  the  primary  according  to  uniform  laws ;  these
laws  constituting  the  biological  philosophy  by  which  each
determinate  case  is  to  be  explained.  If  the  question  is
anatomical,  Man,  in  his  adult  and  normal  state,  is  taken
for  the  fundamental  unity,  and  all  other  organizations  as
successive  simplifications,  descending  from  the  primitive
type,  whose  essential  features  will  be  found  in  the  remotest
cases,  stripped  of  all  complication.  If  tlie  question  is  phy-
siological, we  seek  the  fundamental  identity  of  the  chief


22  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

phenomenon  wliich  characterises  the  function  proposed,
amidst  the  graduated  modifications  of  the  series  of  com-
parative cases,  till  we  find  it  isolated,  or  nearly  so,  in  the
simplest  case  of  all ;  and  thence  we  may  trace  it  back  again,
clothed  in  successive  complications  of  secondary  qualities.
Thus,  the  theory  of  analogous  existences,  which  has  been
offered  as  a  recent  innovation,  is  only  the  necessary  principle
of  the  comparative  method,  under  a  new  name.  It  is
evident  that  this  method  must  be  of  surpassing  value  when
philosophically  applied  :  and  also  that,  delicate  as  it  is,  aud
requiring  extreme  discrimination  and  care  in  its  estimate
and  use,  it  may  be  easily  converted  into  a  hindrance  and
embarrassment,  by  giving  occasion  to  vicious  speculations
on  analogies  which  are  only  apparent.

Of  the  five  classes  specified  above,  three  only  are  so
marked  as  to  require  a  notice  here :  the  comparison  between
the  different  parts  of  the  same  organism ;  between  the
different  phases  of  each  development ;  and  between  the
distinct  terms  of  the  great  hierarchy  of  living  bodies.
Comparison  of  ^^^^  method  of  comparison  began  with  the
parts  of  the  first  of  these.  Looking  no  further  than  Man,
same  organ-  no  philosophical  mind  can  help  being  struck
^^"''  by  the  remarkable  resemblance  that  his  dif-

ferent chief  parts  bear  to  each  other  in  many  respects, — both
as  to  structure  and  function.  First,  all  the  tissues,  all  the
apparatus,  in  as  far  as  they  are  organized  and  living,  offer
those  fundamental  characteristics  which  are  inherent  in
the  very  ideas  of  organization  and  life,  and  to  which  the
lowest  organisms  are  reduced.  But,  in  a  more  special
view,  the  analogy  of  the  organs  becomes  more  and  more
marked  as  that  of  the  functions  is  so  ;  and  the  converse ;
and  this  often  leads  to  luminous  comparisons,  anatomical
and  physiological,  passing  from  the  one  to  the  other,  alter-
nately. This  original  and  simple  method  of  comparison  is
by  no  means  driven  out  by  newer  processes.  It  was  thus,
for  instance,  that  Bichat,  whose  subject  was  Man  only,  and
adult  Man,  discovered  the  fundamental  analogy  between
the  mucous  and  the  cutaneous  systems,  which  has  yielded
so  much  advantage  to  both  biology  and  pathology.  And
again,  with  all  M.  de  Blainville's  mastery  of  the  principle
of  the  comparative  method,  Ave  cannot  doubt  the  sufiiciency


COMPARISON    OF   ORGANISMS.  23

of  the  analysis  of  the  human  organism  to  establish  the
resemblance  he  exhibited  between  the  skull  and  the  other
elements  of  the  vertebral  column.

A  new  order  of  resources  presents  itself  Of  phases  of
when  we  compare  the  different  phases  of  the  the  same  or-
same  organism.  Its  chief  value  is  in  its  ganism.
offering,  on  a  small  scale,  and,  as  it  were,  under  one  aspect,
the  whole  series  of  the  most  marked  organisms  of  the
biological  hierarchy ;  for  it  is  obvious  that  the  j^rimitive
state  of  the  highest  oi'ganism  must  present  the  esseotial
characters  of  the  complete  state  of  the  lowest ;  and  thus
successively, — without,  however,  compelling  us  to  find  the
counterpart  of  every  inferior  term  in  the  superior  organism.
Such  an  analysis  of  ages  vmquestionably  offers  the  property
of  realizing  in  an  individual,  that  successive  complication
of  organs  and  functions  which  characterizes  the  biological
hierarchy,  and  which,  in  this  homogeneous  and  compact
form,  constitutes  a  special  and  singular  order  of  luminous
comparisons.  Useful  through  all  degrees  of  the  scale,  it  is
evidently  most  so  in  the  case  of  the  highest  type,  the  adult
Man,  as  the  interval  from  the  origin  to  the  utmost  com-
plexity is  in  that  case  the  greatest.  It  is  valuable  chiefly
in  the  visible  ascendant  period  of  life  ;  for  we  know  very
little  of  the  foetal  period  ;  and  the  declining  stage,  which
is  in  fact  only  a  gradual  death,  presents  little  scientific
interest :  for,  if  there  are  many  ways  of  hving,  there  is
only  one  natural  way  of  dying.  The  rational  analysis  of
death,  howeve;,  has  its  own  importance,  constituting  a  sort
of  general  corollary,  convenient  for  the  verification  of  the
whole  body  of  biological  laws.

The  popular  notion  of  comparative  biology        of  rff
is  that  it  consists  wholly  of  the  last  of  the        organisms
methods  I  hare  jiointed  out :  and  this  shows
how  jire-eminent  it  is  over  the  others;  the  popular  exaggera-
tion however  being  mischievous  by  concealing  the  origin  of
the  art.    The  peculiarity  of  this  largest  application  consists
in  its  being  founded  on  a  very  protracted  comparison  of  a
very   extensive    series   of  analogous    cases,    in  which   the
modification  proceeds  by  almost  insensible  graduated  declen-
sion.    The  tvo  more  restricted  methods  could  not  offer  a
series  of  cases  extensive  enough  to  establish,  without  con-


24  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

firmation,  the  nature  and  value  of  the  comparative  method,
though,  that  point  once  fixed,  they  may  then  come  into
unquestionable  use.  As  for  the  value  of  the  largest  applica-
tion, it  demonstrates  itself.  There  is  clearly  no  structure
or  function  whose  analysis  may  not  be  perfected  by
an  examination  of  what  all  organisms  offer  in  common
with  regard  to  that  structure  and  function,  and  by  the
simplification  effected  by  the  stripping  away  of  all  accessory
characteristics,  till  the  quality  sought  is  found  alone,  from
whence  the  process  of  reconstruction  can  begin.  It  may
even  be  fairly  said  that  no  anatomical  arrangement,  and
no  physiological  phenomenon,  can  be  really  understood  till
the  abstract  notion  of  its  principal  element  is  thus  reached,
by  successively  attaching  to  it  all  secondary  ideas,  in  the
rational  order  prescribed  by  their  greater  or  less  persistence
in  the  organic  series.  Such  a  method  seems  to  me  to  offer,
in  biology,  a  philosophical  character  very  like  niathematical
analysis  genuinely  applied ;  when  it  presents,  as  we  have
seen,  in  every  indefinite  series  of  analogous  cases,  the
essential  part  which  is  common  to  all,  and  which  was
before  hidden  under  the  secondary  specialities  of  each
separate  case.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  comparative
art  of  biologists  will  produce  an  equivalent  result,  up  to  a
certain  point ;  and  especially,  by  the  rational  consideration
of  the  organic  hierarchy.

This  great  consideration  was  at  first  established  only  in
I'egard  to  anatomy  ;  but  it  is  yet  more  necessary  in  physio-
logy, and  not  less  applicable,  except  from  the  difficulty  of
that  kind  of  observation.  In  regard  to  physiological  pro-
blems particularly,  it  should  be  remarked  tlia.t  not  only  all
animal  organisms,  but  the  vegetable  also,  should  be  included
in  the  comparison.  Many  important  phenomena,  and
among  others  those  of  organic  life,  properly  so  called,
cannot  be  analysed  without  an  inclusion  of  the  vegetable
form  of  them.  There  we  see  them  in  theii  simplest  and
most  marked  condition,  for  it  is  by  the  great  act  of  vege-
table assimilation  that  brute  matter  passes  really  into  the
organized  state,  all  ulterior  transformations  by  means  of
the  animal  organization  being  much  less  marked.  And
thus,  the  laws  of  nutrition,  which  are  of  the  highest  im-
portance, are  best  disclosed  by  the  vegetable  organism.


IMPERFECTION    OF   THE   COMPARATIVE    METHOD.      25

The  method  is  unquestionably  applicable  to  all  organs  and
all  acts,  without  any  exception ;  but  its  scientific  value
diminishes  as  it  is  apjjlied  to  the  higher  apparatus  and
functions  of  the  superior  organisms,  because  these  are
restricted  in  proportion  to  their  complexity  and  superiority.
This  is  eminently  the  case  with  the  highest  intellectual  and
moral  functions  which  below  Man  disappear  almost  entirely ;
or,  at  least,  almost  cease  to  be  recognizable  below  the  first
classes  of  the  mammifers.  We  cannot  but  feel  it  to  be  an
imperfection  in  the  comparative  method  that  it  serves  us
least  where  we  are  most  in  need  of  all  our  resources  ;  but
it  would  be  unphilosophical  to  deprive  ourselves,  even  in
this  case,  of  the  light  which  is  cast  upon  the  analysis  of
Man  as  moral,  by  the  study  of  the  intellectual  and  affective
qualities  of  the  superior  animals,  and  of  all  others  which
present  such  attributes,  however  imj^erfect  our  manage-
ment of  the  compai'ison  may  yet  be.  And  we  may  ob-
serve that  the  comparative  method  finds  a  partial  equiva-
lent in  the  rational  analysis  of  ages, — thus  rendered
more  clear,  extensive,  and  complete, — for  the  disadvan-
tages which  belong  to  the  same  stage  of  the  biological
hierarchy.

Thus  I  have  presented  the  principal  philosophical  cha-
racters of  the  comparative  method.  It  being  the  aim  of
biological  study  to  ascertain  the  general  laws  of  organic
existence,  it  is  plain  that  no  course  of  inquiry  could  be
more  favourable  than  that  which  exhibits  organic  cases  as
radically  analogous,  and  deducible  from  each  other.

This  study  of  our  means  of  exploration  has  shown  that
our  resources  do  increase  with  the  complexity  of  our  subject.
The  two  first  methods — of  Observation  and  Experiment —
we  have  seen  to  acquire  a  large  extension  in  the  case  of
this  science :  while  the  third,  before  almost  imperceptible,
becomes,  by  the  nature  of  the  phenomena,  wellnigh  un-
bounded in  its  scope.  We  have  next  to  examine  the  true
rational  position  of  Biology  in  the  hieraix-hy  of  the  funda-
mental sciences  ;  that  is,  its  relation  to  those  that  precede
it,  and  to  the  one  which  follows  it,  in  order  to  ascertain
what  kind  and  degree  of  speculative  perfection  it  admits
of,  and  what  preliminary  training  is  best  adapted  to  its
systematic  cultivation.     By  this  inquiry  we  shall  see  why


26  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

we  are  justified  in  assigning  to  it  a  place  between  chemistry
and  social  science.

Kelation  of  Bi-  Of  the  relation  of  Biology  to  social  science,
ology  to  other  I  need  say  little  here,  as  I  shall  have  to  speak
sciences.  of  it  at  length  in  the  next  volume.     My  task

will  then  he  to  separate  them,  rather  than  to  establish  their
connection,  which  it  is  the  tendency  of  our  time  to  exag-
gerate, through  the  spontaneous  development  of  natural
philosophy.  None  but  purely  metaphysical  philosophers
would  at  this  day  persist  in  classing  the  theory  of  the  human
mind  and  of  society  as  anterior  to  the  anatomical  and  l^hy-
siological  study  of  individual  man.  We  may  therefore
regard  this  point  as  sufiiciently  settled  for  the  present,
and  pass  on  to  the  relation  of  Biology  to  inorganic
philosophy.

rp  p,  .  ,  _  It  is  to  chemistry  that  Biology  is,  by  its
■  '  nature,  most  directly  and  completely  subordi-
nated. In  analyzing  the  phenomenon  of  life,  we  saw  that
the  fundamental  acts  which,  by  their  perpetuity,  charac-
terize that  state,  consist  of  a  series  of  compositions  and  de-
compositions ;  and  they  are  therefore  of  a  chemical  nature.
Though  in  the  most  imj^erfect  organisms,  vital  reactions  are
widely  separated  from  common  chemical  effects,  it  is  not
the  less  true  that  all  the  functions  of  the  proper  organic
life  are  necessarily  controlled  by  those  fundamental  laws  of
composition  and  decomposition  which  constitute  the  siibject
of  chemical  science.  If  we  could  conceive  throughout  the
whole  scale  the  same  separation  of  the  organic  from  the
animal  life  that  we  see  in  vegetables  alone,  the  vital  motion
would  offer  only  chemical  conceptions,  except  the  essential
circumstances  which  distinguish  such  an  order  of  mole-
cular reactions.  The  general  source  of  these  important
differences  is,  in  my  opinion,  to  be  looked  for  in  the  result
of  each  chemical  conflict  not  depending  only  on  the  simple
composition  of  the  bodies  between  which  it  takes  place,  but
being  modified  by  their  proper  organization  ;  that  is,  by
their  anatomical  structure.  Chemistry  must  clearly  furnish
the  starting-point  of  every  rational  theory  of  nutrition,
secretion,  and,  in  short,  all  the  functions  of  the  vegetative
life,  considered  separately ;  each  of  which  is  controlled  by


RELATION    OF   BIOLOGY   TO   CHEMISTRY.  27

the  influence  of  chemical  laws,  except  for  the  special  modi-
fications belonging  to  organic  conditions.  If  we  now  bring
in  again  the  consideration,  discarded  for  the  moment,  of
the  animal  life,  we  see  that  it  could  in  no  way  alter  this
fundamental  subordination,  though  it  must  greatly  compli-
cate its  actual  application :  for  we  have  seen  that  the
animal  life,  notwithstanding  its  vast  importance,  can  never
be  regarded  in  biology  otherwise  than  as  destined  to  extend
and  perfect  the  organic  life,  whose  general  nature  it  cannot
change.  Such  an  intervention  modifies,  anew  and  largely,  the
chemical  laws  of  the  purely  organic  functions,  so  as  to
render  the  effect  very  difficult  to  foresee  ;  but  not  the  less
do  these  laws  continue  to  control  the  aggregate  of  the
phenomena.  If,  for  instance,  a  change  in  the  nervous
condition  of  a  superior  organism  disturbs  a  given  secretion,
as  to  its  energy  or  even  its  nature,  we  cannot  conceive  that
such  an  alteration  can  ].)e  of  a  random  kind  :  such  modifi-
cations, irregular  as  they  may  appear,  are  still  submitted
to  the  chemical  laws  of  the  fundamental  organic  pheno-
menon, which  permit  certain  variations,  but  interdict  many
more.  Thus,  no  complication  produced  by  animal  life  can
withdraw  the  organic  functions  from  their  subordination  to
the  laws  of  composition  and  decomposition.  This  relation
is  so  important,  that  no  scientific  theory  could  be  conceived
of  in  biology  without  it ;  since,  in  its  absence,  the  most
fundamental  phenomena  might  be  conceived  of  as  suscep-
tible of  arbitrary  variations,  which  would  not  admit  of  any
true  law.  When  we  hear,  at  this  day,  on  the  subject  of
azote,  such  a  doctrine  as  that  the  organism  has  the  power
of  spontaneously  creating  certain  elementary  substances,
we  perceive  how  indispensable  it  still  is  to  insist  dii'ectlv
on  those  principles  which  alone  can  restrain  the  spirit
of  aberration.

Besides  this  direct  subordination  of  biology  to  chemistry,
tlxere  ai-e  relations  of  method  between  them.  Observation
and  experimentation  being  much  more  perfect  in  chemistry,
they  serve  as  an  admirable  training  for  biological  inquiry.
Again,  a  special  property  of  chemistry  is  its  developing  the
art  of  scientific  nomenclature  ;  and  it  is  in  chemistry  that
biologists  must  study  this  important  part  of  the  ])ositive
method,   though  it  cannot,  from  the  complexity  of  their


28  posrnvK  philosophy.

science,  be  of  so  much  scientific  value  as  in  chemistry.  It
is  on  the  model  of  the  chemical  nomenclature  that  those
systematic  denominations  have  been  laid  down  by  which
biologists  have  classified  the  most  simple  anatomical
arrangements,  certain  well-defined  pathological  states,  and
the  most  general  degrees  of  the  animal  hierarchy  :  a.nd  it  is
by  a  continued  pursuit  of  the  same  method  that  further
improvements  will  be  effected.

We   thus   see  why  biology  takes   its   place   next  after
chemistry,  and  why  chemical  inquiries  constitute  a  natural
transition  from  the  inorganic  to  the  organic  philosophy.
™   p,     .  The  subordination  of  biology  to  Physics

follows  from  its  relation  to  Chemistry  :  but
there  are  also  direct  reasons,  relating  both  to  doctrine  and
method,  why  it  should  be  so.

As  to  doctrine, — it  is  clear  that  the  general  laws  of  one
or  more  branches  of  Physics  must  be  applied  in  the  analysis
of  any  physiological  phenomenon.  This  application  is
necessary  in  the  examination  of  the  medium,  in  the  first
place ;  and  the  analysis  of  the  medium  is  required  to  be
very  exact,  on  account  of  the  strong  effect  of  its  variations
on  phenomena  so  easily  modified  as  those  of  the  organism.
And  next,  the  organism  itself  is  no  less  dependent  on  those
laws,  relating  as  they  do  to  weight,  heat,  electricity,  etc.
It  is  obvious  that  if  biology  is  I'elated  to  chemistry  through
the  organic  life,  it  is  related  to  physics  by  the  animal  life,
— the  most  special  and  noble  of  the  sensations,  those  of
sight  and  hearing,  requiring  for  the  starting-2:>oint  of  their
investigation  an  application  of  optics  and  acoustics.  The
same  remark  holds  good  in  I'egard  to  the  theory  of  utter-
ance, and  the  study  of  animal  heat  and  the  electric  jjroper-
ties  of  the  organism.  It  remains  to  be  wished  that  the  biolo-
gists would  study  and  apply  these  laws  themselves,  instead
of  committing  the  task  to  physicists :  but  they  have  hitherto
followed  too  much  the  exam])le  of  the  physicists,  who,  as  we
have  seen,  have  committed  the  application  of  mathematical
analysis  in  their  own  science  to  the  geometers  ;  whereas,  it
cannot  be  too  carefully  remembered  that  if  the  more  general
sciences  are  independent  of  the  less  general,  which,  on  the
other  hand,  must  be  dependent  on  them,  the  students  of  the
higher  must  be  unfit,  in  virtue  of  that  very  independence,


RELATIONS   TO    PHYSICS   AND   ASTRONOMY.  29

to  apply  them  to  a  more  complex  science,  whose  conditions
they  cannot  sufficiently  understand.  If  the  case  was  clear
in  regard  to  the  intrusion  of  the  geometers  into  physics,  it
is  yet  moi'e  so  with  regard  to  the  intrusion  of  the  physicists
into  biology  ;  on  account  of  the  more  essential  diiierence  in
the  nature  of  the  two  sciences.  The  biologists  should
qualify  themselves  for  the  application  of  the  preceding
sciences  to  their  own,  instead  of  looking  to  the  physicists
for  guidance  which  can  only  lead  them  astray.

In  regard  to  Method,  biology  is  indebted  to  physics  for
the  most  perfect  models  of  observation  and  experimenta-
tion. Observations  in  physics  are  of  a  sufficient  complexity
to  serve  as  a  type  for  the  same  method  in  biology,  if  divested
of  their  numerical  considerations,  which  is  easily  done.
Chemistry  however  can  furnish  an  almost  equally  good
model  in  simple  observation.  It  is  in  experimentation
that  biologists  may  find  in  physics  a  special  training  for
their  work.  As  the  most  perfect  models  are  found  in  the
study  of  physics,  and  the  method  is  singularly  difficult  in
physiology,  we  see  how  important  the  contemplation  of  the
best  type  must  be  to  biologists.  Such  is  the  nature  of  the
dependence,  as  to  doctrine  and  method,  of  biology  on
physics.  We  turn  next  to  its  relations  with  Astronomy  ;
and  first,  with  regard  to  doctrine.

The  relation  of  physiology  to  astronomy  is  rp     .   ,

,111         •  n  1       -r  J- o  -A.strononiv,

more  important  than  is  usually  supposed.     I

mean  something  more  than  the  impossibility  of  under-
standing the  theory  of  weight,  and  its  effects  upon  the
organism,  apart  from  the  consideration  of  general  gravita-
tion. I  mean,  besides,  and  more  specially,  that  it  is  impos-
sible to  form  a  scientific  conception  of  the  conditions  of
vital  existence  without  taking  into  the  account  the  aggregate
astronomical  elements  that  characterize  the  planet  which  is
the  home  of  that  vital  existence.  We  shall  see  more  fully,
in  the  next  volume,  how  humanity  is  affected  by  these
astronomical  conditions ;  but  we  must  cursorily  review
these  relations  in  the  present  connection.

The  astronomical  data  proper  to  our  planet  are,  of  course,
statical  and  dynamical.  The  biological  importance  of  the
statical  conditions  is  immediately  obvious.  No  one  ques-
tions the  importance  to  vital  existence  of  the  mass  of  our


30  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

planet  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  sun,  which  deter-
mines the  intensity  of  gravity ;  or  of  its  form,  which  regu-
lates the  direction  of  the  force ;  or  of  the  fundamental
equilibrium  and  the  regular  oscillations  of  the  fluids  which
cover  the  greater  part  of  its  surface,  and  with  which  the
existence  of  living  beings  is  closely  implicated ;  or  of  its
dimensions,  which  limit  the  indefinite  multiplication  of
races,  and  especially  the  human ;  or  of  its  distance  from
the  centre  of  our  system,  which  chiefly  determines  its  tem-
perature. Any  sudden  change  in  one  or  more  of  these
conditions  would  largely  modify  the  phenomena  of  life.
But  the  influence  of  the  dynamical  conditions  of  astronomy
on  biological  study  is  yet  more  important.  Without  the
two  conditions  of  the  fixity  of  the  poles  as  a  centre  of  rota-
tion, and  the  uniformity  of  the  angular  velocity  of  the  earth,
there  would  be  a  continual  perturbation  of  the  organic
media  which  would  be  incompatible  with  life.  Bichat
pointed  out  that  the  intermittence  of  the  proper  animal
life  is  subordinate  in  its  periods  to  the  diurnal  rotation  of
our  planet ;  and  we  may  extend  the  observation  to  all  the
periodical  phenomena  of  any  organism,  in  both  the  normal
and  pathological  states,  allowance  being  made  for  secondary
and  transient  influences.  Moreover,  there  is  every  reason
to  believe  that,  in  every  organism,  the  total  duration  of  life
and  of  its  chief  natural  phases  depends  on  the  angular
velocity  proper  to  our  planet;  for  we  are  authorized  to
admit  that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  diiration  of  life
must  be  shorter,  especially  in  the  animal  organism,  in  pro-
portion as  the  vital  phenomena  succeed  each  other  more
rapidly.  If  the  earth_were  to  rotate  much  faster,  the  course
of  physiological  phenomena  would  be  accelerated  in  propor-
tion ;  and  thence  life  would  be  shorter ;  so  that  the  dura-
tion of  life  may  be  regarded  as  dependent  on  the  duration
of  the  day.  If  the  duration  of  the  year  were  changed,  the
life  of  the  organism  would  again  be  affected :  but  a  yet
more  striking  consideration  is  that  vital  existence  is  abso-
lutely implicated  with  the  form  of  the  earth's  orbit,  as  has
been  observed  before.  If  that  ellipse  were  to  become,
instead  of  nearly  circular,  as  eccentric  as  the  orljit  of  a
comet,  both  the  medium  and  the  organism  would  undergo
a  change  fatal  to  vital  existence.     Thus  the  small  eccentri-


TO   ASTRONOMY.  31

city  of  the  earth's  orbit  is  oue  of  the  main  conditions  of  bio-
logical phenomena,  almost  as  necessary  as  the  stability  of
the  earth's  rotation  ;  and  every  other  element  of  the  annual
motion  exercises  an  influence,  more  or  less  marked,  on  bio-
logical conditions,  though  not  so  great  as  the  one  we  have
adduced.  The  inclination  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit,  for  in-
stance, determines  the  division  of  the  earth  into  climates,
and,  consequently,  the  geographical  distribution  of  living
species,  animal  and  vegetable.  And  again,  through  the
alternation  of  seasons,  it  influences  the  phases  of  individual
existence  in  all  organisms  ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  life
would  be  affected  if  the  revolution  of  the  line  of  the  nodes
Avere  accelerated  ;  so  that  its  being  nearly  immoveable  has
some  biological  value.  These  considerations  indicate  how
necessary  it  is  for  biologists  to  inform  themselves  accu-
rately, and  without  any  intervention,  of  the  real  elements
proper  to  the  astronomical  constitution  of  our  planet.  An
inexact  knowledge  will  not  suffice.  The  laws  of  the  limits
of  variation  of  the  different  elements,  or,  at  least,  a  scientific
analysis  of  the  chief  grounds  of  their  permanence,  are
essential  to  biological  investigation  ;  and  these  can  be  ob-
tained only  through  an  acquaintance  with  astronomical
conceptions,  both  geometrical  and  mechanical.

It  may  at  first  appear  anomalous,  and  a  breach  of  the
encyclopedical  arrangement  of  the  sciences,  that  astronomy
and  biology  should  be  thus  immediately  and  eminently
connected,  while  two  other  sciences  lie  between.  But,
indispensable  as  are  physics  and  chemistry,  astronomy
and  biology  are,  by  their  nature,  the  two  principal  branches
of  natural  philosophy.  They,  the  complements  of  each
other,  include  in  their  rational  harmony  the  general  system
of  our  fundamental  conceptions.  The  solar  system  and
Man  are  the  extreme  terms  within  which  our  ideas  will
for  ever  be  included.  The  system  first,  and  then  Man,
according  to  the  positive  course  of  our  speculative  reason :
and  the  I'everse  in  the  active  process :  the  laws  of  the
system  determining  those  of  Man,  and  remaining  un-
affected by  them.  Between  these  two  poles  of  natural
philosophy  the  laws  of  physics  interpose,  as  a  kind  of
complement  of  the  astronomical  laws ;  and  again,  those  of
chemistry,  as  an  immediate  preliminary  of  the  biological.


32  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

Such  being  the  rational  and  indissoluble  constitution  of
these  sciences,  it  becomes  apparent  why  I  insisted  on  the
subordination  of  the  study  of  Man  to  that  of  the  system,
as  the  primary  philosophical  characteristic  of  j^^^itive
biology.

Though  in  the  infancy  of  the  human  mind,  when  it  was
in  its  theological  state,  and  in  its  youthful  metaphysical
stage,  the  order  of  these  sciences  was  reversed,  there  was  a
pre2:)aration  for  the  true  view.  Through  all  the  fanciful
notions  of  the  ancient  philosophy  about  the  physiological
influence  of  the  stars,  we  discern  a  strong  though  vague
perception  of  some  connection  between  vital  and  celestial
phenomena.  Like  all  primitive  intuitions  of  the  under-
standing, this  one  needed  only  rectification  by  the  positive
philosophy ;  under  the  usual  condition,  however,  of  being
partially  overthrown  in  order  to  be  reorganized.  But
modern  students,  finding  no  astronomical  conditions  in
the  course  of  their  anatomical  and  physiological  observa-
tions, have  discarded  the  idea  of  them  altogether, — as  if
it  were  ever  possible  for  facts  to  bear  immediate  testimony
to  the  conditions  without  which  they  could  not  exist,  and
which  do  not  admit  of  a  moment's  suspension  !  Such  an
order  of  primitive  conditions  is  however  now  established
beyond  dispute.  In  order  to  prevent  any  return  to  vicious
or  exaggerated  notions  about  the  physiological  influence
of  the  stars,  it  is  enough  to  bear  in  mind  two  considera-
tions :  first,  that  the  astronomical  conditions  of  vital
existence  are  comprised  within  our  own  planetary  system ;
and  secondly,  that  they  relate,  not  directly  to  the  organism,
but  to  its  environment,  affecting  as  they  do  the  constitution
of  our  globe.

In  regard  to  method, — the  importance  of  astronomical
study  to  biologists  consists,  as  in  other  cases,  in  its  offering
the  most  perfect  model  of  philosophizing  on  any  phenomena
whatever ;  the  importance  of  this  example  becoming  greater
in  proportion  to  the  complexity  of  the  subordinate  science,
on  account  of  the  stronger  temptation  to  discursive  and
idle  inquiries  offered  by  the  latter.  The  more  difficult
their  researches  become,  the  more  sedulous  should  physio-
logists be  to  refresh  their  positive  forces  at  the  source  of
positive  knowledge  ;  and,  in  the  contemplation  of  the  few


THE   USE    OF   HYPOTHESIS   IN    BIOLOGY.  33

general  and  indisputable  conceptions  which  constitute  this
lofty  science,  to  be  on  their  guard  against  the  baseless
notions  of  a  vital  principle,  vital  forces,  and  entities  of
that  character.  Hitherto,  all  advance  in  positivity  in
biology  has  been  obtained  at  the  expense  of  its  dignity,
which  has  always  been  implicated  with  an  imaginary  origin
of  life,  of  sensibility,  etc. :  but  when  physiologists  have
learned  from  their  study  of  gravitation  and  other  primary
laws  how  to  confine  themselves  to  true  science,  their  sub-
ject will  rise  to  the  highest  elevation  that  positivity  admits
of, — that  rational  prevision  of  events  which  is,  as  I  have
so  often  said,  the  end  of  true  science : — an  end  to  be  aimed
at  in  biology,  as  it  is  perfectly  fulfilled  in  astronomy.

Here,  too,  must  biologists  learn  the  character  of  sound
scientific  hypothesis.  This  method  is  eminently  wanted  in
so  complex  a  study  as  jDhysiology ;  but  it  has  been  as  yet-
used  with  very  little  effect.  The  way  is,  undoubtedly,  to
determine  the  organ  from  the  function,  or  the  function
from  the  organ.  It  is  permissible  to  form  the  most
plausible  hypothesis  as  to  the  unknown  function  of  a
given  organ,  or  the  concealed  organ  of  a  manifest  function.
If  the  supposition  be  in  harmony  with  existing  knowledge,
if  it  be  held  provisionally,  and  if  it  be  capable  of  a  positive
verification,  it  may  contribute  to  the  progress  of  discovery,
and  is  simply  a  use  of  a  right  of  the  human  mind,  exercised
as  in  astronomy.  The  only  eminent  example  known  to  me
of  sound  hypothesis  in  biology  is  that  of  M.  Broussais,  in
proposing  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  alimentary  canal
as  the  seat  of  so-called  essential  fevers.  Whether  he  was
mistaken  or  not,  is  not  the  question.  His  hypothesis  being
open  to  unquestionable  confirmation  or  subversion,  it  gave
a  great  impulse  to  the  study  of  pathology  in  a  positive
manner:  and  it  will  stand  in  the  history  of  the  human
mind,  as  the  first  example  of  the  si^ontaneous  inti'oduction
of  a  sound  hyjjothetical  method  into  the  positive  study
of  living  beings :  a  method  derived  from  the  region  of
astronomy.

It  remains  to  consider  the  relation  of  biology  to  mathe-
matics.

The  encroachments  of  the  pure  geometers  To  mathe-
upon  the  domain  of  biology  have  been  at-         matics.

II.  D


34  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

tended  with  the  same  mischief,  but  in  an  aggravated
form,  that  we  have  witnessed  in  the  case  of  other  sciences.
This  mischief  has  led  physiologists  to  repudiate  mathe-
matics altogether,  and  oj^en  an  impassable  gulf  between
themselves  and  the  geometers.  This  is  a  mistake ;  inas-
much as  their  science  cannot  be  severed  from  that  which
is  the  basis  of  the  whole  of  natural  philosophy ;  and  it
is  only  through  the  admission  of  this  that  they  can  main-
tain the  originality  and  independence  of  their  scientific
labours.  The  rational  study  of  nature  jDroceeds  on  the
ground  that  all  phenomena  are  subject  to  invariable  laws,
which  it  is  the  business  of  philosophical  sjieculation  to
discover.  It  is  needless  to  prove  that  on  any  other  sup-
position, science  could  not  exist,  and  our  collections  of
facts  could  yield  no  result.  In  the  phenomena  of  living
bodies,  as  in  all  others,  every  action  proceeds  according  to
precise,  that  is,  mathematical  laws,  which  we  should  ascer-
tain if  we  could  study  each  phenomenon  by  itself.  The
phenomena  of  the  inorganic  world  are,  for  the  most  part,
simple  enough  to  be  calculable  :  those  of  the  organic  world
are  too  complex  for  our  management :  but  this  has  nothing
to  do  with  any  difference  in  their  nature.  And  this  is
the  view  which  both  geometers  and  biologists  should  bear
in  mind.

If  in  astronomy  our  calculations  are  baffled  when  we
pass  beyond  two  or  three  essential  conditicms,  it  is  evident
how  impracticable  they  must  be  amidst  the  inextricable
complications  of  physiology.  And  again,  this  complexity
prevents  our  ever  effecting  a  mathematical  disclosure  of
the  elementary  laws  of  the  science.  This  excludes  all  idea
of  this  method  of  philosophizing  in  biology  ;  for  these  laws
are  no  otherwise  accessible  than  by  the  immediate  analysis
of  their  numerical  effects.  Now,  whichever  way  vital
phenomena  are  looked  at,  they  present  such  endless  and
incessant  variations  in  their  numbers,  that  geometers  are
baffled  as  completely  as  if  those  degrees  were  entirely
arbitrary.  Even  numerical  chemistry  is  inapplicable  to
bodies  whose  molecular  composition  varies  incessantly ;
and  this  is  precisely  the  distinguishing  character  of  living
organisms.  However  hurtful  may  have  been  the  incur-
sions of  the  geometers,  direct  and  indirect,  into  a  domain


BIOLOGY   AND    MATHEMATICS.  35

which  it  is  not  for  them  to  cultivate,  the  physiologists  are
not  the  less  wrong  in  turning  away  from  mathematics
altogether.  It  is  not  only  that  without  mathematics  they
could  not  receive  their  clue  preliminary  training  in  the
intervening  sciences :  it  is  further  necessary  for  them  to
have  geometrical  aTid  mechanical  knowledge,  to  under-
stand the  structure  and  the  play  of  the  complex  aj^paratus
of  the  living,  and  especially  the  animal  organism.  Animal
mechanics,  statical  and  dynamical,  must  be  unintelligible
to  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  general  laws  of  rational
mechanics.  The  laws  of  equilibrium  and  motion  are,  as
we  saw  when  treating  of  them,  absolutely  universal  in
their  action,  depending  wholly  on  the  energy,  and  not  at
all  on  the  nature  of  the  forces  considered :  and  the  only
difficulty  is  in  their  numerical  application  in  cases  of  com-
plexity. Thus,  discarding  all  idea  of  a  numerical  applica-
tion in  biology,  we  perceive  that  the  general  theorems  of
statics  and  dynamics  must  be  steadily  verified  in  the
mechanism  of  living  bodies,  on  the  rational  study  of  which
they  cast  an  indispensable  light.  The  highest  orders  of
animals  act,  in  repose  and  motion,  like  any  other  mechani-
cal apparatus  of  a  similar  complexity,  with  the  one  difference
of  the  mover,  which  has  no  power  to  alter  the  laws  of
motion  and  equilibrium.  The  participation  of  rational
mechanics  in  positive  biology  is  thus  evident.  Mechanics
cannot  dispense  with  geometry ;  and  besides,  we  see  how
anatomical  and  physiological  speculations  involve  con-
siderations of  form  and  position,  and  require  a  familiar
knowledge  of  the  princii:)al  geometrical  laws  which  may
cast  light  upon  those  complex  relations.

In  regard  to  Method,  the  necessity  of  recurring  to  a  per-
fect model  of  reasoning,  the  more  earnestly  in  proportion
to  the  complexity  of  the  science  concerned,  is  applicable  in
regard  to  Mathematics,  as  to  Astronomy ;  only  with  still
greater  urgency.  In  mathematics  we  find, the  primitive
source  of  rationality  ;  and  to  mathematics  must  the  biolo-
gists resort  for  means  to  carry  on  their  researches.  If
biologists  have  hitherto  not  done  this,  but  contented  them-
selves with  what  is  called  logic,  apart  from  all  determinate
reasoning,  much  of  the  fault  is  chargealjle  upon  the  in-
difference of  geometers  about  duly  organizing  the  whole  of


36  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

inatliematical  kuowledge.  The  imperfect  and  inadequate
character  of  the  elementary  treatises  on  mathematics  that
have  hitherto  been  given  to  the  world  quite  accounts  for
the  neglect  of  the  fundamental  logical  properties  of  mathe-
matical science  by  even  intelligent  minds.  It  accounts  also
for  the  exaggerations  of  some  j^hilosophers,  who  maintain
that,  far  from  preparing  the  intellectual  organ  for  the
rational  interjjretation  of  nature,  a  mathematical  education
rather  tends  to  develop  a  spirit  of  sophistical  argumenta-
tion and  illusory  speculation.  Such  an  abuse,  however,
cannot  affect  the  real  value  of  mathematics  as  a  means  of
jiositive  ediication  ;  but  rather  exhibits  the  necessity  of  a
philosophical  renovation  of  the  whole  system  of  mathe-
matical instruction.  Whatever  advantage  can  be  attri-
buted to  logic  in  directing  and  strengthening  the  action  of
the  understanding  is  found  in  a  higher  degree  in  mathe-
matical study,  with  the  immense  added  advantage  of  a  de-
terminate subject,  distinctly  circumsci'ibed,  admitting  of
the  utmost  precision,  and  free  from  the  danger  which  is  in-
herent in  all  abstract  logic, — of  leading  to  useless  and
puerile  rules,  or  to  vain  ontological  speculations.  The
positive  method,  being  everywhere  identical,  is  as  much  at
home  in  the  art  of  reasoning  as  anywhere  else :  and  this  is
why  no  science,  whether  biology  or  any  other,  can  offer  any
kind  of  reasoning,  of  which  mathematics  does  not  supply  a
simpler  and  purer  counterpart.  Thus,  we  are  enabled  to
eliminate  the  only  remaining  portion  of  the  old  philosophy
which  could  even  appear  to  offer  any  real  utility ;  the
logical  part,  the  value  of  which  is  irrevocably  absorbed  by
mathematical  science.  Hither,  then,  must  biologists  come,
to  study  the  logical  art  so  as  to  apply  it  to  the  advancement
of  their  difficult  researches.  In  this  school  must  they  learn
familiarly  the  real  characters  and  conditions  of  scientific
evidence,  in  order  to  transfer  it  afterwards  to  the  province
of  their  own  theories.  The  study  of  it  here,  in  the  most
simple  and  perfect  cases,  is  the  only  sound  preparation  for
its  recognition  in  the  most  complex.

The  study  is  equally  necessary  for  the  formation  of  intel-
lectual habits ;  for  obtaining  an  aptitude  in  forming  and
sustaining  positive  abstractions,  without  which  the  com-
parative method  cannot  be  used  in  either  anatomy  or  phy-


USE   OF   SCIENTIFIC   FICTIONS.  37

siology.  The  abstraction  which  is  to  be  the  standard  of
comparison  must  be  first  clearly  formed,  and  then  steadily
maintained  in  its  integrity,  or  the  analysis  becomes  abor-
tive :  and  this  is  so  completely  in  the  spirit  of  mathema-
tical combinations,  that  practice  in  them  is  the  best  pre-
paration for  it.  A  student  who  cannot  accomplish  the
process  in  the  more  simple  case  may  be  assured  that  he  is
not  qualified  for  the  higher  order  of  biological  researches,
and  must  be  satisfied  with  the  humbler  office  of  collecting
materials  for  the  use  of  minds  of  another  order.  Hence
arises  another  use  of  mathematical  training  ; — that  of  test-
ing and  classifying  minds,  as  well  as  preparing  and  guiding
them.  Probably  as  much  good  would  be  done  by  exclud-
ing the  students  who  only  encumber  the  science  by  aimless
and  desultory  inquiries,  as  by  fitly  instituting  those  who
can  better  fulfil  its  conditions.

There  seems  no  sufficient  reason  why  the      ^^       .     .
c       •     A-«     a  4--  •      j-i  Use  of  scien-

use  or  scientific  factions,  so  common  in  the      ^-^^  fictions

hands  of  geometers,  should  not  be  introduced
into  biology,  if  systematically  employed,  and  adopted  with
sufficient  sobriety.  In  mathematical  studies,  great  advan-
tages have  arisen  from  imagining  a  series  of  hypothetical
cases,  the  consideration  of  which,  though  artificial,  may  aid
the  clearing  up  of  the  real  subject,  or  its  fundamental
elaboration.  This  art  is  usually  confounded  with  that  of
hypotheses ;  but  it  is  entirely  different ;  inasmuch  as  in
the  latter  case  the  solution  alone  is  imaginary ;  whereas  in
the  former,  the  problem  itself  is  radically  ideal.  Its  use
can  never  be  in  biology  comparable  to  what  it  is  in  mathe-
matics :  but  it  seems  to  me  that  the  abstract  character  of
the  higher  conceptions  of  comparative  biology  renders  them
susceptible  of  such  treatment.  The  process  would  be  to
intercalate,  among  different  known  organisms,  certain
purely  fictitious  organisms,  so  imagined  as  to  facilitate
their  comparison,  by  rendering  the  biological  series  moi*e
homogeneous  and  continuous  :  and  it  might  be  that  several
might  hereafter  meet  with  more  or  less  of  a  realization
among  organisms  hitherto  unexplored.  It  may  be  possible,
in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  of  living  bodies,  to
conceive  of  a  new  organism  capable  of  fulfilling  certain
given  conditions  of  existence.     However  that  may  be,  the


38  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

collocation  of  real  cases  witli  well-iinagiued  ones,  after  the
manner  of  geometers,  will  doubtless  be  practised  hereafter,
to  complete  the  general  laws  of  comparative  anatomy  and
physiology,  and  possibly  to  anticipate  occasionally  the
direct  exploration.  Even  now,  the  rational  use  of  such  an
artifice  might  greatly  simplify  and  clear  up  the  ordinary
system  of  pure  biological  instruction.  But  it  is  only  the
highest  order  of  investigators  who  can  be  entrusted  with
it.  Whenever  it  is  adopted,  it  will  constitute  another
ground  of  relation  between  biology  and  mathematics.

We  have  now  gone  over  all  those  grounds, — both  of  doc-
trine and  of  method.  Of  the  three  parts  of  mathematics,
Mechanics  is  connected  with  biology  in  the  scientific  point
of  view  ;  and  geometry  in  the  logical :  while  both  rest  upon
the  analytical  theories  which  are  indispensable  to  their  sys-
tematic development.

This  specification  of  the  relations  of  biology  determines
its  rank  in  the  hierarchy  of  sciences.  From  this  again  we
learn  the  kind  and  degree  of  perfection  of  which  biology  is
susceptible  ;  and,  more  directly,  the  rational  plan  of  pi'e-
liminary  education  which  it  indicates.

Condition  and  If  tlie  perfection  of  a  science  were  to  be
prospects  of  estimated  by  the  means  of  its  pursuit,  bio-
the  science.  logy  would  evidently  excel  all  others  ;  for  we
can  concentrate  upon  it  the  whole  of  the  resources  of  ob-
servation and  of  reasoning  offered  by  all  the  others,  together
with  some  of  high  im2:)ortance  appropriate  to  itself.  Yet,
all  this  wealth  of  resources  is  an  insufficient  compensation
for  the  accumulated  obstacles  which  beset  the  science.
The  difficulty  is  not  so  much  in  its  I'ecent  passage  into  the
positive  state  as  in  the  high  complexity  of  its  phenomena.
After  the  wisest  use  of  all  our  resources,  this  study  must
ever  remain  inferior  to  all  the  departments  of  inorganic
philosophy,  not  excepting  chemistry  itself.  Still,  its  specu-
lative improvement  will  be  greater  than  might  be  supposed
by  those  who  are  unaware  how  incomplete  and  barren  is
the  accumulation  of  observations  and  heterogeneous  con-
ceptions which  now  goes  by  the  name  of  the  science.  All
that  has  yet  been  done  slu)uld  be  regarded  as  a  j^reliminary
operation, — an  ascertainment  and  trial  of  means,  hitherto


BIOLOtilCAL    EDUCATION,  39

provisional,  but  henceforth  to  be  organized.  Such  an
organization  having  really  taken  j^lace  among  a  few  quali-
fied investigators,  the  state  of  the  science  may  be  regarded
as  very  satisfactory.  As  for  the  direct  establishment  of
biological  laws,  the  few  positive  ideas  that  we  have  ob-
tained justify  the  expectation  that  the  science  of  living
bodies  may  attain  to  a  real  co-ordination  of  phenomena,
and  therefore  to  their  prevision,  to  a  greater  or  smaller
extent.

As  for  the  requisite  education, — as  it  com-  .

prehends  the  study  of  the  preceding  sciences,  Educatio^
from  mathematics  downwards,  it  is  clearly
of  a  more  extensive  and  difficult  order  than  any  hitherto
prescribed.  But  the  time  saved  from  the  useless  study  of
words,  and  from  futile  metaphysical  speculations,  would
suffice  for  all  the  purposes  of  the  regenerated  science,
which  discards  these  encumbrances.

If,  next,  we  look  at  the  reaction  of  the  science  on  the
education  of  the  general  mind,  the  first  thing  that  strikes
us  is  that  the  positive  study  of  Man  affords  to  observers
the  best  test  and  measure  of  the  mental  power  of  those
who  pursue  the  study.  In  other  sciences,  the  real  power
of  the  inquirer  and  the  value  of  his  acquisitions  are  con-
cealed from  popular  estimate  by  the  scientific  artifices
which  are  requisite  for  the  pursuit;  as  in  the  case  of
mathematics,  whose  hieroglyphic  language  is  very  imposing
to  the  uninitiated  :  so  that  men  of  extremely  small  ability,
rendering  very  doubtful  services,  have  obtained  a  high
reputation  for  themselves  and  their  achievements.  But
this  can  hardly  take  place  in  biology  ;  and  the  preference
which  popular  good  sense  has  accorded  to  the  study  of
Man  as  a  test  of  scientific  intelligence  is  therefore  well-
grounded.  Here  the  most  important  phenomena  are
common  to  all ;  and  the  race  may  be  said  to  concur  in  the
study  of  Man  :  and,  the  more  difficult  and  doubtful  the
ascertainment  of  general  laws  in  so  complex  a  science,  the
higher  is  the  value  of  individual  and  original  meditation.
When  these  laws  become  better  kno^\ii,  this  originality
will  yield  some  of  its  value  to  the  ability  which  will  then
be  requisite  for  their  application,  The  moral  world  will,
under  all  future,  as  under  all  past  circumstances,  regard


40  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

the  Icnowledge  of  human  nature  as  the  most  indubitable
sign,  and  the  commonest  measure,  of  true  intellectual
superiority.

The  first  intellectual  influence  of  the  science  is  in  per-
fecting, or  rather  developing,  two  of  the  most  important
of  our  elementary  powers,  which  are  little  required  by  the
preceding  sciences ; — the  arts  of  comparison  and  of
classification,  which,  however  necessary  to  each  other,  are
perfectly  distinct.  Of  the  first,  I  have  said  enough  ;  and
of  the  second  I  shall  speak  hereafter  ;  so  that  I  have  now
only  to  indicate  its  function  in  biology.

.  The     universal     theory    of    philosophical

Hcation  ^''''^'  classifications,  necessary  not  only  to  aid  the
memory  but  to  perfect  scientific  combina-
tions, cannot  be  absent  from  any  branch  of  natural  philo-
sophy :  but  it  is  incontestable  that  the  full  development  of
the  art  of  classification  was  reserved  for  biological  science.
As  Ave  have  seen  before,  each  of  our  elementary  powers
must  be  specially  developed  by  that  one  of  our  positive
studies  which  requires  its  most  urgent  application,  and
which,  at  the  same  time,  offers  it  the  most  extended  field.
Under  both  aspects,  biology  tends,  more  than  any  other
science,  to  favour  the  spontaneous  rise  of  the  general
theory  of  classifications.  First,  no  other  so  i;rgently  claims
a  series  of  rational  classifications,  on  account  both  of  the
multiplicity  of  distinct  but  analogous  beings,  and  of  the
necessity  of  organizing  a  systematic  comparison  of  them  in
the  form  of  a  biological  hierarchy ;  and  next,  the  same
characteristics  which  demand  these  classifications  facilitate
their  spoiitaneous  establishment.  The  multii>licity  and
complexity  are  not,  as  might  at  first  appear,  obstacles  to
the  systematic  arrangement  of  subjects :  on  the  contrary,
they  are  aids,  as  the  diversity  of  their  relations  offers  a
greater  number  of  analogies,  more  extensive  and  easy  to
lay  hold  of.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  classification  of
animals  is  superior  to  that  of  vegetables  ;  the  greater
variety  and  complexity  of  animal  organisms  affording  a
better  hold  for  the  art  of  classifying.  And  thus  we  see
that  the  very  difficulties  of  the  science  are  of  a  nature  at
once  to  require  and  permit  the  most  marked  and  sponta-
neous development  of  the  general  art  of  classification  ;  and


BIOLOGY  AND    POSITIVISM.  41

hither  must  the  student  in  every  other  department  of
science  resort,  to  form  his  conceptions  of  this  all- important
method.  Here  alone  can  geometers,  astronomers,  physicists,
and  even  chemists  learn  the  formation  of  natural  groups,
and  their  rational  co-ordination  ;  and  yet  more,  the  general
principle  of  the  subordination  of  characteristics,  which
constitutes  the  chief  artifice  of  the  method.  The  biologists
alone,  at  this  day,  can  be  in  habitual  possession  of  clear
and  positive  ideas  in  these  three  relations. — Each  of  the
fundamental  sciences  has,  as  we  have  already  so  often
seen,  the  exclusive  property  of  specially  developing  some
one  of  the  great  logical  procedures  of  which  the  whole
positive  method  is  composed ;  and  it  is  thus  that  the  more
complex,  while  dependent  on  the  simpler,  react  on  their
superiors  by  affording  them  new  rational  powers  and
instruments.  In  this  view  of  the  hierarchical  character
and  unity  of  the  system  of  human  knowledge,  it  becomes
clear  that  the  isolation  still  practised  in  the  organization
of  our  positive  studies  is  as  hurtful  to  their  special  pro-
gress as  to  their  collective  action  upon  the  intellectual
government  of  the  human  I'ace.

Looking  now  to  the  higher  function  of  influence  of
this  science, — its  influence  upon  the  positive  Biology  upon
spirit,  as  well  as  method, — we  have  only  to  the  Positive
try  it  by  the  test  proposed  before ; — its  spirit.
power  of  destroying  theological  conceptions  in  two  ways  : —
by  the  rational  prevision  of  phenomena,  and  by  the  volun-
tary modification  of  them  which  it  enables  Man  to  exercise.
As  the  phenomena  of  any  science  become  more  complex,
the  first  power  decreases,  and  the  other  increases,  so  that
the  one  or  the  other  is  always  present  to  show,  unques-
tionably, that  the  events  of  the  world  are  not  ruled  by
supernatural  will,  but  by  natural  laws.  Biological  science
eminently  answers  to  this  test.  While  its  complexity
allows  little  prevision,  at  present,  in  regard  to  its  pheno-
mena, it  supplies  us  with  a  full  equivalent,  in  regard  to
theological  conceptions,  in  the  testimony  afforded  by  the
analysis  of  the  conditions  of  action  of  living  bodies.  The
natural  opposition  of  this  species  of  investigation  to  every
kind  of  theological  and  metaphysical  conception  is  particu-
larly remarkable  in  the  case  of  intellectual  and  affective


42  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY,

phenomena, — the  positivism  of  which  is  very  recent,
and  which,  with  the  social  phenomena  that  are  derived
from  them,  are  the  last  battle-ground,  in  the  popular  view,
between  the  positive  philosophy  and  the  ancient.  In
virtue  of  their  complexity,  these  phenomena  are  precisely
those  which  require  the  most  determinate  and  extensive
concurrence  of  various  conditions,  exterior  and  interior ;
so  that  the  positive  study  of  them  is  eminently  fitted  to
expose  the  futility  of  the  abstract  explanations  derived
from  the  theological  or  metaphysical  philosojjhy.  Hence,
we  easily  understand  the  marked  aversion  which  this  study
is  privileged  to  arouse  among  different  sects  of  theologians
and  metaphysicians.  As  the  labours  of  anatomists  and
physiologists  disclose  the  intimate  dependence  of  moral
phenomena  on  the  organism  and  its  envii'onment,  there  is
something  very  striking  in  the  vain  efforts  of  followers  of
the  old  philosophies  to  harmonize  with  these  facts  the
illusory  play  of  supernatural  influences  or  psychological
entities.  Thus  has  the  development  of  biological  science
put  the  positive  philosophy  in  possession  of  the  very
stronghold  of  the  ancient  philosophy.  The  same  effect
becomes  even  more  striking  in  the  other  direction,  from
biological  phenomena  being,  beyond  all  others,  susceptible
of  modification  from  human  intervention.  We  have  a  large
power  of  affecting  both  the  organism  and  its  environment,
from  the  very  considerable  number  of  the  conditions  which
concur  in  their  existence :  and  our  voluntary  power  of  dis-
turbing phenomena,  of  suspending,  and  even  destroying
them,  is  so  striking  as  to  compel  us  to  reject  all  idea  of  a
theological  or  metaphysical  du'ection.  As  in  the  other
case,  of  which  indeed  it  is  a  mere  extension,  this  effect  is
most  particularly  marked  in  regard  to  moral  phenomena,
properly  so  called,  which  are  more  susceptible  of  modifica-
tion than  any  others.  The  most  obstinate  psychologist
could  not  well  persist  in  maintaining  the  sovereign  inde-
pendence of  his  intellectual  entities,  if  he  would  consider
that  the  mere  standing  on  his  head  for  a  moment  would
put  a  complete  stop  to  the  course  of  his  own  speculations.
Much  as  we  may  wish  that,  in  addition  to  these  evidences,
we  had  that  of  an  extensive  power  of  scientific  pi'evision  in
biology,  such  a  power  is  not  needed  for  the  conclusions  of


POSITIVE   BIOLOGY.  43

popular  good  sense.  This  prevision  is  not  always  baffled  :
and  its  success  in  a  few  marked  cases  is  sufficient  to  satisfy
the  general  mind  that  the  jihenomena  of  living  bodies  are
subject,  like  all  others,  to  invariable  natural  laws,  which
we  are  ])revented  from  interi^reting  in  all  cases  only  by
their  extreme  complexity.

But,  moreover,  positive  biology  has  a  special  conquest  of
its  own  over  the  theological  and  metai^hysical  systems,  by
which  it  has  converted  an  ancient  dogma  into  a  new  prin-
ciple. In  chemistry  the  same  thing  occurred  when  the
primitive  notion  of  absolute  creation  and  destruction  was
converted  into  the  precise  conception  of  perpetual  decom-
position and  recomposition.  In  Astronomy,  the  same
thing  occurred  when  the  hypothesis  of  final  causes  and
providential  rule  gave  place  to  the  view  of  the  solar  system
as  the  necessary  and  spontaneous  result  of  the  mutual
action  of  the  principal  masses  which  compose  it.  Biology,
in  its  close  connection  with  astronomy,  has  completed  this
demonstration.  Attacking,  in  its  own  way,  the  elementary
dogma  of  final  causes,  it  has  gradually  transformed  it  into
the  fundamental  principle  of  the  conditions  of  existence,
which  it  is  the  particular  aptitude  of  biology  to  develope
and  systematize.  It  is  a  great  error  in  anatomists  and
j^hysiologists, — an  error  fatal  both  to  science  and  theology,
— to  endeavour  to  unite  the  two  views.  Science  compels
us  to  conclude  that  there  is  no  organ  without  a  function,
and  no  function  without  an  organ.  Under  the  old  theo-
logical influences,  students  are  apt  to  fall  into  a  state  of
anti-scientific  admiration  when  they  find  the  conditions  and
the  fulfilment  coincide, — when,  having  observed  a  func-
tion, anatomical  analysis  discloses  a  statical  position  in  the
organism  which  allows  the  fulfilment  of  the  function.  This
irrational  and  barren  admiration  is  hurtful  to  science,  by
habituating  us  to  suppose  that  all  organic  acts  are  effected
as  perfectly  as  we  can  imagine,  thus  repressing  the  expan-
sion of  our  biological  speculations,  and  inducing  us  to
admire  complexities  which  are  evidently  injurious :  and  it
is  in  direct  opposition  to  religious  aims,  as  it  assigns
human  wisdom  as  the  rule  and  even  the  limit  of  the
divine,  which,  if  such  a  parallel  is  to  be  established,  must
often  appear  to  be  the  inferior  of  the  two.     Though  we


44  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

cannot  imagine  radically  new  organisms,  we  can,  as  I
showed  in  my  suggestion  about  the  use  of  scientific  fictions,
conceive  of  organizations  which  should  differ  distinctly
from  any  that  are  known  to  us,  and  which  should  he  in-
contestably  superior  to  them  in  certain  determinate
respects.  The  philosophical  principle  of  the  conditions  of
existence  is  in  fact  simply  the  direct  conception  of  the
necessary  harmony  of  the  statical  and  the  dynamical
analyses  of  the  subject  proposed.  This  principle  is  emi-
nently adapted  to  the  science  of  biology,  which  is  con-
tinually engaged  in  establishing  a  harmony  between  the
means  and  the  end  ;  and  nowhere  else,  therefore,  is  seen  hi
such  perfection,  that  double  analysis,  statical  and  dynami-
cal, which  is  found  everywhere.

These,  then,  are  the  philosophical  properties  of  positive
biology.  To  complete  our  review  of  the  science  as  a  whole,
we  have  only  to  note  briefly  the  division  and  rational  co-
ordination of  its  parts.

^.      .,      .  It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  this

r.f  +I1Q  c,/.;o,i/.o  work  to  notice  several  branches  01  positive
biological  knowledge,  which  are  or  extreme
importance  in  their  own  place,  but  secondary  in  regard  to
the  principles  of  positive  philosophy.  We  have  no  concern
here  with  pathology,  and  the  corresponding  medical  art ;
nor  with  natural  history,  and  the  corresponding  art  of  the
education  of  organisms.  These  are  naturally,  and  not
untruly,  called  biological  studies  :  but  we  must  here  con-
fine the  term  strictly  to  the  speculative  and  abstract
researches  which  are  the  foundation  of  the  science.  The
interior  distribution  of  the  science,  thus  regarded,  is  this.

The  speculative  and  abstract  study  of  the  organism  must
be  divided,  first,  into  statics  and  dynamics  ;  according  as
we  are  seeking  the  laws  of  organization  or  those  of  life :
and  again,  statical  biology  must  be  divided  into  two  parts,
to  which  M.  de  Blainville  has  given  the  name,  in  regard  to
animals,  of  zootomy  and  zootaxy,  according  as  we  study  the
structure  and  composition  of  individual  organisms,  or  con-
struct the  great  biological  hierarchy  which  results  from  the
comparison  of  all  known  organisms.  It  would  be  easy  to
modify  M.  de  Blaiuville's  terms  so  as  to  make  them
common  to  animals  and  vegetables.     Dynamical  biology,


DIVISIONS   OF   THE   SCIENCE.  45

to  which  we  may  give  the  name  bionomy,  as  the  end  and
aim  of  the  whole  set  of  studies,  evidently  admits  of  no
analogous  subdivision.  The  general  name  of  Biology  thus
includes  the  three  divisions,  biotomy,  biotaxy,  and  pure
bionomy,  or  physiology  properly  so  called.

Their  definition  exhibits  their  necessary  dependence ;
and  thereby  determines  also  their  philosophical  co-ordina-
tion. While  it  is  universally  allowed  that  anatomical  ideas
are  indispensable  to  physiological  studies,  because  the
structure  must  be  known  before  its  action  can  be  judged
of,  the  subordination  of  bionomy  to  biotaxy  is  not  so  well
understood.  Yet  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  place  of  any
organism  in  the  scale  must  be  known  before  its  aggregate
phenomena  can  be  effectually  studied:  and  again,  the
consideration  of  this  hierarchy  is  indispensable  to  the  use
of  that  grandest  instrument  of  all  —  the  comparative
method.  Thus,  from  every  point  of  view,  the  double  re-
lation of  dynamical  to  statical  biology  is  unquestionable.

The  two  divisions  of  statical  biology  are  less  clearly
marked;  and  it  even  appeal's  as  if,  in  regard  to  them,  we
were  involved  in  a  vicious  circle  :  for  if,  on  the  one  hand,
the  rational  classification  of  living  beings  requires  the
antecedent  knowledge  of  their  organization,  it  is  certain,
on  the  other  hand,  that  anatomy  itself,  like  physiology,
cannot  be  studied,  in  regard  to  all  organisms,  without  an
antecedent  formation  of  the  biological  hierarchy.  Thus  we
must  admit  a  consolidation  of  the  respective  advancements
of  biotomic  and  biotaxic  studies,  through  their  intimate
connection.  In  such  a  case,  as  a  sej^aration  and  determi-
nate co-ordination  are  required  by  our  understandings,  it
appears  to  me  that  we  cannot  hesitate  to  make  a  dogmatic
arrangement, — placing  the  theory  of  organization  before
that  of  classification, — for  the  last  is  absolutely  dependent
on  the  first ;  while  the  first  could  meet  some  wants,  though
in  a  restricted  way,  without  the  second.  In  a  word,  none
but  known  organisms  can  be  classified  ;  whereas  they  all
can  and  must  be  studied,  to  a  certain  extent,  without  being
mutually  compared.  And  again,  there  is  no  reason  why,
in  a  systematic  exposition  of  anatomical  philosophy,  we
should  not  borrow  directly  from  biotaxy  its  construction  of
the   organic   hierarchy  ;    an   anticipation   which   involves


46  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

miicli  less  inconvenience  than  severing  tlie  complete  study  of
structure. — However,  it  must  be  always  borne  in  mind  that
any  system  will  have  to  undergo  a  general  revision,  with  a
view  to  bringing  out  the  essential  relations  of  its  parts  :
the  relations,  not  only  of  the  two  sections  of  statical
biology,  but  of  both  to  the  dynamical.  This  consideration
goes  far  to  diminish  the  importance  assigned  to  these
questions  of  iiriority  :  and  the  only  reason  why  such  a
revision  appears  more  necessary  in  biology  than  in  the
other  sciences  is,  that  there  is  a  profonnder  accordance
between  its  dej^artments  than  we  find  in  theirs.

The  interior  distribution  of  these  three  departments  is
determined,  as  usual,  by  the  order  of  dej^endence  of  phe-
nomena, on  the  ground  of  their  relative  generality.  Thus,
the  theory  of  the  organic  life  precedes  that  of  the  animal :
and  the  theory  of  the  highest  functions  and  organs  of  Man
termmates  the  biological  system.

--,.  It  has  often  been  a  question  whether,  in

\^Q„iii  studying  each   organ   and   function   in  the

whole  scale,  it  is  best  to  begin  at  the  one
end  or  the  other ; — to  begin  with  Man  or  the  simplest
known  organism.  1  do  not  consider  this  question  so  all-
imj^ortant  as  it  is  often  supposed,  as  all  qualified  inquirers
admit  the  necessity  of  using  the  two  methods  alternately,
whichever  is  taken  first :  but  I  thinlc  that  a  distinction
should  be  made  between  the  study  of  the  organic  and  that
of  the  animal  life.  The  functions  of  the  first  being  chemi-
cal, it  is  less  necessary  to  begin  with  Man  ;  and  I  think
there  may  be  a  scientific  advantage  in  studying  the  vege-
table organism  first,  in  which  that  kind  of  functions  is  the
more  pure  and  more  marked,  and  therefore  the  more
easily  and  completely  studied :  but  every  investigation,
anatomical  or  physiological,  relating  to  animal  life,  must
be  obscure  if  it  began  elsewhere  than  with  Man,  who  is  the
only  being  in  which  such  an  order  of  phenomena  is  im-
mediately intelligible.  It  is  evidently  the  ol)vious  state  of
Man,  more  and  more  degraded,  and  not  the  indecisive
state  of  the  sponge,  more  and  more  improved,  that  we
should  pursue,  through  the  animal  series,  when  Ave  are
analysing  any  of  the  constituent  characters  of  animality.
If  we  seem  to  be  by  this  procedure  deserting  the  ordinary


CONCLUSION    OF    REVIEW.  47

course  of  passing  from  the  most  general  and  simple  sub-
ject to  the  most  particular  and  complex,  it  is  only  to
conform  the  better  to  the  philosophical  principal  which
prescribes  that  every  coarse,  and  which  leads  us  from  the
most  known  subjects  to  the  least  known.  In  all  cases  but
this,  the  usual  course  is  the  fittest  in  biological  studies.

Here  we  conclude  our  I'eview  of  biological  science  as  a
whole.  The  extent  to  which  I  have  carried  out  the  survey
will  allow  us  to  consider  its  separate  portions  very  briefly.
In  doing  so,  I  shall  follow  the  order  just  laid  down,  pass-
ing from  the  simjile  considerations  of  pure  anatomy  to  that
positive  study  of  the  phenomena  of  the  intellect  and  the
affections,  as  the  highest  part  of  human  nature,  which  will
carry  us  over  from  biology  to  Social  Physics, — the  final
object  of  this  work.


48


CHAPTEE  II.

ANATOMICAL    PHILOSOPHY.

Development  T  T  was  during  the  second  lialf  of  the  last
of  Statical  -^    century  that  Daubenton  and  Vicq-d'Azyr

biology.  achieved  the  extension  of  the  statical  study

of  living  bodies  to  the  vfhole  of  known  organisms  ;  and  the
lectures  and  writings  of  Cuvier  carried  on,  and  sj^read
abroad,  the  regenerating  influence  of  this  great  view.  But,
indispensable  as  was  this  conception  to  the  development  of
anatomical  science,  it  could  not  complete  the  character  of
statical  biology  without  the  aid  and  addition  of  Bichat's
grand  idea  of  the  general  decomposition  of  the  organism
into  its  various  elementary  tissues ;  the  high  pliilosophical
importance  of  which  appears  to  me  not  yet  to  be  worthily
appreciated.

The  natural  development  of  comparative  anatomy  woiild,
no  doubt,  have  disclosed  this  analysis  to  us  sooner  or  later  :
but  how  slow  the  process  would  have  been  we  may  judge
by  what  we  see  of  the  reluctance  of  comparative  anatomists
to  abandon  the  exclusive  study  of  systems  of  organs  while
unable  to  deny  the  preponderant  importance  of  the  study
of  the  tissues.  Of  all  changes,  those  which  relate  to  method
are  the  most  difficult  of  accomplishment ;  and  perhaps
there  is  no  example  of  their  resulting  spontaneously  from
a  regular  advance  under  the  old  methods,  without  a  direct
impulsion  from  a  new  original  conception,  energetic  enough
to  work  a  revolution  in  the  system  of  study.  Biology
must,  from  its  great  complexity,  be  more  dependent  on  such
a  necessity  than  any  other  science.

Though  zoological  analysis  furnishes  the  best  means  of
separating  the  various  organic  tissues,  and  especially  of
giving  i^recision  to  the  true  philosophical  sense  of  this
Process  of  great  notion,  pathological  analysis  offered  a

discovery  of  more  direct  and  raj)id  way  to  suggest  the
the  tissues.         gj-st  idea  of  such  a  decomposition,  even  re-


PROCESS   OF  DISCOVERY   OF   THE   TISSUES.  49

garding  the  human  organism  alone.  When  pathological
anatomy  had  been  once  founded  by  Morgagni,  it  was
evident  that  in  the  best-marked  maladies  no  organ  is  ever
entirely  diseased,  and  that  the  alterations  are  usually  con-
fined to  some  of  its  constituent  parts,  while  the  others  pre-
serve their  normal  condition.  In  no  other  way  could  the
distinction  of  the  elementary  tissues  have  been  so  clearly
established.  By  the  co-existence  in  one  organ  of  sound
and  impaired  tissues,  and,  again,  by  different  organs  being
affected  by  similar  maladies,  in  virtue  of  the  disease  of  a
common  tissue,  the  analysis  of  the  chief  anatomical  elements
was  spontaneously  indicated,  at  the  same  time  that  the
study  of  the  tissues  was  shown  to  be  more  important  than
that  of  the  organs.  It  is  not  consistent  with  my  objects
to  go  further  into  this  :  but  it  was  necessary  to  show  that
we  owe  to  pathological  analysis  the  perception  of  this
essential  truth.  It  was  Pinel  who  suggested  it  to  Bichat,
by  his  happy  innovation  of  studying  at  once  all  the  diseases
proper  to  the  different  mucous  menabranes.  Bichat  then,
while  knowing  nothing  of  the  study  of  the  organic  hieraix-hy,
carried  off  from  the  students  of  comparative  anatomy  the
honour  of  discovering  the  primitive  idea  which  is  most  in-
dispensable of  all  to  the  general  advancement  of  anatomical
philosophy.  His  achievement  consisted  in  rationally  con-
necting with  the  normal  condition  a  notion  derived  from
the  pathological  condition,  in  virtue  probably  of  the  natural
reflection  that  if  the  different  tissues  of  the  same  organ
could  each  be  separately  diseased  in  its  own  way,  they
must  have,  in  their  healthy  condition,  distinct  modes  of
existence,  of  which  the  life  of  the  organ  is  really  composed.
This  principle  was  entirely  overlooked  before  Bichat  pub-
lished the  treatise  in  which  he  established  the  most  satis-
factory a  posteriori  development  of  it :  and  it  is  now  placed
beyond  all  question.  The  only  matter  of  regret  is  that,
in  creating  a  wholly  new  aspect  of  anatomical  science,
Bichat  bid  not  better  mark  its  spirit  by  the  title  he  gave
it.  If  he  had  called  it  abstract  or  elementary  instead  of
general  anatomy,  he  would  have  indicated  its  philosophical
function,  and  its  relation  to  other  anatomical  points  of
view.

The  anatomical  philosophy  began  to  assume  its  definitive

IT.  E


60  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

Combination  character  from  the  very  recent  time  when
-with  Conipa-  the  human  mind  learned  to  combine  the
rative  ana-  two  great  primitive  ideas  of  the  organic  hier-
tomy.  archy,  and  of  Bichat's  discovery,  which  ap-

plies the  universal  conception  to  the  statical  study  of  living
bodies.  These  combined  ideas  are  necessarily  the  subject
of  our  present  examination.  Putting  aside  the  irrational
distinctions,  still  too  common  among  biologists,  of  many
different  kinds  of  anatomy,  we  must  here  recognize  only
one  scientific  anatomy,  chiefly  characterized  by  the  philo-
sophical combination  of  the  comparative  method  with  the
fundamental  notion  of  the  decomposition  of  the  organs
into  tissues.  It  is  apparently  sti-ange  that,  after  Bichat's
discovery,  comparative  anatomists,  with  Cuvier  at  their
head,  should  have  persisted  in  stvidying  organic  apparatus
in  its  complex  state,  instead  of  beginning  with  the  investiga-
tion of  the  tissues,  pursuing  the  analysis  of  the  laws  of
their  combinations  into  organs,  and  ending  with  the  group-
ing of  those  organs  into  apparatus,  properly  so  called  :  but
not  even  Cuvier's  great  name  can  now  prevent  the  applica-
tion of  the  comparative  method  to  the  analysis  of  tissues,
throughout  the  whole  biological  hierarchy.  The  work,
though  at  jiresent  neither  energetically  nor  profoundly
j)ursued,  is  begun,  and  will  reform  the  habitual  direction
of  anatomical  speculation.

Bichat's  studies  related  to  Man  alone  ;  and  his  method
of  comparison  bore  only  upon  the  simplest  and  most
restricted  cases  of  all ;  the  comparison  of  parts  and  that  of
ages.  His  principle  must,  therefore,  necessarily  undergo
some  transformations,  to  fit  it  for  a  more  extensive  applica-

^,         ,         ,    tion.    The  most  important  of  these  improve-

Elements  and  ,  •  n      •  i      •     i      •

Products  ments,  especially  m  a  logical  view,  appears

to  me  to  consist  in  the  great  distinction  intro-
duced by  M.  de  Blainville  betAveen  the  true  anatomical
elements  and  the  simple  products  of  the  organism,  which
Bichat  had  confounded.  We  saw  before  the  importance  of
this  distinction  in  the  chemical  study  of  organic  substances  :
and  we  meet  it  again  now,  face  to  face,  as  an  anatomical
conception.

We  have  seen  that  life,  reduced  to  the  simplest  and  most
general  notion  of  it,  is  characterized  by  the  double  con-


ELEMENTS   AND    PRODUCTS.  5l

tinuous  motion  of  absorption  and  exhalation,  owing  to  tlie
reciprocal  action  of  the  organism  and  its  environment,  and
adapted  to  sustain  during  a  certain  time,  and  within
certain  limits  of  variation,  the  integrity  of  the  organization.
It  results  from  this  that,  at  every  instant  of  its  existence,
every  living  body  must  present,  in  its  structure  and  com-
position, two  very  different  orders  of  principles :  absorbed
matters  in  a  state  of  assimilation,  and  exhaled  matters  in  a
state  of  separation.  This  is  the  ground  of  the  great
anatomical  distinction  between  organic  elements  and  organic
products.  The  absorbed  matters,  once  completely  assimi-
lated, constitute  the  whole  of  the  real  materials  of  the
organism.  The  exhaled  substances,  whether  solid  or  fluid,
become,  from  the  time  of  their  separation,  foreign  to  the
organism,  in  which  they  cannot  generally  remain  long
without  danger.  Regarded  in  a  solid  state,  the  true  anato-
mical elements  are  always  necessarily  continuous  in  tissue
with  the  whole  of  the  organism :  and  again,  the  fluid
elements,  whether  stagnant  or  circulating,  remain  in  the
depths  of  the  general  tissue,  from  which  they  are  equally
insejiarable :  whereas  the  products  are  only  deposited,  for
a  longer  or  shorter  time,  on  the  exterior  or  interior  surface
of  the  organism.  The  differences  are  not  less  characteristic,
in  a  dynamical  view.  The  true  elements  alone  must  be
regarded  as  really  living:  they  alone  participate  in  the
double  vital  motion :  and  they  alone  grow  or  decrease  by
absorption  or  exhalation.  Even  before  they  are  finally  ex-
creted, the  products  are  already  essentially  dead  substances,
exhibiting  the  same  conditions  that  they  would  manifest
anywhere  else,  under  similar  molecular  influences.

The  separation  of  the  elements  from  the  products  is  not
always  easy  to  effect  when,  as  frequently  happens,  they
combine  in  the  same  anatomical  arrangement  to  concur  in
the  same  function.  All  products  are  not,  like  sweat,  urine,
etc.,  destined  to  be  expelled  without  further  use  in  the
organic  economy.  Several  others,  as  saliva,  the  gastric
fluid,  bile,  etc.,  act  as  exterior  substances,  and  in  virtue  of
their  chemical  composition  in  preparing  for  the  assimilation
of  the  organic  materials.  It  is  difiicult  to  fix  the  precise
moment  when  these  bodies  cease  to  be  products  and  become
elements  ; — the  moment,  that  is,  when  they  pass  from  the


52  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

inorganic  to  the  organic  state, — from  death  to  life.  But
these  difficulties  arise  from  the  imperfection  of  our  analysis,
and  not  from  any  uncertainty  in  the  principle  of  separation.
It  may  be  observed  however  that  there  are  circumstances
in  which  products,  and  particularly  among  the  solids,  are
closely  united  to  true  anatomical  elements  in  the  structure
of  certain  apparatus,  to  which  they  supply  essential  means
of  improvement.  Such  are,  for  instance,  the  greater  number
of  epidermic  productions,  the  hair,  and  eminently  the  teeth.
But  even  in  this  case,  a  sufficiently  delicate  dissection,  and
a  careful  analysis  of  the  whole  of  the  function  will  enable
us  to  ascertain,  with  entire  j^recision,  how  much  is  organic
and  how  much  inorganic  in  the  proposed  structure.  Such
an  investigation  was  not  prepared  for  when  Bichat  con-
founded the  teeth  with  the  bones,  and  concluded  the  epidermis
and  the  hair  to  be  tissues,  of  a  piece  with  the  cutaneous
tissue  ;  but  the  rectification  which  ensued  was  all-important,
as  enabling  us  to  define  the  idea  of  tissue  or  anatomical
element,  which  is  the  preferable  term.  It  was  throiigh
comparative  anatomy  that  the  rectification  took  place ;  for
the  study  of  the  biological  series  showed  that  the  inorganic
parts  which  in  Man  appear  inseparable  from  the  essential
apparatus  are  in  fact  only  simple  means  of  advancement,
gradually  introduced  at  assignable  stages  of  the  ascending
biological  series.

If  we  assert  that  in  the  order  of  purely  anatomical  specu-
lations, the  study  of  products  must  be  secondary  to  that  of
elements,  it  will  not  be  supposed  that  we  undervalue  the
study  of  products.  This  study  is  of  extreme  importance  in
physiology,  whose  principal  phenomena  would  be  radically
unintelligible  without  it ;  and  without  it  pathological
knowledge  must  come  to  a  stand.  As  results,  they  indi-
cate organic  alterations ;  and  as  modifiers,  they  exhibit  the
origin  of  a  great  number  of  those  alterations.  In  fact,  the
knowledge  of  them  is  much  promoted  by  their  separation
from  the  anatomical  elements,  which  withdraw  the  atten-
tion of  biologists  from  the  real  claims  of  the  whole  class  of
products.

The  consideration  of  products  being  once  dismissed  to  its
proper  place,  anatomical  analysis  has  assumed  its  true
character  of  completeness  and  clearness.     Thus  we  may


VITALITY   OF  THB    ORGANIC    FLUIDS.  53

undertake  now  what  was  befoi'e  impossible — an  exact
enumeration  of  anatomical  elements.  And  again,  these
tissues  can  be  classified  according  to  their  true  general  re-
lations ;  and  may  even  be  reduced  to  a  single  tissue,  modi-
fied by  determinate  laws.  These  two  are  the  other  chief
transformations  undergone  by  the  great  anatomical  theory
of  Bichat,  through  the  application  of  the  comparative
method  :  and  these  two  we  now  proceed  to  review.

The  first  is  connected  with  the  great  ques-  .        ,  .

tion  of  the  vitality  of  the  organic  fluids,  about  or'i-anic  fluids
which  our  ideas  are  far  from  being,  I  think,
sufiiciently  settled.  Every  living  body  consists  of  a  com-
bination of  solids  and  fluids,  the  respective  proportions  of
which  vary,  according  to  the  species,  within  very  wide
limits.  The  very  definition  of  the  vital  state  supposes  this
conjunction  ;  for  the  double  luotion  of  composition  and  de-
composition which  characterizes  life  could  not  take  place
among  solids  alone  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  liquid  or
gaseous  mass  not  only  requires  a  solid  envelope,  but  could
admit  of  no  real  organization.  If  the  two  great  primitive
ideas  of  Life  and  Organization  were  not  inseparable,  we
might  imagine  the  first  to  belong  to  fluids,  because  they
are  so  readily  modified  ;  and  the  other  to  solids,  as  alone
capable  of  structural  formation :  and  here,  under  another
view,  we  should  find  the  necessary  harmony  of  the  two
elements.  The  comparison  of  types  in  the  biological  series
confirms,  in  fact,  the  general  rule  that  the  vital  activity  in-
creases with  the  preponderance  of  fluid  elements  in  the
organism  ;  while  a  greater  persistence  of  the  vital  state
attends  the  preponderance  of  solids.  This  has  long  been
regarded  as  a  settled  law  by  philosophical  biologists,  in
studying  the  series  of  ages  alone.  These  considerations
seem  to  show  that  the  controversy  about  the  vitality  of
fluids  rests,  like  many  other  famous  controversies,  on  a
vicious  proposal  of  the  problem,  since  such  a  mutual  rela-
tion of  the  solids  and  the  fluids  excludes  at  once  both
humourism  and  solidism.  Discarding,  of  course,  the  pro-
ducts from  the  question,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
fluid  elements  of  the  organism  manifest  a  life  as  real  as
that  of  the  solids.  The  founders  of  modern  pathology,  in
their  reaction  against  the  old  humourism,  have  not  paid


54  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

sufficient  attention,  in  the  theory  of  diseases,  to  the  direct
and  spontaneous  alterations  of  which  the  organic  fluids,
especially  the  blood,  are  remarkably  susceptible,  in  virtue
of  the  complexity  of  their  composition.  It  would  appear,
from  a  philosophical  point  of  view,  very  strange  if  the  most
active  and  susceptible  of  the  anatomical  elements  did  not
participate,  primarily  or  consecutively,  in  the  perturbations
of  the  organism.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  less
certain  that  the  fluids,  animal  and  vegetable,  cease  to  live
as  soon  as  they  have  quitted  the  organism  ;  as,  for  instance,
the  blood  after  venesection.  They  then  lose  all  organiza-
tion, and  are  in  the  condition  of  products.  The  vitality  of
the  fluids,  considered  separately,  constitutes  them  an  ill-
defined,  and  therefore  interminable,  question.

A  truly  positive  inquiry  however  arises  out  of  the  ques-
tion— the  inquiry  as  to  which  of  the  immediate  principles
of  a  fluid  are  vital ;  for  it  cannot  be  admitted  that  all  are
so  indiscriminately.  Thus,  the  blood  being  chiefly  com-
posed of  Avater,  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  such  an  inert
vehicle  to  participate  in  the  life  of  the  fluid ;  but  then,
which  of  the  other  constituents  is  the  seat  of  life  ?  Micro-
scopic anatomy  gives  us  the  answer, — that  it  resides  in  the
globules,  properly  so  called,  which  are  at  once  organized
and  living.  However  valuable  such  a  solution  would  be.
it  can  be  regarded  at  present  only  as  an  attempt ;  for  it
is  admitted  that  these  globules,  though  determinate  in
form,  shrink  more  and  more  as  the  arterial  blood  passes
through  an  inferior  order  of  vessels, — that  is,  as  it  ap-
proaches its  incorporation  with  the  tissues ;  and  that,  at
the  precise  moment  of  assimilation,  there  is  a  complete
liquefaction  of  the  globules.  It  would  thus  appear  that
we  must  cease  to  regard  the  blood  as  living  at  the  very
moment  when  it  accomplishes  its  chief  act  of  vitality.
Before  any  decision  can  be  made,  we  must  have  the  counter
proof,— the  acknowledgment  that  true  globules  are  exclu-
sively characteristic  of  living  fluids,  in  opposition  to  those
which,  as  simyjle  products,  are  essentially  inert,  and  hold
in  suspension  various  solids,  which  make  them  difficult  to
be  distinguished  from  true  globules,  notwithstanding  the
determinate  form  of  the  latter.  Microscopical  observations
are  too  delicate,  and  sometimes  deceptive,  to  admit  at  pre-


VITAL    PARTS   OF   FLUIDS.  65

sent  of  the  irreversible  establishmeut  of  this  essential  point
of  anatomical  doctrine.

The  statical  study  of  living  bodies  would  form  but  a  very
incomplete  introduction  to  the  dynamical,  if  the  fluids  were
left  out  of  the  investigation  of  the  organic  elements,  how-
ever much  remains  to  be  desired  in  our  knowledge  of  them.
The  omission  of  them  in  Bichat's  treatise  leaves  a  great
gap.  Still,  as  the  anatomy  of  solids  must  ahvays  take  pre-
cedence of  that  of  fluids,  Bichat  chose  the  true  point  of  de-
parture, though  he  did  not  undertake  the  whole  subject.
It  must  be  added  that  the  examination  of  the  fluids  is  so
much  the  more  difficult  of  the  two  as  to  be  wellnigh  im-
practicable. In  an  anatomical  sense,  it  is  impracticable  :
and  the  two  only  methods, — microscopical  and  chemical
examination, — are  impaired  by  the  rapid  disorganization
which  ensues  when  the  fluids  quit  the  organism.  The
chemical  method  is  in  itself  the  more  valuable  of  the  two  :
but,  besides  that  the  chemists  habitually  confound  the
elements  and  the  products,  they  have  always  examined  the
former  in  a  more  or  less  advanced  state  of  decomposition :
and,  being  unaware  of  this,  they  have  offered  only  the
most  false  and  incohei'ent  notions  of  the  molecular  consti-
tution of  the  organized  fluids.  In  such  a  state  of  things,
it  is  only  by  a  full  preparation,  from  the  study  of  the  solid
elements,  that  anything  can  be  done  in  the  study  of  the
fluids.  It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that  by  the  same  rule
which  prescribes  this  order,  we  should  study  fluids  in  the
order  of  their  increasing  liquefaction, — taking  the  fatty
substances  first,  then  the  blood  and  other  liquids,  and
lastly  the  vaporous  and  gaseous  elements,  which  will  always
be  the  least  understood.

The  order  of  inquiry  being  thus  settled,  ^,  .„  .
the  next  subject  is  the  rational  classification  ^f  ^i^g  tissues,
of  the  tissues,  according  to  their  anatomical
filiation.  It  was  not  by  such  a  study  as  Bichat's,— of  Man
alone, — that  anything  certain  could  become  known  of  such
obscure  differences  as  those  of  the  fundamental  tissues.
In  order  to  obtain  such  knowledge  the  study  of  the  whole
biological  series  is  indispensable.

The  first  piece   of   knowledge  thus  ob-     Organic.
tained   is   that  the   cellular   tissue  is  the    Cellular  tissue.


56  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

primitive  and  essential  web  of  every  organism ;  it  being
the  only  one  that  is  present  tlirougli  the  whole  range  of
the  scale.  The  tissues  which  appear  in  Man  so  multiplied
and  distinct  lose  all  their  characteristic  attributes  as  we
descend  the  series,  and  tend  to  merge  entirely  in  the
general  cellular  tissue,  which  remains  the  sole  basis  of
vegetable,  and  perhaps  of  the  lowest  animal  organiza-
tion. This  fact  harmonizes  well  with  the  philosophical
account  of  the  basis  of  life,  in  its  last  degree  of  simplicity  ;
for  the  cellular  tissue  is  eminently  fitted,  by  its  structure,
for  absorption  and  exhalation.  At  the  lower  end  of  the
series,  the  living  organism,  placed  in  an  unvarying  medium,
does  nothing  but  absorb  and  exhale  by  its  two  surfaces,
between  which  are  ever  oscillating  the  fluids  destined  for
assimilation,  and  those  which  result  from  the  contrary  pro-
cess. For  so  simple  a  fimction  as  this  the  cellular  tissue
suffices.  It  remained  to  be  ascertained  under  what  laws
the  original  tissue  becomes  gradually  modified  so  as  to  en-
gender all  the  others,  with  those  attributes  which  at  first
disguise  their  common  derivation :  and  this  is  what  Com-
parative anatomy  has  begun  to  establish,  with  some  dis-
tinctness.

The  characteristic  modifications  of  the  tissue  are  of  two
prominent  classes  :  the  first,  more  common  and  less  pro-
found, are  limited  to  the  simple  structure  :  the  other  class,
more  special,  and  more  profound,  aifect  the  composition
itself.

Of  the  first  order  tlie  prominent  case  is  that  of  the  der-

^  mous   tissue,   properly  so   called,   which   is

Dermous  ^.i      i      •       *  j-i,  *  i  •  i

tissue  basis  ot  the  general  organic  envelope,  ex-

terior and  interior.  The  modification  here  is
mere  condensation,  differently  marked,  in  regard  to  animal
organisms,  according  as  the  surface  is,  as  in  exterior  sur-
faces, more  exhalant  than  absorbent,  or,  as  in  interior  sur-
faces, more  absorbent  than  exhalant.  Even  this  first  trans-
formation is  not  rigorously  universal ;  and  we  must  ascend
the  scale  a  little  way  to  find  it  clearly  characterized.  Not
only  in  some  of  the  lowest  of  the  animal  organisms,  are
the  exterior  and  interior  essentially  alike,  so  that  the
two  surfaces  may  be  interchanged,  but,  if  we  go  a  little
lower,  we  find  no  anatomical  distinction  between  the  en-


ORGANIC   TISSUES.  57

velope  and  the  wliole  of  the  organism,  "wliicli  is  uniformly

cellular.

By  an  increasing  condensation  of  the  parent  tissue,  three

distinct  but  inseparable  tissues  proceed  from  the  derma,

all  of  which  are  destined  to  an  important,  though  passive

office  in  the  animal  economy,  either  as  envelopes  protecting

the  nervous  organs,  or  as   auxiliaries  of  the  locomotive

apparatus.     These  are  the  fibrov;s,  cartilaginous,  and  bony

tissues,    ranged   by    Bichat   in    their   rational   order,  and

named  bv  M.  Laurent,  in  their  combination,    „  ,

,■,         7     *       ,■  mi       T£c         J.   1  i?   bcleroiis  tissue.

the  sclerous  tissue.    The  d liferent  degrees  or

consolidation  here  arise  from  the  deposition  in  the  cellular
network  of  a  heterogeneous  substance,  organic  or  inorganic,
the  extraction  of  which  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  nature  of
the  tissue.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  by  a  last  direct  con-
densation, the  original  tissue  becomes  itself  more  compact,
withovit  being  incrusted  by  a  foreign  substance,  we  recog-
nize a  new  modification,  in  which  impermeability  becomes
compatible  with  suppleness,  which  is  the  characteristic  of

the  serous,  or  (as  M.  Laurent  calls  it)  the   ,-    x
,      .         . .  .,        ^         r-      1  •  1    ■     i     •    i  Kystous  tissue.

kystous  tissue,  the  omce  or  which  is  to  inter-
pose between  the  various   mobile  organs,  and  to  contain
liquids,  both  circulating  and  stagnant.

The  second  order  of  transformations  ex-  Animal.
hibits  two  secondary  kinds  of  tissue  which  Muscular  and
distinguish  the  animal  organism,  and  which  nervous  tissues,
appear  at  about  the  same  degi-ee  of  the  scale — the  muscular
and  the  nervous  tissues.  In  each  there  is  an  anatomical
combination  of  the  fundamental  tissue  with  a  special
organic  element,  semi-solid  and  eminently  vital,  which,
having  long  gone  by  the  name  of  fibrine  in  the  first  case,
has  suggested  the  corresponding  name  of  neurine  (given
us  Tjy  M.  de  Blainville)  for  the  other.  Here  the  trans-
formation of  the  parent  tissue  is  so  complete,  that  it  would
be  difficult  to  establish,  and  yet  more  to  detect  it  in  the
higher  organisms ;  but  the  analogies  of  comparative  ana-
tomy leave  no  doubt,  and  only  make  us  wish  that  we  could
understand  with  more  precision  the  mode  of  anatomical
union  of  the  muscular  and  nervous  substances  with  the
cellular  tissue.

Passing    on    to    the    chief    subdivision    of   each   of   the


58  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

secondary  tissues,  the  first  consideration  is  of  the  general
position,  which  is  always  related  to  a  modification,  greater
or  smaller,  of  the  structure  itself.  Comparative  analysis
shows  us  that  in  the  case  of  both  the  muscular  and  the
nervous  system,  the  organization  of  the  tissue  becomes,
more  special  and  elevated,  exactly  in  proportion  to  its,
deeper  position  between  the  exterior  and  interior  surfaces
of  the  animal  envelope.  Thence  arises  the  rational  division
of  each  of  these  systems  into  superficial  and  profound.
This  distinction  is  more  especially  remarkable  with  regard
to  the  nervous  system,  arranged,  first,  in  the  form  of  fila-
ments, and  afterwards  that  of  ganglions,  with  or  without
external  apparatus.

This  is  the  family  of  tissues,  the  study  of  which  forms
the  basis  of  anatomical  analysis.  It  would  be  departing
from  my  object  to  inquire  into  the  laws  of  composition
under  which  the  ascent  is  made  from  this  jjrimary  study
to  that  of  porous  substances,  and  thence  on  to  the  theory
of  the  organs,  and  then  to  that  of  systems  of  organs,  which
would  lead  us  on  to  physiological  analysis.  I  have  ful-
filled the  aim  of  this  section  in  exhibiting  the  methodical
connection  of  the  four  degrees  of  anatomical  speculation,
about  which  no  real  uncertainty  exists.

.    .  .         Deeper  than  this  we  cannot  go.     The  last

the  inquiry  term  in  our  abstract,  intellectual  decomposi-
tion of  the  organism  is  the  idea  of  tissue.
To  attempt  the  passage  from  this  idea  to  that  of  molecule,
which  is  appropriate  to  inorganic  philosophy,  is  to  quit  the
positive  method  altogether :  and  those  who  do  so,  under
the  fancy  that  they  may  possibly  establish  a  notion  of
organic  molecules,  and  who  give  that  vain  search  the  name
of  transcendental  anatomy,  are  in  fact  imitating  the
chemists  in  a  region  into  which  Chemistry  must  enter  in
its  own  shape  where  admissable  at  all,  and  are  asserting
in  other  words  that,  as  bodies  are  formed  of  indivisible
molecules,  animals  are  formed  of  animalcules.  This  is
simply  an  atteni]>t,  in  the  old  spirit,  to  penetrate  into  the
nature  of  existences,  and  to  establish  an  imaginary  analogy
between  orders  of  phenomena  which  are  essentially  hetero-
geneous. It  is  little  creditable  to  the  scientific  spirit  of
our  time  that  this  aberration  should  call  for  exposure  and


STATE    OF  ANATOMICAL  SCIENCE.  59

rebute,  and  that  it  should  need  to  be  asserted  that  the
idea  of  tissue  is,  in  organic  speculation,  the  logical  equiva-
lent of  the  idea  of  molecule  in  inorganic  speculation.

We  here  find  ourselves  in  possession  of  a  sufficient  basis
of  anatomical  science,  while  we  need  yet  a  more  complete
and  profound  combination  of  the  ideas  of  comparative  and
textural  anatomy.  This  want  will  be  supplied  when  we
become  universally  familiarized  with  the  four  analytical
degrees,  complementary  to  each  other,  which  must  hence-
forth be  recognized  and  treated  as  the  basis  of  anatomical
speculation.


60


CHAPTER  III.

BIOTAXIC    PHILOSOPHY.

AFTER  the  statical  analysis  of  living  bodies,  there  must
be  a  hierarchical  co-ordination  of  all  known,  or  even
possible  organisms,  in  a  single  series,  which  must  serve  as
a  basis  for  the  whole  of  biological  speculations.  The
essential  principles  of  this  philosophical  operation  are  what
I  have  now  to  point  out.

Comparative  ^^  have  already  seen  that  it  is  the  dis-

anatomy  of  tinction  of  biological  science  to  have  de-
vegetables  and  veloped  the  theory  of  classifications,  which,
animals.  existing  in  all  sciences,  attains  its  perfection

when  applied  to  the  complex  attributes  of  the  animal
organisms.  In  all  ages,  the  vegetable  organism  was  the
direct  subject  of  biological  classification  ;  but  it  was  pur-
sued on  the  principles  furnished  by  the  consideration  of
animals,  whence  the  type  was  derived  which  guided  philo-
sophical speculation  in  the  case.  It  could  not  be  other-
wise, so  marked  and  incontestable  as  are  the  distinctions
among  animal  organisms  :  and  even  the  zoological  classifi-
cation of  Aristotle,  imperfect  as  it  is,  is  infinitely  superior
to  anything  which  could  then  have  been  attempted  with
regard  to  vegetables.  This  natural  original  classification
has  been  rather  rectified  than  changed  by  the  labours  of
modern  times ;  while  that  of  vegetables  has  met  with  an
opposite  fate.  As  a  fact,  the  first  successful  attempts  in
the  animal  region  long  preceded  the  establishment  of  the
true  principles  of  classification ;  whereas,  it  was  only  by  a
laborious  systematic  application  of  these  principles  that  it
has  been  possible,  even  within  a  century,  to  effect  any
rational  co-ordination  in  the  vegetable  region,  so  little
marked,  in  comparison,  are  the  distinctions  in  the  latter
case.  The  natural  result  was  that  the  animal  realm,  used
as  a  type,  became  more  and  more  attended  to,  till  the


VEGETABLE   AND   A>;iMAL   ANATOMY.  61

improvements  in  zoological  classification  have  gone  so  far
as  perhaps  to  lead  us  to  fear  that  the  vegetable  organism,
owing  to  its  great  simplicity,  can  never  become  subject  to
a  much  better  classification  than  that  in  which  it  was  left
in  the  last  century.  The  labours  of  the  reformers  of  that
time  are  very  far  indeed  from  having  been  useless ;  only,
what  they  undertook  for  the  vegetable  kingdom  has  turned
rather  to  the  profit  of  the  animal ; — an  inevitable  circum-
stance, since  the  property  which  rendered  the  animal  king-
dom the  natural  type  of  the  taxonomical  series  must  adapt
it  to  receive  all  the  improvements  arising  from  the  general
principles  of  the  theory.  The  character  of  the  theory  could
not  but  remain  incomplete,  however,  as  long  as  the  vege-
table classification  continued  to  be  regarded  as  the  chief
end  of  the  research ;  and  the  classification  became  rational
only  when  it  was  seen  that  the  vegetable  region  was  the
further  end  of  the  series,  in  which  the  most  complex
animal  organism  must  hold  the  first  place ;  an  order  of
arrangement  under  which  the  vegetable  organism  will  be
more  effectually  studied  than  it  ever  was  while  made  an
object  of  exclusive  investigation.  All  that  is  needed  is
that  naturalists  should  extend  to  the  whole  series  the
anatomical  and  physiological  considerations  which  have
been  attached  too  exclusively  to  animal  organisms ;  and
this  will  certainly  be  done  now  that  the  human  mind  is
fairly  established  at  the  true  point  of  view,  commanding
the  fundamental  theory  of  natural  classification.

These  prefatory  remarks  indicate  our  Animal  ana-
theme.  We  must  have  the  whole  series  in  tomy  our  sub-
view  ;  but  the  animal  region  must  be  our  J®^*-
immediate  and  explicit  subject, — both  as  furnishing  the
rational  bases  of  the  general  theory  of  classification,
and  as  exhibiting  its  most  eminent  and  perfect  appli-
cation.

The  subject  divides  itself  into  two  parts :         Division  of
the  formation  of  natui'al  groups,  and  their         the  natural
hierarchical   succession  ; — a   division   neces-         method,
sary  for  purposes  of  study,  though  the  two  parts  ultimately
and  logically  coalesce.

In  contemplating  the  groups,  the  process    ^  ,      ,  ^
is  to  class  together  these  species  which  pre-  '^      '■^^'


62  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

sent,  amidst  a  variety  of  differences,  such  essential  analo-
gies as  to  make  them  more  like  each  other  than  like
any  others, — without  attending,  for  the  present,  to  the
gradation  of  the  groups,  or  to  their  interior  distribution.
If  this  were  all,  the  classification  must  remain  either
doubtful  or  arbitrary,  as  the  circumscription  of  each  group
could  seldom  be  done  so  certainly  as  inevitably  to  include
or  exclude  nothing  that  might  not  belong  to  another  group  :
and  great  discordance  was  therefore  observed  in  the  early
division  into  orders,  families,  and  even  genera.  But  the
difficulty  disapi^ears  on  the  foundation  of  the  fundamental
hierarchy,  which  rigorously  assigns  its  place  to  each  species,
and  clearly  defines  the  ideas  of  genera,  families,  and  classes,
which  henceforth  indicate  different  kinds  of  decomposition,
effected  through  certain  modifications  of  the  principle
which  graduates  the  whole  series.  The  animal  realm,
especially  in  its  higher  parts,  is  as  yet  the  only  one  in
which  the  successive  degrees  have  admitted  a  fully  scientific
description.  The  rough  classification  into  natural  groups
was  an  indispensable  pi*eparation  for  the  marshalling  into
a  series  of  the  immeasurable  mass  of  materials  presented
by  nature.  The  gi'oups  being  thus  separated,  and  the
study  of  the  irinterior  distribution  postponed,  the  innumer-
able throng  of  organic  existences  became  manageable.
This  great  benefit  has  misled  botanists  into  the  supposition
that  the  formation  of  these  groups  is  the  most  scientific
part  of  the  natural  method, — otherwise  than  as  a  prelimi-
nary process.  The  i-egular  establishment  of  natural  fami-
lies offers,  no  doubt,  great  facilities  to  scientific  study,  l)y
enabling  a  single  case  to  serve  for  a  whole  group :  but  this
is  a  wholly  dilferent  matter  from  the  value  of  the  natural
method,  regarded  as  it  must  henceforth  be,  as  the  highest
rational  means  of  the  whole  study,  statical  and  dynamical,
of  the  system  of  living  bodies ;  and  the  great  condition  of
which  is  that  the  mere  position  assigned  to  each  body
makes  manifest  its  whole  anatomical  and  physiological
nature,  in  its  relation  to  the  bodies  which  rank  before
or  after  it.  These  properties  could  never  belong  to  any
.        mere  establishment   of   natural  families,  if

ofthem"       ""    t^^J   ^o^l^  ^'^    grouped   with   a  perfection
which  is  far  from  being  possible ;   for  the


THE   NATURAL   METHOD,  63

axbitrary  arrangement  of  the  families,  and  the  indetermi-
nate decomposition  of  each  of  them  into  species,  would
destroy  all  aptitude  for  comprehensive  anatomical  or
physiological  comparison,  and  open  the  way  for  that  search
after  partial  and  secondary  analogies  which  we  see  to  he  so
mischievous  in  the  study  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  at  this
day.

The  Natural  Method,  then,  is  philosophically  charac-
terized by  the  general  establishment  of  the  organic  hier-
archy, reduced,  if  desired,  to  the  rational  co-ordination  of
genera  and  even  of  families,  the  realization  of  which  is
found  only  in  the  animal  region  ;  and  there  only  in  an
initiatory  state.  And  the  co-ordination  proceeds  under
three  great  laws,  which  are  these  :  first,  that
the  animal  species  present  a  perpetually  in-  co-ordinatTon
creasing  complexity,  both  as  to  the  diversity,
the  multiplicity,  and  the  speciality  of  their  organic
elements,  and  as  to  the  composition  and  augmenting
variety  of  their  organs  and  systems  of  organs.  Secondly  :
that  this  order  corresponds  precisely,  in  a  dynamical  view,
with  a  lil'e  more  complex  and  more  active,  composed  of
functions  more  numerous,  more  varied,  and  better  defined.
Thirdly :  that  the  living  being  thus  l^ecomes,  as  a  necessary
consequence,  more  and  more  susceptible  of  modification,  at
the  same  time  that  he  exercises  an  action  on  the  external
world,  continually  more  profound  and  more  extensive.  It
is  the  union  of  these  three  laws  which  rigorovisly  fixes  the
philosophical  direction  of  the  biological  hierarchy,  each  one
dissipating  any  uncertainty  which  might  hang  about  the
other  two.  Hence  results  the  possibility  of  conceiving  of  a
final  arrangement  of  all  living  species  in  such  an  order
as  that  each  shall  be  always  inferior  to  all  that  precede
it,  and  superior  to  all  that  follow  it,  whatever  might
otherwise,  from  its  nature,  be  the  difficulty  of  ever
realizing  the  hierarchical  type  to  such  a  degree  of  pre-
cision as  this.

All  adequate  inquirers  are  now  agreed  upon  this  con-
ception as  the  starting-point  of  biological  speculation  ;  and
I  need  not  therefore  stop  to  take  notice  of  any  prior  con-
troversies, except  one,  which  is  noticeable  from  its  having
tended   to   illustrate  and   advance  the   principle   of    the


64  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

natural  method.  I  refer  to  the  discussion  raised  by
Question  of  Lamarck,  and  maintained,  though  in  an  im-
permanence  of  perfect  manner,  by  Cuvier,  with  regard  to
organic  species,  the  general  permanence  of  organic  species.
The  first  consideration  in  this  matter  is,  that  whatever  may
be  the  final  decision  of  this  great  biological  question,  it  can
in  no  way  affect  the  fundamental  existence  of  the  organic
hierarchy.  Instead  of  there  beiug,  as  Lamarck  conjectured,
no  real  zoological  series,  all  animal  organisms  being  iden-
tical, and  their  characteristics  due  to  external  circum-
stances, we  shall  see,  by  a  closer  examination,  that  the
hypothesis  merely  presents  the  series  under  a  new  aspect,
which  itself  renders  the  existence  of  the  scale  more  clear
and  unquestionable  than  before;  for  the  whole  zoological
series  would  then  become,  in  fact  and  in  sj^eculation,  per-
fectly analogous  to  the  development  of  the  individual ;  at
least,  in  its  ascending  period.  There  would  be  simply
a  long  determinate  succession  of  organic  states,  gradually
deduced  from  each  other  in  the  course  of  ages  by  transfor-
mations of  growing  complexity,  the  order  of  which,  neces-
sarily linear,  would  be  precisely  comparable  to  that  of  the
consecutive  metamorphoses  of  hexapod  insects,  only  much
more  extended.  In  brief,  the  progressive  course  of  the
animal  organism,  which  is  now  only  a  convenient  abstrac-
tion, adapted  to  facilitate  thought  by  abridging  discourse,
would  thus  be  converted  into  a  real  natural  law.  This
controversy,  then,  in  which  Lamarck  showed  by  far  the
clearer  and  profounder  conception  of  the  organic  hierarchy,
while  Cuvier,  without  denying,  often  misconceived  it,  leaves,
in  fact,  wholly  untouched  the  theory  of  the  biological  series,
which  is  quite  independent  of  all  opinion  about  the  perma-
nence or  variation  of  living  species.

The  only  attribute  of  this  series  which  could  be  affected
by  this  controversy  is  the  continuity  or  discontinuity  of  the
organic  progression :  for,  if  we  admit  Lamarck's  hypo-
thesis, in  which  the  diiferent  organic  states  succeed  each
other  slowly  by  imperceptible  transitions,  the  ascending
series  must  evidently  be  conceived  of  as  rigorously  con-
tinuous; whereas,  if  we  admit  the  stability  of  living
species,  we  must  lay  down  as  a  fundamental  principle  the
discontinuousness  of  the  series,  without  pretending,  either,  to


Lamarck's  hypothesis.  65

limit,  a,  'priori,  in  any  way  the  small  elementary  intervals.
This  is  the  question  to  be  considered  ;  and  thus  restricted,
the  discussion  is  of  extreme  importance  to  the  general  ad-
vancement of  the  Natural  Method,  which  will  be,  in  fact,
much  more  clearly  described  if  we  are  able  to  regard  the
species  as  essentially  stable,  and  the  organic  series  there-
fore as  composed  of  distinctly  separate  terms,  even  at  its
highest  stages  of  development ;  for  the  idea  of  species,
which  is  the  principal  biotaxic  unity,  would  no  longer  allow
any  scientific  definition,  if  we  must  admit  the  indefinite
transformation  of  different  species  into  each  other,  under
the  sufficiently-prolonged  influence  of  circumstances  suffi-
ciently intense.  However  certain  might  be  the  existence
of  the  biological  hierarchy,  we  should  have  almost  insur-
mountable difficulty  in  realizing  it ;  and  this  proves  to  us
the  high  philosoj^hical  interest  which  belongs  to  this  great
question.

Lamarck's  reasoning  rested  on  the  combination  of  these
two  incontestable  but  ill-described  principles :  first,  the
aptitude  of  any  organism  (and  especially  an  animal
organism)  to  be  modified  to  a  conformity  to  the  exterior
circumstances  in  which  it  is  placed,  and  which  solicit  the
predominant  exercise  of  some  special  organ,  corresponding-
to  some  faculty  become  requisite  ;  and  secondly,  the  ten-
dency of  direct  and  individual  modifications  to  become
fixed  in  races  by  hereditary  transmission,  so  that  they  may
increase  in  each  new  generation,  if  the  environment  remains
unaltered.  It  is  evident  that  if  this  double  j^roperty  is
admitted  without  restriction,  all  organisms  may  be  re-
garded as  having  been  produced  by  each  other,  if  we  only
dispose  the  environment  with  that  freedom  and  prodi-
gality so  easy  to  the  artless  imagination  of  Lamarck.
The  falseness  of  this  hypothesis  is  now  so  fully  admitted
by  naturalists  that  I  need  only  briefly  indicate  where  its
vice  resides.

We  need  not  stop  to  object  to  the  immeasurable  time
required  for  each  system  of  circumstances  to  effect  such  an
organic  transformation  ;  nor  yet  to  expose  the  futility  of
imagining  organic  environments,  purely  ideal,  which  are
out  of  all  analogy  with  existing  media.  We  may  pass  on
to  the  consideration  that  the  conjecture  rests  on  a  deeply

II.  r


66  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

erroneous  notion  of  the  nature  of  the  living  organism.
The  organism  and  the  medium  must  do"ubtless  be  mutually
related  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  either  of  them  pro-
duces the  other.  The  question  is  simply  of  an  equilibrium
between  two  heterogeneous  and  independent  powers.  If
all  possible  organisms  had  been  placed  in  all  possible
media,  for  a  suitable  time,  the  greater  number  of  them
would  necessarily  disappear,  leaving  those  only  which  were
accordant  with  the  laws  of  the  fundamental  equilibrium ;
and  it  is  probably  by  a  series  of  eliminations  like  this  that
a  biological  harmony  has  become  gradually  established  on
our  globe,  where  we  see  such  a  process  now  for  ever  going
on.  But  the  whole  conception  would  be  overthrown  at
once  if  the  organism  could  be  supposed  capable  of  modifi-
cation, ad  ivjinitum,  by  the  influence  of  the  medium,
without  having  any  proper  and  indestructible  energy  of
its  own.

Though  the  solicitation  of  external  circumstances  cer-
tainly does  change  the  primitive  organization  by  develop-
ing it  in  some  particular  direction,  the  limits  of  the
alteration  are  very  narrow :  so  that,  instead  of  wants
creating  faculties,  as  Lamarck  would  have  us  believe,  those
wants  merely  develop  the  powers  to  a  very  inconsiderable
degree,  and  could  have  no  influence  at  all  without  a
primitive  tendency  to  act  uj^on.  The  disappearance  of  the
superior  races  of  animals  before  the  encroachments  of  Man
shows  how  limited  is  the  power  of  the  organism  to  adapt
itself  to  an  altered  environment ;  even  the  human  barba-
rian gives  way  to  civilized  Man :  and  yet  the  power  of
adaptation  is  known  to  be  greatest  in  the  highest
organisms,  whereas  the  hypothesis  of  Lamarck  would
require  the  fact  to  be  the  other  way.  In  a  statical  view,
too,  this  conception  would  compel  us  to  regard  the  intro-
ductory animal  as  containing,  at  least  in  a  rudimentary
state,  not  only  all  the  tissues,  (which  might  be  admissible,
reducible  as  they  are  to  the  cellular  tissue,)  but  all  the
organs  and  systems  of  organs ;  which  is  incompatible  with
anatomical  comparison.  Thus,  in  every  view  is  Lamarck's
conception  condemned :  and  it  even  tends  to  destroy  the
philosophical  balance  between  the  two  fundamental  ideas
of  organization  and  life,  by  leading  us  to  sup[>ose  most  life


cuvier's  argument.  67

where  there  is  least  organization.  The  lesson  that  we  may
learu  from  it  is  to  study  more  effectually  the  limits  within
which,  in  each  case,  the  medium  may  modify  the  organism,
about  which  a  very  great  deal  remains  to  be  learned :  and
meantime,  there  can  scarcely  be  a  doubt,  especially  after
the  luminous  exposition  of  Cuvier,  that  species  remain
essentially  fixed  through  all  exterior  variations  compatible
Avith  their  existence.

Cuvier's  argument  rests  upon  two  chief  considerations,
complementary  to  each  other; — the  permanence  of  the
most  ancient  loiown  species  ;  and  the  resistance  of  existing
species  to  the  most  powerful  modifying  forces :  so  that,
first,  the  number  of  sjjecies  does  not  diminish  ;  and  next,
it  does  not  increase.  We  go  back  for  evidence  to  the
descriptions  of  Aristotle,  twenty  centuries  ago :  we  find
fossil  species,  identical  with  those  before  our  eyes  :  and  we
observe  in  the  oldest  mummies  even  the  siinple  secondary
differences  which  now  distinguish  the  races  of  men.  And,
as  to  the  second  view,  we  derive  evidence  from  an  exact
analysis  of  the  effects  of  domestication  on  races  of  animals
and  vegetables.  Human  intervention,  affording,  as  it  does,
the  most  favourable  case  for  alteration  of  the  organism,
has  done  nothing  more,  even  when  combined  with  change
of  locality,  than  alter  some  of  the  qualities,  without  touch-
ing any  of  the  essential  characters  of  any  species ;  no  one
of  which  has  ever  been  transformed  into  any  other.  No
modification  of  race,  nor  any  influences  of  the  social  state,
have  ever  varied  the  fundamental  and  strongly  marked
nature  of  the  human  species.  Thus,  without  straying  into
any  useless  speculations  about  the  origin  of  the  different
organisms,  we  rest  upon  the  great  natural  law  that  living
species  tend  to  perpetuate  themselves  indefinitely,  with  the
same  chief  characteristics,  through  any  exterior  changes
compatible  with  their  existence.  In  non-essentials  the
species  is  modified  within  certain  limits,  beyond  which  it
is  not  modified  but  destroyed.  To  know  thus  much  is
good :  but  we  must  remember  that  it  teaches  us  nothing,
with  any  completeness,  of  the  kind  of  influence  exercised
by  the  medium  on  the  organism.  The  rational  theory  of
this  action  remains  to  be  formed  :  and  the  laying  down  the
question  was  the  great  result  of  the  Lamarck  controversy.


68  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

which  thus  rendered  an  eminent  service  to  the  j^rogress  of
sound  biological  philosophy.

We  may  now  proceed  on  the  authorized  conception  that
the  great  biological  series  is  necessarily  discontinuous.
The  transitions  may  ultimately  become  more  gradual,  by
the  discovery  of  intermediate  organisms,  and  by  a  better
directed  study  of  those  already  known :  but  the  stability
of  species  makes  it  certain  that  the  series  will  always  be
composed  of  clearly  distinct  terms  sepai'ated  by  impractic-
able intervals.  It  now  appears  that  the  preceding  exami-
nation was  no  needless  digression,  but  an  inquiry  necessary
to  establish,  in  the  hierarchy  of  living  bodies,  this  cha-
racteristic projDerty,  so  directly  involved  in  the  rational
establishment  of  the  hierarchy  itself.

Two  loo'ical  Having  surveyed  the  two  great  conceptions

conditions  of  of  Natural  Groups,  and  the  biological  series,
the  study.  which  together  constitute  what  is  called  the

Natural  Method,  we  must  now  notice  two  great  logical
conditions  of  the  study.  The  first,  or  primordial,  is  the
principle  of  the  subordination  of  characters :  the  other,
the  final,  prescribes  the  translation  of  the  interior  cha-
racters into  exterior,  which,  in  fact,  results  from  a  radical
investigation  of  the  same  principle.

Subordination  From  the  earliest  use  of  the  natural
of  characteris-  method,  even  befoi'e  the  investigation  had
*^^^-  passed   on    from  the  natural   groups  to  the

series  of  them,  it  was  seen  that  the  taxonomic  characters
must  be  not  only  numbered  but  weighed,  according  to  the
rules  of  a  certain  fundamental  subordination  which  must
exist  among  them.  The  only  subordination  which  is
strictly  scientific,  and  free  from  all  arbitrary  intermixture,
is  that  which  results  from  a  comparative  analysis  of  the
different  organisms:  this  analysis  is  of  recent  date,  and
even  yet  is  adequately  applied  only  in  the  animal  region  ;
and  thus  the  subordination  was  no  more  than  barely  con-
ceived of  before  the  institution  of  comparative  anatomy,
and  the  weighing  of  attributes  is  closely  connected  with
the  conception  of  the  organic  hierarchy.  The  subordina-
tion of  taxonomic  characters  is  effected  by  measuring  their
i-espective  importance  according  to  the  relation  of  the  cor-
responding organs  to  the  j)henomena  which  distinguish  the


LOGICAL   CONDITIONS.  69

species  under  study, — the  phenomena  becoming  more
special  as  we  descend  to  smaller  subdivisions.  In  short,
here  as  elsewhere,  the  philosophical  task  is  to  establish  a
trvie  harmony  between  statical  conditions  and  dynamical
properties  ;  between  ideas  of  life  and  ideas  of  organization,
which  should  never  be  se^^arated  in  our  scientific  studies
but  in  order  to  their  ulterior  combination.  Thus  our  aim,
sometimes  baffled  but  always  hopeful,  is  to  subordinate  the
taxonomic  characters  to  each  other,  without  the  admission
of  anything  arbitrary  into  any  arrangement  of  importance.
We  thus  meet  with  gaps  in  our  schedules  which  we  should
avoid,  or  be  insensible  to,  under  an  arbitrary  system  ;  but
we  may  subdue  our  natural  impatience  under  this  imper-
fection by  accustoming  our  mind  to  regard  rational  classifi-
cation as  a  true  science,  continually  progressive,  always
perfectible,  and  therefore  always  more  or  less  imperfect,
like  all  positive  science.

In  conducting  the  jirocess  of  comparison,  Procedure,  in
the  characters  viust  be  admitted  without  use  of  the  Na-
restriction,  in  virtue  of  their  positive  tural  Method,
rationality,  however  iiiconvenient  to  manage  and  difficult
to  verify.  This  is  the  foundation  of  the  proposed  classifi-
cation. The  next  step  is  to  discard  from  the  collection
those  whose  verification  would  be  too  difficult,  substituting
for  them  some  customary  equivalents.  Without  this
second  process,  which  is  as  yet  inadequately  appreciated,
the  passage  from  the  abstract  to  the  concrete  would  be  in-
extricably embarrassed.  The  anatomist  and  physiologist
may  be  satisfied  with  a  definition  of  groups  which  will  not
suit  the  zoologist,  and  still  less  the  naturalist.  The  kind
of  transformations  required  is  easily  specified.  First,  it  is
clear  how  important  it  is  to  discard  the  characters  which
are  not  permanent,  and  those  which  do  not  belong  to  the
various  natural  modifications  of  the  species  under  study.
They  can  be  admitted  only  as  provisional  attributes  till
true  equivalents,  permanent  and  common,  have  been  dis-
covered. But  the  very  natuie  of  the  problem  indicates
that  the  aim  of  the  chief  substitution  should  be  to  replace
all  the  interior  characters  by  exterior  :  and  it  is  this  which
constitutes  the  main  difficulty,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the
highest  perfection  of  this  final  operation.     When  such  a


70  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

condition  is  fulfilled,  on  the  basis  of  a  rational  primitive
classification,  the  natural  method  is  irrevocably  constituted,
in  the  plenitude  of  its  various  essential  properties,  as  we
now  find  it  in  the  case  of  the  animal  kingdom.

This  transformation  aj^pears  to  be  necessarily  j^ossible ;
for,  as  a  chief  characteristic  of  animality  is  action  upon
the  external  world  and  corresponding  reaction,  the  most
important  primitive  phenomena  of  animal  life  must  take
place  at  the  surface  of  separation  between  the  organism
and  its  environment ;  and  considerations  with  regard  to
this  envelope,  its  form,  consistence,  etc.,  naturally  furnish
the  principal  distinctions  of  the  different  animal  organiza-
tions. The  interior  organs,  which  have  no  direct  and
continuous  relation  to  the  medium,  will  always  be  of  the
highest  importance  among  vegetative  j^li^nomena,  the
primitive  and  uniform  basis  of  all  life :  but  they  are  of
secondary  consequence  in  considering  the  degrees  of  ani-
mality ;  so  that  the  interior  part  of  the  animal  envelope,
by  which  various  materials  for  use  are  elaborated,  is  less
important,  in  a  taxonomic  point  of  view,  than  the  exterior
part,  which  is  the  seat  of  the  most  characteristic  phe-
nomenon. Accordingly,  the  transformation  of  interior
into  exterior  zoological  characters  is  not  merely  an  in-
genious and  indispensable  artifice,  but  a  simple  return
from  the  distraction  of  an  overwhelming  mass  of  facts  to  a
direct  philosophical  course  of  investigation.  When  there-
fore we  see  a  recourse  to  inferior  characteristics  in  the
study  of  the  animal  series,  we  must  recognize  the  truth
that  not  only  is  the  classification  as  yet  unfinished,  but
that  the  oj)eration  is  imjjerfectly  conceived  of ;  that  the
inquirer  has  not  ascended,  through  sound  biological
analysis,  to  the  original  source  of  analogies  empii'ically
discovered.

After   thus   ascertaining    the   nature    of    the    Natural
Method,  we  must,  before  quitting  the  subject,  glance  at
the  mode  of  its  application   in   the   co-ordination   of  the
biological  series,  condensed  into  its  principal  masses.
Division  of  The  most  general  division  of  the  organic

aiiiiiiai  and  world  is  into  the  animal  and  vegetable  king-
vej^etable  doms ;  a  division  which  remains  as  an  instance

Kingdoms.  ^^  thorough  discontinuity,   in    spite    of   all


THE  ANIMAL  AMD  VEGETABLE  KINGDOMS.     71

efforts  to  represent  it  as  an  artificial  arrangement.  The
deeper  we  go  in  tlae  study  of  the  inferior  animals,  the
more  plainly  we  perceive  that  locomotion,  partial  at  least,
and  a  con-esponding  degree  of  general  sensibility,  are  the
predominant  and  uniform  characters  of  the  entire  animal
series.  These  two  attributes  are  even  more  universal  in
the  animal  kingdom  than  the  existence  of  a  digestive  canal,
which  is  commonly  regarded  as  its  chief  exclusive  charac-
teristic ;  a  predominance  which  would  not  have  been
assigned  to  this  attribute  of  the  organic  life  but  for  its
being  an  inevitable  consequence,  and  therefore  an  i;nques-
tionable  test,  of  the  double  property  of  locomotion  and
sensibility  ;  to  which  we  must,  in  consequence,  assign  the
first  place.  Such  a  transformation,  however,  I'elates  only
to  moveable  animals ;  so  that  for  the  rest,  we  should  have
still  to  seek  some  other  yet  more  general  indication  of
universal  animality,  if  we  must  despair  of  finally  dis-
covering in  it  every  direct  anatomical  condition  of  these
two  animal  properties.  As  for  the  case  of  certain  gyrating
plants  which  appear  to  manifest  some  signs  of  these  pro-
perties, our  imperfect  analysis  of  their  motions  discloses
no  true  character  of  animality,  since  we  can  discover  no
constant  and  immediate  relation  with  either  exterior  im-
pressions or  the  mode  of  alimentation.

Next  to  the  division  of  the  two  organic  Hierarcliy  of
kingdoms  comes  the  question  of  the  rational  the  animal
hierarchy  of  the  animal  kingdom,  by  itself.  kingdom.
In  the  place  of  tlie  irrational  considerations,  so  much  relied
on  formerly,  of  abode,  mode  of  nutrition,  etc.,  we  now  rest
upon  tlie  supreme  consideration  of  the  greater  or  less  com-
plexity of  the  organism,  of  its  relative  perfection,  speciality,
elevation ;  in  short,  of  the  degree  of  animal  dignity,  as
M.  Jussieu  has  well  expressed  it.  The  next  preparatory
step  was  in  the  anatomical  field,  to  determine  the  suc-
cessive degrees  of  animality  proper  to  the  different  organs.
The  combination  of  the  two  great  inquiries, — into  the
bases  of  the  zoological  hierarchy  as  residing  in  the  organi-
zation, and  into  the  rank  of  the  organs  in  their  relation
to  life, — has  furnished,  since  the  beginning  of  this  century,
the  first  direct  and  general  sketch  of  a  definitive  gradua-
tion of  the  animal  kingdom.     Henceforth,  it  became  ad-


72  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY,

mitted  that,  as  the  nervous  system  constitutes  the  most
animal  of  the  anatomical  elements,  the  classification  must
be  directed  by  it ;  other  organs,  and,  yet  more,  inorganic
conditions,  being  recurred  to  only  on  the  failure  of  the
chief  in  the  most  special  subdivisions  ;  and  the  substitutes
being  employed  according  to  their  decreasing  animality.
Whatever  share  other  zoologists  may  have  contributed  by
their  labours  to  the  formation  of  this  theory,  it  is  to
M.  de  Blainville  that  the  credit  of  it  especially  belongs :
and  it  is  by  his  classification  that  we  must  proceed  in
estimating  the  application  of  the  Natural  Method  to  the
direct  construction  of  the  true  animal  hierarchy.
.      .  .  The    happiest    innovation    vphich    distin-

svmmetrv  guishes    this    zoological    system    is   that    it

attributes  a  high  taxonomic  importance  to
the  general  form  of  the  animal  envelope,  which  had  l^efore
been  neglected  by  naturalists,  and  which  offers  the  most
striking  feature,  in  regard  to  description,  in  the  symmetry
which  is  the  prevailing  character  of  the  animal  organism.
We  must  here  reserve  the  case  of  the  non-symmetrical
animals ;  and  this  shows  that  the  idea  is  insufficiently
analysed  as  yet.  The  principle  is  perhaps  saved,  or  the
difficulty  distanced,  by  the  fact  that  in  these  animals  no
trace  can  be  discovered  of  a  nervous  system  ;  but  there  is
a  sufficient  want  of  precision  and  clearness  to  mark  this  as
a  case  reserved  for  further  analysis.  We  shall  not  wonder
at  this  imperfection  if  we  remember  how  erroneous  were
the  notions,  no  further  back  than  two  generations  ago,
about  very  superior  orders  of  animals, — the  whole  of  the
radiated,  a  part  of  the  mollusks,  and  even  of  the  lower
ai'ticulated  animals.  Among  the  orders  thus  restricted,
there  are  two  kinds  of  symmetry,  the  most  perfect  of  which
relates  to  a  plane,  and  the  other  to  a  point,  or  rather  to
an  axis :  hence  the  further  classification  of  animals  into
the  duplicate  and  the  radiated.  It  is  impossible  to  admire
too  much  the  exactness  with  which  an  attribute,  apparently
so  unim])ortant,  corresponds  with  the  aggregate  of  the
higliest  biological  comjmrisons,  which  are  all  found  spon-
taneously converging  towards  this  simple  and  luminous
distinction.  Still  it  remains  empirical  in  its  ])reponder-
ance ;    and  we  yet  need  a  clear  and  rational  explanation.


ANIMAL    HIERAECHY.  73

both  physiological  and  anatomical,  of  the  extreme  neces-
sary inferiority  of  the  radiated  to  the  duplicate  animals,
which,  by  their  natvire,  must  be  nearer  to  Man,  the  funda-
mental unity  in  zoology.

Taking  the  duplicate  animals,  or  artiozoa-  Division  of
ries,  their  oi'der  is  again  divided  according  duplicate
to  the  consistence  of  the  envelope, — whether  animals,
it  is  hard  or  soft, — and  therefore  more  or  less  fit  for  loco-
motion. This  is,  in  fact,  a  protraction  of  the  last  considera-
tion, as  symmetry  must  be  more  marked  in  the  case  of
a  hard  than  of  a  soft  covering.  The  two  great  attributes
of  animality, — locomotion  and  sensation, — establish  pro-
found and  unquestionable  differences,  anatomical  and
physiological,  between  these  two  cases  ;  and  we  may  easily
connect  them  rationally  with  this  primitive  distinction,
and  perceive  how  they  exhibit  inarticulated  animals  as
necessarily  inferior  to  the  articulated.

The  articulated  animals  must  next  be  dis-  Division  of
tinguished  into  two  gi-eat  classes,  according  articulated
to  the  mode  of  articulation ;  whether  under  animals,
the  envelope,  by  a  bony  skeleton,  or  a  cartilaginous  one,
in  the  lowest  degrees  ;  or  whether  the  articulation  is  ex-
ternal, by  the  consolidation  of  certain  horny  parts  of  the
envelope,  alternating  with  the  soft  parts.  The  inferiority
of  this  latter  organization,  especially  with  regard  to  the
high  functions  of  the  nervous  system,  must  be  seen  at  a
glance.  It  is  observable  that  the  more  imperfect  develop-
ment of  this  eminently  animal  system  always  coincides
with  a  fundamental  difference  in  the  position  of  its  central
part,  whi<h  is  always  above  the  digestive  canal  in  verte-
brated  animals,  and  below  it  in  those  Avhicli  have  an
external  articulation.

The  rational  hierarchy  of  the  chief  organisms  in  the
upper  part  of  the  animal  series  is,  then,  composed  of  the
three  great  classes ; — the  vertebrated  animals,  those  Avhich
are  articulated  externally,  and  the  moUusks  ;  or,  in  scien-
tific language,  the  osteozoaries,  the  entomozoaries,  and  the
malacozoaries.

Griancing,    finally,   at  the  division   of  the     Consideration
first  of  these  classes,  I  may  remark  that  all     of  the  enve-
former    descriptions    and    definitions    may     ^^pe.


74  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

merge  in  the  consideration  of  the  enveloiDe.  It  will  be
enough  here  to  refer  merely  to  the  secondary  view  of  the
envelope, — that  of  the  inorganic  productions  which  sepa-
rate it  from  its  environment.  M.  de  Blainville  has  shown
us  how  the  descent  from  Man,  through  all  the  niammifera,
the  birds,  reptiles,  amphibious  animals,  and  fishes,  is
faithfully  represented  by  the  consideration  of  a  cutaneous
surface  furnished  with  hair,  feathers,  scales,  or  left  bare.
The  same  determining  importance  of  the  envelope  is  per-
ceived in  the  next  order  of  animals,  in  which  the  descent
is  measured  by  the  increasing  number  of  pairs  of  loco-
motive appendages,  from  the  hexapods  to  the  myriapods,
and  even  to  the  apodes,  which  are  at  the  lower  extremity.

It  is  not  consistent  with  the  object  of  this  Work  to  go
further  into  a  description  of  the  animal  hierarchy.  My  aim
in  giving  the  above  details  has  been  to  fix  the  reader's
attention  on  my  preliminary  recommendation  to  study  the
present  co-ordination  of  the  animal  kingdom  as  an  indis-
pensable conci'ete  exj^lanation  of  the  abstract  conceptions
which  I  had  offered,  in  illustration  of  the  natural  method.
We  must  pass  by,  therefore,  all  speculations  and  studies
which  belong  to  zoological  philoso])hy,  and  merely  observe
that  there  is  one  portion  of  the  fundamental  system  which
remains  to  be  constituted,  and  the  general  pi'inciples  of
which  are  as  yet  only  vaguely  perceived ; — I  mean  the
rational  distribution  of  the  species  of  each  natural  genus.
This  extreme  and  delicate  application  of  the  taxonomic
theory  would  have  been  inopportune  at  an  earlier  stage  of
the  development  of  the  science:  but  the  time  has  arrived
for  it  to  be  undertaken  now.

Natural  me-  ^^  cannot  but  see  that  the  natural  method

thod  applied  does  not  admit  of  anything  like  the  perfection
to  the  Vege-  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  that  it  exhibits  in
table  kingdom.  ^^^^^  the  lower  stages  of  the  animal.  The
families  may  be  regarded  as  established,  though  in  an
empirical  way ;  but  their  natural  co-ordination  remains
almost  entirely  arbitrary,  for  want  of  a  hierarchical  prin-
ciple by  which  to  subordinate  them  rationally.  The  idea
T-w-fY-  14- .  f  of  animality  yields  a  succession  of  degrees,
co-ordination  deeply  marked,  so  as  to  supply  the  basis  of
a  true  animal  hierarchy  :  but  there  is  nothing


ISO   VEGETABLE    HIERARCHY,  75

of  the  kind  in  our  conception  of  vegetable  existence.  The
intensity  in  this  region  is  not  always  equal ;  but  the
character  of  vegetable  life  is  homogeneous ; — it  is  always
assimilation  and  the  contrary,  continuous,  and  issuing  in  a
necessary  reproduction.  The  mere  differences  of  intensity
in  such  phenomena  cannot  constitute  a  true  vegetable  scale,
analogous  to  the  animal ;  and  the  less  because  the  gradation
is  owing  at  least  as  much  to  the  j^reponderant  influence  of
external  circumstances  as  to  the  characteristic  organization
of  each  vegetable.  Thus,  we  have  here  no  sufficient  rational
basis  for  a  hierarchical  comparison.  A  second  obstacle
ought  to  be  noticed, — serious  enough,  though  of  less  im-
portance than  the  first ; — that  each  vegetable  is  usually  an
agglomeration  of  distinct  and  independent  beings.  The
case  does  not  resemble  that  of  the  polypus  formation.  In
the  compound  structure  of  the  lowest  animal  orders  a  scien-
tific definition  is  still  possible.  There  is  a  vital  basis  common
to  all  the  animal  structures  which  are  otherwise  indepen-
dent of  each  other  :  but  in  the  vegetable  case,  it  is  a  mere
agglomeration,  such  as  we  can  often  produce  by  grafting,
and  where  the  only  common  elements  are  inorganic  parts,
aiding  a  mechanical  consolidation.  There  is  no  saying,  in
the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  how  far  such  a  system
may  extend,  without  being  limited  by  any  organic  condition,
as  it  seems  to  depend  on  purely  physical  and  chemical  con-
ditions, in  combination  with  exterior  circumstances.  Faintly
marked  as  the  original  organic  diversity  is  by  nature,  it  is
evident  how  all  rational  subordination  of  the  vegetable
families  in  a  common  hierarchy  is  impeded  by  the  coalescent
tendency  just  noticed.

The  princij^al  division  which  is  the  starting-point  of  M.
Jussieu's  classification  is  the  only  beginning  of  a  true  co-
ordination in  the  vegetable  kingdom.  It  consists  in  dis-
tinguishing the  vegetables  by  the  presence  or  the  absence
of  seminal  leaves ;  and  when  they  are  present,  by  their
having  several  or  only  one.  For  the  successive  passage  from
those  which  have  several  to  those  that  have  none  may  be
regarded  as  a  continuous  descent,  like  that  of  the  biological
series,  though  less  marked.  Such  a  view  has  been  verified
by  the  investigation  of  the  organs  of  nutrition,  according
to  the  discovery  of  Desfontaines, — as  yet  the  only  eminent


76  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

example  of  a  large  and  happy  application  of  comparative
anatomy  to  the  vegetable  organism.  By  this  concurrence
of  the  two  modes  of  comparison, — of  the  reproductive  and
nutritive  arrangements, — this  proposition  has  taken  its
rank  among  the  most  eminent  theorems  of  natural  philo-
sophy. But  this  beginning  of  a  hierarchy  remains  obviously
insufficient, — the  numerous  families  in  each  of  the  three
divisions  remaining  under  a  purely  arbitrary  arrangement,
which  we  can  hardly  hope  to  convert  into  a  rational  one.
The  interior  distribution  of  species,  and  even  of  genera,
within  each  family  must  be  radically  imperfect,  as  the
requisite  taxonomical  principles  cannot  be  applied  to  their
ari'angement  till  the  difficulty  of  the  co-ordination  of  the
families, — a  difficulty  much  less,  but  as  yet  instirmountable,
— ^has  been  overcome.  The  Natural  Method  has,  therefore,
as  yet  yielded  no  other  result,  as  to  the  vegetable  kingdom,
than  the  more  or  less  empirical  establishment  of  families
and  genera.  We  cannot  be  surprised  that  it  has  not  yet
excluded  the  use  of  artificial  methods,  and  above  all  that
of  Linnseus, — true  as  it  is  that,  up  to  our  time,  the  co-
ordination of  the  vegetable  kingdom  was  the  field  for  the
application  of  the  Natural  Method.  It  should  ever  be
remembered,  however,  that  the  Natural  Method  is  not
merely  a  means  of  classification,  but  an  important  system
of  real  knowledge  as  to  the  true  relations  of  existing  beings  :
so  that  even  if  it  should  be  disused  for  the  purposes  of
descriptive  botany,  it  would  not  the  less  be  of  high  value
for  the  study  of  plants,  the  comparative  results  of  which
would  be  fixed  and  combined  by  it.  In  the  present  con-
dition and  prospects  of  the  science,  as  to  the  establishment
of  a  vegetable  series,  we  must  take  the  whole  vegetable
kingdom  together  as  the  last  term  of  the  great  biological
series, — as  the  last  of  the  small  number  of  essential  modes
of  organization  which  (when  the  subdivisions  are  disre-
garded) are  markedly  separated  from  each  other  in  the
classification  that  gives  us  the  logical  command  of  the
study  of  living  beings.  Applied  first  to  the  vegetable  king-
dom, the  natural  method  is  now  seen  to  be  the  means  by
which  the  animal  realm,  the  type  of  all  our  knowledge  of
organic  life,  is  to  be  perfected.  To  whatever  orders  of
phenomena  natural  classification  is  to  be  applied,  here  its


MERITS  OF  THE  NATURAL  METHOD.        l^i

theory  must  first  be  studied ;  and  hence  it  is  that  biological
science  bears  so  important  a  part  in  the  advancement  of
the  whole  of  the  positive  method.  It  is  much  that  a  con-
siderable progress  has  been  made  in  ranging,  in  a  due
order  of  dignity,  the  immense  series  of  living  beings,  from
Man  to  the  simplest  plant :  but,  moreover,  this  theory  of
classification  is  an  indispensable  element  of  the  whole
positive  method ;  an  element  which  could  not  have  been
developed  in  any  other  way,  nor  even  otherwise  appreciated.


78


CHAPTER  IV.

OEGANIC    OR    VEGETATIVE   LIFE.

Condition  of  A  A/-^  have  to  pass  on  to  dynamical  biology,
Dynamical  *  *      wliicli  is  very  far  indeed  from  having

Biology.  attained  the  clearness  and  certainty  of  the

statical  department  of  the  science.  Important  as  are  the
physiological  researches  of  recent  times,  they  are  only  pre-
liminary attempts,  which  must  be  soundly  systematized
before  they  can  constitute  a  true  dynamical  biology.  The
minds  which  are  devoted  to  mathematical,  astronomical,
and  physical  studies  ai'e  not  of  a  different  make  from  those
of  physiologists ;  and  the  sobriety  of  the  former  classes,
and  the  extravagance  of  the  latter,  must  be  ascribed  to  the
definite  constitution  of  the  simpler  sciences  and  the  chaotic
state  of  physiology.  The  melancholy  condition  of  this  last
is  doixbtless  owing  in  part  to  the  vicious  education  of  those
who  cultivate  it,  and  who  go  straight  to  the  study  of  the
most  complex  phenomena  without  having  prepared  their
understandings  by  the  practice  of  the  most  simple  and
positive  speculation :  but  I  consider  the  prevalent  license
as  due  yet  more  to  the  indeterminate  condition  of  the  spirit
of  physiological  science.  In  fact,  the  two  disadvantages
are  one  ;  for  if  the  true  character  of  the  science  were  estab-
lished, the  prepai'atory  education  would  immediately  be
rectified.

This  infantine  state  of  physiology  prescribes  the  method
of  treating  it  here.  I  cannot  proceed,  as  in  statical  biology,
to  an  analytical  estimate  of  established  conceptions.  I  can
only  examine,  in  pure  physiology,  the  notions  of  method ;
that  is,  the  mode  of  organization  of  the  researches  neces-
sary to  the  ascertainment  of  the  laws  of  vital  phenomena.
The  progress  of  biological  philosophy  depends  on  the  dis-
tinct and  rational  institi;tion  of  physiological  questions,
and  not  on  attempts,  which  must  be  premature,  to  resolve


VITAL   PHENOMENA.  79

them.  Conceptions  relating  to  method  are  always  impor-
tant in  proportion  to  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena  in
view :  therefore  are  they  especially  valuable  in  the  case  of
vital  phenomena ;  and  above  all,  while  the  science  is  in  a
nascent  state.

Though  all  vital  phenomena  are  truly  in-  Vital  pheno-
terconnected,  we  must,  as  usual,  decompose  mena :  their
them,  for  purposes  of  speculative  study,  into  division,
those  of  greater  and  those  of  less  generality.  This  dis-
tinction answers  to  Bichat's  division  into  the  organic  or
vegetative  life,  which  is  the  common  basis  of  existence  of
all  living  bodies ;  and  animal  life,  proper  to  animals,  but
the  chief  characters  of  which  are  clearly  marked  only  in
the  higher  part  of  the  zoological  scale.  But,  since  Gall's
time,  it  has  become  necessary  to  add  a  third  division, — the
positive  study  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  phenomena
which  are  distinguished  from  the  preceding  by  a  yet  more
marked  speciality,  as  the  organisms  which  rank  nearest  to
Man  are  tlie  only  ones  which  admit  of  their  direct  explora-
tion. Though,  under  a  rigorous  definition,  this  last  class
of  functions  may  doubtless  be  implicitly  included  in  what
we  call  the  animal  life,  yet  its  restricted  generality,  the
dawning  positivity  of  its  systematic  study,  and  the  peculiar
nature  of  the  higher  difficulties  that  it  offers,  all  indicate
that  we  ought,  at  least  for  the  present,  to  regard  this  new
scientific  theory  as  a  last  fundamental  branch  of  physio-
logy ;  in  order  that  an  unseasonable  fusion  should  not
disguise  its  high  importance,  and  alter  its  true  character.
These,  then,  are  the  three  divisions  which  remain  for  us  to
study,  in  our  survey  of  biological  science.

Before  proceeding  to  the  analysis  of  organic    „.  .  ^

or  vegetative  life,  I  must  say  a  few  words  on    fraiTic'^iledia^"
the  theory  of  organic  media,  without  con-    '^
sidering  which,  there  can   be   no   true   analysis  of   vital
phenomena.

This  new  element  may  be  said  to  have  been  practically
introduced  into  the  science  by  that  controversy  of  Lamarck,
already  treated  of,  about  the  variation  of  animal  species
through  the  prolonged  influence  of  external  circumstances.
It  is  our  business  here  to  exclude  from  the  researches  thus
introduced,  everything  but  what  concerns  physiology  pro-


80  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

perly  so  called,  reduced  to  the  abstract  theory  of  the  living
organism.  We  have  seen  that  the  vital  state  supposes  the
necessary  and  permanent  concurrence  of  a  certain  aggre-
gate of  external  actions  with  the  action  of  the  organism
itself :  it  is  the  exact  analysis  of  these  conditions  of
existence  which  is  the  object  of  the  preliminary  theory  of
organic  media ;  and  I  think  it  should  be  effected  by  con-
sidering separately  each  of  the  fundamental  influences
under  which  the  general  phenomenon  of  life  occurs.  It
cannot  be  necessary  to  point  out  the  importance  of  the
study  of  this  half  of  the  dualism  which  is  the  condition  of
life:  but  I  may  just  remark  on  the  evidence  it  affords  of
the  subordination  of  the  organic  to  the  inorganic  philo-
sophy ;  the  influence  of  the  medium  on  the  organism  being
an  impracticable  study  as  long  as  the  constitution  of  the
medium  is  not  exactly  known.

^  ^    .  The  exterior  conditions  of  the  life  of  the

xLxtenor  con-  .  £  ^  ^  i       •     i        j

ditions  of  Life  organism  are  of  two  classes, — physical  and
chemical ;  or,  in  other  words,  mechanical  and
molecular.  Both  are  indispensable ;  but  the  first  may  be
considered,  from  their  more  rigorous  and  sensible  per-
manence, the  most  general, — if  not  as  to  the  different
organisms,  at  least  as  to  the  continued  duration  of  each
of  them.

Mechanical  First  in  generality  we  must  rank  the  action

conditions.  of  Weight.     There  is  no  denying  that  Man

Weight.  himself   must  obey,  whether    as   weight   or

projectile,  the  same  mechanical  laws  that  govern  every
other  equivalent  mass :  and  by  reason  of  the  universality
of  these  laws,  weight  participates  largely  in  the  production
of  vital  phenoQiena,  to  which  it  is  sometimes  favourable,
sometimes  opposed,  and  scarcely  ever  indifferent.  There
is  great  difficulty  in  the  analysis  of  its  effects,  because  its
influence  cannot  be  suspended  or  much  modified  for  the
purpose  ;  but  we  have  ascertained  something  of  them,  both
in  the  normal  and  the  pathological  states  of  the  organism.
In  the  lower,  the  vegetable  portion  of  the  scale,  the  physio-
logical action  of  weiglit  is  less  varied  but  more  prepon-
derant, the  vital  state  being  there  extremely  simple  and
least  removed  from  the  inorganic  condition.  The  laws
and  limits  of  the  growth  of  vegetables  appear  to  depend


EXTERNAL   CONDITIONS   OF   LIFE,  81

essentially  on  this  influence,  as  is  proved  by  Mr.  Knight's
experiments  on  germination,  as  modified  by  a  quicker  or
slower  motion  of  rotation.  Much  higher  organisms  are
subject  to  analogous  conditions,  without  which  we  could
not  explain,  for  instance,  why  the  largest  animal  masses
live  constantly  in  a  fluid  sufiiciently  dense  to  support
almost  their  whole  weight,  and  often  to  raise  it  sponta-
neously. However,  the  superior  part  of  the  animal  series
is  least  fit  for  the  ascertainment  of  the  physiological
influence  of  weight,  from  its  concurrence  with  a  great
number  of  heterogeneous  actions :  but  this  again  enables
us  to  study  it  in  a  variety  of  vital  operations :  for  there  is
scarcely  a  function,  organic,  animal,  or  even  intellectual,
in  which  we  may  not  point  out  the  indispensable  inter-
vention of  weight,  which  specially  manifests  itself  in  all
that  relates  to  the  stagnation  or  movement  of  fluids.  It
is  therefore  much  to  be  regretted  that  a  subject  so  extended
and  important  has  not  been  studied  in  a  rational  spirit  and
method.

The  next  mechanical  condition, — pressure,  ti
liquid  or  gaseous, — is  an  indirect  consequence
of  weight.  Some  few  scientific  results  have  here  been
obtained,  from  the  facility  witli  which  pressure  may  be
modified  by  artificial  or  natural  circumstances.  There  are
limits  in  the  barometrical  scale,  outside  of  which  no  atmo-
spherical animal, — Man  or  any  other,— can  exist.  We
cannot  so  directly  verify  such  a  law  in  the  case  of  aquatic
animals :  but  it  would  seem  that  in  proportion  to  the
density  of  the  medium  must  be  the  narrowness  of  the
vertical  limits  assignable  to  the  abode  of  each  species.
Of  the  relation  between  these  intervals  and  the  degree  of
organization,  it  must  be  owned,  however,  that  we  have  no
scientific  knowledge,  our  ideas  being,  in  fact,  wholly  con-
fused as  to  the  inferior  organisms,  and  especially  in  the
vegetable  kingdom.  Though,  through  many  difiiculties
and  complexities,  the  science  is  in  a  merely  nascent  state,
some  inquiries,  such  as  those  relating  to  the  influence  of
atmospheric  pressure  on  the  venous  circulation,  and  recent
observations  on  its  co-operation  in  the  mechanism  of
standing  and  moving,  etc.,  show  that  biologists  are  disposed
to  study  this  order  of  questions  in  a  rational  manner.

II.  G


82  ,       POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

,^  ,.  ,  Aiiiono;  the  physical  conditions,  and  per-

Motion  and        i  n  ",  ±-t  j.i  i       •  i      •     i

j.gg^  haps    ni'st   among   them,    the    physiological

influence  of  motion  and  rest  should  be  in-
vestigated. Amidst  the  confusion  and  obscurity  which
exist  on  this  subject,  I  think  we  may  conclude  that  no
organism,  even  the  very  simplest,  could  live  in  a  state  of
comjjlete  immobility.  The  double  movement  of  the  earth,
and  especially  its  rotation,  may  probably  be  as  necessary
to  the  develojmient  of  life  as  to  the  periodical  distribution
of  heat  and  light.  Too  much  care,  however,  cannot  be
taken  to  avoid  confounding  the  motion  produced  by  the
organism  itself  with  that  by  which  it  is  affected  from
without ;  and  the  analysis  had  therefore  better  be  api)lied
to  communicated  than  spontaneous  motion.  And  as  rotary
motion  tends,  by  the  laws  of  mechanics,  to  disorganize  any
system,  and  therefore,  eminently,  to  trouble  its  interior
phenomena,  it  is  this  kind  of  motion  which  may  be  studied
with  the  best  result ;  for  which  object  we  should  do  well
to  investigate,  in  a  compai-ative  way,  the  modifications
undergone  by  the  principal  functions  from  the  organism
being  made  to  rotate  in  such  a  gradual  variety  as  is  com-
patible with  a  normal  state.  The  attempt  has  as  yet  been
made  only  with  plants,  and  for  another  purpose ;  while,  in
the  case  of  the  superior  animals,  including  Man,  we  have
only  incomplete  and  disjointed  observations,  scarcely  trans-
cending mere  popular  notions.

rr<,  1     •     1        After  the  mechanical  influences,  w^e  reach

1  herniological  i  •  i      rx-     ^       j.        i.  i-i      xi  i       ■

action.  ^'^'^^'  which  affects  structure — the  tiiermoiogi-

cal  action  of  the  medium.  It  is  the  best
known  of  all ;  for  nothing  is  plainer  than  that  life  can
exist  only  within  certain  limits  of  the  thermometrical  scale,
and  that  there  are  limits  affecting  every  family,  and  even
every  living  race ;  and  again,  that  the  distribution  of
organisms  over  our  globe  takes  place  in  zones  sufficiently
marked,  as  to  differences  of  heat,  to  furnish  thermo-
metrical materials  to  the  physicists,  in  a  general  way.
But,  amidst  the  multitude  of  facts  in  our  possession,  all
the  essential  points  of  rational  doctrine  are  still  obscure
and  uncertain.  We  have  not  even  any  satisfactory  series
of  observations  about  the  tliermometrical  intervals  corre-
sponding to  the  different  organic  conditions ; — much  less


EXTKRXAL   COXDITIOXS   OF   LIFE.  83

any  law  relating  to  such  a  harmony,  which  has  never,  in
fact,  been  connected  with  any  other  essential  biological
character.  This  great  gap  exists  as  much  with  regard  to
the  successive  states  of  the  same  organism  as  to  the  scale
of  organisms.  The  necessary  revision  might  be  best
applied  first  to  the  lowest  states ;  as  the  egg  and  the
lowest  organisms  appear  able  to  sustain  wider  differences
of  temperature  than  those  of  a  higher  order :  and  several
philosophical  biologists  have  even  believed  that  life  may
have  been  always  possible  on  our  planet,  notwithstanding
the  different  systems  of  temperature  through  which  its  sur-
face has  successively  passed.  On  the  whole,  the  sum  of  our
analyses  may  seem  to  disclose,  amidst  many  anomalies,  a
general  law :  that  the  vital  state  is  so  subordinated  to  a
determinate  thermometrical  interval,  as  that  this  interval
perpetually  diminishes  as  life  becomes  more  marked, — ^in
the  case  both  of  the  individual  and  of  the  series.  If  even
this  general  law  is  not  yet  scientifically  established,  it  may
be  supposed  how  ignorant  we  are  of  the  modifications
produced  in  the  organism  by  variations  of  external  tem-
perature, within  the  limits  compatible  with  life.  There
has  even  been  much  confusion  between  the  results  of
abrupt  and  gradual  changes  of  temperature,  though  ex-
])eriment  has  shown  that  graduation  vastly  expands  the
limits  within  which  the  human  organism  can  exist ;  and
again,  between  the  influence  of  external,  and  the  organic
production  of  vital  heat.  This  last  great  error  shows  that
even  the  laying  down  the  question  remains  to  be  done.
The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  other  exterior  con-
ditions, such  as  light  and  electricity,  of  which

all  that  we  know  in  this  connection  is  that  /l"!^''  l^'ec-
,1  ^  ^  ■    n  ir   T  n  tncity,  etc.

they  exert  a  permanent  miiuence  needful  tor

the  production  and  support  of  life.  Besides  the  confusion
and  uncertainty  of  our  observations,  we  have  to  contend
with  the  inferiority  of  our  knowledge  of  those  branches  of
physics,  and  with  the  mischief  of  the  baseless  hypotheses
which  we  before  saw  to  infest  the  study  of  them.  While
l)hysicists  talk  of  fluids  and  ethers,  avowing  that  thev  do
BO  in  an  artificial  sense,  for  purposes  of  convenience,  phy-
siologists si)ealc  of  them  as  the  real  principles  of  two  orders
of  exterior  actions  indispensable  to  the  vital  state.     Till


84  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

refoi'in  becomes  substantial  and  complete  in  the  study  of

light  and  electricity, these  will  remain  the  exterior  conditions

of  vitahty  of  which  our  knowledge  is  the  most  imperfect.

Passing  onfroni  the  physical  to  the  chemical

concUtions  conditions  of  the  medium,  we  find  our  amount

of  knowledge  scarcely  more  satisfactory.     In

strict  generality,  this  study  relates  to  the  physiological  in-

1 ,,.  ^       fluence   of  air  and  water,   the   mingling  of
Air  and  W  ater.      ....  .  -,  i.-j.    i.     '  ii

which,   m   various   degrees,  constitutes  tlie

common  medium  necessary  to  vitality.  As  M.  de  Blain-
ville  remarked,  they  must  not  be  considered  separately,  as
in  a  physical  or  chemical  inquiry,  but  in  that  mixture
which  varies  only  in  the  proportions  of  its  elements.  This
might  be  anticipated  from  our  knowledge  of  the  chemical
constitution  of  living  bodies,  the  essential  elements  of
which  are  found  only  in  the  combination  of  air  and  water  :
but  we  have  physiological  evidence  also,  which  shows  thai
air  deprived  of  moistiire,  and  water  not  aerated,  are  fatal
to  vital  existence.  In  this  view  there  is  no  differerce  be-
tween atmospheric  and  aquatic  beings,  animal  and  vege-
table, but  the  unequal  proportion  of  the  two  fluids ;  the
air,  in  the  one  case,  serving  as  a  vehicle  for  vaporized
water ;  and  the  water,  in  the  other  case,  conveying  lique-
fied air.  In  both  cases',  water  furnishes  the  indispensable
basis  of  all  the  organic  liquids  :  and  the  air  the  essential
elements  of  nutrition.  We  know  that  the  higher  mammi-
fera,  including  Man,  perish  when  the  air  reaches  a  certain
degree  of  dryness,  as  fishes  do  in  water  which  has  been
sufficiently  deprived  of  air  by  distillation.  Between  these
extreme  terms  there  exists  a  multitude  of  intermediaries  in
which  moister  conditions  of  air  and  more  aerated  states  of
water  correspond  with  determinate  organisms  ;  and  the  ob-
servation of  Man  in  the  diiferent  hygrometrical  stales  of
atmospheres  shows  how,  in  the  individual  case,  physio-
logical phenomena  are  modified  within  the  limits  compa-
tible with  the  vital  state.  If  we  may  say  that  the  question
has  been  laid  down  in  this  inquiry,  it  is  only  in  a  vague
and  obscure  way.  Besides  our  ignorance  of  the  varying
proportions,  we  have  none  but  the  most  confused  notions
about  the  way  in  which  each  fluid  participates  in  the  sup-
port of  life.  '  Oxygen  is  the  only  element  of  the  air  aboul


AIR   AND    WATER,  85

which  we  have  made  any  intelligeut  iuquiry,  while  physio-
logists entertain  the  most  contradictory  notions  aboiit  azote :
and  the  uncertainty  and  obscurity  are  still  greater  with  re-
gard to  water.  In  this  state  of  infancy,  it  cau  be  no  wonder
that  the  science  offers  as  yet  no  law  as  to  the  influence  of
the  medium  on  the  organism — even  in  regard  to  the  ques-
tion whether  a  certain  condition  of  existence  becomes  more
or  less  inevitable  as  the  organism  rises  in  the  scale.

The  study  of  the  influence  of  specifies  does
not  enter  here,  on  account,  of  course,  of  the  'specifics

absence  of  generality  ;  but  it  should  be  just
pointed  out  that,  reduced  as  is  the  number  of  substances
called  sj)ecifics,  there  are  still  enough, — as  aliments,  medi-
cines, and  poisons, — to  afford  a  hint  of  what  might  be
learned  by  an  exploration  of  them,  in  regard  to  the  har-
mony between  the  organic  world  and  the  inorganic.  The
very  c{uality  of  their  operation,  that  it  is  special  and  dis-
continuous, and  therefoi'e  not  indispensable,  indicates  the
ex]3erimental  method  in  this  case,  as  being  certain,  well
circumscribed,  and  very  various.  This  study  may  then  be
regarded  as  a  needful  appendix,  completing  the  preliminary
biological  doctrine  which  I  have  called  that  of  organic
media,  and  offering  resources  which  are  proper  to  it,  and
cannot  be  otherwise  obtained.  Unhappily,  this  complement
is  in  even  a  more  backward  state  than  the  more  essential
portions,  notwithstanding  the  multitude  of  observations,
unconnected  and  unfinished,  already  assembled  in  this  path
of  research.

If  such  is  the  state  of  ])reliminarv  know-
ledge,  it  is  clear  how  little  has  yet  been  p/.t^?K°!.
learned  or  the  laws  of  lite  themselves.  The
incjuiry  has  gone  through  revolutions,  as  other  questions
have,  before  reaching  the  threshold  of  positivity,  in  our
day.  From  the  impulse  given  by  Descartes,  the  illustrious
school  of  Boerhaave  arose  in  physiology,  which  exaggerated
the  subordiuation  of  biology  to  the  simpler  parts  of  natural
philosophy  so  far  as  to  assign  to  the  study  of  life  the  place
of  appendix  to  the  general  system  of  inorganic  physics.
From  the  consequent  reaction  against  this  absurdity  arose
the  theory  of  Stahl,  which  may  be  considered  the  most
scientific  formula  of  the  metaphysical  state  of  physiology.


86  POSITIVE    nilLOSOPlIY.

The  stniggle  has  since  lain  between  these  two  schools, — the
strengtli  of  the  metaphysical  one  residing  in  its  recognition
of  physiology  as  a  distinct  science,  and  that  of  the  physico-
chemical,  in  its  Y)rinciple  of  the  depeudence  of  the  organic
on  the  inorganic  laws,  as  daily  disclosed  more  fully  by  the
progress  of  science.  The  effect  of  this  improved  knowledge
has  been  to  modify  the  conceptions  of  metaphysical  physio-
logy :  the  formida  of  Barthez,  for  instance,  representing  a
further  departure  from  the  theological  state  than  that  of
Stahl ;  as  Stahl's  already  did  than  that  of  Van  Helmont,
though  the  same  metaphysical  entity  might  be  in  view  when
Van  Helmont  called  it  the  archeus,  and  Stahl  the  so^ll,  and
Barthez  the  vital  principle.  Stahl  instituted  a  reaction
against  the  physico-chemical  exaggerations  of  Boerhaave  ;
but  Barthez  established,  in  his  preliminary  discourse,  the
characteristics  of  sound  philosophizing,  and  exposed  the
necessary  futility  of  all  inquisition  into  causes  and  modes
of  production  of  phenomena,  reducing  all  real  science  to
the  discovery  of  their  laws.  For  want  of  the  requisite
practice  in  the  positive  method,  the  scheme  of  Bartliez
proved  abortive  ;  and,  after  having  proposed  his  concep-
tion of  a  vital  principle  as  a  mere  term  to  denote  the  un-
known cause  of  vital  phenomena,  he  was  drawn  away  by
the  prevalent  spirit  of  his  time  to  regard  the  assumed
principle  as  a  real  and  comjjlex  existence,  though  pro-
foundly unintelligible.  Ineffectual  as  his  enterprise  proved,
its  design  with  regard  to  the  advancement  of  positive
science  cannot  be  mistaken.  The  progressive  s]>irit  is  still
more  marked  in  the  physiological  theory  of  Bichat,  though
we  find  entities  there  too.  These  entities  however  sliow  a
great  advance,  as  a  determinate  and  visible  seat  is  assigned
to  them.  The  vital  forces  of  Bichat  however  still  inter-
vene in  phenomena,  like  the  old  sjiecific  entities  introduced
into  physics  and  chemistry,  in  their  metaphysical  period,
under  the  name  of  faculties  or  occult  virtues,  which  Des-
cartes so  vigorously  hunted  down,  and  Molicre  so  happily
ridiculed.  Such  is  the  character  of  the  supposed  organic  sen-
sibility, by  which,  though  a  mere  term,  Bichat  endeavoured
to  exjdain  physiological  j)henomena,  which  he  thus  mei'ely
reproduced  under  another  name  :  as  when,  for  instance,  he
thou^lit  he  had  accounted  for  the  successive  flow  of  different


HISTORY   OF   PHYSIOLOGV.  87

liquids  in  one  canal  bv  saying  tliat  tlie  organic  sensibility
of  the  canal  was  snccessively  in  harmony  with  each  fluid,
and  in  antipathy  to  the  rest.  But  for  his  untimely  death
however,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  would  have  issued
into  an  entire  positivity.  His  treatise  on  General  Anatomy,
though  appearing  a  very  few  years  after  his  treatise  on  Life
and  Death,  is  a  great  advance  upon  it ;  and  even  in  the  con-
struction of  his  metaphysical  theory  of  vital  forces  he  cer-
tainly first  introduced,  under  the  title  j^roperfies  of  tissue,  a
conception  of  the  highest  value,  destined  to  absorb  all  onto-
logical  conceptions,  and  to  prepare  for  the  entire  positivity
of  the  elementary  notions  of  physiology.  Tlie  thing  re-
quired is  to  svibstitute  properties  for  forces  ;  and  Bichat's
treatment  of  tissue  fulfilled  this  condition  with  regard  to  a
very  extensive  class  of  effects :  and  thus  his  theory,  while
it  amended  the  metaphysical  doctrine  of  Stahl  and  Barthez,
opened  the  way  to  its  entire  reformation  by  presenting  at
once  the  germ  and  the  example  of  purely  positive  concep-
tions. This  is  now  the  state  of  physiological  philosophy  in
the  minds  of  the  majority  of  students ;  and  the  conflict
between  the  schools  of  Stahl  and  Boerhaave, — between  the
metaphysical  and  the  physico-chemical  tendency, — remains
at  the  point  to  which  it  was  brought  up  by  the  impulse
communicated  by  Bicliat.  It  would  be  hopeless  to  look  to
the  oscillations  of  this  antagonism  for  an  advance  in  science.
If  the  one  doctrine  prevailed,  science  would  be  in  a  state  of
retrogression  ;  if  the  other,  in  a  state  of  dissolution  ;  as  in
our  social  condition,  in  the  conflict  of  the  two  political  ten-
dencies, the  retrograde  and  the  revolutionaiy.  The  pro-
gress of  physiology  dej^ends  on  the  growth  of  positive
elementaiw  conceptions,  such  as  will  remand  to  the  domain
of  history  the  controversy  from  which  nothing  more  is  to
be  expected.  Abundant  promise  of  such  an  issue  now
appears :  the  tAvo  schools  have  annulled  each  other ;  and
the  natural  development  of  the  science  has  furnished
means  for  its  complete  institution  to  be  begun.  Tliis  I
look  upon  as  the  proper  task  of  the  existing  generation  of
scientific  men,  who  need  only  a  better  training  to  make
them  adequate  to  it.  If,  from  its  complexity,  physiology
has  been  later  than  other  sciences  in  its  rational  formation,
it  may  reach  its  maturity  more  rapidly  from  the  ground


00  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

liaviug  been  cleared  by  the  pursuit  of  the  anterior  sciences.
Many  delays  were  occasioned  in  their  case  by  transitory
phases  which  were  not  understood  in  the  earlier  days  of
])Ositivity,  and  which  need  never  again  arrest  experienced
investigation.  It  may  be  hoped  that  physiologists  will
spare  their  science  the  useless  and  ]iuml)ling  delay  in  the
region  of  metaphysical  hypothesis  which  long  embarrassed
the  j^rogress  of  physics.

Philoso))liicaI  The  true  philosophical  character  of  phy-
cliaracter  of  siology  consists,  as  we  have  seen,  in  establish-
Physiology.  {-^g  ^m  exact  and  constant  harmony  between
the  statical  and  the  dynamical  points  of  view, — between  the
ideas  of  organization  and  of  life, — between  the  notion  of
the  agent  and  that  of  the  act ;  and  hence  arises  the  obliga-
tion to  reduce  all  abstract  conceptions  of  physiological
properties  to  the  consideration  of  elementary  and  general
phenomena,  each  of  which  conveys  the  idea  of  a  determi-
nate seat.  In  other  words,  the  reduction  of  functions  to
corresponding  properties  must  be  regarded  as  the  simple
consequence  of  decompounding  the  general  life  into  the
different  functions, — discarding  all  notions  about  causes,
and  inquiring  only  into  laws.  Bichat's  conception  of  the
properties  of  tissue  contains  the  first  germ  of  this  renovated
view  ;  but  it  only  indicates  the  natiire  of  the  philosophical
operation,  and  contains  no  solution  of  the  problem.  Not
only  is  there  a  secondary  confusion  between  the  pro]>erties
of  tissue  and  simple  physical  pro]>erties,  but  the  principle
of  the  conception  is  vitiated  by  the  irrational  distinction
between  the  properties  of  tissue  and  vital  ])roperties ;  for
no  property  can  be  admitted  in  physiology  without  its
being  at  once  vital  and  belonging  to  tissue.  In  endeavour-
ing to  harmonize  the  different  degrees  of  physiological  and
of  anatomical  analysis,  we  may  lay  down  the  philosophical
principle  that  the  idea  of  property  which  indicates  the  last
term  of  the  one  must  correspond  with  tissue,  which  is  the
extreme  term  of  the  other ;  whilst  the  idea  of  function,  on
the  other  hand,  corresponds  to  that  of  organ:  so  that  the
successive  ideas  of  function  and  of  ])i'o]>erty  present  a
gradation  of  thoughts  similar  to  that  wliich  exists  between
the  ideas  of  organ  and  of  tissue,  except  that  tlie  one  re-
lates to  the  act  and  the  other  to  the  agent.     This  relation


DIVISION    OF   PHYSIOLOGICAL    STUDY.  89

appears  to  me  to  constitute  an  incontestable  and  impoi'tant

rule  in  biological  philosophy  ;  and  on  it  we  may  establish

the  first  great  division  among  physiological         -r^.  .  .        ^
, .   ^      -r-tr     1  1  •  *  1  Division  01

properties.      We  have  seen  how  m  anatomy         ^j^^  study.

there  is  a  division  between  the  fundamental,
generating  tissue,  the  cellular,  and  the  secondary  tissues
which  result  from  the  combination  of  certain  substances
with  this  original  web ;  and  in  the  same  way  must  physio-
logical properties  be  divided  into  two  groups, — the  one
comprising  the  general  proj^erties  which  belong  to  all  the
tissues,  and  which  constitute  the  proper  life  of  the  cellular
tissue  ;  and  the  other,  the  special  properties  which  charac-
terize its  most  marked  modifications, — that  is,  the  muscular
and  nervous  tissues.  This  division,  indicated  by  anatomy,
strilcingly  agrees  with  the  great  physiological  distinction
lietween  the  organic  or  vegetative  and  the  animal  life ;  as
the  first  order  of  properties  must  afford  the  basis  of  that
general  life,  common  to  all  organized  beings,  to  which
vegetable  existence  is  reduced ;  while  the  secoud  relates
exclusively  to  the  special  life  of  animated  beings.  Such
a  correspondence  at  once  makes  the  principle  more  unques-
tionable, and  facilitates  the  application  of  the  rule.

If  we  look  at  what  has  been  clone,  towards  the  construc-
tion of  this  fundamental  theory,  we  shall  find  that  it  is
fairly  accomplished  with  regard  to  the  secondary,  or  animal
tissues, — all  the  general  phenomena  of  animal  life  being
unanimously  connected  Avith  irritability  and  sensibility, —
these  being  considered  as  attributes  each  of  a  definite
tissue :  and  thus,  the  most  marked  case  is  the  best  under-
stood. But  the  other  division,^ — the  properties  which  are
wholly  general,  belonging  to  the  universal  life,  are  far  more
important,  as  underlying  the  others  ;  and  an  extreme  con-
fusion and  divergence  exist  with  regard  to  them.  No  clear
and  satisfactory  conception  of  the  secoud  class  can  be
formed  while  the  first  is  left  in  obscurity ;  and  thus,  the
science  remains  in  a  purely  provisional  state, — its  develop-
ment having  taken  place  in  an  order  inverse  to  that  which
its  nature  requires.

The  functions  which  belong  to  the  vegeta-    T\vo  functions
tive  life  are  two, — the  antagonism  of  which    of  the  or-
corresponds   to  the  definition  of  life  itself :    yanic  life.


90  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

first,  the  interior  absorption  of  nutritive  materials  from  the
surrounding  medium  ;  whence  results,  after  their  assimila-
tion, final  nutrition  ;  and  secondly,  the  exhalation  of  mole-
cules, which  then  become  foreign  bodies,  to  be  parted  with,
or  disassimilated,  as  nutrition  proceeds.  It  appears  to  be
an  error  to  make  digestion  and  circulation  characteristics  of
a.nimality  ;  as  we  certainly  find  them  here  in  the  funda-
mental sense  of  both.  Digestion  is  properly  a  preparation
of  aliment  for  assimilation  ;  and  this  takes  place  in  a  simple
and  almost  unvaried  manner  in  vegetable  organisms  :  and
circulation,  though  nothing  like  what  it  is  in  animals,
where  there  is  a  central  organ  to  effect  it,  is  not  less  essen-
tial in  vegetative  life, — the  lowest  organism  showing  the
continual  motion  of  a  fluid  holding  in  suspension  or  dis-
solved, matters  absorbed  or  thrown  out ;  and  this  perpetual
oscillation,  which  does  not  require  a  system  of  vessels  to
itself,  but  may  take  place  through  the  cellular  tissue,  is
equally  indispensable  to  animal  and  vegetable  existence.
These,  then,  are  the  two  great  vegetative  processes,  per-
formed hj  properties  which  are  provisionally  supposed
(after  the  analysis  of  M.  de  Blainville,  which  is  open
id  some  objection)  to  be  three, — hygrometricity,  capillarity,
and  retractility.  'This  analysis  shows  clearly  that  the
actions  which  constitute  vegetable  life  are  simj)ly  j)hysico-
chemical  phenomena ;  physical  as  to  the  motion  of  the
molecules  inwards  and  outwards ;  and  chemical  in  what
relates  to  the  successive  modifications  of  these  different
substances.  Under  the  first  aspect,  they  depend  on  the
properties,  hygrometrical,  capillary,  and  retractile,  of  the
cellular  tissue  :  under  the  second,  and  much  more  obscure
at  present,  they  i^elate  to  the  molecular  action  which
its  composition  admits.  This  is  the  spirit  in  which  the
analysis  of  organic  phenomena  should  be  instituted ;
whereas  tluit  of  animal  phenomena  should  l)e  regarded
from  a  wholly  different  point  of  view,  as  we  shall  see  here-
after.

The  stuily  of  this  vegetative  life  is  not  even  yet  ration-
ally organized.  We  liave  seen  that,  in  the  anatomical  view,
the  vegetable  kingdom  is  regarded  as  the  last  term  of
iin  unique  series, — the  various  degrees  of  which  differ,  for
the  most  part,  more  widely  from  each  other  than  any  one


STUDY    OF    VEGETATIVE    LIFE.  91

of  them  from  this  extreme  term.  The  same  conception
should,  direct  jihysiological  speculations  on  the  organic  life,
analyzed  uniformly  for  all  living  heings  :  but  this  has  not
hitherto  been  even  attempted.  Till  it  is  accomplished,  no
essential  point  of  physiological  doctrine  can  be  established,
however  able  may  be  the  investigations  carried  on,  and
however  vakiable  the  materials  supplied.  It  may  be  alleged
that  the  phenomena  relating  to  general  life  may  be  studied
in  the  broadest  simplicity  in  vegetable  organisms  :  but  it  is
no  more  possible  in  physiology  than  in  anatomy  to  inter-
pret the  extreme  cases  in  the  scale  by  each  other  without
having  passed  through  the  intermediate  degrees :  and  the
dynamical  case  is  the  more  difhcult  of  the  two :  so  that  the
isolated  study  of  the  organic  life  in  vegetables  cannot  illus-
trate that  of  the  higher  order  of  animals.  And  one  natural
consecjuence  of  this  irrational  isolation  of  the  vegetable
case  is  that  chemists  and  physicists  have  engrossed  re-
searches which  properly  belong  to  biologists  alone.  The
comparative  method,  which  we  have  seen  to  be  the  charac-
teristic resource  of  biological  philosophy,  has  not  as  yet  been
duly  introduced  into  the  general  study  of  organic  life,
though  it  is  at  once  more  indispensable,  and  more  com-
pletel}^  applicable  than  in  the  case  of  animal  life.  If  it
were  consistent  with  the  character  of  this  Work,  we  could
]>oint  out  gaps  at  almost  every  step,  and  about  the  simplest
phenomena,  which  must  shock  any  inc^uiring  mind: — the
darkness,  doubts,  and  differences  about  digestion ;  and
again  about  gaseous  digestion,  or  respiration  ; — in  regard  to
which  the  most  contradictory  opinions  are  held: — diver-
gences about  the  simplest  j^reliminary  phenomena  of  vege-
tative life,  which  show  how  much  has  to  be  done  before  we
can  undertake  any  direct  investigation  into  the  phenomena
of  assimilation  and  the  converse  process.
We  shall  find  ourselves  even  further  from

satisfaction  if  we  turn  from  the  consideration  „  ^^"  -^  "  ..

•     Ti^    J.     ,1  oijianic  action,

of  the  functions  of  organic  lite  to  those  more

compound  phenomena  which  are  usually  confounded  witli
them,  but  which  M.  de  Blainville  has  taught  us  to  distin-
guish as  results  from  the  action  of,  not  one  organ  or  set  of
organs,  as  in  the  case  of  function,  but  of  the  simultaneous
action  of  all  the  principal  organs.     Of  these  results,  the


92  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

State  of  most  immediate  and  necessary  is   tlie  con-

composition  tinuous  state  of  composition  and  decomposi-
and  deconi-  tion  which  characterizes  the  vesjetative  life,
position.  Ignorant  as  we  are  of  assimilation  and  secre-

tion, the  very  questions  cannot  have  been  as  yet  suitably
laid  down.  No  one  has  thought,  for  instance,  of  insti-
tuting an  exact  chemical  comparison  between  the  total
composition  of  each  organism  and  the  corresponding  system
of  alimentation  :  nor,  conversely,  between  the  exhaled  pro-
ducts and  the  whole  of  the  agents  which  had  supplied  or
modified  them ;  so  that  we  can  give  no  j^recise  scientific
account  of  the  general  phenomenon  of  the  composition  and
decomposition  of  every  organism  as  a  necessary  conse-
quence of  the  concurrence  of  the  different  fuuctions.  We
have  at  present  only  incomplete  and  disjointed  materials,
which  have  never  been  referred  to  any  general  fact.
y..  11,  It  is  acknowledged  now  that  all  organisms

have,  moi'e  or  less,  the  character  which  used
to  be  ascribed  to  only  the  highest,  of  sustaining  a  deter-
minate temperature,  notwithstanding  variations  of  heat  in
their  environment ;  and  this  is  a  second  result  of  the  whole
of  the  vegetative  functions,  which  almost  always  co-exists
with  the  first.  But  this  im2)ortant  study  is  not  only  in  a
l)ackward  state,  but  ill-conceived.  Besides  the  error  before
noticed,  of  confounding  vital  heat  with  the  temperature  of
the  medium,  the  fundamental  character  of  the  phenomenon
appears  to  me  to  have  been  misconceived.  Its  modifica-
tion by  the  animal  functions  can  never  be  understood  till
it  has  been  studied  in  its  primitive  universal  manifestation
in  all  living  bodies,  each  of  which  represents  a  chemical
centre,  able  to  maintain  its  temperature  against  external
influences,  within  certain  limits,  as  a  necessary  conse-
quence of  the  j^henomena  of  composition  and  decomposi-
tion. This  is  doubtless  the  point  of  view  from  whicli  the
jjositive  study  of  vital  heat  must  be  regarded  ;  and  to  con-
sider it  under  the  modifications  of  animal  life,  is  to  place
the  accessory  before  the  })rincij)al,  and  to  propose  views
which  are  merely  provisional,  if  not  erroneous.  In  the
most  recent  works  upon  this  leading  subject,  the  organic
foundations  are,  it  is  true,  more  carefully  considered :  but
the  investigation  cannot  ])e  said  to  be  duly  instituted  as


RESULTS    OF   VEGETAJIVE    FUNCTIONS.  93

long  as  tlie  vegetable  organism  is  not  regularly  introduced
into  it.

These  remai'lvs  are  even  more  applicable  to  fi    t  •    i

the  electrical  study  of  living  bodies.     Here  state

we  find  again,  and  with  aggravation,  the
confusion  between  organic  action  and  external  influence,
as  well  as  the  aberrations  remarked  on  in  physics  about
ethers  and  electric  fluids.  Here,  too,  we  meet  with  the
error  observed  upon  in  the  last  case,  about  the  physiolo-
gical origin  of  the  phenomenon.  And  here,  again,  we
are  bound  to  conclude  that  a  permanent  electrization  is
ascribable  to  acts  of  composition  and  decomposition,  not-
withstanding the  electrical  variations  of  the  medium.  And
again  we  find  that  the  animal  functions  can  only  modify,
by  accelerating  or  augmenting,  more  or  less,  the  funda-
mental phenomenon.  But  the  electrical  analysis  of  the
organism  is  yet  further  than  the  thermological  from  being-
conceived  of  and  pursued  in  a  I'ational  view.

Next  follow  the  general  phenomena  which  result  in  a
less  direct  and  necessary  manner  from  the  whole  of  the
vegetative  functions : — the  production  and  development  of
living  bodies.

Notwithstanding  the  original  investiga-  Production
tions  of  Harvey  and  of  Haller,  with  regard  ami  develop-
to  the  superior  animals,  this  investigation  nient  of  living
may  be  considered,  owing  to  its  complexity,  "o'hes.
to  be  more  in  the  rear  of  a  positive  institution  than  any  of
the  preceding.  The  tendency  to  search  for  causes  and
modes  of  production  of  phenomena,  instead  of  for  their
laws,  has  acted  with  fatal  effect  here ;  and,  amidst  every
kind  of  deficiency,  the  main  cause  of  the  obscurity  of  the
case  is,  undoubtedly,  that  students  have  occupied  them-
selves in  looking  for  what  cannot  be  found.  However,  the
labours  of  anatomists  and  zoologists  have  evidently  pre-
pared the  way  for  a  more  rational  study.  It  is  even
worthy  of  remark  that  some  students  who  were  most  bent
on  the  search  into  causes  have  been  led  on  by  the  spread
of  the  positive  spirit,  to  spend  their  efforts  on  inquiries
into  ovology  and  embryology,  which  are  assuming  a  more
scientific  character  every  day.  Still,  the  preliminary  requi-
site for  the  formation  of  doctrine, — a  fundamental  analysis,


94  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

— remains  unfulfilled.  ;  and  the  ascertainment  of  the  laws
of  production  and  development  is  not,  therefore,  to  be
attempted  at  present.  In  the  lowest  departments  of  the
scale,  the  multiplication  of  organisms  takes  place  by  a
simple  prolongation  of  any  part  of  the  parent  mass,  which
is  almost  homogeneous ;  and  in  this  extreme  case,  we
understand  the  phenomenon  to  be  analogous  to  every  other
Ivind  of  reproduction  of  the  primitive  cellular  tissue.  In
the  higher  degrees  of  the  scale,  we  are  in  the  dark  from
the  moment  we  dej^art  from  immediate  observation  ;  and
v/hen  the  simplest  previsions  are  so  radically  uncertain  and
even  erroneovis  as  in  this  case,  the  science  may  be  pro-
nounced to  be  in  a  state  of  infancy,  notwithstanding  the
imposing  apj^earance  of  the  mass  of  works  accumulated
for  its  illustration.

The  comparative  method  has  been  api)lied  in  a  yet  more
incomplete  way  to  the  phenomena  of  organic  develoj)ment.
The  question  has  never  yet  been  laid  down  under  a  form
common  to  all  organisms,  including  the  vegetable.  The
grave  error  is  still  committed  of  studying  the  development
in  the  animal  cases  alone ;  so  that  the  most  eminently
animal  of  the  systems,  the  nervous,  is  represented  as  the
first  to  appear  in  the  embryo  of  the  higher  orders, — a  sup-
position adverse  to  the  institution  of  any  i-eally  general
conception  of  the  theory  of  develoj^ment,  and  in  direct
opposition  to  one  of  the  most  constant  laws  of  biological
philosophy, — the  perpetual  accordance  between  the  chief
phases  of  the  individual  evolution  and  the  most  marked
successive  degrees  of  the  organic  hierarchy  ;  for  in  this
last  view  the  nervous  tissue  is  seen  to  be  the  latest  and
most  special  transformation  of  the  primitive  tissue.  The
preliminary  analysis  of  organic  development  is,  then,  still
far  from  being  conceived  of  in  a  rational  spirit,  governed
by  the  high  philosophical  intention  of  reconciHng,  as  much
as  possible,  the  various  essential  aspects  of  the  science  of
living  bodies.

To  be  com])lete,  this  analysis  should  evi-

„.^,^r/^..?     '*^    dently  be  followed   by  the  inverse,  and  vet

correlative    study    of    the    declme    or     the

organism,  from  its  maturity  to  its   death.       The   general

theory  of  death  is  certainly  in  a  very  backward  state,  since


DECLINE   OF   THE    ORGANISM.  95

the  ablest  physiological  researches  on  this  subject  have
usually  related  to  violent  or  accidental  death  ;  considered,
too,  in  the  highest  organisms  exclusively,  and  affecting
functions  and  systems  of  organs  of  an  essentially  animal
nature.  As  for  the  deterioration  of  the  organic  life,  "we
have  yet  attained  to  only  one  initiatory  philosophical
glimpse,  which  exhibits  it  as  a  necessary  consequence  of
life  itself,  by  the  growing  predominance  of  the  movement
of  exhalation  over  that  of  absorption,  whence  results
gi'adually  an  exaggei'ated  consolidation  of  the  organism
which  was  originally  almost  fluid,  a  process  which,  in  the
absence  of  more  rapid  influences,  tends  to  produce  a  state
of  desiccation  incompatible  with  all  vital  phenomena.
Valuable,  however,  as  is  such  a  glimpse,  it  serves  onlv  to
characterize  the  true  nature  of  the  question,  by  indicating
the  general  direction  of  the  researches  which  it  requires.
The  important  considerations  relative  to  animal  life  could
not  lie  rationally  introduced  into  such  a  subject  till  this
preliminary  doctrine  shall  have  been  established  ;  as  in
regard  to  all  the  other  points  of  view  before  examined.

Summary  as  this  review  has  been,  we  have  seen  euough
to  be  authorized  to  conclude  that  the  backward  state  of
physiological  science  is  owing  mainly  to  the  vicious  train-
ing of  physiologists,  and  the  irrational  institution  of  their
habitual  labours.  The  circulation  of  the  blood,  the  first
general  fact  which  gave  birth  to  positive  physiology  ;  and
the  laws  of  the  fall  of  bodies,  the  first  acquisition  of  sound
physics,  are  discoveries  almost  absolutely  contempora-
ueoiis  ;  and  yet,  what  an  immense  inequality  there  is  now
in  the  progress  of  two  sciences  setting  out  from  so  similar
a  disclosure !  Such  a  difference  cannot  be  attributed
wholly  to  the  greater  complexity  of  ])hysiological  phe-
nomena, and  must  have  depended  much  also  on  the  scien-
tific spii-it  which  directed  their  general  study,  to  the  level
of  which  tlie  greater  number  of  those  who  cultivate  it  have
been  unable  to  rise.  The  phenomena  of  the  vegetative  life
obviously  require,  both  for  their  analysis  and  their  expla-
nation, an  intimate  combination  of  the  leading  notions  of
inorganic  philosophy  with  physiological  considerations,
obtained  through  a  thorough  familiarity  with  the  ]irelimi-
nary  laAvs    relating  to  the  structure  and  classification  of


96  POSITIVE  rniLosopiiY.

living  bodies.  Now,  each  of  these  inseparable  conditions
is,  in  our  day,  the  sejiarate  property  of  a  particular  order
of  positive  investigators.  Hence  we  have,  on  the  one  hand,
the  supposed  organic  chemistry,  a  bastard  study,  which  is
only  a  rough  first  sketch  of  vegetable  physiology,  under-
taken by  inquirers  who  know  nothing  of  the  true  subject
of  their  labours  :  and,  on  the  other  hand,  vague,  inco-
herent, and  partly  metaphysical  doctrines,  of  which  phy-
siology has  been  chiefly  constituted  by  minds  almost
entirely  destitute  of  the  most  indispensable  preliminary
ideas.  The  barren  anarchy  which  has  resulted  from  so
vicious  an  organization  of  scientific  labour  would  be  enough
of  itself  to  testify  to  the  direct  utility  of  the  general,  and
yet  positive  point  of  view  which  characterizes  the  fore-
going survey.


97


CHAPTEE  V.


THE   ANIMAL    LIFE.


IT  was  only  by  a  late  and  long-prej>ai'ed  effort  that  the
human  mind  could  attain  that  state  of  abstraction  and
physiological  generality  necessary  for  the  comprehension  of
all  vital  beings, — from  Man  to  the  vegetable, — as  one  series.
It  is  only  in  our  own  day  that  a  point  of  view  so  new  and
so  difficult  has  been  established ;  and  as  yet,  among  only
the  most  advanced  minds,  even  as  regards  the  simplest
general  aspe(;ts  of  biology, — in  the  statical  study  of  the
organism.  It  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  physiological
comparison  should  have  been  tirst  applied  to  the  animal
functions,  because  they  first  suggest  its  importance  and
possibility,  however  clearly  it  may  afterwards  appear  that
the  organic  life  at  once  requires  and  admits  a  larger  and
more  indispensable  a])plicatiou  of  the  compai'ative  method.
Looking  more  closely,  however,  into  this  evident  existing
superiority  of  animal  over  organic  physiology,  we  must
bear  iu  mind  the  distinction  between  the  two  elementarv
aspects  of  every  positive  study, — the  analysis  of  phenomena
and  their  explanation.  It  is  only  with  regai'd  to  the  first
that  the  animal  life  has  been  in  reality  better  explored
than  the  organic.  It  is  not  possible  that  the  explanation
of  the  most  special  and  complex  phenomena  should  be  more
advanced  than  that  of  the  most  simple  and  general,  which
serve  as  a  basis  to  the  others.  Such  a  state  of  the  science
would  be  in  opposition  to  all  the  established  laws  of  the
human  mind.

However  imperfect  the  theory  of  organic  phenomena
still  is,  it  is  unquestionably  conceived  in  a  more  scientific
spirit  than  we  find  in  any  explanations  of  animal  physiology.
We  have  seen  that  the  vegetative  phenomena  approach
most  nearly  to  the  inorganic ;  and  that  the  school  of  Boer-
liaave  sinned   only  in  exaggeration,  proceeding  from  in-

II.  H


98  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

Transition  sufficient  kno-vvledf,^e  ;  and  it  must  be  by  this

from  the  in-  time  evident  that  this  is  the  link  between  the
org.anic  to  tlie  inorganic  and  the  biological  philosophy,  by
organic.  which  we  are  enabled  to  regard  the  whole  of

natural  philosophy  as  forming  a  homogeneous  and  con-
tinuous body  of  doctrine.  By  a  natural  consequence,  a
wholly  different  view  must  be  talcen  of  the  rational  theories
of  animal  life  :  that  is,  of  the  phenomena  of  irritability  and
sensibility,  which  offer  no  basis  of  analogy  with  inorganic
phenomena.  With  regard  to  sensibility,  no  one  will  ques-
tion this :  and,  as  to  irrital)ility, — though  contraction  may
be  seen  as  a  movement  occasioned  by  heat,  and,  yet  more,
by  electricity,  these  phenomena  must  be  carefully  separated
from  the  contractile  effect  of  the  irritable  fiVire  which  is  a
product  of  the  nervous  action ;  and  especially  when  it  is
voluntary.  Irritability  is  as  radically  foreign  to  the  inor-
ganic world  as  sensibility  ;  with  which,  too,  it  is  inseparably
Primitive  connected.     This  double   property  is,   then,

nervous  pro-  strictly  primitive  in  the  secondary  tissues,
perties.  ^^^^^  therefore  no  more  a  subject  of  explana-

tion than  weight,  heat,  or  any  other  fundamental  physical
])roperty.  Whenever  we  have  a  true  theory  of  animal  life,
it  will  be  by  comparing  all  the  general  phenomena  which
are  connected  with  this  doul)le  property,  according  to  their
preparatory  analysis,  in  order  to  discover  their  laws  ;  that
is,  as  in  all  other  cases,  their  constant  relations,  both  of
succession  and  similitude.  This  will  be  done  in  order  to
the  usual  end  of  ol)taining  a  I'ational  prevision  ;  the  subject
here  being  the  mode  of  action  of  a  given  animal  organism,
placed  in  determinate  circumstances  ;  or,  reciprocally,  the
animal  arrangement  that  may  be  induced  by  any  given  act
of  animality.  All  attempts  to  oxjilore  the  nature  of  sensi-
bility and  irritability  are  mere  hindrances  in  the  way  of
this  final  aim.  by  drawing  off  (Hir  attention  from  the  laws
of  animality  in  a  vain  search  after  what  can  never  be
found.

Relation  of  The   true   relation   of   the   animal  to   the

the  animal  to     organic  life   must    throughout    be    carefully
the  organic        Icept  in  mind.     This  relation  is  double.     The
■  organic  life  first  serves  as  the  basis  of  the

animal ;  and  then  as  its  general  end  and  object.     We  have


RELATION    OF   THl-:    ANIMAL   TO   THE   ORGANIC   LIFE.      99

dwelt  enough  on  the  first,  if  even  any  one  would  think  of
contesting  that,  in  order  to  move  and  feel,  the  animal  must
first  live  ;  and  that  tlie  fuudauieutal  vegetative  life  could
not  cease  without  extinguishing  the  other.  As  for  the
second  relation,  it  is  evident  that  the  phenomena  of  irrita-
bility and  sensibility  are  directed  by  the  general  needs  of
the  organic  life,  which  they  serve  by  procuring  better
materials,  and  by  guarding  against  unfavourable  influences.
Even  the  intellectual  and  moral  functions  have  usually  no
other  primitive  oftice.  Without  such  a  destination,  these
properties  would  either  destroy  the  organism  or  themselves
perish.  It  is  only  in  the  liumau  species,  and  even  there
only  under  a  high  degree  of  civilization,  that  any  kind  of
inversion  of  this  order  can  be  conceived  of.  In  that  case,
the  vegetative  life  is  essentially  subordinated  to  the  animal,
the  development  of  which  it  is  alone  destined  to  aid  ;  and
this,  it  seems  to  me,  is  the  noblest  scientific  notion  that  we
(•an  form  of  humanity,  distinct  from  auimality : — a  trans-
formation which  can  be  safely  considered  as  possible  only
l)v  transferring  to  the  whole  species,  or  at  least  to  society,
the  primitive  end  which,  in  the  case  of  animals,  is  limited
to  the  individual,  or,  at  the  utmost,  to  the  family,  as  wa
shall  see  hereafter.  It  is  only  among  a  small  number  of
men,  and  it  is  very  far  indeed  from  being  a  just  matter  of
expectation  from  the  whole  species,  that  the  intellect  can
acquire  such  a  preponderance  in  the  whole  of  the  organism
as  to  become  the  end  and  object  of  human  existence.  An
exception  so  special,  and  so  easy  to  explain  in  the  case  of
Man,  cannot  alter  the  luiiversality  of  a  consideration  verified
l)y  the  whole  animal  kingdom,  wherein  the  animal  life  is
seen  to  be  always  destined  to  perfect  the  organic.  It  is  only
l\y  a  scientific  abstraction,  necessary  for  purposes  of  progress,
that  we  can  provisionally  conceive  of  the  first  as  isolated
from  the  second,  which  is,  strictly  speaking,  inseparable
from  it  under  the  double  aspect  just  exhibited.  Thus,  as  the
positive  theory  of  auimality  must  continually  rest  on  that  of
general  vitality,  it  is  indissolubly  combined  with  the  whole  of
inorganicphilosophy, which furnishesthe basis  ^  .
or  organic  physiology,  in  a  secondary  sense,  i,hiiosojriiv
the  same  dependence  exists.  We  admitted,
while  reviewing  mathematical  philosophy,  that  the  laws  of


100  posriivE  PHILOSOPHY.

equilibrium  and  motion  o])erate  among  all  orders  of  pheno-
mena, being  absolutely  universal.  Among  physiological
phenomena  Ave  find  them  accordingly  ;  and,  when  contrac-
tion is  produced  by  the  irritability  of  the  muscular  fibre,
all  the  ]>henoniena  of  animal  mechanics  which  result,
whether  for  rest  or  locomotion,  are  dependent  on  the
general  laws  of  mechanics.  In  an  inverse  way  the  same
thing  takes  place  with  regard  to  the  functions  of  sensibility,
in  which  the  inorganic  philosophy  must  intervene  in  con-
iiection  with  the  primitive  impression  on  the  sentient
extremities,  cai'efully  distinguished  from  its  transmission
by  the  nervous  filament,  and  its  perception  by  the  cerebral
organ.  This  impression  acts  through  an  intermediate
physical  apparatus,  optical,  acoustic,  or  other,  the  study  of
which  according  to  appropriate  physical  laws,  constitutes  a
chief  element  of  the  positive  analysis  of  the  phenomenon.
Not  only  must  we  use  the  knowledge  already  established,
but  we  want,  for  our  analysis,  further  progress  in  it,  and
even  the  creation  of  new  doctrines,  as  the  theory  of  flavours,
and  yet  more  of  odours,  in  regard  to  the  mode  of  propaga-
tion of  which  there  are  doubtless  several  general  laws,  of  a
purely  inorganic  character,  remaining  to  be  established.
In  investigating  these  connections  between  biology  and
inorganic  science,  we  find  again  what  we  saw  before,  that
chemistry  is  spontaneously  related  to  vegetable  physiology,
and  physics  especially  to  animal  ])hysiology ;  though  neither
could  be  altogether  dispensed  with  in  either  department,
where  they  are  reqvnred,  more  or  less,  in  combination.

Our  ideas  of  the  double  properties  of  irrita-
tiasue''  ^^^  "  bility  and  sensibility  cannot  be  truly  scientific
till  each  is  irreversibly  assigned  to  a.  corre-
i^ponding  tissite.  Biehat  conceived  of  all  tissues  as  neces-
sainly  sensitive  and  irritable,  but  in  different  degrees ; — an
error  which  was  natural  or  inevitable  at  a  time  when  so
little  was  known  of  tissue  in  the  way  of  anatomical  analysis,
but  one  which,  if  maintained  now,  Avoidd  hand  over  the
whole  science  to  the  physico-chemical  school,  and  efface  all
real  distinction  between  the  inorganic  and  organic  depart-
ments of  natural  philosophy.  Kational  biology  requires
that  the  two  properties  should  be  inherent  in  determinate
tissues,^ — themselves  modifications,  profound  and  distinctly


PROPERTIES    OF   TISSUE.  101

marked,  of  the  primitive  cellular  tissue, — that  our  anato-
mical data  may  be  in  harmony  with  the  physiological ;  in
other  words,  that  the  elementary  ideas  of  tissue  and  of  pro-
perty should  be  in  perfect  correspondence.  The  scientific
character  of  physiology  in  this  direction  is  essentially  defec-
tive among  biologists  in  general.  But  the  new  explorations
continually  made  show  us  how  it  was  that  ^  .-i  •,-.
Bichat  was  misled.     He  considered  it  proved  ^'

that  sensibility  existed  where  there  were  no  nerves :  but
further  investigation  proves  that  the  systems  of  sensibility
were  erroneously  attributed  to  an  organ  deprived  of  nerves,
instead  of  being  referred  to  the  simultaneous  injury  of
neighbouring  nerves ;  or  that  the  nervous  tissue  existed,
though  it  was  difiicult  to  find.  If  cases  apparently  contra-
dii/tory  still  remain,  it  would  be  obviously  al;>surd  to  reject
on  their  account  a  conception  required  by  the  principles  of
rational  physiology,  and  founded  on  unquestionalde  cases,
by  far  more  numerous  and  decisive  than  those  which  still
seem  to  be  exceptional.  This  consideration  should  be
ajiplied  to  diifereut  organisms,  as  well  as  to  the  different
tissues  of  the  human  organism.  The  animals  supposed  to
be  without  nerves,  on  which  the  metiphysical  school  has
insisted  so  much,  disaj^pear  as  comparative  anatomy  enables
us  to  generalize  more  and  more  the  idea  of  nervous  tissue,
and  to  detect  it  in  the  inferior  organisms.  It  is  thus,  for
instance,  that  it  has  been  recently  found  in  several  radiated
animals.  The  time  has  come  for  its  being  established  as  a
philosophical  axiom  that  nerves  are  necessary  for  any
degree  of  sensibility,  the  apparent  exceptions  being  left  as
so  many  anomalies  to  be  resolved  by  the  future  pi'Ogress  of
anatomical  analysis.

The  same  in'ocess  must  be  instituted  with        ^    .,  ,  .,.
,  1       .  c  ■     ■.    1  -Ti         1  ■  1  Irritability,

the  common  notions  oi  irritability,  which  are

still  ruled  by  Bichat's  theory.  He  supposed,  for  instance,
that  the  contractions  of  the  heart  were  determined,  inde-
pendently of  all  nervous  action,  by  the  immediate  stimulus
of  the  flow  of  the  blood  towards  it ;  whereas,  it  is  now
established  that  a  provision  of  nerves  is  as  indispensable  to
the  irritability  of  this  muscle  as  of  any  other;  and  gener-
ally, that  the  great  distinction  laid  down  by  Bichat,  l)e-
tweeu  organic  and  animal  contractility,  must  be  abandoned.


102  POSniVK    IMIILOSOPIIY.

All  irritability  is  then  necessarily  animal ;  that  is,  it  in-
quires a  corresponding  nervous  provision,  whatever  may
he  tlie  immediate  centre  from  which  tlie  nervous  action
proceeds.  Much  illustration  of  this  subject  is  needed  for
its  scientific  use,  though  not  for  the  logical  sanction  of  a
j)rinciple  already  placed  beyond  dispute.  We  need  this
further  enlightenment,  not  only  in  regard  to  the  use  of  the
modern  distinction  made  by  many  physiologists  between
the  sensoi-y  and  the  motory  nerves,  though  such  a  question
has  considerable  philosophical  importance;  but  much  more
iu  regard  to  another  consideration,  more  direct  and  more
eminent,  in  regard  to  which  we  are  in  a  state  of  most  in-
convenient uncertainty  and  obscurity:  I  mean  the  scientific
distinction  which  must  be  maintained,  sooner  or  later,  be-
tween the  voluntary  and  involuntary  motions.  The  doc-
trine of  Bichat  had  the  advantage  of  re j) resenting  this
ilifference,  which  we  see,  in  fact,  to  have  furnished  him
with  his  chief  arguments ;  whereas,  now  that  we  insist  on
ii'ritability  being  of  one  kind  only,  and  dependent  on  a
nervous  provision,  we  find  oiirselves  involved  in  a  very
delicate  fundamental  difficulty,  the  solution  of  which  is
however  indispensable,  to  enable  us  to  understand  how  all
motions  must  not  be  indistinctly  voluntary.  For  this  solu-
tion we  must  obtain — what  we  certainly  have  not  as  yet —
an  exact  co-ordination  of  anatomical  diiferences  with  incon-
testable physiological  differences.  There  can  be  no  question
that  such  a  phenomenon  as  the  voluntaiT  movements  of
the  locomotive  muscles  while  that  of  the  cardiac  muscle
remains  absolutely  involuntary,  must  admit  of  analysis,
however  difficult  it  may  be.  Here  then  we  find  a  chasm
among  the  very  principles  of  the  science,  by  which  the
positive  theory  of  irritability  is  much  perplexed,  certain  as
is  its  principle.  In  almost  all  cases  the  ablest  anatomist  is
unable  to  decide  otherwise  than  by  the  fact  itself,  if  any
definite  motion  is  necessarily  voluutaiy  or  involuntary  ;
which  affords  sufficient  proof  of  the  absence  of  any  real
law  in  the  case.  The  solution  will  probably  be  obtained
by  an  analysis  of  the  int(>rmediate  motions,  as  we  may  call
them, — those  which,  involuntary  at  first,  end  in  becoming
voluntary ;  or  the  reverse.  These  cases,  which  are  very
common,  appear  to  me  eminently  fit  to  prove  that  the  dis-


IMPERFECTION    OF   THE   STUDY   OF   ANIMALITY.        103

tinctiou  between  voluntary  and  involuntary  motions  arises
from  no  radical  difference  of  muscular  irritability,  but  only
from  the  mode,  and  perhaps  the  degree  of  innervation,
modified  by  long  habit.  If  this  be  as  generally  true  as  it
seems  to  be  in  some  cases  of  acquired  control,  it  must  be
supposed  that  the  most  involuntary  motions,  which  are
those  most  indispensable  to  life,  woiild  have  been  suscep-
tible of  voluntary  suspension  (not  even  excepting  the
motions  of  the  heart)  if  their  incessant  rigorous  necessity
had  not  hindered  the  contraction  of  suitable  habits  in  their
case.  While  we  conclude  it  to  be  jH'obable  that  the  differ-
ence between  the  two  kinds  of  motion  proceeds  indirectly
from  the  action  of  the  entire  nervous  system  upon  the
muscular  system,  we  cannot  help  perceiving  how  greatly
science  stands  in  need  of  a  thorough  new  examination  into
this  obscure  fact.

This  brief  survey  shows  i;s  the  general  Present  state
imperfection  of  the  study  of  animality.  We  of  analysis  of
shall  find  that  even  in  the  department  of  the  animality.
jirimitive  analysis  of  its  general  phenomena,  in  which  it
appears  so  superior  to  that  of  the  organic  life,  it  is  very
far  indeed  from  being  yet  fit  for  exploration  by  positive
laws.

In  regard  to  irritability,  first, — the  me-  Movement,
chauism  of  no  animal  movement  has  yet
been  satisfactorily  analysed, — all  the  chief  cases  being  still
the  subject  of  radical  controversy  among  equally  qualified
physiologists.  We  retain  a  vicious  distinction  among
movements,  contrary  to  all  mechanical  judgment, — a  dis-
tinction between  the  general  motion  which  displaces  the
whole  mass,  and  the  partial  motions  which  subserve  the
organic  life, — as  for  the  reception  of  aliment,  or  the  expul-
sion of  any  residuum,  or  the  circulation  of  fluids ;  yet  the
first  order  are  partial,  though  their  object  is  unlike  that
of  the  second ;  for,  in  a  mechanical  view,  the  organism
allows  of  no  others.  By  the  great  laws  of  motion,  the
animal  can  never  displace  its  centre  of  gravity  by  interior
motion,  without  co-operation  from  its  environment,  any
more  than  a  steam-carriage  which  should  work  without
friction  on  a  horizontal  plane,  turning  its  wheels  without
result.     The  movements  which  produce  locomotion  are  not


104  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

ineclianically  different  from  tliose,  for  instance,  which  carry
food  along  the  alimentary  canal ; — the  difference  is  in  the
apparatus,  which,  for  locomotion,  consists  of  exterior  ap-
pendages, so  disj)osed  as  to  cause  a  reaction  in  the  medium,
which  produces  the  displacement  of  the  whole  hody.
Certain  mollusks  furnish  an  illustration  of  this,  when  they
change  their  place  by  means  of  contractions  of  the  cardiac
muscle,  or  of  intestinal  muscles.  The  simplest  notions  of
animal  mechanics  heing  thus  obscured  and  corrupted  in
their  origin,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  physiologists  still
dispute  about  the  mechanism  of  the  circulation,  and  most
of  the  means  of  locomotion,  as  leaping,  flying,  swimming,
etc.  In  the  way  in  which  they  proceed,  they  are  remote
from  any  mutual  understanding,  and  the  most  opposite
opinions  may  be  maintained  with  equal  plausibility.  It
needs  but  a  word  to  suggest  to  those  who  have  attended  to
what  has  gone  before,  that  this  extreme  imperfection
results  from  the  inadequate  and  faulty  education  of  physio-
logists, who  are  too  often  ignorant  of  the  inorganic  science
which  is  here  directly  involved.  The  complexity  of  the
animal  a])paratus,  and  the  ini])ossibility  of  bringing  the
primitive  moving  powers  under  any  mathematical  theory,
will  for  ever  forbid  the  application  of  numerical  methods :
but  the  great  laws  of  equilibrium  and  motion  are  applic-
able, through  all  varieties  of  apparatus,  and  are  the  same
in  animal  mechanics,  or  celestial,  or  industrial,  or  any
other  mechanics  whatever.  Some  physiologists,  finding
their  difficulty,  have  handed  over  their  study  to  the  geo-
I'leters  and  physicists  :  and  these,  with  their  habits  of
numerical  precision,  and  their  ignorance  of  anatomy,  have
brought  out  only  absurd  results.  The  remedy  is,  as  we
know,  in  the  work  being  consigned  to  physiologists,  duly
jirepared  by  a  sutKcient  training  in  inorganic  science.  The
study  of  animal  sounds,  or  phonatiou,  for  instance,  cannot
be  carried  on  to  any  purpose  without  such  knowledge  as
physicists  have  of  the  theory  of  sound  ;  and  the  general
production  of  the  voice,  and  the  differences  of  utterance
among  animals,  require  for  their  explanation  a  knowledge
at  once  of  acoustics  and  anatomy  ;  and  speech  itself  requires
this  preparation  no  less,  while  demanding  otlier  requisites
with  it.     It   is  to   be  hoped  that  all  experience,  in  each


MOVEMENT.  105

department  of  scientific  inquiry,  will  convince  students
more  and  more  of  the  folly  and  mischief  of  the  anarchical
parcelling  out  of  natural  philosophy  ;  but  the  physiolooists
iire  those  who.  above  all,  must  see  the  need  of  a  Vjetter
organization  of  scientific  labour, — so  remarkable  as  is  the
subordination  of  their  particular  science  to  all  that  have
gone  before.

The  analysis  of  the  phenomena  of  sensibility  is  not  more
satisfactory  than  that  of  irritability  :  and  even  less  so,  if
we  leave  out  of  the  account  the  great  knowledge  that  we
have  obtained,  by  anatomical  study,  of  the  corresponding
organs  ;  a  knowledge  which,  however,  must  here  be  con-
nected with  physiology.  The  least  imperfect  part  of  this
study  relates  to  the  simple  exterior  sensa-
tious.  The  phenomenon  of  sensation  is  -"^  enor  ^en-
composed  of  three  elements,  as  we  have  seen:
the  impression  of  the  external  agent  or  the  nervous  ex-
tremities, by  the  aid  of  some  physical  apparatus ;  the
transmission  by  the  nervous  fibre  ;  and  the  recejjtion  by
the  cereltral  organ.  The  first  of  these  suggests,  like  the
mechanical  facts  we  have  been  considering,  the  immediate
dependence  of  the  phenomenon  on  the  laws  of  the  iu or-
ganic world ;  as  the  relation  of  the  theory  of  visions  to
o]>tics  :  of  the  theory  of  hearing  to  acoustics,  in  all  that
<'0ucerns  the  mode  of  action  proper  to  the  apparatus  of
sight  and  hearing.  And  yet,  more  expi'essly  than  even  in
the  case  of  mechanics,  have  these  theories  been  delivered
into  the  hands  of  the  physicists,  who,  again,  bring  out  re-
sults from  their  treatment  of  them  which  are  manifestly
absurd.  The  only  difference  between  this  case  and  the
preceding  is  that  the  metaphysicians  have  kej^t  a  longer
hold  upon  this  part  of  animal  physiology, — the  theory  of
sensations  having  been  abandoned  to  them  till  a  very  recent
time.  It  was  not,  indeed,  till  Gall  im])arted  his  ever-
memorable  impulse  to  the  investigation,  that  physiologists
claimed  this  deitartment  at  all.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,
that  the  positive  theory  of  sensations  is  less  av ell  conceived,
and  more  recent,  than  that  of  motion  ;  and  naturally  more
imperfect,  indej)endently  of  its  superior  difiiculty,  and  the
backwardness  of  those  bi'anches  of  j^hysics  to  which  it  re-
lates.    The  simplest  modifications  of  the  phenomenon  of


106  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

vision  and  of  hearing  cannot  as  yet  be  referred  with  cer-
tainty to  determinate  organic  conditions  ;  as,  for  instance,
the  adjustment  of  the  eye  to  see  distinctly  at  very  various
distances ;  a  faculty  which  the  physiologists  have  allowed
the  physicists  to  attribute  to  various  circumstances  of
structure,  always  illusory  or  inadequate,  the  physiologists
the  while  playing  the  j^art  of  critics,  instead  of  appropriat-
ing a  study  which  belongs  exclusively  to  them.  Even  the
limits  of  the  function  are  usually  very  vaguely  defined :
that  is,  the  kind  of  exterior  notions  furnished  by  each
sense,  abstracted  from  all  intellectual  reflection,  is  rarely
circumscribed  with  any  distinctness.  Thus  it  is  no  wonder
if  we  are  still  ignorant  of  almost  all  positive  laws  of  sight
and  hearing,  and  even  of  smell  and  taste. — The  only  point
of  doctrine,  or  rather  of  method,  that  we  may  consider  to
have  attained  any  scientific  stability,  is  the  fundamental
order  in  which  the  different  kinds  of  sensations  should  be
studied :  and  this  notion  has  been  supplied  by  comparative
anatomy  rather  than  by  i)hysiology.  It  consists  in  classi-
fying the  senses  by  tlieir  increasing  speciality, — beginning
with  the  universal  sense  of  contact,  or  toiTcli,  and  proceed-
ing by  degrees  to  the  four  special  senses,  taste,  smell,  sight.
and  finally,  hearing.  This  order  is  rationally  determined
by  the  analysis  of  the  animal  series,  as  the  senses  must  be
considered  more  special  and  of  a  higher  kind  in  proportion
as  they  disappear  from  the  lower  degrees  of  the  zoological
scale.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  gradation  coincides  with
the  degree  of  imj^ortance  of  the  sensation  in  regard  to
sociality,  if  not  to  intelligence.  Unhappily,  it  measures
yet  more  evidently  the  increasing  imperfection  of  the
theory. — We  ought  not  to  pass  over  the  luminous  distinc-
tion mtroduced  by  Gall  between  the  passive  and  the  active
state  of  each  special  sense.  An  analogous  consideration  to
this,  but  more  fundamental,  would  consist,  it  seems  to  me.
in  distinguishing  the  senses  themselves  as  active  and
passive,  according  as  their  action  is,  from  their  natui'e.
voluntary  or  involuntary.  This  distinction  seems  very
marked  in  the  case  of  sight  and  hearing  ;  the  one  requiring
our  free  participation,  to  a  certain  extent,  while  the  other
affects  us  wdthout  our  will,  or  even  our  consciousness.  The
more   vague,    but   more    profound  influence   that    music


EXTEllIOR   AND    liNTKUlOR    SENSATION.  107

exercises  over  us,  compared  with  that  of  painting,  seems  to
be  chiefly  attributable  to  such  a  diversity.  An  analogous
difference,  but  less  marked,  exists  between  taste  and  smell.

_  There  is  a  second  class  of  sensations,  form-
ing the  natural  transition  from  the  study  of  s"/s' t^o
the  sensations  to  that  of  the  affective  and
intellectual  functions,  which  all  physiologists,  since  the
time  of  Cabanis,  and  yet  more,  of  Gall,  have  found  it
necessary  to  admit,  to  complete  the  study  of  the  sensations.
They  are  the  interior  sensations  which  relate  to  the  satis-
faction of  the  natural  Avants  ;  and,  in  a  pathological  state.
the  pains  produced  by  bodily  alteration.  These  are  still
more  indispensable  than  the  first  to  the  perfection  of  the
organic  life  ;  and,  though  they  procure  no  direct  notions
of  the  external  world,  tliey  radically  modify,  by  their  in-
tense and  continuous  action,  the  general  course  of  intellec-
tual operations,  which  are,  in  most  animal  species,  entirelv
subordinated  to  them.  This  gi'eat  department  of  the
theory  of  sensations  is  even  more  obscure  and  unadvanced
than  the  foregoing.  The  only  jjositive  notion  which  is  fairly
established  in  regard  to  it  is  that  the  nervous  system  is  in-
dispensable to  both  kinds  of  sensibility.

Once  again  we  see  how  the  extreme  imperfection  of
doctrine  here  is  owing  to  the  imperfection  of  method  ;  and
that  again,  as  before,  to  the  inadequate  preparation  of  the
inquirers  to  whom  the  study  belongs.  It  is  a  great  tiling,
however,  to  have  withdrawn  the  subject  from  the  control
of  the  metaphysicians  ;  and  some  labours  of  contemporary
physiologists  authorize  us  to  hojje  that  the  true  spiiit  of
the  inquiry  is  at  length  entered  into ;  and  that  the  study
of  the  sensations  will  be  directed,  as  it  ought  to  be,  to  de-
velope  the  radical  accordance  between  anatomical  and  phv-
siological  analysis.

Having  reviewed  the  two  orders  of  animal  Mode  of

functions,  we  must  consider  the  complemen-  action  of

tary  part  of  the  theory  of  animality  ;— the  .animaHty.

ideas  about  the  mode  of  action  which  are  common  to  the
phenomena  of  irritability  and  sensibility.  It  is  true,  these
ideas  belong  also  to  intellectual  and  moral  phenomena ;
but  we  must  review  them  here,  to  complete  our  delineation
of  the  chief  aspects  of  the  study  of  animal  life.


108  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

The  considerations  about  such  mode  of  action  naturally
divide  themselves  into  two  classes :  the  one  relating  to  the
function  of  either  motion  or  sensation,  separately  ;  and  the
other  to  the  association  of  the  two  functions.  The  first
may  relate  to  either  the  mode  or  the  degree  of  the  animal
y   ,    ,    ., ,  phenomenon.     Follovving  this  order,  the  first

theory  that  presents  itself  is  that  of  the  in-
termittence  of  action,  and  consequently,  that  of  habit,
which  results  from  it.  Bichat  was  the  first  Avho  pointed
out  the  intermittent  character  of  every  animal  faculty,  in
contrast  with  the  continuousness  of  vegetative  phenomena.
The  double  movement  of  absorption  and  exhalation  which
constitutes  life  could  not  be  suspended  for  a  moment
withoiit  determining  the  tendency  to  disorganization :
whereas,  every  act  of  irritability  or  sensibility  is  neces-
sarily intermittent,  as  no  contraction  or  sensation  can  be
conceived  of  as  indefinitely  prolonged ;  so  that  continuity
would  imply  as  great  a  contradiction  in  animal  life  as
interruption  in  the  organic.  All  the  progress  made,  during
the  present  centuiy,  in  physiological  anatomy,  has  contri-
l)uted  to  the  perfecting  of  this  theory  of  intermittence.
Rationally  understood,  it  applies  immediately  to  a  very
extensive  and  important  class  of  animal  j^henomena ;
^,.  that   is,   to  those  which  belong  to  the   different

^  ■  degrees  of  sleep.  The  state  of  sleep  thus  con-
sists of  the  simultaneous  suspension,  for  a  certain  time,
of  the  principal  actions  of  irritability  and  sensibility.  It
is  as  complete  as  the  organization  of  the  superior  animals
admits  when  it  suspends  all  motions  and  sensations  but
such  as  are  indispensable  to  the  organic  life, — their
activity  being  also  remarkably  diminished.  The  jihe-
nomenon  admits  of  great  variety  of  degrees,  from  simple
somnolence  to  the  torpor  of  hybernating  animals.  But
this  theory  of  sleej),  so  well  instituted  by  Bichat,  is  still
merely  initiated,  and  presents  many  fiuidainental  difficul-
ties, when  we  consider  the  chief  modifications  of  such  a
state,  even  the  organic  conditions  of  which  are  very  imper-
ft  ctly  known,  except  the  stagnation  of  the  venous  blood  in
the  brain,  which  appears  to  be  generally  an  indispensable
preliminary  to  all  extended  and  durable  lethargy.  It  is
<'asy  to  conceive  how  the  prolonged  activity  of  the  animal


SLEEP.  109

fuiictious  in  a  wakiug  state  may,  by  tlie  law  of  intermit-
teiice,  occasion  a  proportional  suspension  :  but  it  is  not  so
easy  to  see  why  the  suspension  should  be  total  when  the
activity  has  been  only  partial.  Yet  we  see  how  profound
is  the  sleep,  intellectual  and  niusciilar,  induced  by  fatigue
of  the  muscles  alone  in  men  who,  while  awate,  have  given
very  little  exercise  to  their  sensibilit}',  interior,  or  even
exterior.  We  know  still  less  of  incomplete  sleep;  espe-
cially when  only  a  part  of  the  intellectual  or  affective
organs,  or  of  the  locomotive  apparatus  is  torpid  ;  whence
arise  dreams  and  various  kinds  of  somnambulism.  Yet
such  a  state  has  certainly  its  own  general  laws,  as  well  as
the  waking  state.  Some  experiments,  not  duly  attended
to,  perhaps  justify  the  idea  that,  in  animals,  in  which  the
cerebral  life  is  much  less  varied,  the  nature  of  dreams
])ecomes,  to  a  certain  point,  susceptible  of  being  directed
at  the  jjleasure  of  the  observer,  by  the  aid  of  external  im-
])ressions  produced,  during  sleep,  upon  the  senses  whose
action  is  involuntary  ;  and  especially  smell.  And  in  the
case  of  Man,  there  is  no  thoughtful  physician  who,  in
certain  diseases,  does  not  take  into  the  account  the  habitual
character  of  the  patient's  dreams,  in  order  to  perfect  the
diagnosis  of  maladies  in  which  the  nervous  system  is  espe-
cially implicated :  and  this  supposes  that  the  state  is
subject  to  determinate  laws,  though  they  may  be  unknown.
But,  however  imperfect  the  theory  of  sleep  may  still  be,  in
these  essential  respects,  it  is  fairly  constituted  upon  a
positive  basis  of  its  own ;  for,  looked  at  as  a  whole,  it  is
explained,  according  to  the  scientific  acceptation  of  the
term,  by  its  radical  identity  with  the  phenomena  of  partial
repose  offered  by  all  the  elementary  acts  of  the  animal  life.
When  the  theoiw  of  intermittence  is  perfected,  we  shall,  J
imagine,  adopt  Gall's  view  of  connecting  it  with  the  svni-
pathy  which  characterizes  all  the  organs  of  animal  life,  bv
regarding  the  two  parts  of  the  symmetrical  apparatus  as
alternately  active  and  passive,  so  tliat  their  function  is
never  simultanecms :  and  this,  as  much  in  regard  to  the
external  senses  as  the  intellectual  organs.  All  this,  how-
ever, deserves  a  fresh  and  thorough  investigation.

The  theory   of  Habit  is   a  sort   of  necessai-y  u-i't

ai)pendix   to    that    of  intermittence ;    and,  like  '*'  *^  '


110  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

it,  due  to  Bicliat.  A  contiuiions  phenomenon  would  be,  in
fact,  capable  of  pei'sistence,  in  virtue  of  the  law  of  inertia ;
but  intermittent  phenomena  alone  can  give  rise  to  habits,
properly  so  called  :  that  is,  can  tend  to  reproduce  them-
selves spontaneously  through  the  influence  of  a  preliminary
repetition,  sufficiently  prolonged  at  suitable  intervals.  The
importance  of  this  animal  property  is  now  universally
acknowledged  among  able  inquirers,  who  see  in  it  one  of
the  chief  bases  of  the  gradual  perfectibility  cf  animals,
and  especially  of  Man.  Through  this  it  is  that  vital  phe-
numena  may,  in  some  sort,  participate  in  the  admirable
regularity  of  those  of  the  inorganic  world,  by  becoming,
like  them,  periodical,  notwithstanding  their  greater  com-
plexity. Thence  also  results  the  transformations, — optional
up  to  a  certain  point  of  inveteracy  of  hal)it,  and  inevitable
beyond  that  point, — of  voluntary  acts  into  involuntary  ten-
dencies. But  the  study  of  habit  is  no  further  advanced
than  that  of  intermittence,  in  regard  to  its  analysis :  for
we  have  paid  more  attention  hitherto  to  the  influence  of
habits  once  contracted  than  to  their  origin,  with  regard  to
which  scarcely  any  scientific  doctrine  exists.  What  is
known  lies  in  the  department  of  natural  history,  and  not
in  that  of  biology.  Perhaps  it  may  be  found,  in  the  course
of  scientific  study,  that  we  have  been  too  hasty  in  calling
this  an  animal  property,  though  the  animal  structure  may
be  more  susceptible  of  it.  In  fact,  thei'e  is  no  doubt  that
inorganic  ap]iaralus  admits  of  a  more  easy  reproduction
of  the  same  acts  after  a  sufficient  regular  and  j)rolonged
reiteration,  as  I  had  occasion  to  observe  in  regard  to  tlu;
phenomencm  of  sound:  and  this  is  essentially  the  cha-
lacter  of  animal  habit.  According  to  this  view,  which  I
commend  to  the  attention  of  biologists,  and  which,  if  true,
would  constitute  the  most  general  point  of  view  on  this
subject,  the  law  of  habit  may  be  scientifically  attached  to
the  law  of  inertia,  as  geometers  understand  it  in  the  posi-
tive theory  of  motion  aud  equililirium.

In  examining  the  pheuomena  common  to  irrital)ility  and
sensibility  under  the  aspect  of  their  activity,  piiysiologists
have  to  examine  the  two  extreme  terms, — exaggerated
action,  and  insufHcient  action,  in  order  to  deteiinine  the
intermediate  normal  degree:  for  the  study  of  intermediate


HABIT   AND    THE   NEED    OF   ACTIVITY.  Ill

cases  can  never  be  successfully  undertaken  till  the  extreme
cases  wliicli  comprehend  them  have  been  tirst  examined.

The   need  of   exercising  the   faculties   is
certainly  the  most  general  and  important  of  activit's

all  those  that  belong  to  the  animal  life  :  we
may  even  say  that  it  comprehends  them  all,  if  we  exclude
what  relates  merely  to  the  organic  life.  The  existence  of
an  animal  organ  is  enough  to  awaken  the  need  imme-
diately. We  shall  see,  in  the  next  volume,  that  this  con-
sideration is  one  of  the  chief  bases  that  social  physics
derives  from  individual  physiology.  Unhappily  this  study
is  still  very  imperfect  with  regard  to  most  of  the  animal
functions,  and  to  all  the  three  degrees  of  their  activity.
To  it  we  must  refer  the  analysis  of  all  the  varied  phe-
nomena of  pleasure  and  pain,  physical  and  moral.  The
case  of  defect  has  been  even  less  studied  than  that  of
excess ;  and  yet  its  scientific  examination  is  certainly  not
less  important,  on  account  of  the  theory  of  enmii,  the  con-
sideration of  which  is  so  prominent  in  social  physics, — not
only  in  connection  with  an  advanced  state  of  civilization,
but  even  in  the  roughest  periods,  in  which,  as  we  shall  see
hereafter,  ennui  is  one  of  the  chief  moving  springs  of  social
evolution.  As  for  the  intermediate  degree,  which  cha-
racterizes health,  welfare,  and  finally  happiness,  it  cannot
be  well  treated  till  the  extremes  are  better  xinderstood.
The  only  ]iositive  princii)le  yet  established  in  this  part  of
])hysi()logy  is  that  which  prescribes  that  we  should  not
contt'mplate  this  normal  degree  in  an  absolute  manner,  but
in  subordination  to  the  intrinsic  energy  of  the  corre-
sponding faculties  ;  as  popular  good  sense  has  already
admitted,  however  difficult  it  may  be  practically  to  con-
form to  the  precept  in  social  matters,  from  the  unreflecting
tendency  of  every  man  to  erect  himself  into  a  necessary
type  of  the  whole  species.

We  have  now  only  to  notice,  further,  the  third  order  o1'
considerations;  the  study  of  the  association  of  the  animal
fimctions.

This  great  subject  should  be  divided  into    Association  ot"
two    parts,    relating    to    the    siimpathies,    to    the  animal
which    Bicdiat   has    sufficiently    drawn    the    functions,
attention  of  physiologists,   and  the  synergies,   as   Barthez


112  POSITIVE    PIIILOSOI'IIV,

has  called  them,  which  are  at  present  too  much  neglected.
The  difference  between  these  two  sorts  of  vital  association
corresponds  to  that  between  the  normal  and  the  patho-
logical states :  for  there  is  synergy  whenever  two  organs
concur  simultaneously  in  the  regular  accomplishment  of
any  function  ;  whereas  sympathy  supposes  a  certain  per-
turbation, momentary  or  permanent,  partial  or  general,
which  has  to  be  stopped  by  the  intervention  of  an  organ
not  primarily  affected.  These  two  modes  of  physiological
association  are  proper  to  the  animal  life,  any  appearance
to  the  contrary  being  due  to  the  influence  of  animal  over
organic  action.  The  study  is  fairly  established  on  a  rational
basis ;  the  physiologists  of  our  time  seeming  to  be  all
agreed  as  to  the  nei'vous  system  being  the  necessary  agent
of  all  sympathy ;  and  this  is  enoiagh  for  the  foundation
of  a  positive  theory.  Beyond  this,  we  have  only  disjointed
though  numerous  facts.  The  study  of  the  synergies,  though
more  simple  and  better  circumscribed,  does  not  present,  as
yet,  a  more  satisfactory  scientific  character,  either  as  to
the  mutual  association  of  the  different  motions,  or  as  to
the  different  modes  of  sensibility  ;  or  as  to  the  more  general
and  complex  association  between  the  phenomena  of  sensi-
bility and  those  of  irritability.  And  yet  this  great  subject
leads  directly  to  the  most  important  theory  that  physiology
can  finally  jiresent, — that  of  the  fundamental  unity  of  the
animal  organism,  as  a  necessary  result  of  a  harmony  be-
tween its  various  chief  functions.  Here  alone  it  is  that,
taking  each  elementary  faculty  in  its  normal  state,  we  can
find  the  sound  theory  of  the  Ego,  so  absurdly  perverted
at  present  by  the  vain  dreams  of  the  metaphysicians :  for
the  general  sense  of  the  I  is  certainly  determined  by  the
equilibrium  of  the  faculties,  the  disturbance  of  which
impairs  that  consciousness  so  profoundly  in  many  diseases.


11^


CHAPTER  VI.

INTELLECTUAL    AND    MORAL,    OR    CEREBRAL    FUNCTIONS.

THE  remaining  portion  of  biological  philosophy  is  that
which  relates  to  the  study  of  the  affective  and  intel-
lectual faculties,  which  leads  us  over  from  individual  phy-
siology to  Social  Physics,  as  vegetative  physiology  does
from  the  inorganic  to  the  organic  philosophy.

Wliile    Descartes   was    rendering   to    the     .,,     ,
,  1    , ,  1      .  .  £•!•..•  bhortcomin*:-

world  the  glorious   service  ot   instituting  a     ^^  Descartes

complete  system  of  positive  philosophy,  the
reformer,  with  all  his  bold  energy,  was  unable  to  raise
himself  so  far  above  his  age  as  to  give  its  complete  logical
extension  to  his  own  theory  by  comprehending  in  it  the
part  of  physiology  that  relates  to  intellectual  and  moral
phenomena.  After  having  instituted  a  vast  mechanical
hypothesis  upon  the  fundamental  theory  of  the  most  simple
and  universal  phenomena,  he  extended  in  succession  the
same  philosophical  spirit  to  the  different  elementary  notions
relating  to  the  inorganic  world ;  and  finally  subordinated
to  it  the  study  of  the  chief  physical  functions  of  the  animal
organism.  But,  when  he  arrived  at  the  functions  of  the
affections  and  the  intellect,  he  stopped  abrujjtly,  and  ex-
pressly constituted  from  them  a  special  study,  as  an
appurtenance  of  the  metaphysico-theological  philosophy,
to  which  he  thus  endeavoured  to  give  a  kind  of  new  life,
after  having  wrought  far  more  successfully  in  sapping  its
scientific  foundations.  We  have  an  unquestionable  evi-
dence of  the  state  of  his  mind  in  his  celebrated  paradox
about  the  intelligence  and  instincts  of  animals.  He  called
brutes  automata,  rather  than  allow  the  application  of  the
old  philosophy  to  them.  Being  unable  to  pursue  this
method  with  Man,  he  delivered  him  over  expressly  to  the
domain  of  metaphysics  and  theology.  It  is  difficult  to  see
how  he  could  have  done  otherwise,  in  the  then  existing
II.  I


114  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

state  of  knowledge :  and  we  owe  to  his  strange  liypotbesis,
which  the  physiologists  went  to  work  to  confvite,  the  clear-
ing away  of  the  partition  which  he  set  up  between  the
study  of  animals  and  that  of  Man,  and  consequently,  the
entire  elimination  among  the  higher  order  of  investigators,
of   theological  and  metaphysical  philosophy.      What   the

first  con ti'adictory  constitution  of  the  modern
History  till  i  -i  i  •      j.i  i.

Gall's  time         philosophy    was,   we   may   see  ni  the    great

work  of  Malebranche,  who  was  the  chief
interpreter  of  Descartes,  and  who  shows  how  his  philo-
sophy continued  to  aj^ply  to  the  most  complex  parts  of
the  intellectual  system  the  same  methods  which  had  been
shown  to  be  necessarily  futile  with  regard  to  the  simplest
subjects.  It  is  necessary  to  indicate  this  state  of  things
because  it  has  remained  essentially  unaltered  during  the
last  two  centuries,  notwithstanding  the  vast  progress  of
positive  science,  which  has  all  the  while  been  gradually
preparing  for  its  inevitable  transformation.  The  school
of  Boerhaave  left  Descartes's  division  of  subjects  as  they
fovmd  it :  and  if  they,  the  successors  of  Descartes  in  phy-
siology, abandoned  this  department  of  it  to  the  metaphysical
method,  it  can  be  no  wonder  that  intellectual  and  moral
phenomena  remained,  till  this  century,  entirely  excluded
from  the  great  scientific  movement  originated  and  guided
by  the  impulse  of  Descartes.  The  growing  action  of  the
positive  sj)irit  has  been,  during  the  whole  succeeding  in-
terval, merely  critical, — attacking  the  inefficacy  of  meta-
physical studies, — exhibiting  the  perpetual  reconciliation
of  the  naturalists  on  points  of  genuine  doctrine,  in  contrast
to  the  incessant  disputes  of  various  metaphysicians,  arguing
still,  as  from  Plato  downwards,  about  the  very  elements  of
their  pretended  science :  this  criticism  itself  relating  only
to  results,  and  still  offering  no  objection  to  the  supremacy
of  metaphysical  philosophy,  in  the  study  of  Man,  in  his
intellectual  and  moral  aspects.  It  was  not  till  our  own
time  that  modern  science,  with  tlie  illustrious  Gall  for  its
organ,  drove  the  old  philosophy  from  this  last  ])orfion  of
its  domain,  and  passed  on  in  the  inevitable  course  from  the
critical  to  the  organic  state,  striving  in  its  turn  to  treat  in
its  own  way  the  general  theory  of  the  highest  vital  func-
tions.    However  imperfect  the  first  attem2:)ts,  the  thing  is


NEW  SYSTEM    OF   BIOLOGICAL    I.WESTIGATION,      115

done.  Subjected  for  half  a  century  to  the  most  decisive  tests,
this  new  doctrine  has  clearly  manifested  all  the  indications
which  can  guarantee  the  indestructible  vitality  of  scientific
conceptions.  Neither  enmity  nor  irrational  advocacy  has
hindered  the  continuous  spread,  in  all  parts  of  the  scientific
world,  of  the  new  system  of  investigation  of  intellectual  and
moral  man.  All  the  signs  of  the  progressive  success  of  a
happy  philosophical  revolution  are  present  in  this  case.

The  positive  theory  of  the  affective  and  in-  Positive
tellectual  functions  is  thei'efore  settled,  irre-  theory  "f
versibly,  to  be  this: — it  consists  in  the  experi-  Cerebral
mental  and  rational  study  of  the  phenomena  'mctioiis.
of  interior  sensibility  proper  to  the  cerebral  ganglions,
apart  from  all  im  mediate  external  apparatus.  These  jAeno-
mena  are  the  most  complex  and  the  most  special  of  all
belonging  to  physiology  ;  and  therefore  they  have  naturally
been  the  last  to  attain  to  a  jjositive  analysis  ;  to  say  nothing
of  their  relation  to  social  considerations,  which  must  be  an
impediment  in  the  way  of  their  study.  This  study  could
not  precede  the  principal  scientific  conceptions  of  the
organic  life,  or  the  first  notions  of  the  animal  life  ;  so  that
Gall  must  follow  Bichat :  and  our  sur2:>rise  would  be  that
he  followed  him  so  soon,  if  the  maturity  of  his  task  did
not  explain  it  sufiiciently.  The  grounds  of
my  provisional  separation  of  this  part  of  place  °^'^^
physiology  from  the  province  of  animal  life
generally  are — the  eminent  diiferences  between  this  order
of  i^henomena  and  those  that  have  gone  before, — their
more  direct  and  striking  importance, — and,  above  all,  the
greater  imperfection  of  our  present  study  of  them.  This
new  body  of  doctrine,  thus  ei'ected  into  a  third  section  of
physiology,  will  assume  its  true  place  within  the  lioun-
daries  of  the  second  when  we  ol  itain  a  distincter  knowledge
of  organic,  and  a  more  philosophical  conception  of  animal
physiology.  We  must  bear  in  mind  what  the  pi'0])er
arrangement  should  be, — this  third  department  differing
mucli  less  from  the  second  than  the  second  differs  from
the  first.

We  need  not  stop  to  draw  ovit  any  parallel     Vices  of  Psy-
or  contrast  between  phrenology  and  psycho-     chological
logy.     Grail  has  fully  and  clearly  exposed  the     systems.


116  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

poweiiessuess  of  metaphysical  methods  foi'  the  study  of
intellectual  and  moral  phenomena :  and  in  the  pi-esent
state  of  the  human  mind,  all  discussion  on  this  subject  is
superfluous.  The  great  jjhilosophical  cause  is  tried  and
judged;  and  the  metaphysicians  have  passed  from  a  state
of  domination  to  one  of  jjrotestation, — in  the  learned  world
at  least,  where  their  opposition  would  obtain  no  attention
but  for  the  inconvenience  of  their  still  impeding  the  pro-
gress of  popular  reason.  The  triumph  of  the  positive
method  is  so  decided  that  it  is  needless  to  devote  time  and
effort  to  any  demonstration,  except  in  the  way  of  instruc-
tion :  but,  in  order  to  characterize,  by  a  striking  conti'ast,
the  true  general  spirit  of  phrenological  physiology,  it  may
be  useful  here  to  analyse  very  briefly  the  radical  vices  of
the  pretended  physiological  method,  considered  merely  in
regard  to  what  it  has  in  common  in  the  principal  existing
schools  ; — in  those  called  the  French,  the  Grerman,  and  (the
least  consistent  and  also  the  least  absurd  of  the  three)  the
Scotch  school : — that  is,  as  far  as  we  can  talk  of  schools  m
a  philosophy  which,  by  its  nature,  must  engender  as  many
incompatible  opinions  as  it  has  adepts  gifted  with  any
degree  of  imagination.  We  may,  moreover,  refer  con-
fidently to  these  sects  for  the  mutual  refutation  of  their
most  essential  points  of  diiference.

Method.  As  for  their  fundamental  principle  of  w-

Interior  terior  observation,  it  would  certainly  be  super-

Observation,  fluous  to  add  anything  to  what  I  have  already
said  about  the  absurdity  of  the  supposition  of  a  man  seeing
himself  think.  It  was  well  remarked  by  M.  Broussais,  on
this  point,  that  such  a  method,  if  possible,  would  extremely
restrict  the  study  of  the  understanding,  by  necessarily
limiting  it  to  the  case  of  adult  and  healthy  Man,  without
any  hope  of  illustrating  this  difficult  doctrine  by  any  com-
parison of  different  ages,  or  consideration  of  pathological
states,  Avhich  yet  are  unanimously  recognized  as  indis-
pensable auxiliaries  in  the  simplest  researches  about  Man.
But,  further,  Ave  must  be  also  struck  by  the  resolute  inter-
dict which  is  laid  upon  all  intellectual  and  moi'al  study  of
animals,  from  whom  the  psychologists  can  hardly  be
expecting  any  interior  observation.  It  seems  rather  strange
that  the  philosophers  who  have  so  attenuated  this  immense


METHOD    OF    INTERIOR   OBSERVATION.  117

subject  sliould  be  those  who  are  for  ever  reproaching  their
adversaries  with  a  want  of  comprehensiveness  and  elevation.
The  case  of  animals  is  the  rock  on  which  all  psycholoo;ical
theories  have  split,  since  the  naturalists  have  compelled
the  metaphysicians  to  part  with  the  singular  expedient
imagined  by  Descartes,  and  to  admit  that  animals,  in  the
higher  parts  of  the  scale  at  least,  manifest  most  of  our
affective,  and  even  intellectual  faculties,  with  mei'e  differ-
ences of  degree  ;  a  fact  which  no  one  at  this  day  ventures
to  deny,  and  which  is  enough  of  itself  to  demonstrate  the
absurdity  of  these  idle  conceptions.

Recurring  to  the  first  ideas  of  philosophical  common
sense,  it  is  at  once  evident  that  no  function  can  be  studied
but  with  relation  to  the  organ  that  fulfils  it,  or  to  the
phenomena  of  its  fulfilment :  and,  in  the  second  place,  that
the  affective  functions,  and  yet  more  the  intellectual,  ex-
hibit in  the  latter  respect  this  particular  characteristic, —
that  they  cannot  be  observed  during  their  operation,  but
only  in  their  results, — moi'e  or  less  immediate,  and  more
or  less  durable.  There  are  then  only  two  ways  of  studying
such  an  order  of  functions ;  either  determining,  with  all
attainable  precision,  the  various  organic  conditions  on
which  they  depend, — which  is  the  chief  object  of  phreno-
logical physiology  ;  or  in  directly  observing  the  series  of
intellectual  and  moral  acts, — which  belongs  rather  to
natural  history,  properly  so  called :  these  two  inseparable
aspects  of  one  subject  being  always  so  conceived  as  to
throw  light  on  each  other.  Thus  regarded,  this  great
study  is  seen  to  be  indissolubly  connected  on  the  one  hand
with  the  whole  of  the  foregoing  parts  of  natural  philosophy,
and  especially  with  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  biology ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  with  the  whole  of  history. — of
animals  as  well  as  of  man  and  of  humanity.  But  when,
by  the  pi-etended  psychological  metliod,  the  consideration
of  both  the  agent  and  the  act  is  discarded  altogether,  what
material  can  remain  but  an  unintelligible  conflict  of  words,
in  which  merely  nominal  entities  are  substituted  for  real
phenomena?  The  most  difficult  study  of  all  is  thus  set  up
in  a  state  of  isolation,  without  any  one  point  of  support  in
the  most  simple  and  perfect  sciences,  over  which  it  is  yet
proposed  to  give  it  a  majestic  sovereignty :  and  in  this  all


118  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

psychologists  agree,  however  extreme  may  be  their  diifei'-
ences  on  other  points.

J.     . ..  About  the  method  of  psychology  or  ideo-

Relation  l)e-       1*^B7'   enough   has   been    said.      As   to   the
tweeu  the  doctrine,  the  first  glance  shows  a  radical  fault

Atlective  and  in  it,  common  to  all  sects, — a  false  estimate
Intellectnal  ^^  ^j-jg  general  relations  between  the  affective
and  the  intellectual  faculties.  However
various  may  be  the  theories  about  the  preponderance  of  the
latter,  all  metaphysicians  assert  that  preponderance  by
making  these  faculties  their  starting-point.  The  intellect
is  almost  exclusively  the  subject  of  their  speculations,  and
the  affections  have  been  almost  entirely  neglected  ;  and,
moreover,  always  subordinated  to  the  understanding.  Now,
such  a  conception  represents  precisely  the  reverse  of  the
reality,  not  only  for  animals,  but  also  for  Man :  for  daily
experience  shows  that  the  affections,  the  propensities,  the
passions,  are  the  great  springs  of  human  life;  and  that,
so  far  from  resulting  from  intelligence,  their  spontaneous
and  inde]:)endent  impulse  is  indispensable  to  the  first
awakening  and  continuous  development  of  the  various  in-
tellectual faculties,  by  assigning  to  them  a  permanent  end,
without  which — to  say  nothing  of  the  vagueness  of  their
general  direction — they  would  remain  dormant  in  the
majority  of  men.  It  is  even  but  too  certain  that  the  least
noble  and  most  animal  propensities  are  habitually  the
most  energetic,  and  therefore  the  most  influential.  The
whole  of  human  nature  is  thus  veiy  unfaithfully  repre-
sented by  these  futile  systems,  which,  if  noticing  the
affective  facilities  at  all,  have  vaguely  connected  them  with
one  single  principle,  sympathy,  and,  above  all,  self-
consciousness,  always  supposed  to  be  directed  by  the  in-
tellect. Thus  it  is  that,  contrary  to  evidence,  Man  has
been  represented  as  essentially  a  reasoning  being,  con-
tinually carrying  on,  unconsciously,  a  multitude  of  imper-
ceptible (calculations,  with  scarcely  any  spontaneity  of
action,  from  infancy  upwards.  This  false  conception  has
doubtless  been  supported  by  a  consideration  worthy  of  all
respect, — that  it  is  by  the  intellect  that  Man  is  modified
and  improved ;  but  science  reqiiires,  before  all  things,  the
reality  of  any  views,  independently  of  their  desirableness ;


THE   AFFECTIVE    AND    INTELLFCTUAL    FACULTIES.     119

and  it  is  always  this  reality  wliicla  is  the  basis  of  genuine
utility.  Without  denying  the  secondary  influence  of  such
a  view,  we  can  show  that  two  jjurely  philosophical  causes,
(|uite  unconnected  with  any  idea  of  application,  and  inherent
in  the  nature  of  the  method,  have  led  the  metaphysicians  of
all  sects  to  this  hypothesis  of  the  supremacy  of  the  intellect.
Thefirst  is  the  radical  separation  which  it  was  thought  neces-
sary to  make  between  brutes  and  man,  and  p .  +
which  would  have  been  eifaced  at  once  by  the  ]yj.^j^
admission  of  the  preponderance  of  the  affec-
tive over  the  intellectual  faculties  ;  and  the  second  was  the
necessity  that  the  metaphysicians  found  themselves  under,
of  preserving  the  unity  of  what  they  called  the  I,  that  it
might  correspond  with  the  luiity  of  the  soul,  rp,  .  r  ,i  r
in  obedience  to  the  requisitions  of  the  theo-
logical philosophy,  of  which  metapliysics  is,  as  we  must  ever
bear  in  mind,  the  final  transformation.  But  the  positive
philosophers,  who  apjjroach  the  question  with  the  simple
aim  of  ascertaining  the  true  state  of  things,  and  repro-
ducing it  with  all  positive  accuracy  in  their  theories,  have
perceived  that,  according  to  universal  experience,  human
nature  is  so  far  fi'om  being  single  that  it  is  eminently
multiple ;  that  is,  usually  induced  in  various  directions  by
distinct  and  independent  powers,  among  which  ecjuilibrium
is  established  with  extreme  difficulty  when,  as  usually
happens  in  civilized  life,  no  one  of  them  is,  in  itself,  suffi-
ciently marked  to  acquire  spontaneously  any  considerable
preponderance  over  the  rest.  Thus,  the  famous  theory  of
the  T  is  essentially  without  a  scientific  object,  since  it  is
destined  to  represent  a  purely  fictitious  state.  There  is,  in
this  direction,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  no  other  real
subject  of  positive  investigation  than  the  study  of  the
equilibrium  of  the  various  animal  functions, — both  of  irri-
tability and  of  sensibility, — which  marks  the  normal  state,
in  which  each  of  them,  duly  moderated,  is  I'egularly  and
permanently  associated  with  the  whole  of  the  others,
according  to  the  laws  of  sympathy,  and  yet  more  of
synergy.  The  very  absti-act  and  indirect  notion  of  the  I
proceeds  from  the  continuous  sense  of  such  a  harmony  ;
that  is,  from  the  imiversal  accordance  of  the  entire
organism.     Psychologists  have  attem2:)ted  in  vain  to  make


120  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

out  of  this  idea,  or  rather  sense,  an  attribute  of  humanity
exchisively.  It  is  evidently  a  necessary  result  of  all  animal
life  ;  and  therefore  it  must  belong  to  all  animals,  whether
they  are  able  to  discourse  upon  it  or  not.  No  doubt  a  cat,
or  any  other  vertebrated  animal,  without  knowing  how  to
say  "  I,"  is  not  in  the  habit  of  taking  itself  for  another.
Moreover,  it  is  probable  that  among  the  superior  animals
the  sense  of  personality  is  still  more  marked  than  in  Man,
on  account  of  their  more  isolated  life ;  though  if  we
descended  too  far  in  the  zoological  scale  we  should  reach
organisms  in  which  the  continvious  degradation  of  the
nervous  system  attenuates  this  compound  sense,  to-
gether with  the  various  simple  feelings  on  which  it
depends.

It  must  not  be  overlooked  that  though  the
Instinct'  psychologists  have  agreed  in  neglecting  the

intellectual  and  moral  faculties  of  brutes,
which  have  been  ha]ipily  left  to  the  naturalists,  they  have
occasioned  great  mischief  by  their  oV)Scin'e  and  indefinite
distinction  between  intelligence  and  instinct,  thus  setting
wp  a  division  between  human  and  animal  natin-e  which  has
had  too  much  effect  even  upon  zoologists  to  this  day.  The
only  meaning  that  can  be  attributed  to  the  word  instinct,
is  any  spontaneous  impulse  in  a  determinate  direction,  in-
dependently of  any  foreign  influence.  In  this  primitive
sense,  the  term  evidently  applies  to  the  proper  and  direct
activity  of  any  faculty  whatever,  intellectual  as  well  as
affective ;  and  it  therefore  does  not  conflict  with  the  term
intelligence  in  any  way,  as  we  so  often  see  when  we  speak
of  those  who,  without  any  education,  manifest  a  mai*ked
talent  for  music,  painting,  mathematics,  etc.  In  this  way
there  is  instinct,  or  rather,  there  are  instincts  in  Man,  as
much  or  more  than  in  brutes.  If,  on  the  tether  hand,  we
describe  intelligence  as  the  aptitude  to  modify  conduct  in
conformity  to  the  circumstances  of  each  case, — which,  in
fact,  is  the  main  joractical  attribute  of  reasoti,  in  its  pro])er
sense, — it  is  more  evident  than  before  that  there  is  no
other  essential  difference  between  humanity  and  animality
than  that  of  the  degree  of  development  admitted  by  a
faculty  which  is,  by  its  nature,  common  to  all  animal  life,
and.  without  which  it  could  not  even  be  conceived  to  exist.


REASON   AND    INSTINCT.  121

TliiTS  the  famous  scholastic  definition  of  Man  as  a  reason-
able animal  offers  a  real  no-meaning,  since  no  animal,
especially  in  the  higher  parts  of  the  zoological  scale,  could
live  without  being  to  a  certain  extent  reasonable,  in  pro-
portion to  the  complexity  of  its  organism.  Though  the
moral  nature  of  animals  has  been  but  little  and  very  im-
l^erfectly  exploited,  we  can  yet  perceive,  without  possibility
of  mistake,  among  those  that  live  with  us  and  that  are
familiar  with  us, — judging  of  them  by  the  same  means  of
observation  that  we  should  employ  about  men  whose
language  and  ways  were  previously  unknown  to  us. — that
they  not  only  apply  their  intelligence  to  the  satisfaction  of
their  organic  wants,  much  as  men  do,  aiding  themselves
also  with  some  sort  of  language ;  but  that  they  are,  in  like
manner,  susceptible  of  a  kind  of  wants  more  disinterested,
inasmuch  as  they  consist  in  a  need  to  exercise  their
faculties  for  the  mere  pleasvire  of  the  exercise.  It  is  the
same  thing  that  leads  children  or  savages  to  invent  new
sports,  and  that  renders  them,  at  the  same  time,  liable  to
ennui.  That  state,  erroneously  set  up  as  a  special  privilege
of  human  nature,  is  sometimes  sufficiently  marked,  in  the
case  of  certain  animals,  to  urge  them  to  suicide,  when
captivity  has  become  intolerable.  An  attentive  examina-
tion of  the  facts  therefore  discredits  the  perversion  of  the
word  instinct  when  it  is  used  to  signify  the  fatality  under
which  animals  are  impelled  to  the  mechanical  performance
of  acts  uniformly  determinate,  without  any  possible  modi-
fication from  corresponding  circumstances,  and  neither  re-
quiring nor  allowing  any  education,  properly  so  called.
This  gratuitous  supposition  is  evidently  a  remnant  of  the
automatic  hypothesis  of  Descartes.  Leroy  has  demon-
strated that  among  mammifers  and  birds  this  ideal  fixity
in  the  construction  of  habitations,  in  the  seeking  of  food
by  hunting,  in  the  mode  of  migi'atiou,  etc.,  exists  only  in
the  eyes  of  closet-naturalists  or  inattentive  observers.

After  thus  much  notice  of  the  radical  vice  of  all  psycho-
logical systems,  it  would  be  departing  from  the  object  of
this  work  to  show  how  the  intellectual  faculties  themselves
have  been  misconceived.  It  is  enough  to  refer  to  the  refu-
tation by  which  Gall  and  Spurzheim  have  introduced  their
labours :    and  I   would  particularly   point  out  the    philo-


122  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

sophical  demonstration  by  which  they  have  exhibited  the
conclusion  that  sensation,  memory,  imagination,  and  even
judgment, — all  the  scholastic  faculties,  in  short, — are  not,
in  tact,  fundamental  and  abstract  faculties,  but  only  differ-
ent degrees  or  consecutive  modes  of  the  same  phenomenon,
])ro])er  to  each  of  the  true  elementary  phrenological  func-
tions, and  necessarily  variable  in  different  cases,  with
a  i^roportionate  activity.  One  virtue  of  this  admirable
analysis  is  that  it  deprives  the  varioiis  metaphysical
theories  of  their  one  remaining  credit, — their  mutual
criticism,  which  is  here  effected,  once  for  all,  with  more
efficacy  than  by  any  one  of  the  mutually  opposing  schools.
Again,  it  would  be  departing  from  the  object  of  this
portion  of  our  work  to  judge  of  the  doctrines  of  the  schools
by  their  results.  What  these  have  been  we  shall  see  in
the  next  volume;  the  deplorable  influence  on  the  political
and  social  condition  of  two  generations  of  the  doctrines  of
the  French  school,  as  presented  by  Helvetius,  and  of  the
German  psychology,  with  the  ungovei'iiable  /  for  its  sub-
ject;  and  the  impotence  of  the  Scotch  school,  through  the
vagueness  of  what  it  called  its  doctrines,  and  their  want  of
mutual  connection.  Dismissing  all  these  for  the  present,
we  must  examine  the  great  attempt  of  Gall,  in  order  to  see
what  is  wanting  in  phrenological  philoso])hy  to  form  it
into  the  scientific  constitution  which  is  proper  to  it,  and
from  which  it  is  necessarily  still  more  remote  than  organic,
and  even  animal  physiology.

_,    .      .  .,  ,,,  Two  i)hilosophical  in'inciples,  now  admitted

isasis  or  (jail  s    ,1       •     -■•        ^^  ,  ,       ^  ,1       •  ii

doctrine  indisputable,  serve  as  tlie  immovable

basis  of  Gall's  doctrine  as  a  whole :  viz.,  the
iunateness  of  the  fundamental  dispositions,  affective  and
intellectual,  and  the  plurality  of  the  distinct  and  inde-
pendent faculties,  though  real  acts  usually  require  their
more  or  less  complex  concurrence.  Within  the  limits  of
the  human  race,  all  cases  of  marked  talents  or  character
prove  the  first ;  and  the  second  is  proved  by  the  diversity
of  such  marked  cases,  and  by  most  pathological  states, —
especially  by  those  in  which  the  nervous  system  is  directly
affected.  A  comparative  observation  of  the  higher  animals
would  dispel  all  doubt,  if  any  existed  in  either  case.  These
two  principles, — aspects  of  a  single  fundamental  concep-


gall's  phrenological  doctrine.  123

tion, — are  but  the  scientific  expression  of  the  results  of
experience,  in  all  times  and  places,  as  to  the  intellectual
and  moral  nature  of  Man, — an  indispensable  symptom  of
truth,  with  regard  to  all  parent  ideas,  which  must  always
be  connected  with  the  spontaneous  indications  of  popular
reason,  as  we  have  seen  in  2:)receding  cases  in  natural  philo-
sophy. Thus,  besides  all  guidance  from  analogy,  after  the
study  of  the  animal  life,  we  derive  confirmation  from  all
the  methods  of  investigation  that  physiology  admits  ;  from
direct  observation,  exjDeriment,  pathological  analysis,  the
comj^arative  method  and  popular  good  sense,— all  of  which
converge  towards  the  establishment  of  this  double  ]n"in-
ciple.  Such  a  collection  of  proofs  secures  the  stability  of
this  much  of  phrenological  doctrine,  whatever  transforma-
tions other  parts  may  have  to  undergo.  In  the  anatomical
view,  this  physiological  conception  corresponds  with  the
division  of  the  brain  into  a  certain  number  of  partical
organs,  symmetrical  like  those  of  the  animal  life,  and,
though  more  contiguous  and  mutually  resembliiig  than  in
any  other  system,  and  therefore  more  adapted  both  for
sympathy  and  synergy,  still  distinct  and  mutually  inde-
pendent, as  we  were  already  aware  was  the  case  with  the
ganglions  appropriate  to  the  external  senses.  In  brief,  the
brain  is  no  longer  an  organ,  but  an  apjjaratus  of  organs,
more  complex  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  animality.  The
proper  object  uf  phrenological  physiology  thence  consists
in  determining  the  cei-ebral  organ  appropriate  to  each
clearly  marked,  simple  disposition,  affective  or  intellec-
tual ;  or,  reciprocally,  which  is  more  difficult,  what  func-
tion is  fulfilled  by  any  portion  of  the  mass  of  the  brain
which  exhil;>its  the  anatomical  conditions  of  a  distinct
organ.  The  two  processes  are  directed  to  develope  the
agreement  between  physiological  and  anatomical  analysis
which  constitutes  the  true  science  of  living  beings.  Un-
fortunately, our  means  are  yet  further  from  answering
our  aims  than  in  the  two  preceding  divisions  of  the
science.

The   scientific   princii)le    involved   in    the        t^-  •  •
phrenological    view    is    that    the    functions,        th"  brahi  *
affective  and  intellectual,  are  more  elevated,
more  human,  if  you  will,  and  at  the  same  time  less  ener-


124  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

getic,  in  proportion  to  the  exclusiveness  witla  which  they
belong  to  the  higher  j^art  of  the  zoological  series,  their
positions  being  in  portions  of  the  brain  more  and  more
restricted  in  extent,  and  further  removed  from  its  imme-
diate origin, — according  to  the  anatomical  decision  that
the  skull  is  simply  a  prolongation  of  the  vertebral  column,
which  is  the  primitive  centre  of  the  entii'e  nervous  system.
Thus,  the  least  developed  and  anterior  part  of  the  brain  is
appropriated  to  the  characteristic  faculties  of  humanity ;
and  the  most  voluminous  and  hindmost  j^art  to  those  which
constitute  the  basis  of  the  whole  of  the  animal  kingdom.
Here  we  have  a  new  and  confirmatory  instance  of  the  rule
which  we  have  had  to  follow  in  every  science ;  that  it  is
necessary  to  proceed  from  the  most  general  to  the  more
S2:)ecial  attributes,  in  the  order  of  their  diminishing  gene-
rality. We  shall  meet  with  it  again  in  the  one  science
which  remains  for  iis  to  review ;  and  its  constant  presence,
through  the  whole  range,  points  it  out  as  the  first  law  of
the  dogmatic  p)rocedure  of  the  positive  spirit.

A  full  contemplation  of  Grail's  doctrine  convinces  us  of
its  faithful  representation  of  the  intellectual  and  moral
nature  of  Man  and  animals.  All  the  psychological  sects
have  misconceived  or  ignored  the  pre-eminence  of  the
affective  faculties,  plainly  manifest  as  it  is  in  all  the  moral
phenomena  of  brutes,  and  even  of  Man ;  but  we  find  this
fact  placed  on  a  scientific  basis  by  the  discovery  that  the
affective  organs  occupy  all  the  hinder  and  middle  portion
of  the  cerebral  apparatus,  while  the  intellectual  occupy
only  the  front  portion,  which,  in  extreme  cases,  is  not
more  than  a  fourth,  or  even  a  sixth  ])art  of  the  whole.
The  diifereuce  between  Gall  and  his  predecessors  was
not  in  the  separation  of  the  two  kinds  of  faculties,  but
that  they  assigned  the  brain  to  the  intellectual  faculties
alone,  regarding  it  as  a  single  organ,  and  distributing  the
jjassions  among  the  organs  pertaining  to  the  vegetative
life, — the  heart,  the  liver,  etc.  Bichat  supported  this
view  by  the  argument  of  the  sympathies  of  these  organs,
under  the  excitement  of  the  respective  passions ;  but  the
variableness  of  the  seat  of  sympathy,  according  to  native
susceptibility  or  to  accident,  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  such
a   plea,  and   teaches   us   simply  the  imj^ortance  of   con-


SUBDIVISION    OF   THE    FACULTIE.':.  125

sideriug  the  influence  exercised  by  tlie  state  of  the  Iwain
upon  the  nerves  which  supply  tlie  apparatus  of  the  organic
life.

Next  comes  the  subdivision  established  by  Subdivision
Gall  and  Spurzheim  in  each  of  these  two
orders.  The  affective  faculties  are  divided  into  the  pro-
pensities, and  the  affections  or  sentiments,  the  first  re-
siding in  the  hindmost  and  lowest  part  of  the  brain ;  and
the  other  class  in  the  middle  portion.  The  intellectual
faculties  are  divided  into  the  various  percej^tive  faculties,
which  together  constitute  the  range  of  observation  :  and
the  small  number  of  reflective  faculties,  the  highest  of  all,
constituting  the  power  of  combination,  by  comparison  and
co-ordination.  The  upper  part  of  the  frontal  region  is  the
seat  of  these  last,  which  are  the  chief  characteristic  attri-
bute of  human  nature.  There  is  a  certain  deficiency  of
precision  in  this  description  ;  but,  besides  that  we  may
expect  improving  knowledge  to  clear  it  up,  w^e  shall  find,
on  close  examination,  that  the  inconvenience  lies  more  in
the  language  than  in  the  ideas.  The  only  language  we
have  is  derived  from  a  philosophical  period  when  all  moral
and  even  intellectual  ideas  were  shrouded  in  a  mysterious
metaphysical  unity,  which  allows  us  now  no  adequate  choice
of  terms.

Taking  the  ordinary  terms  in  their  literal  sense,  we
should  misconceive  the  fundamental  distinction  between
the  intellectual  faculties  and  the  others.  When  the  former
are  very  marked,  they  unquestionably  produce  real  inclina-
tions or  projiensities,  which  are  distinguished  from  the
inferior  passions  only  by  their  smaller  energy.  Nor  can
we  deny  that  their  action  occasions  true  emotions  or  senti-
ments, more  rare,  more  pure,  more  sublime  than  any  other,
and,  though  less  vivid  than  others,  capable  of  moving  to
tears ;  and  is  testified  by  so  many  instances  of  the  rapture
excited  by  the  discovery  of  truth,  in  the  most  eminent
thinkers  that  have  done  honour  to  their  race — as  Archi-
medes, Descartes,  Ke^jler,  Newton,  etc.  Would  any  thought-
ful student  take  occasion,  by  such  approximations,  to  deny
all  real  distinction  between  the  intellectual  and  affective
faculties?  The  wiser  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the
case  is  that  we  must  reform  our  philosophical  language,  to


126  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

raise  it,  by  rigorous  precision,  to  tlie  dignity  of  scientific
language.  We  may  say  as  much  about  the  subdivision  of
the  affective  faculties  into  ])ropensities  and  sentiments,  the
distinction  being,  though  less  marked,  bv  no  means  less
real.  Apart  from  all  useless  discussion  of  nomenclature,
we  may  say  that  the  real  difference  has  not  been  clearly
seized.  In  a  scientific  vievp,  it  would  suffice  to  say  that
the  first  and  fundamental  class  relates  to  the  individual
alone,  or,  at  most,  to  the  family,  regarded  successively  in
its  principal  needs  of  preservation, — such  as  reproduction,
the  rearing  of  young,  the  mode  of  alimentation,  of  habita-
tion, etc.  Whereas,  the  second  more  sijecial  class  supposes
the  existence  of  some  social  relations,  either  among  indi-
viduals of  a  different  species,  or  especially  between  indi-
viduals of  the  same  sjiecies,  apart  from  sex,  and  determines
the  character  which  the  tendencies  of  the  animal  must
impress  on  each  of  these  relations,  whether  transient  or
])ermanent.  If  we  keep  this  distinctive  character  of  the
two  classes  in  view,  it  will  matter  little  what  terms  we  use
to  indicate  them,  when  once  they  shall  have  acquired  a
sufficient  fixedness,  through  rational  use.

These  are  the  great  philosophical  results  of  Gall's  doc-
trine, regarded,  as  I  have  now  presented  it,  aj^art  from  all
vain  attempts  to  localize  in  a  special  manner  the  cerebral
or  jihrenological  functions.  I  shall  have  to  show  how  such
an  attempt  was  imposed  upon  Gall  by  the  necessities  of
his  glorious  mission  :  but,  notwithstanding  this  unfortunate
necessity,  the  doctrine  embodies  already  a  real  knowledge
of  human  and  brute  nature  very  far  sui^erior  to  all  that
had  ever  been  offered  before.

.  Among  the  innumerable  objections  which

^  )j(x  ion&.         liave  been  aimed  at  this  fine  doctrine, — con-

rsecessity  of       sidered  always  as  a  whole, — the   onlv  one

Juiinan  actions.      ,  .  ,  -it  ■       ■,  ■    ji  '  ^

which  merits  discussion  here  is  the  supposed

necessity  of  human  actions.  This  objection  is  not  only  of
high  importance  in  itself,  but  it  casts  new  light  back  upon
the  spirit  of  the  theory ;  and  we  must  briefly  examine  it
from  the  point  of  view  of  positive  ])hil()so]ihv.

When  objectors  confound  the  sulijecticm  of  events  to
invariable  laws  with  their  necessary  exemption  from  modi-
fication, they  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  phenomena  become


OBJECTIONS   ANSWERED.  127

susceptible  of  inodification  in  proportion  to  their  com-
plexity.    The  onl}'  irresistible  action  that  we  know  of  is

that  of  weiffht,  which  takes  place  under  the  \  „„„„..„  i

IT-        1       p     11  11  Answeieu.

Tnost  general  and  simple  ot  all  natui-ai  laws.

But  the  phenomena  of  life  and  acts  of  the  mind  are  so
highly  complex  as  to  admit  of  modification  beyond  all
estimate  ;  and,  in  the  intermediate  regions,  phenomena  are
under  control  precisely  in  the  order  of  their  complexity.
Gall  and  Spurzheim  have  shown  how  human  action  depends
on  the  coml  lined  operation  of  several  faculties  ;  how  exercise
develops  them  ;  how  inactivity  wastes  them  ;  and  how  the
intellectual  faculties,  adapted  to  modify  the  general  conduct
of  the  animal  according  to  the  variable  exigencies  of  his
situation,  may  overrule  the  practical  influence  of  all  his
other  faculties.  It  is  only  in  mania,  when  disease  inter-
feres with  the  natural  action  of  the  faculties,  that  fatality,
or  what  is  popularly  called  irresponsibility,  exists.  It  is
therefore  a  great  mistake  to  accuse  cerebral  physiology  of
disowning  the  infliience  of  education  or  legislation,  because
it  fixes  the  limits  of  their  power.  It  denies  the  possibility,
asserted  by  the  ideology  of  the  French  school,  of  converting
by  suitable  arrangements,  all  men  into  so  many  Socrates,
Homers,  or  Archimedes ;  and  it  denies  the  ungovernable
energy  of  the  I,  asserted  by  the  German  school ;  but  it
does  not  thei-efore  affect  Man's  reasonable  liberty,  or  inter-
fere with  his  improvement  by  the  aid  of  a  wise  education.
It  is  evident  indeed  that  improvement  by  education  sup-
poses the  existence  of  requisite  predispositions :  and  that
each  of  them  is  subject  to  determinate  laws,  without  which
they  could  not  be  systematically  influenced ;  so  that  it  is,
after  all,  cerebral  physiologv  that  is  in  possession  of  the
philosophical  problem  of  education.  Furthermore,  this
physiology  shows  us  that  men  are  commonly  of  an  average
constitution  ;  that  is,  that,  aj^art  from  a  very  few  excep-
tional organizations,  every  one  possesses  iu  a  moderate
degree  all  the  propensities,  all  the  sentiments,  and  all  the
elementary  aptitudes,  without  an}^  one  faculty  being  re-
markably preponderant.  The  widest  field  is  thus  open
for  education,  in  modifying  in  almost  any  direction  or-
ganisms so  flexible,  though  the  degree  of  their  develop-
ment may  remain  of  that  average  amount  which  consists


128  POSITIVE   PIIILOSUPIIY.

very  well  with  social  liarmouy  ;  as  we  shall  have  occasion
to  see  hereafter.

Hypothetical  A  much  more  serious  objection  to  Gall's

distribution  of  doctrine  arises  out  of  the  venturesome  and
faculties.  largely  erroneous  localization  of  the  faculties

which  he  thought  proper  to  propose.  If  we  look  at  his
position,  we  shall  see  that  he  merely  used  the  right,  common
to  all  natural  philosophers,  of  instituting  a  scientific  hypo-
thesis, in  accordance  with  the  theory  on  that  subject  which
we  examined  in  connection  with  Physics.  He  fulfilled  the
conditions  of  this  theory ;  his  subject  being,  not  any
imaginary  fluids,  ether  or  the  like,  but  tangible  organs,
whose  hypothetical  attributes  admit  of  positive  verifica-
tions. Moreover,  none  of  those  who  have  criticised  his
localization  could  have  proposed  any  less  imperfect,  or,
probably,  so  well  indicated.  The  advice  of  prudent  medio-
crity, to  abstain  from  hypothesis,  is  very  easy  to  offer  ;  but
if  the  advice  was  followed,  nothing  would  ever  be  done  in
the  way  of  scientific  discovei'y.  It  is  doubtless  inconvenient
to  have  to  withdraw  or  remake,  at  a  subsequent  period,  the
hypotheses  to  which  a  science  owes  its  existence,  and  which,
by  that  time,  have  been  adopted  by  inferior  inquirers  with
a  blinder  and  stronger  faith  than  that  of  the  original  pro-
posers :  but  there  is  no  use  in  dwelling  vipon  a  liability
which  arises  from  the  infirmity  of  our  intelligence.  Tlie
practical  point  for  the  future  is  that  strong  minds,  pre-
pared by  a  suitable  scientific  education,  should  plant  them-
selves on  the  two  great  principles  which  have  been  laid
down  as  the  foundation  of  the  science,  and  thence  explore
the  princij)al  needs  of  cerebral  physiology,  and  the  character
of  the  means  by  which  it  may  be  carried  forwards.  Nor
need  there  be  any  fear  that  the  science  will  be  held  back
by  such  a  method.  Nothing  pi-events  us,  when  reasoning,
as  geometers  do,  upon  indeterminate  seats,  or  positions
sup2:)osed  to  be  indeterminate,  from  arriving  at  real  con-
clusions, involving  actual  utility,  as  I  hope  to  show,  from
my  own  experience,  in  the  next  volume  ;  though  it  is  evident
that  it  will  be  a  great  advantage  to  the  exactness  and  efficacy
of  our  conclusions,  whenever  the  time  arrives  for  the  posi-
tive determination  of  the  cerebral  organs.  Meantime  it  is
clear  that  we  owe  to  Grail's  hypothetical  localization  our


IMPROVEMENTS  NEEDED  BY  CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY.      12^

view  of  the  necessity  of  such  a  course  ;  aud  that  if  he  had
confined  himself  to  tlie  higli  philosophical  generalities  with
which  he  has  furnished  us,  he  would  never  have  constituted
a  science,  nor  formed  a  school ;  and  the  truths  which  we
see  to  be  inestimable  would  have  been  strangled  in  their
birth  by  a  coalition  of  hostile  influences.

We  see  what  is  the  philosophical  character
of  cerebral  physiology.     We  must  next  in-       provements
quire  what  are  the  indispensable  improve-
ments that  it  demands.

First,  we   want  a  fundamental  rectification  of  all  the

organs  and  faculties,  as  a  necessary  basis  for  all  further

progress.     Taking  an  anatomical  view  of  this  matter,  we

see  that  the  distribution  of  organs  has  been  directed  by

phvsiological  analvses  alone, — usuallv  imper-  ....
i.    *,        1  ^         c   •   I  1        •      i-      1  ■  £  1    •  Anatoiincal

lect  and  superficial  enough, — instead  of  being        basis

subjected  to  anatomical  determinations.  This
has  entitled  all  anatomists  to  treat  such  a  distribution  as
arbitrary  and  loose,  because,  being  subject  to  no  anatomical
consideration  about  the  difference  between  an  organ  and  a
part  of  an  organ,  it  admits  of  indefinite  subdivisions,  which
each  phrenologist  seems  to  be  able  to  multiply  at  will.
Though  the  analysis  of  functions  no  doubt  casts  much
light  on  that  of  organs,  the  original  decomposition  of  the
whole  organism  into  systems  of  organs,  and  those  again
into  single  organs,  is  not  the  less  independent  of  physio-
logical analysis,  to  which,  on  the  contrary,  it  must  furnish
a  basis.  This  is  established  in  regard  to  all  other  bio-
logical studies  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  cerebi'al  in-
quiries should  be  an  exception.  We  do  not  need  to  see
the  digestive,  or  the  respiratory  apparatus  in  action,  before
anatomy  can  distinguish  them  from  each  other :  and  why
should  it  be  otherwise  with  the  cerebral  apparatus  ?  The
anatomical  difficulties  are  no  doubt  much  greater,  on
account  of  the  resemblance  and  proximity  of  the  organs  in
the  cerebral  case :  but  we  must  not  give  up  this  indispens-
able analysis  for  such  a  reason  as  that.  If  it  were  so,  we
must  despair  of  conferring  a  special  scientific  character  on
phrenological  doctrine  at  all  ;  and  we  must  abide  by  those
generalities  alone  which  I  have  just  laid  down.  Wlien  we
propose  to  develope  the  harmony  between  the  anatomical


130  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

and  the  physiological  analysis  of  any  case,  it  is  supposed
that  each  has  been  separately  established,  and  not  that  the
one  can  be  copied  from  the  other.  Nothing  therefore  can
absolve  the  phrenologists  from  the  obligation  to  pursue
the  analysis  of  the  cerebral  system  by  a  series  of  vigorous
anatomical  labours,  discarding  for  the  time  all  ideas  of
function,  or,  at  most,  employing  them  only  as  auxiliary  to
anatomical  exploration.  Such  a  consideration  will  be  most
earnestly  supported  by  those  phrenologists  who  perceive
that,  in  determining  the  relative  preponderance  of  each
cerebral  organ  in  dilfei'ent  subjects,  it  is  not  only  the  bulk
and  weight  of  the  organ  that  has  to  be  taken  into  the
account,  but  also  its  degree  of  activity,  anatomically  esti-
mated, by,  for  instance,  the  energy  of  its  partial  circu-
lation.

Next,  following  a  distinct  but   parallel  order  of  ideas,

there  must  be  a  j^urely  physiological  analysis
Fliysiological  ^f  ^^q  various  elementaiy  faculties ;  and  in
faculties  ^^^^^   analysis,  which   has   to  be  harmonized

with  the  other,  every  anatomical  idea  must
be,  in  its  turn,  discarded.  The  jjosition  of  2:>hrenology  is
scari'ely  more  satisfactory  in  this  view  than  any  other,  for
the  distinction  between  the  different  faculties,  intellectual
and  even  affective,  and  their  enumeration  ai'e  conceived  of
in  a  very  sujoerficial  way,  though  incomparably  more  in  the
positive  spirit  than  any  metaphysical  analyses.  If  meta-
j)hysicians  have  confounded  all  their  jisychological  notions
in  an  absurd  unity,  it  is  probable  that  the  phrenologists
have  gone  to  the  other  extreme  in  multiplying  elementary
functions.  Gall  set  up  twenty-seven  ;  which  was,  no  doubt,
an  exaggeration  to  begin  with.  Spurzheim  raised  the  num-
ber to  thirty-five  ;  and  it  is  liable  to  daily  increase  for  want
of  a  rational  principle  of  circumscrijition  for  the  regulation
of  the  easy  enthusiasm  of  popular  explorers.  Unless  a
sound  philosophy  interposes,  to  establish  some  order,  we
may  have  as  many  faculties  and  organs  as  the  j^sycho-
logists  of  old  made  entities.  However  great  may  be  the
diversity  of  animal  natures,  or  even  of  human  types,  it  is
yet  to  be  conceived,  (as  real  acts  usuylly  suppose  the  con-
cuiTcnce  of  several  fundamental  faculties,)  that  even  a
greater  multiplicity  might  be  represented  by  a  very  small


PHYSIOLOGICAL   ANALYSIS    OF    FACULTIES.  131

number  of  elementary  fuuctious  of  the  two  orders.  If,  for
instance,  the  whole  number  were  reduced  to  twelve  or
fifteen  well-marked  faculties,  their  combinations,  binary,
ternary,  quaternary,  etc.,  would  doubtless  correspond  to
many  more  types  than  can  exist,  even  if  we  restricted  our-
selves to  distinguishing,  in  relation  to  the  normal  degree
of  activity  of  each  function,  two  other  degrees, — one  higher
and  the  other  lower.  But  the  exorbitant  multiplication  of
faculties  is  not  in  itself  so  shocking  as  the  levity  of  most
of  the  pretended  analyses  which  have  regulated  their  dis-
tribution. In  the  intellectual  order,  especiallv,  the  apti-
tudes have  been  usually  ill-described,  apart  from  the
organs :  as  when  a  mathematical  aptitude  is  assigned  on
grounds  which  would  justify  our  assigning  a  chemical
aptitude,  or  an  anatomical  aptitude,  if  the  whole  l)ony
casket  had  not  been  previously  parcelled  off  into  irre-
moveable  compartments.  If  a  man  could  do  sums  accord-
ing to  rules  quickly  and  easily,  he  had  the  mathematical
aptitude,  according  to  those  who  do  not  suspect  that
mathematical  speculations  require  any  superiority  of  in-
tellect. Though  the  analysis  of  the  affective  faculties,
which  are  so  much  better  marked,  is  less  imperfect,  there
ai-e  several  instances  of  needless  multiplication  in  that
department.

To  rectify  or  improve  this  analysis  of  the  Exainination
cerebral  faculties,  it  would  be  useful  to  add  of  historical
to  the  observation  of  Man  and  society  a  cases.
])hysiological  estimate  of  the  most  marked  individual
cases, — especially  in  past  times.  The  intellectual  order,
which  most  needs  revision,  is  that  which  best  admits  of  this
procedure.  If,  for  instance,  it  had  been  applied  to  the
cases  of  the  chief  geometers,  the  absurd  mistake  that  I
have  just  pointed  out  could  not  have  been  committed ;  for
it  Avould  have  been  seen  what  compass  and  variety  of
faculties  are  required  to  constitute  mathematical  genius,
a'ld  how  various  are  the  forms  in  which  that  genius  mani-
fests itself.  One  great  geometer  has  shone  by  the  sagacity
of  his  inventions ;  another  by  the  strength  and  extent  of
his  combinations ;  a  third  by  the  happy  choice  of  his  nota-
tions, and  the  perfection  of  his  algebraic  style,  etc.  We
might  discover,  or  at  least  verifv.  all  the  real  fundamental


132  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

intellectual  faculties  hy  the  scientific  class  alone.  In  au
inferior  degree  it  would  be  the  same  with  an  analogous
study  of  the  most  eminent  artists.  This  consideration,  in
its  utmost  extent,  is  connected  with  the  utility  of  the
philosophical  study  of  the  sciences,  under  the  historical  as
well  as  the  dogmatical  point  of  view,  for  the  discovery  of
the  logical  laws  concerned :  the  difference  being  that  in
this  last  case,  we  have  first  to  determine  the  elementary
faculties,  and  not  the  laws  of  their  action  :  but  the  grounds
must  be  essentially  analogous.

Phrenological  analysis  has,  then,  to  be  reconstituted ;
first  in  the  anatomical,  and  then  in  the  physiological  order  ;
and  finally,  the  two  must  be  harmonized  ;  and  not  till  then
can  phrenological  physiology  be  established  upon  its  true
scientific  basis.  Such  a  procedure  is  fairly  begun,  as  we
have  seen,  with  regard  to  the  two  preceding  divisions  of
our  science ;  but  it  is  not  yet  even  conceived  of  in  relation
to  cerebral  physiology,  from  its  greater  complexity  and
more  recent  positivity.

Pathological  The  phrenologists  must  make  a  much  more

and  Conipara-  extensive  use  than  hitherto  of  the  means
tive  analysis,  furnished  by  biological  philoso[)hy  for  the
advancement  of  all  studies  relating  to  living  bodies :  that
is,  of  pathological,  and  yet  more  of  comparative  analysis.
The  luminous  maxim  of  M.  Broussais,  which  lies  at  the
foundation  of  medical  philosophy, — that  the  phenomena  of
the  pathological  state  are  a  simple  prolongation  of  the
phenoinena  of  the  normal  state,  beyond  the  ordinary  limits
of  variation, — has  never  been  duly  applied  to  intellectual
and  moral  phenomena :  yet  it  is  impossible  to  understand
anything  of  the  diiferent  kinds  of  madness,  if  they  are  not
examined  on  this  principle.  Here,  as  in  a  former  division
of  the  science,  we  see  that  the  study  of  malady  is  the  way
to  imderstand  the  healtliy  state.  Nothing  can  aid  us  so
well  in  the  discovery  of  the  fundamental  faculties  as  a
judicious  study  of  the  state  of  madness,  when  each  faculty
manifests  itself  in  a  degree  of  exaltation  which  separates
it  distinctly  from  others.  There  has  been  ])leutiful  study
of  monomania ;  but  it  has  been  of  little  use,  for  want  of  a
due  connection  and  comparison  with  the  normal  state.
The  works  that  have  appeared  on  the  subject  have  been


PATHOLOGICAL   AND   COMPARATIVE   ANALYSIS.      133

more  literary  than  scientific ;  those  who  have  had  the  best
opportunity  for  observation  have  been  more  engaged  in
governing  their  patients  than  in  analysing  their  cases  ;  and
the  successors  of  Pinel  have  added  nothing  essential  to  the
ameliorations  introduced  by  him,  half  a  century  ago,  in
regard  to  the  theory  and  treatment  of  mental  alienation.
As  for  the  study  of  animals,  its  use  has  been  vitiated  by
the  old  notions   of    the    diffei-ence    between   instinct   and
intelligence.     Humanity  and  animality  ought  reciprocally
to  cast  light  upon  each  other.     If  the  whole  set  of  faculties
constitutes  the  complement  of  animal  life,  it  must  surely
be  that  all  that  are  fundamental  must  be  common  to  all
the  superior  animals,  in  some  degree  or  other :  and  differ-
ences of  intensity  are  enough  to  account  for  the  existing
diversities, — the   association   of  the  faculties  being  taken
into  the  account,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  the
improvement  of  Man  in  society  being  set  aside.     If  there
are  any  faculties  which  belong  to  Man  exclusively,  it  can
only   be    such   as    correspond   to   the   highest    intellectual
aptitudes:  and  this  much  may  appear  doubtful  if  we  com-
pare, in  an  unprejudiced  way,  the  actions  of  the  highest
mammifers  with  those  of  the  least  developed  savages.     It
seems  to  me  more  rational  to  suppose  that  power  of  observa-
tion and  even  of  combination  exists  in  animals,  though  in
an  immeasurably  inferior  degree ; — the  want  of  exercise,
resulting  chiefly  from  their  state  of  isolation,  tending  to
benumb   and   even   starve   the  organs.      Much  might  be
learned  from  a  study  of  domestic  animals,  though  they  are
far  from   being   the    most   intelligent.      Much   might  be
learned  by  comparing  their  moral  nature  now  with  what  it
was  at  periods  nearer  to  their  first  domestication  ;  for  it
would  be  strange  if  the  changes  that  they  have  undergone
in  so  many  physical  respects  had  been  unaccompanied  by
variations  in  the  functions  which   more  easily  than  any
others  admit  of  modification.     The  extreme  imperfection
of  phrenological  science  is  manifest  in  the  pride  with  which
Man,  from  the  height  of  his  supremacy,  judges  of  animals
as  a  despot  judges  of  his  subjects ;  that  is,  in  the  mass,
without  perceiving  any  inequality  in  them  worth  noticing.
It  is  not  the  less  certain  that,  surveying  the  whole  animal
hierarchy,  the  principal  orders  of  this  hierarchy  sometimes


134  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

differ  more  from  each  other,  in  intellectual  and  moral
respects,  than  the  highest  of  them  vary  from  the  human
type.  The  rational  study  of  the  mind  and  the  ways  of
animals  has  still  to  he  instituted, — nothing  having  yet
been  done  but  in  the  way  of  preparation.  It  promises  an
ample  harvest  of  important  discovery  directly  applicable  to
the  advancement  of  the  study  of  Man,  if  only  the  naturalists
will  disregard  the  declamation  of  theologians  and  meta-
physicians about  their  j^retended  degradation  of  human
natui'e,  while  they  are,  on  the  contrary,  rectifying  the
fundamental  notion  of  it  by  establishing,  rigorously  and
finally,  the  profound  differences  which  positively  separate
us  from  the  animals  nearest  to  us  in  the  scale.

T  r     .•  The  two  laws  of  action, — intermission  and

Ji.aw.s  or  action.  .    ,.  .  '  ,        ,.

association, — require   much    more   attention

than  they  have  yet  received  in   connection  with  cerebral

])hysiology.     The  law  of  intermittence  is  eminently  apj)lic-

able  to  the  functions  of  the  brain, — the  symmetry  of  the

organs  being  borne  in  mind.  But  this  great
Internuttence  i  •     j.  •  •      x-  •

.and  contimiitv  ^^^'^.F*-'*  requires  a  new  examination,  seeing
that  it  is  requisite  for  science  to  reconcile
their  evident  intermittence  with  the  perfect  continuity  that
seems  to  be  involved  in  the  connection  which  mutually
unites  all  our  intellectual  operations,  from  earliest  infancy
to  extreme  decrepitude,  and  which  cannot  be  interrupted
by  the  deepest  cerebral  perturbations,  provided  they  are
transient.  This  question,  for  which  metaphysical  theories
allowed  no  place,  certainly  offers  serious  difficulties :  but
its  positive  solution  must  throw  great  light  upon  the  general
course  of  intellectual  acts.  As  for  tlu^  association  of  the
.        ._  , .  faculties,  in  sympathy  or  synergy,  the  physio-

logists begin  to  understand  its  high  import-
ance, though  its  general  laws  have  not  yet  been  scientifically
studied.  Without  this  consideration,  the  number  of  pro-
pensities, sentiments,  or  aptitudes  would  seem  to  be  sus-
cei)til)le  of  any  degree  of  multiplication.  For  one  instance,
investigators  of  human  nature  have  been  wont  to  distin-
guish various  kinds  of  courage,  luider  the  names  of  civil,
military,  etc.,  though  the  original  disposition  to  brave  any
Ivind  of  danger  must  always  l)e  uniform,  but  more  or  less
directed  by  the  understanding.     No  doubt,  the  martyr  who


LAWS    OF    Af'TION.  135

endures  the  most  horrible  tortures  with  unshaken  fortitude
rather  than  deny  his  convictions,  and  the  man  of  science
■who  undertakes  a  perilous  experiment  after  having  calcu-
lated the  chances,  might  fly  in  the  field  of  hattle  if  com-
pelled to  fight  for  a  cause  in  which  they  felt  no  interest ;
but  not  the  less  is  their  kind  of  courage  the  same  as  that
of  the  brave  soldier.  Apart  from  inequalities  of  degree,
there  is  no  other  difference  than  the  siiperior  infl;ience  of
the  intellectual  faculties.  Without  the  diverse  cerel)ral
syiaergies,  either  between  the  two  gi'eat  orders  of  faculties,
or  between  the  different  functions  of  each  order,  it  would
be  impossible  to  analyse  the  greater  propoi'tion  of  mental
actions  ;  and  it  is  in  the  positive  interpretation  of  each  of
them  by  such  association  that  the  application  of  phreno-
logical doctrine  will  chiefly  consist,  when  such  doctrine
shall  have  been  scientifically  erected.  When  the  elemen-
tary analysis  shall  have  been  instituted,  allowing  us  to  pass
on  to  the  study  of  these  compound  phenomena,  we  may
think  of  proceeding  to  the  more  delicate  inquiry  whether,
in  each  cerebral  organ,  a  distinct  jjart  is  not  esjjecially
appropriate  to  the  establishment  of  these  synergies  and
symjmthies.  Some  pathological  observations  have  given
rise  to  this  suspicion, — the  grey  substance  of  the  brain
appearing  more  inflamed  in  those  perturbations  which
affect  the  phenomena  of  the  will,  and  the  white  in  those
which  relate  to  intellectual  operations.

If  our  existing  phrenology  isolates  the  Unity  of  the
cerebral  functions  too  much,  it  is  yet  more  brain  and  ner-
open  to  reproach  for  separating  the  brain  '^'"^^^s  system,
from  the  whole  of  the  nervous  system.  Bichat  taught  us
that  the  intellectual  and  affective  j^henomena,  all-important
as  they  are,  constitute,  in  the  whole  system  of  the  animal
economy,  only  an  intermediate  agency  between  the  action
of  the  external  world  upon  the  animal  through  sensorial
impressions,  and  the  final  reaction  of  the  animal  by  muscular
contractions.  Now,  in  the  present  state  of  phrenological
jihysiology,  no  positive  conception  exists  with  regard  to
the  relation  of  the  series  of  cerebral  acts  to  this  last  neces-
sary reaction.  We  merely  suspect  that  the  spinal  marrow
is  its  immediate  organ.  Even  if  cerebral  physiology  care-
fully comprehended  the  whole  of  the  nervous  system,  it


136  rosiTivK  PHILOSOPHY.

would  still,  at  present,  separate  it  too  mucli  from  the  rest
of  the  economy.  While  rightly  discarding  the  ancient
error  about  the  seat  of  the  passions  being  in  the  organs  of
the  vegetative  life,  it  has  too  much  neglected  the  great
influence  to  which  the  chief  intellectual  and  moral  func-
tions are  subject  from  other  physiological  phenomena ;
as  Cabanis  pointed  out  so  emphatically,  while  preparing
the  way  for  the  philosophical  revolution  which  we  owe  to
Gall.

We  have  now  seen  how  irrational  and  narrow  is  the  way
in  which  intellectual  and  moral  physiology  is  conceived  of
and  studied  :  and  that  till  this  is  rectified,  the  science,
which  really  appears  not  to  have  advanced  a  single  step
since  its  institution,  cannot  make  any  true  progress.     We

,   ,     see  how  it  requires,   above  even  the  other
Impeirectst.ate  i  ^  c      ^       •   ^  j.i  .•  s

of  Phreiiolo'Tv     oranches  or   physiology,  the  preparation  oi

scientific  habits,  and  familiarity  with  the
foregoing  departments  of  natural  philosophy  ;  and  how,
from  its  vicious  isolation,  it  tends  to  sink  to  the  level  of
the  most  superficial  and  ill-prepared  minds,  which  will
make  it  the  groundwork  of  a  gross  and  mischievous
quackery,  if  the  true  scientific  inquirers  do  not  take  it  out
of  their  hands.  No  inconveniences  of  this  kind,  however,
should  blind  us  to  the  eminent  merits  of  a  conception
which  will  ever  be  one  of  the  principal  grounds  of  distinc-
tion of  the  philosophy  of  the  nineteenth  century,  in  com-
parison with  the  one  which  preceded  it.

„         ^    ^  ,  Looking;  back,  on  the  completion  of  this

Present  state  ,..^  ...         ,     ■,       !•  v    •        i     t

of  Bioloo-y  survey  ot  the  positive  study  ot  fivmg  bodies,

we  see  that,  imperfect  as  it  is,  and  unsatis-
factory as  are  the  parts  which  relate  to  life,  compared  with
those  which  relate  to  organization,  still  the  most  imperfect
have  begun  to  assume  a  scientific  character,  more  or  less
clearly  indicated,  in  proportion  to  the  complexity  of  the
phenomena.

We  have  now  surveyed  the  whole  system  of  natural
philosophy,  from  its  basis  in  mathematical,  to  its  termina-
tion in  biological  ])hilosophy.  Notwithstanding  the  vast
interval  embraced  by  these  two  extremities,  we  have  passed
through  the  whole  by  an  almost  insensible  gradation,
finding   nothing    hyjjothetical  in  the   transition,  through


RETROSPECT   OF    NATURAL    PHILOSOPHY.  137

chemistry,  from  inorganic  to  organic  pliilo-  Retrospect  of
sopliy,  and  verifying  as  we  proceeded  the  Natural  Phi-
rigorous  continuity  of  the  system  of  the  losophy.
natural  sciences.  That  system,  though  comprehending  all
existing  knowledge,  is,  however,  still  incomplete,  leaving  a
wide  area  to  the  reti'ograde  influence  of  the  theologico-
metaphysical  philosophy,  to  which  it  abandons  a  whole
order  of  ideas,  the  most  immediately  applicable  of  all.
There  is  yet  wanting,  to  complete  the  body  of  positive
philosophy,  and  to  organize  its  universal  preponderance,
the  subjection  to  it  of  the  most  complex  and  special  phe-
nomena of  all, — those  of  humanity  in  a  state  of  association.
I  shall  therefore  venture  to  propose  the  new  science  of
Social  Physics,  which  I  have  found  myself  compelled  to
create,  as  the  necessary  complement  of  the  system.  This
new  science  is  rooted  in  biology,  as  every  science  is  in  the
t)ue  which  precedes  it ;  and  it  will  render  the  body  of
doctrine  complete  and  indivisible,  enabling  the  human
mind  to  proceed  on  positive  principles  in  all  directions
whatever,  to  which  its  activity  may  be  incited.  Imperfect
as  the  preceding  sciences  are,  they  have  enough  of  the
positive  character  to  render  this  last  transformation  pos-
sible :  and  when  it  is  effected,  the  way  will  be  open  for
their  future  advancement,  through  such  an  organization  of
scientific  labour  as  must  put  an  end  to  the  intellectual
anarchy  of  our  present  condition.


138


BOOK   YI.

SOCIAL    PHYSICS.
CHAPTER  I.

NECESSITY    AND    OPPORTUNENESS    OP    THIS    NEW    SCIENCE.

IN  the  five  foregoing  parts  of  tliis  work,  our  investiga-
tion proceeded  on  an  ascertained  and  undisputed
scientific  basis  ;  and  our  business  was  to  exhibit  the  pro-
gress made  in  each  science ;  to  free  it  from  entanglement
with  the  ancient  pliilosophy ;  and  to  show  what  further
improvements  might  be  anticipated.  Our  task  is  a  dif-
ferent, and  a  much  harder  one,  in  the  case  of  the  sixth  and
last  science  that  I  am  about  to  ti-eat  of.  The  theories  of
Social  science  are  still,  even  in  the  minds  of  the  best
thinkers,  completely  implicated  with  the  theologico-meta-
I^hysical  philosophy ;  and  are  even  suj)j:)osed  to  be,  by  a
fatal  separation  from  all  other  science,  condemned  to
remain  so  involved  for  ever.  The  philosoj^hical  procedure
which  I  have  undertaken  to  carry  through  becomes  more
difficult  and  bold,  from  this  point  onwards,  without  at
all  changing  its  nature  or  object ;  and  it  must  so  far
present  a  new  character  as  it  must  henceforth  be  employed
in  creating  a  wholly  new  order  of  scientific  conceptions,
instead  of  judging,  arranging,  and  improving  such  as
already  existed.

It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  this  new  science  can  be  at
once  raised  to  a  level  with  even  the  most  imperfect  of  those
which  we  have  been  reviewing.  All  that  can  be  rationally
projiosed  in  our  day  is  to  recognize  the  character  of  posi-
tivity  in  social  as  in  all  other  science,  and  to  ascertain  the
chief  bases  on  which  it  is  founded  ;  but  this  is  enough,  as
I  hope  to  show,  to  satisfy  our  most  urgent  intellectual


INTEHMISSION    AND    xVSSOCIATION,  139

necessities,  and  even  the  most  imperative  needs  of  im-
mediate social  practice.  In  its  scientific  connection  witli
the  rest  of  this  work,  all  that  I  can  hope  to  do  is  to  exhibit
the  general  considerations  of  the  case,  so  as  to  resolve  the
intellectual  anarchy  which  is  the  main  source  ,,
of  our  moral  anarchy  first,  and  tlien  of  the  ^j^^  subiect
political,  which  I  shall  treat  of  only  through
its  originating  causes.  The  extreme  novelty  of  such  a
doctrine  and  method  renders  it  necessary,  before  entering
upon  the  immediate  subject,  to  set  forth  the  importance  of
such  a  procedure,  and  the  futility  of  the  chief  attemjjts
which  have  been  indirectly  made  to  investigate  social
science.  However  unquestionable  may  be  the  need  of  such
science,  and  the  obligation  to  discover  it,  the  best  minds
have  not  yet  attained  a  point  of  view  from  which  they  can
estimate  its  depth  and  breadth  and  true  position.  In  its
nascent  state  every  science  is  implicated  with  its  corre-
sponding art ;  and  remains  implicated  with  it,  as  we  have
seen,  the  longer  in  proportion  to  the  complexity  of  the
phenomena  concerned.  If  biological  science,  which  is  more
advanced  than  social,  is  still  too  closely  connected  with  the
medical  art,  as  we  have  seen  that  it  is,  we  cannot  be  sur-
prised that  men  are  insensible  to  the  value  of  all  social
speculations  which  are  not  immediately  connected  with
practical  affairs.  We  cannot  be  surprised  at  any  obsti-
nacy in  repelling  them,  as  long  as  it  is  supposed  that  by
rejecting  them,  society  is  preserved  from  cliimerical  and
mischievous  schemes :  though  experience  has  abundantly
shown  that  the  precaution  has  never  availed,  and  that  it
does  not  now  prevent  our  being  daily  invaded  by  the  most
illusory  proposals  on  social  matters.  It  is  in  deference  to
as  much  as  is  reasonable  in  this  ajiprehension  that  I  pro-
pose to  state,  first,  how  the  institution  of  a  science  of  Social
Physics  bears  upon  the  principal  needs  and  grievances  of
society,  in  its  present  deploral)le  state  of  anarchy.  Such  a
representation  may  perhaps  convince  men  worthy  of  the
name  of  statesmen  that  there  is  a  real  and  eminent  utility
in  labours  of  this  kind,  worthy  of  the  anxious  attention  of
men  who  profess  to  devote  themselves  to  the  task  of  re-
solving the  alarming  revolutionary  constitution  of  modern
societies.


140  I'o.sri'ivi':  piiiloropiiy.

From  the  point  of  view  to  wliicli  we  have  been  raised
by  our  study  of  the  preceding  sciences,  we  are  able  to
survey  the  social  situation  of  our  own  time  in  its  fullest
extent  and  broadest  light ;  and  what  we  see  is  that  there
is  a  deep  and  widely-spread  anarchy  of  the  whole  intel-
lectual system,  which  has  been  in  this  state  of  disturbance
during  the  long  interregnum,  resulting  from  the  decline
of  the  theologico-metaphysical  philosophy.  At  the  present
time,  the  old  philosophy  is  in  a  state  of  imbecility  ;  while
the  development  of  the  positive  philosophy,  though  always
proceeding,  has  not  yet  been  bold,  broad,  and  general
enough  to  comprehend  the  mental  government  of  the
human  race.  We  must  go  back  through  that  interregnum
to  understand  truly  the  present  floating  and  contradictory
state  of  all  great  social  ideas,  and  to  perceive  how  society
is  to  be  delivered  from  the  peril  of  dissolution,  and  brought
under  a  new  organization,  more  consistent  and  more  pro-
gressive than  that  which  once  rested  on  the  theological
philosophy.  When  we  have  duly  observed  the  j^owerless-
ness  of  conflicting  political  schools,  we  shall  see  the  neces-
sity of  introducing  an  entirely  new  sj^irit  into  the
organization  of  society,  by  which  these  useless  and  pas-
sionate struggles  may  be  put  an  end  to,  and  society  led
out  of  the  revolutionary  state  in  Avliich  it  has  been  tossed
for  three  centuries  past.

Conditions  of  The  ancients  used  to  suppose  Order  and

(,)i(ler  and  Progress  to  be  irreconcilable :  but  both  are

Progress.  indispensable  conditions  in  a  state  of  modern

civilization  ;  and  their  combination  is  at  once  the  grand
difficulty  and  the  main  resource  of  every  genuine  political
system.  No  real  order  can  be  established,  and  still  less
can  it  last,  if  it  is  not  fully  compatible  with  progress :  and
no  great  2)rogress  can  be  accom])lished  if  it  does  not  tend
to  the  consolidation  of  order.  Any  conception  which  is  so
devoted  to  one  of  these  needs  as  to  prejudice  the  other,  is
sure  of  rejection,  sooner  or  later,  as  mistaking  the  nature
of  the  political  problem.  Therefore,  in  positive  social
science,  the  chief  feature  must  be  the  union  of  these  two
conditions,  which  will  be  two  aspects,  constant  and  insepar-
able, of  the  same  principle.     Thi'oughout  the  whole  range


CONDITIONS    OF    ORDER    AND    PROGRKSS.  141

of  science,  thus  far,  we  liave  seen  that  the  couditious  of
combination  and  of  progress  are  originally  identical :  and
I  trust  we  sliall  see,  after  looking  into  social  science  in  the
same  way,  that  ideas  of  Order  and  Progress  are,  in  Social
Physics,  as  rigorously  inseparable  as  the  ideas  of  Organiza-
tion and  Life  in  Biology :  fi'om  whence  indeed  they  are,  in
a  scientific  view,  evidently  derived.

The  misfortune  of  our  actual  state  is  that  the  two  ideas
are  set  up  in  radical  opposition  to  each  other, — the  retro-
grade spirit  having  directed  all  efforts  in  favour  of  Order,
and  anarchical  doctrine  having  ai'rogated  to  itself  the
charge  of  Social  Progress  ;  and,  iu  this  state  of  things,  the
I'eproaches  exchanged  between  the  respective  parties  are
only  too  well  merited  by  both.  In  this  vicious  circle  is
society  now  confined  ;  and  the  only  issue  from  it  is  by  the
undisputed  preponderance  of  a  doctrine  equally  progres-
sive and  hierarchical.  The  observ^ations  which  I  have  to
make  on  this  subject  are  applicable  to  all  European  societies,
which  have,  in  fact,  all  undergone  a  common  disorganiza-
tion, though  in  diffei'ent  degrees,  and  with  various  modifica-
tions, and  which  cannot  be  separately  reorganized,  however
they  may  be  for  a  time  restrained ;  but  I  shall  keep  the
French  nation  chiefly  in  view,  not  only  because  the  revolu-
tionary state  has  been  most  conspicuous  in  them,  but  because
they  are,  in  all  important  respects,  better  prepared,  in  spite
of  appearances,  than  any  other,  for  a  true  reorganization.

Among  the  infinite  variety  of  political  ideas  which
appear  to  be  striving  in  society,  there  are  in  fact  only  two
orders,  the  mingling  of  which  in  various  proportions  occa-
sions the  apparent  multiplicity:  and  of  these  two,  the  one
is  really  only  the  negation  of  the  other.  If  we  wish  to
vmderstand  our  own  condition,  we  must  look  at  it  as  the
result  and  last  term  of  the  general  conflict  undertaken,  for
three  centuries  past,  for  the  gradual  demolition  of  the  old
political  system.  So  regarding  it,  we  see  that  whereas,  for
above  half  a  century,  the  irremediable  decay  of  the  old
system  has  {)roved  the  necessity  of  founding  a  new  one,  we
have  not  been  sufficiently  aware  of  the  need  to  have
formed  an  original  and  direct  conception,  adequate  to  the
purpose ;  so  that  our  theoretical  ideas  have  remained
inferior  to  our  practical  necessities,    which,  in  a   healthy


142  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

state  of  the  social  orofanism,  they  habitually  anticipate,  to
prepare  for  their  i-egular  and  peaceable  satisfaction.
Though  the  political  movement  could  not  but  have
changed  its  nature,  from  that  time  forward,  becoming
organic  instead  of  critical,  yet,  for  want  of  a  basis  in
science,  it  has  proceeded  on  the  same  old  ideas  that  had
actuated  the  past  struggle ;  and  we  have  witnessed  the
spectacle  of  defenders  and  assailants  alike  endeavouring  to
convert  their  old  weapons  of  war  into  instruments  of  reor-
ganization, without  suspecting  the  inevitable  failure  which
must  ensue  to  both  parties.  Such  is  the  state  that  we  find
ourselves  in  now.  All  ideas  of  order  in  the  political  world
are  derived  from  the  old  doctrine  of  the  theological  and
military  system,  regarded  especially  in  its  catholic  and
feudal  constitution  :  a  doctrine  which  from  our  point  of
view  in  this  work,  represents  the  theological  state  of  social
science :  and,  in  the  same  way,  all  ideas  of  progress  are
still  derived  from  the  purely  negative  philosophy  which,
issuing  from  j^rotestantism,  assumed  its  final  form  and
development  in  the  last?  century,  and  which,  applied  to
social  affairs,  constitutes  the  metaphysical  state  of  politics.
The  different  classes  of  society  range  themselves  on  the
one  side  or  the  other,  according  to  their  inclination  for
conservatism  or  amelioration.  With  every  new  uprising
of  a  social  difficulty,  we  see  the  retrograde  school  propos-
ing, as  the  only  certain  and  universal  remedy,  the  restora-
tion of  the  corresponding  part  of  the  old  political  system  ;
and  the  critical  school  referring  the  evil  exclusively  to  the
destruction  of  the  old  system  not  being  con]plete.  We  do
not  often  see  the  two  doctrines  presented  without  modifica-
tion. They  so  exist  only  in  i)urely  speculative  minds.
But  when  Ave  see  them  in  monstrous  alliance,  as  we  do  in
all  degrees  of  existing  political  opinion,  we  cannot  but
know  that  such  an  alliance  cannot  yield  any  virtue  which
its  elements  do  not  contain,  and  that  it  can  only  exhibit
their  mutual  neutralization.  We  must  here,  it  is  clear,
regard  the  theological  and  the  metaphysical  polities  sepa-
rately, in  the  first  place,  that  we  may  afterwards  under-
stand their  present  antagonism,  and  form  an  estimate  of
the  futile  combinations  into  which  men  have  endeavoured
to  force  them.


THEOLOGICAL   POLITY.  143

Pernicious  as  the  tlieolos^ical  polity  may       ,„,     ..
1      •  1  X  1  -T  1,  -11  The  tlieolo-

be  lu  our  day,  no  true  philosopher  -will  ever       ^..-^^.^^j  ,,Qji|y

forget  that  it  afforded  the  beneficent  guar-
dianship under  which  the  formation  and  earliest  develop-
ment of  modern  societies  took  place.  But  it  is  equally
incontestable  that,  for  three  centuries  past,  its  influence
among  the  most  advanced  nations  has  been  essentially  retro-
grade, notwithstanding  some  partial  services.  We  need
not  go  into  any  discussion  of  its  doctrine,  in  order  to
ascertain  its  powerlessness  for  future  service :  for  it  is
plain  that  a  polity  that  could  not  hold  its  ground  before
the  natural  progress  of  intelligence  and  of  society  can
never  again  serve  as  a  basis  of  social  order.  The  historical
analysis  which  I  shall  have  to  offer  of  the  causes  that  have
dissolved  the  Catholic  and  feudal  system  will  show,  better
than  any  argument,  how  radical  and  irretrievable  is  the
decay.  The  theological  school  explains  the  fact,  as  far  as
it  can,  by  fortuitous  and,  we  might  almost  say,  personal
causes :  and,  when  they  will  no  longer  suffice,  resorts  to  its
common  supposition,  of  a  mysterious  caprice  of  Providence
which  has  allotted  to  social  order  a  season  of  probation,  of
whicli  no  account  caii  be  given,  either  as  to  its  date  or  its
duration,  or  even  its  character.  A  contemplation  of  his-
torical facts  however  shows  that  all  the  great  successive
modifications  of  the  theological  and  military  system  have,
from  the  beginning  and  increasingly,  tended  to  the  com-
lAete  elimination  of  a  regime  which,  by  the  fundamental
law  of  social  evolution,  could  never  be  more  than  pro-
visional, however  indispensable.  And  if  any  efforts  to
restore  the  system  could  achieve  a  temporary  success,  thev
would  not  bring  back  society  to  a  normal  state,  but  would
merely  restore  the  very  situation  which  compelled  the
revolutionary  crisis,  by  obliging  it  to  set  about  the  work  of
destruction  again,  with  more  violence,  becaiise  the  n'glme
has  altogether  ceased  to  be  compatible  with  progress  in  the
most  essential  respects.  While  avoiding  all  controversy  on
so  plain  a  case,  I  must  briefly  present  a  new  view  which
appears  to  me  to  point  out  the  simplest  and  surest  criterion
of  the  value  of  any  social  doctrine,  and  which  emphatically
condemns  the  theological  jjolity.

Regarded  from  the  logical  point  of  view,  the  jiroblem


144  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPllV.

of  our  social  reorgaiiizatiou  seems  to  me
Cntenon  o         reducible  to  this  one  condition  :  to  consti'uct

rationally  a  political  doctrine  which,  in  the
whole  of  its  active  development,  shall  be  always  fully  con-
sequent on  its  own  principles.  No  existing  doctrines
approach  to  a  fulfilment  of  this  condition  :  all  contain,  as
indispensable  elements,  numerous  and  direct  contradic-
tions on  the  greater  number  of  important  points.  It  may
be  laid  down  as  a  principle  that  the  doctrine  which  fur-
nishes accordant  solutions  on  the  various  leading  questions
of  polity,  without  failing  in  this  one  respect  in  the  course
of  application,  must,  by  this  indirect  test  alone,  be  recog-
nized as  sufiiciently  adapted  to  reorganize  society  ;  since
this  intellectual  reorganization  must  mainly  consist  in  re-
establishing harmony  in  the  troubled  system  of  our  social
ideas.  When  such  a  regeneration  shall  have  been  accom-
plished in  an  individual  mind  (and  in  that  way  it  must
begin),  its  generalization,  sooner  or  later,  is  secure  ;  for  the
number  of  minds  cannot  increase  the  difficulty  of  the  intel-
lectual convergence,  but  only  defer  the  success.  We  shall
hereafter  find  how  great  is  the  superiority  of  the  positive
philosophy  in  this  view  ;  because,  once  extended  to  social
phenomena,  it  must  connect  the  different  orders  of  human
ideas  more  completely  than  could  be  done  in  any  other  way.
Failure  of  the  The  accomplishment  of  this  great  logical
theological  condition  might  be  expected  froin  the  theo-
polity.  logical  polity  above  all  others,   because  its

doctrine  is  limited  to  co-ordinating  a  system  so  clearly  de-
fined by  its  long  application,  and  so  fully  developed  in  all
its  essential  parts,  that  it  may  well  be  supposed  secure
from  all  serious  inconsistency.  The  retrograde  school
accordingly  extols  habitually,  as  its  characteristic  attribute,
the  perfect  coherence  of  its  ideas,  in  (jontrast  with  the  con-
tradictions of  the  revolutionary  school.  Yet,  though  the
theological  polity  is  less  inconsistent  than  the  metaphysical,
it  shows  a  daily  increasing  tend(,'ncy  to  concessions  of  the
most  radical  inqjortance,  directly  contrary  to  all  its  essen-
tial principles.  This  is  evidence  enough  of  the  futility  of  a
doctrine  which  does  not  even  possess  the  one  quality  most
spontaneously  correspondent  to  its  nature.  The  old  poli-
tical system  is  seen  to  be  destroyed  as  soon  as  its  most  de-


ITS   FAILURK.  145

voted  adherents  have  lost  the  true  general  sentiment  of  it :
and  this  may  now  be  observed,  not  only  in  active  practice,
but  among  purely  speculative  minds  of  a  high  order,  which
are  unconsciously  moditied  by  the  irresistible  influences  of
their  age.  If  examples  are  desired,  we  need  only  bring  the
retrograde  doctrine  into  comparison  with  the  elements  of
modern  civilization.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
development  of  the  sciences,  of  industry,  and  even  of  the
fine  arts,  was  historically  the  principal,  though  latent
cause,  in  the  first  instance,  of  the  irretrievable  decline  of
the  theological  and  military  system.  At  present,  it  is  the
ascendancy  of  the  scientific  spirit  which  preserves  us  from
any  real  restoration  of  the  theological  s])irit ;  as,  again,  the
industrial  spirit,  in  its  jierpetual  extension,  constitutes  onr
best  safeguard  against  any  serious  recurrence  of  the  mili-
tary or  feudal  spirit.  Wiiatever  may  be  the  names  given
to  our  political  struggles,  this  is  the  real  character  of  our
social  antagonism.  Now,  amidst  this  state  of  things,  do
we  hear  of  such  a  thing  as  any  government,  or  even  any
school,  seriously  proposing  a  systematic  repression  of
science,  industry  and  art  V  Do  not  all  powers  (with  an  eccen-
tric exception  here  and  there)  claim  the  honour  of  en-
couraging their  progress  ?  Here  we  have  the  first  incon-
sistency of  the  retrograde  polity,  annulling  its  own  project
of  a  restoration  of  the  past :  and  though  the  inconsistency
is  less  ajjparent  than  some  others,  it  must  be  regarded  as
the  most  decisive  of  all,  because  it  is  more  universal  and
more  instinctive  than  any  other.  Napoleon  Bonaparte
himself,  the  hero  of  retrogression  in  our  time,  set  himself
up,  in  all  sincerity,  as  the  ju-otector  of  industry,  art,  and
science.  Purely  speculative  minds,  though  moi'e  easily
separating  themselves  fi-om  any  prevalent  tendency,  have
escaped  no  better  from  the  influence  of  their  times.  How
many  have  been  the  attemjits,  for  instance,  for  two  cen-
turies past,  on  the  part  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  minds,
to  suboi'dinate  reason  to  faith,  according  to  the  theological
formula ;  reason  itself  being  made  the  supreme  judge  of
such  a  submission,  and  thus  evidencing  the  contradictory
character  of  the  proposition  !  The  most  eminent  thinker  of
the  Catholic  school,  the  illustrious  De  Maistre,  boi'e  involun-
tary testimony  to  the  necessity  of  his  time  when  he  eudea-

II.  L


146  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

voured,  in  his  principal  work,  to  re-establish  the  papal
sujjremacy  on  historical  and  political  reasonings,  instead  of
ordaining  it  hj  divine  right,  which  is  the  only  ground
appropriate  to  such  a  doctrine,  and  the  only  ground  he
would  have  proposed  in  any  age  but  one  in  which  the
general  state  of  intelligence  precluded  such  a  plea.  In-
stances like  these  may  spare  us  further  illustration.

As  for  more  direct  inconsistencies,  more  striking,  though
less  pi'ofouud,  and  comprehended  within  the  present  times,
we  see  in  every  sect  of  the  retrograde  school  a  direct  oppo-
sition to  some  fundamental  part  of  their  common  doctrine.
Perhaps  the  only  poiut  on  which  there  is  now  any  unanimity
in  that  school  is  in  the  consent  to  break  u]>  the  very  basis
of  the  catholic  and  feudal  system,  by  surrendering  the  divi-
sion between  the  spiritual  and  temporal  ])ower;  or,  what
comes  to  the  same  thing,  acquiescing  in  the  subordination
of  the  spiritual  to  the  temporal  authority.  In  this  respect,
the  kings  are  showing  themselves  as  revolutionary  as  their
peoples ;  and  the  priests  have  ratified  their  own  de^jrada-
tion,  in  catholic  countries  no  less  than  protestant.  If  their
desire  is  to  restore  the  old  system,  th(  i.-  first  step  must  be
to  unite  the  innumerable  sects  which  have  sprung  out  of
the  decline  of  Christianity  :  but  every  attempt  of  the  sort
has  failed  through  the  blind  and  obstinate  determination
<if  the  governments  to  retain  the  supreme  direction  of  the
theological  power,  the  centralization  of  which  they  thus
render  impossible.  Napoleon  only  showed  an  exaggerated
copy,  in  his  violent  inconsistencies,  of  what  many  j^rinces
had  done  l)efore  liim :  and  after  his  fall,  when  the  sove-
reigns of  Europe  united  to  set  u]>  a  power  in  o])position  to
revoluticmary  tendencies,  they  usurped  the  attributes  of  the
old  spiritual  authority,  and  exhibited  the  spectactleof  a  high
council  composed  of  heiictic  chiefs,  and  governed  by  a
schismatic  prince.  After  this,  it  was  manifestly  impossible
to  inti'oduce  the  papal  power  into  the  alliance,  in  any  way
whatever.  Such  instances  of  the  postponement  of  religious
princi})les  to  temporal  convenience  ure  not  new ;  but  they
show  how  the  main  idea  of  the  old  ])oliti(;al  system  has
ceased  to  prejionderate  in  the  minds  of  the  very  persons
who  undertook  to  I'estore  it.  The  divisions  in  the  retro-
grade school  have  been  of  late  apparent  under  all  circum-


THE  RETROGRADE  SCHOOL  AND  ITS  INCONSISTENCY.      147

stances,  whether  of  success  or  defeat.  Any  temporary
success  ought  to  rally  all  dissentients,  in  a  school  Avhich
boasts  of  the  unity  of  its  doctrine  :  yet,  through  a  loni;
course  of  years  we  have  witnessed  successive,  and  more  and
more  serious  schisms  among  the  subdivisions  of  the  trium-
phant party.  The  advocates  of  Catholicism  and  those  of
feudality  have  Cjuarrelled :  and  the  latter  have  split  into
jiartisans  of  aristocracy  and  defenders  of  royalty.  Under
the  completest  restored  supremacy,  the  schisms  would  only
break  out  again,  with  more  violence,  through  the  incom-
patibility of  the  existing  social  state  with  the  old  political
system.  The  vague  assent  to  its  general  principles  which
is  yielded  in  a  sp-culative  sense,  must  give  way  in  their
application  ;  and  every  practical  development  must  engen-
der further  divisions :  and  this  is  the  scientific  description
of  any  theory  which  is  incompatible  with  the  facts.

When  the  retrogi'ade  party  is  reduced  to  the  rank  of  an
opposition,  it  has  recourse  to  theprinciples  of  the  revolutionary
doctrine.  This  has  been  the  case  repeatedly  during  the
last  three  centuries,  when  that  party  has  been  put  upon  the
defensive.  Thus  we  see  the  Catholics  in  England,  and  yet
more  in  Ireland,  asserting  the  claim  of  liberty  of  conscience,
while  still  clamouring  for  the  rei^ression  of  Protestantism
in  France,  Austria,  and  elsewhere.  Again,  when  the  sove-
reigns of  Europe  invoked  the  aid  of  the  peoples  to  put
down  Napoleon,  they  surrendered  their  retrograde  doctrine,
and  testified  to  the  power  of  the  critical,  as  that  which  was
really  influencing  civilized  society,  even  though  they  were
proposing,  all  th"  while,  to  effect  the  restoration  of  the
ancient  polity.  We  have  seen  something  even  more  won-
derful since  that  struggle.  We  have  seen  the  retrograde
])arty  taking  possession  of  the  whole  body  of  critical  doc-
trine, endeavouring  to  systematize  it  for  its  own  uses,  and
sanctioning  all  its  anarchical  consequences  ;  trying  to  set
up  the  catholic  and  fei;dal  regime  by  the  veiy  means  which
have  desti'oyed  it ;  and  believing  that  a  mere  change  in  the
person  of  the  sovereign  would  intercept  the  consequences  of
a  political  movement  which  they  had  done  nothing  to
modify.^     This  is  simply  a  new  way  of  signing  a  political

'  This  was  written  during  the  reijj;n  of  Louis  Philii)pe,  ami  tlie
administration  of  M.  (Jnizot.


148  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

abdication,  however  the  ability  of  those  who  do  it  may  be
extolled. — We  need  not  look  further  for  illustrations  of  the
jjregnant  fact  that  a  polity  which  is  the  type  of  unity  and
permanence  has  been  full  of  schisms,  and  now  contains
elements  directly  incompatible  with  its  fundamental  prin-
ciples ;  and  that,  as  when  we  find  De  Maistre  reproaching
Bossuet  with  mistaking  the  nature  of  Catholicism,  and  th^-n
himself  falliug  into  inconsistencies,  the  party  of  Order  is
proposing  to  re-establish  that  which  is  not  comprehended
by  its  most  illustrious  defenders.

^,     ,^  ,     ,  Turning  now  to  the  Metaphysical  polity,

The  Metaphy-  i.  if    ^    i  ^  42    n  ^

aical  polity         ^'^^  must  first  observe  and  careiuUy  remember

that  its  doctrine,  though  exclusively  critical,
and  therefore  revolutionary,  has  still  always  had  tlie  virtue
of  being  progressive,  having,  in  fact,  superintended  the
chief  political  progress  accomplished  during  the  last  three
centuries,  which  must  be,  in  the  first  instance,  essentially
negative.  What  this  doctrine  had  to  do  was  to  break  up  a
system  which,  having  directed  the  early  growth  of  the
human  mind  and  society,  tended  to  protract  that  infantile
period  :  and  thus,  the  political  triumph  of  the  metaphysical
school  was  a  necessary  preparation  for  the  advent  of  the
positive  school,  for  which  the  task  is  exclusively  reserved  of
terminating  the  revolutionary  period  by  the  formation  of  a
system  uniting  Order  with  Progress.  Though  the  meta-
physical system,  considered  by  itself,  presents  a  character
of  dii'ect  anarchy,  an  historical  view  of  it,  such  as  we  shall
take  hereafter,  shows  that,  considered  in  its  origin,  and  in
its  antagonism  to  the  old  system,  it  constitutes  a  necessary
provisional  state,  and  must  be  dangerously  active  till  the
new  political  organization  which  is  to  succeed  it  is  ready  to
put  an  end  to  its  agitations.

The  ]iassage  from  one  social  system  to  another  can  never
be  continuous  and  direct.  There  is  always  a  transitional
state  of  anarchy  which  lasts  for  some  generations  at  least ;
and  lasts  the  longer  the  more  complete  is  the  renovation
to  be  wrought.  The  best  political  ])rogress  that  can  be
made  during  such  a  p(n'iod  is  in  gradually  demolishing  the
former  system,  the  foundations  of  which  had  been  sapped
before.  While  this  inevitable  process  is  going  on,  the
elements  of  the  new  system  are  taking  form  as  political


THE    METAPHYSICAL   POLITI.  149

iustitutions,  and  the  reorji;aiiization  is  stimulated  by  the
experience  of  the  evils  of  anarchy.  There  is  another  reason
why  the  constitution  of  the  new  system  cannot  take  place
before  the  destruction  of  the  old  ;  that  without  that  de-
struction no  adequate  conception  could  be  formed  of  what
must  be  done.  Short  as  is  our  life,  and  feeble  as  is  our
reason,  we  cannot  emancipate  ourselves  from  the  influence
of  our  environment.  Even  the  wildest  dreamers  reflect  in
their  dreams  the  contemporary  social  state :  and  much
more  impossible  is  it  to  form  a  conception  of  a  true
political  system,  radically  different  from  that  amidst  which
we  live.  The  highest  order  of  minds  cannot  discern  the
characteristics  of  the  coming  period  till  they  are  close
upon  it ;  and  before  that,  the  incrustations  of  the  old
system  will  have  been  pretty  much  broken  away,  and  the
popular  mind  will  have  been  used  to  the  sjiectacle  of  its
demolition.  The  strongest  head  of  all  antiquity  is  an
example  of  this.  Aristotle  could  not  conceive  of  a  state
of  society  that  was  not  founded  on  slavery,  the  irrevocable
abolition  of  which  took  place  some  centuries  after  him. —
These  considerations  are  illustrative  of  our  own  times,  for
which  all  former  transition  periods  were  merely  a  prepara-
tion. Never  before  was  the  destined  renovation  so  extensive
and  so  thorough ;  and  never  before,  therefore,  was  the
<;ritical  preparatory  period  so  protracted  and  so  perilous.
For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  world,  the  revo-
lutionary action  is  attached  to  a  complete  doctrine  of
methodical  negation  of  all  regular  government.  Such
being  the  origin  of  the  existing  critical  docti-ine,  we  can
explain  the  services  which  that  doctrine  has  hitherto  ren-
dered, and  the  obstacles  Avhich  it  now  opposes  to  the  reor-
ganization of  modern  society.  We  shall  see  hereafter  how
each  of  its  principal  dogmas  has  sprung  out  of  some  corre-
sponding decay  in  the  old  social  order ;  a  decay  which  then
proceeded  all  the  faster  for  the  opposition  having  become
a  dogma.  The  misfortune  of  the  case  lies  in  the  doctrine
which  was  thus  necessarily  relative  to  the  old  system
coming  by  degrees  to  be  supposed  absolute :  but  we  may
leave  it  to  those  who  desire  it  to  blame  the  political  con-
duct of  our  fathers,  without  whose  energetic  perseverance
we  should  not  have  found  ourselves  at  our  present  stage  of


150  .      I'OSiriVK    I'HILOSOPllV.

])rogress,  or  have  been  able  to  conceive  of  tlie  better  polity
that  is  approaching.  The  absolute  or  metaphysical  spirit
was  necessary  to  direct  the  formation  of  the  critical  and
anti-theological  doctrine,  which  needed  all  possible  energy
to  overthrow  the  great  ancient  system ;  and  this  energy
could  no  otherwise  be  imparted  to  the  dogmas  of  the
critical  philosophy.  The  necessity  and  the  fact  of  the  case
are  obvious  enough :  but  not  the  less  must  we  deplore  the
consequence, — that  the  energy  imparted  to  the  anavchical
principle  has  gone  on  to  impede  the  institution  of  the  very
political  order  for  which  it  came  to  prepare  the  way.
When,  in  the  natural  course  of  events,  any  doctrine  has
become  hostile  to  the  pui-poses  it  was  destined  to  serve,  it
is  evidently  done  with ;  and  its  end,  or  the  close  of  its
activity,  is  near.  We  have  seen  that  the  retrograde  or
theological  ])olity  has  ])ecome  as  disturbing  as  the  meta-
physical or  revolutionary :  if  we  find  also  that  the  latter,
whose  office  was  to  aid  progress,  has  become  obstructive,
it  is  clear  that  both  doctrines  are  worn  out,  and  must
soon  be  replaced  by  a  new  philosophy. — This  condition
of  the  metaphysical  polity  is  a  matter  so  serious  that  we
must  dwell  upon  it  a  little,  to  see  how  so  provisional  an
influence  can  have  produced  the  appearance  of  a  new  and
stable  system.

The  spirit  of  revolutionary  polity  is  to  erect  into  a  per-
manency the  temporary  action  which  it  prompts.  For
instance,  being  in  antagonism  with  ancient  order,  its  ten-

dencv  is  to  represent  all  government  as  being
becomes  ob-        ,  i       *  <•         •  i.  ?  .  i       i    .        r        -a'

.structive  enemy  or  society,  and  the  duty  oi  society

to  be  to  keep  xi})  a  perpetual  suspicion  and

vigilance,  restricting  the  activity  of  government  more  and

more,  in  order  to  guard  against  its  encroachments,  so  as  to

reduce  it  at  length  to  mere  functions  of  police,  in  no  way

participating  in  the  supreme  direction  of  collective  action

and  social  development.     This  was  the  inevitable  action

l)y  which  the  social  evolution  was  brought  about:  and  it

is  our  misfortune  that  it  now  remains  as  an  obstacle  to

the  reorganization  that  we  need.     As  tlie  process  could

not  but  occupy  several  centuries,  the  power  that  wrought

it  must  needs  be  invested  with  something  definitive  and

absolute  in  the  popular  view,  wliich  cannot  look  far  beyond


DOGMA   OF   LIBERTY   OF   CONSCIli.NCF.  151

the  present :  and  it  was  well  that  it  was  so ;  for  the  old
system  could  nut  have  been  deprived  of  its  directing
powers,  if  they  had  not  been  stripped  off  from  the  govern-
ments, and  assumed  by  the  polity  which  had  arisen  to
supersede  them.

Regarding  the  doctrine  in  a  more  special  Dofrnia  of
view,  it  is  clear  that  its  most  important  lil>erty  «f
principle  is  the  right  of  free  inquiry,  or  the  conscience,
dogma  of  unbounded  liberty  of  conscience  ;  involving  the
immediate  consequences  of  the  liberty  of  the  pi-ess,  or  of
any  other  mode  of  expression,  and  of  communication  of
opinions.  Tliis  is  the  rallying-point  of  the  revok:tionary
doctrine,  to  which  all  orders  of  minds  have  come  up, — the
proud  and  the  humble,  the  wise  and  the  weak, — those
wbose  other  opinions  were  compatible  with,  this  dogma,
and  those  who  unconsciously  held  views  of  an  opposite
order.  The  impulse  of  this  emancipation  was  irresistible ;
and  the  revolutionary  contagion  was,  in  this  one  respect,
universal.  It  is  a  chief  characteristic  of  the  mind  of
society  in  this  century.  The  most  zealous  partisans  of  the
theological  polity  are  as  apt  as  their  adversaries  to  judge
by  their  jiersonal  knowledge ;  and  those  who,  in  their
writings,  set  up  as  defenders  of  spiritual  government,
recognize,  like  the  revolutionists  whom  they  attack,  no
other  supreme  authority  than  that  of  their  own  reason.
Now  if  we  look  at  what  is  the  real  meaning  of  this  dogma
of  the  universal  and  absolute  right  of  inquiry,  we  shall
find  that  it  is  the  mere  abstract  expression  (such  as  is
common  in  metaphysics)  of  the  tem])orary  state  of  un-
bounded liberty  in  which  the  human  mind  was  left  by  the
decay  of  the  theological  philosophy,  and  which  must  last
till  the  social  advent  of  the  positive  philosophy.  Such  an
embodiment  of  the  fact  of  the  absence  of  intellectual  regu-
lation powerfully  concurred  in  expediting  the  dissolution
of  the  old  system.  The  formula  could  not  but  appear
absolute  at  the  time,  because  no  one  could  foresee  the
scope  of  the  transitional  state  which  it  marked  ;  a  state
which  is  even  now  mistal^en  by  many  enlightened  minds
for  a  definitive  one.  Negative  as  we  now  see  this  dogma
to  be,  signifying  release  from  old  authority  while  waiting
for  the  necessity  of  positive   science,   (a  necessity  which


152  I'osirn'K  piriLosopiiY.

already  puts  liberty  of  conscience  out  of  the  question  in
astronomy  and  physics,  etc.,)  the  absolute  character  sup-
])osed  to  reside  in  it  gave  it  energy  to  fulfil  its  revolu-
tionary destination ;  enabled  philosophers  to  explore  the
]:)rinciples  of  a  new  organization  ;  and,  by  admitting  the
right  of  all  to  a  similar  research,  encouraged  the  discus-
sion which  must  precede  and  effect  the  triumph  of  those
]jrinciples.  Whenever  those  principles  shall  have  become
established,  the  right  of  free  inquiry  will  abide  within  its
natural  and  permanent  limits :  that  is,  men  will  discuss,
under  appropriate  intellectual  conditions,  the  real  connec-
tion of  various  consequences  with  fundamental  rules  uni-
formly res])ected.  Till  then,  the  o]>inions  which  will
hereafter  bring  understandings  into  sul)mission  to  an  exact
<!ontinuous  discipline  by  embodying  the  pi'inciples  of  the
new  social  order  can  appear  only  as  simple  individual
thoughts,  produced  in  virtue  of  the  right  of  free  inquiry ;
since  their  final  supremacy  can  result  in  no  other  way  than
from  the  voluntary  assent  of  numbers,  after  the  freest  dis-
cussion. I  shall  enter  further  into  this  subject  hereafter:
and  what  I  have  said  will,  I  hope,  prevent  any  one  being
shocked  by  my  general  appreciation  of  the  I'evolutionary
dogma  of  free  inquiry,  as  it  is  plain  that  without  it  this
book  would  never  have  been  written.

Indispensable  and  salutary  as  it  has  been,  this  dogma
can  never  be  an  organic  principle:  and,  moreover,  it  con-
stitutes an  obstacle  to  reorganization,  now  that  its  activity
is  no  longer  absorbed  I)y  the  demolition  of  the  old  political
order.  In  any  case,  private  or  public,  the  state  of  inquiry
can  evidently  be  only  provisional,  indicating  the  condition
of  mind  which  precedes  and  prepares  for  a  final  decision,
towards  which  our  reason  is  always  tending,  even  when  it
is  renouncing  old  principles,  in  order  to  form  new  ones.
It  is  taking  the  excejjtion  for  the  rule  when  we  set  iqj,  as
a  natural  and  permanent  state,  the  precarious  situation
which  l)elongs  to  the  period  of  transition;  and  we  ignore
the  dee])est  necessities  of  human  reason  when  we  Avould
j)rotract  that  scepticism  which  is  produced  by  the  passage
from  one  nu)de  of  belief  to  another,  and  which  is,  in  our
nt'cd  of  fixed  points  of  conviction,  a  kind  of  morbid  per-
turbation which  cannot  be  prolonged  beyond  the  correspond-


THE    NECESSITY    FOR   SOCIAL    PRINCIPLES.  153

ing  crisis  without  seriovis  danger.  To  be  always  examining
and  never  deciding  would  be  regarded  as  something  like
madness  in  private  conduct :  and  no  dogmatic  consecration
of  such  conduct  in  all  individuals  could  constitute  any
perfection  of  social  order,  with  regard  to  ideas  which  it  is
much  more  essential,  and  much  more  difficult  to  establish
beyond  the  reach  of  dispute.  Thei'e  are  very  few  persons
who  consider  themselves  fit  to  sit  in  judgment  on  the
astronomical,  physical,  and  chemical  ideas  which  are  des-
tined to  enter  into  social  circulation ;  and  everybody  is
willing  that  those  ideas  should  direct  corresjjonding  t)pera-
tious ;  and  here  we  see  the  beginnings  of  intellectual
government.  Can  it  be  supposed  that  the  most  important
and  the  most  delicate  conceptions,  and  those  which  by  their
complexity  are  accessible  to  only  a  small  numlier  of  highly-
prepared  understandings,  are  to  be  abandoned  to  the  arbi-
trary and  varialile  decisions  of  the  least  competent  minds?
If  si;ch  an  anomaly  could  be  imagined  permanent,  a  disso-
lution of  the  social  state  must  ensue,  through  the  ever-
growing divergence  of  individual  understandings,  delivered
over  to  their  disorderly  natural  impulses  in  the  most  vague
and  easily  perverted  of  all  orders  of  ideas.  The  speculative
inertia  common  to  most  minds,  and  perhaps,  to  a  certain
extent,  the  wise  I'eserve  of  popular  good  sense,  tend,  no
doubt,  to  restrict  such  political  aberrations :  but  these  are
influences  too  feeble  to  root  out  the  pretension  of  every
man  to  set  himself  up  as  a  sovereign  arbiter  of  social
theories  ; — a  pretension  which  every  intelligent  man  blames
in  others,  with  a  reservation,  more  or  less  explicit,  of  his
own  personal  competency.  Now  the  intellectual  reor-
ganization cannot  proceed  amidst  such  a  state  of  things,
because  the  convergence  of  minds  requires  the  renuncia-
tion by  the  greater  number  of  their  right  of  individual
inquiry  on  subjects  above  their  qualifications,  and  re-
quiring, more  than  any  others,  a  real  and  permanent
agreement.  Then  again,  the  imbridled  ambition  of  ill-
prejiared  intellects  rushes  in  among  the  most  complex  and
obscure  questions :  and  these  disturbances,  though  they
must  finally  neutralize  each  other,  make  terrible  devas-
taticm  in  the  interval ;  and  each  one  that  is  destroyed
makes  way  for  another ;  so  that  the  issue  of  these  con-


154  po.sriivE  riiiJA)S()i'iiY.

troversies  is  a  pei'petual  aggravation  of  the  intellectual
anarchy.

No  association  whatever,  even  of  the  smallest  number  of
individuals,  and  for  the  most  temporary  objects,  can  sub-
sist without  a  certain  degree  of  reciprocal  confidence,  intel-
lectual aud  moral,  among  its  members,  each  one  of  whom
has  incessantly  to  act  upon  views  which  he  must  admit  on
the  faith  of  some  one  else.  If  it  is  so  in  this  limited  ease,
there  is  something  monstrous  in  proposing  the  opposite
procedui'e  in  the  case  of  the  whole  human  race,  each  one  of
whom  is  at  an  extreme  distance  from  the  collective  point
of  view,  and  is  the  last  person  of  the  whole  number  fit  to
judge  of  the  rules  by  which  his  personal  action  should  be
directed.  Be  the  intellectual  development  of  each  and  all
what  it  may,  social  order  must  ever  be  incompatible  with  a
perpetual  discussion  of  the  foundations  of  society.  Sys-
tematic toleration  can  exist  only  with  regard  to  opinions
which  are  considered  indifferent  or  doubtful,  as  we  see  in
that  aspect  of  the  revolutionary  spirit  which  takes  its  stand
on  Protestantism,  where  the  innumerable  Christian  sects
are  too  weak  to  pretend  to  sj^iritual  dominion,  but  where
there  is  as  fierce  an  intolerance  about  any  common  })oint  of
doctrine  or  discipline  as  in  the  Komish  Church  itself.  And
when  the  critical  doctrine  was,  at  the  beginning  of  the
French  Revolution,  sujjposed  to  be  organic,  we  know  how
the  directors  of  the  movement  strove  to  obtain  a  general
assent,  voluntary  or  forced,  to  the  dogmas  of  the  revolu-
tionary philosophy,  which  they  regarded  as  the  bases  of
social  order,  and  therefore  above  controversy.  We  shall  see
hereafter  what  are  the  due  limits  of  the  right  of  free
inquiry,  in  a  general  way,  and  in  regard  to  oiu-  own  social
period.  It  is  enough  to  observe  here  that  political  good
sense  has  adopted,  to  expi'ess  the  first  requisite  of  all
organization,  that  fine  axiom  of  the  Catholic  Church  ;  in
necessary  thinijs,  unity :  in  do'tibf/nl  ihitigs,  liberty  :  in  all
things,  charity : — a  maxim  which  admirably  proposes  the
pi'obleni,  without,  however,  suggesting  the  i)riuciples  by
which  it  must  be  solved,  and  that  unity  attained  which
would  be  a  mere  illusion  if  it  did  not  result,  in  the  first
instance,  from  free  discussion.

The  dogma  which  ranks  next  in  im})ortaiice  to  that  of


DOGMA   OF    KQ^ALITY.  155

free  inquiry  is  that  of  Equalitv  ;  aud  iu  the  _  -

•^^,    .      ,    ,  ,    '■■i        'in.         1  Dogma  of

same  way,  it  is  taken  to   be  absolute  wuen  Equality.

it  is  only  rehxtiye,  and  permanent,  while  it
expresses  merely  the  position  of  minds  employed  in  break-
ing uj)  the  old  system.  It  is  an  immediate  consequence
of  liberty  of  conscience,  which  brings  after  it  the  most
fundamental  equality  of  all. — that  of  intelligence.  The
supposition  of  its  being  absolute  was  not  less  necessary  in
this  case  than  the  former :  for,  if  all  social  chissitication
had  not  been  systematically  disallowed,  the  old  corjjora-
tions  would  haye  preseryed  their  sway,  from  the  impossi-
bility of  their  conceiving  of  any  other  classification.  To
this  day  we  haye  no  sufficiently  distinct  notion  ourselves  of
such  an  arrangement  as  would  be  truly  appropriate  to  a
new  state  of  civilization.  When  the  dogma  of  equality  had
achieved  the  overthrow  of  the  old  polities,  it  could  not  but
become  an  obstacle  to  any  reorganization,  because  its
activity  must  then  be  directed  against  the  bases  of  any  new
classification  whatever ;  for,  of  course,  any  classification
must  be  incompatible  with  the  equality  that  was  claimed
for  all.  Since  the  abolition  of  slavery,  there  has  been  no
denial,  from  any  quarter,  of  the  right  of  every  man  (inno-
cent of  strong  anti-social  conduct)  to  expect  from  all  others
the  fulfilment  of  the  conditions  necessary  to  the  natural
development  of  his  personal  activity,  suitably  directed  :  but
beyond  that  undisputed  right,  men  cannot  be  made,  be-
cause they  are  not,  equal,  nor  even  equivalent ;  and  they
cannot  therefore  possess,  in  a  state  of  association,  any
identical  rights  lieyond  the  great  original  one.  The  simple
physical  inequalities  which  fix  the  attention  of  superficial
observers  are  much  less  marked  than  intellectual  and
moral  differences  ;  and  the  j^rogress  of  civilization  tends  to
increase  these  more  important  differences,  as  much  as  to
lessen  the  inferior  kind :  and,  applied  to  any  asseml)lage
of  persons  thus  developed,  the  dogma  of  equality  becomes
anarchical,  and  directly  hostile  to  its  original  destination.
The  second  result  of  the  dogma  of  liberty  Do.nua  of  the
of  conscience  is  the  Sovereignty  of  the  Sovereignty  of
people:  and,  like  the  former,  it  wrought  at  the  People,
first  the  double  service  of  destroying  the  old  regime  and
prejiaring  for  a  new  one.     Till  the  final  system  could  be


156  I'o.snivE  PHILOSOPHY.

constituted,  the  ouly  safoo'uard  against  the  renewed  supre-
macy of  the  old  one  was  in  the  setting  up  of  provisional
institutions,  which  the  peoples  claimed  the  absolute  right
to  change  at  will.  It  was  ouly  by  means  of  the  doctrine
of  popular  sovereignty  that  that  succession  of  political
endeavours  could  take  place  which  must  j^recede  the  in-
stallation of  a  true  system  of  government,  whenever  the
intellectual  renovation  of  society  shall  be  sufficiently
advanced  to  settle  the  conditions  and  natural  extent  of  the
different  sovereignties.  Meanwhile,  in  discharging  its  func-
tion, this  dogma  proves  its  revolutionary  character  before
our  eyes,  by  opposing  all  reorganization,  condemning,  as  it
does,  all  the  superior  to  an  arbitrary  dependence  on  the
multitude  of  the  inferior,  by  a  kind  of  transference  to  the
]ieoples  of  the  divine  right  which  had  become  the  oppro-
brium of  kings.

Doj^'ma  of  Na-  The  revolutionary  spirit  of  the  critical
tional  Inde-  doctrine  manifests  itself  no  less  clearly  when
pendence.  ^q    Iqq].     .^^^    international    relations.     The

necessity  of  order  being  in  this  case  more  equivocal  and
obscure,  the  absence  of  all  I'egulating  power  has  been
moi'e  ingenuously  declared  than  in  other  cases.  When  the
ancient  spiritual  power  was  politically  annulled,  the  disso-
lution of  European  order  followed  spontaneously  from  the
principle  of  liberty  of  conscience ;  and  the  most  natural
papal  fiuiction  was  at  an  end.  Till  the  new  social  organiza-
tion shall  show  us  the  law  l)y  which  the  nations  shall  be-
come once  moi'e  connected,  the  metaphysical  notions  of
national  isolation,  and  therefore  of  mutual  non-interven-
tion, must  prevail ;  and  they  will  be  regarded  as  absolute
till  it  appears  how  tliey  defeat  their  own  end.  As  all
attempts  at  European  co-ordination  must  otherwise  be
directed  by  the  ancient  system,  we  owe  to  the  doctrine  of
national  independence  our  rescvie  from  the  monstrous
arrangement  of  the  most  civilized  nations  being  politically
subordinated  to  the  least  advanced,  because  the  latter  were
least  changed  from  their  ancient  state,  and  would  be  sure
therefore  to  be  placed  at  the  head  of  sucli  an  association.
But,  if  such  a  doctrine  were  more  than  provisional,  the
nations  would  sink  below  their  state  in  the  Middle  Ages ;
and  at  the  very  time  when  they  are  marked  out,  by  an  ever-


INCONSISTENXY   OF   THE    MET APll  VSICAL    DOCTiaNE.       157

gi'owing  resemblance,  for  an  association  more  extensive,
and,  at  the  same  time  more  regular,  than  that  which  was
proposed  by  the  old  catholic  and  feudal  system.  It  is
clear  that  when  the  dogma  of  national  isolation  has  ful-
filled its  function  of  separating  the  nations,  in  order  to  a
prejiaration  for  a  new  union,  its  further  action  must  be  as
purely  anarchical  as  that  of  its  predecessors.

A  brief  notice  of  the  logical  inconsistency  of  the  revolu-
tionary doctrine  will  conclude  our  preliminary  review  of  it.

This  inconsistency  is  more  radical  and  inconsistenev
more  manifest  than  in  the  case  of  the  retro-  of  the  Meta-
grade  or  theological  doctrine;  but  it  does  pliysical  doc-
not  imply  so  utter  a  condemnation  ;  not  only  tnne.
on  account  of  its  recent  formation,  bvit  because  such  a  vice
does  not  prevent  its  fultilling  its  critical  office.  Notwith-
standing profound  differences,  the  adversaries  of  the  old
polity  found  no  difficulty  in  uniting  for  successive  partial
demolitions  about  which  they  were  agreed,  postponing  till
their  period  of  success  their  contests  about  the  ulterior
developments  of  their  doctrine  ;  a  course  which  would  be
impossible  in  the  case  of  any  organic  operation,  in  which
each  part  must  be  considered  in  its  relation  to  the  whole.
Thus  far  only,  however,  can  the  inconsistency  be  tolerated.
When  once  the  whole  of  any  doctrine  becomes  hostile  to
its  original  purposes,  it  is  condemned :  and  this  is  true  of
the  metaphysical  doctrine,  which  at  once  opposes  the  pro-
gress it  professed  to  aid,  and  sustains  the  foundations  of
the  political  system  it  pi'oposed  to  destroy.

Its  culminating  point  was  at  the  most  marked  period  of
the  first  French  Revolution,  when  it  was,  by  an  unavoidable
illusion,  taken  to  be  the  principle  of  social  reorganization.
It  was  then  seen  in  its  best  aspect  of  consistency  and
power ;  and  then  it  was  that,  the  ancient  system  being  dis-
posed of,  its  vices  became  apparent.  It  showed  itself
hostile  to  all  social  reorganization,  and  became  actuallv
retrograde  in  its  character  by  setting  itself  up  in  violent
opposition  to  the  movement  of  modern  civilization.  For
one  illustration,  look  at  the  strange  meta-  Notion  of  a
physical  notion  of  a  supposed  state  of  nature,  state  of  Na-
whicth  was  to  Ije  the  primitive  and  invariable  ^'i''^-
type  of  eveiy  social  state.     This  doctrine  is  not  to  be  attri-


158  POSniVE    PHILOSOPHY.

Touted  to  Rousseau  aloiie.  It  is  that  of  all  philosophers,  in
all  times  and  countries,  who  have  unconsciously  concurred
in  developing  the  revolutionary  metaphysical  doctrine
which  Rousseau,  by  his  urgent  dialectics,  only  pushed  to
its  real  conclusions.  His  doctrine,  which  represents  a  state
of  civilization  as  an  ever-growing  degeneracy  from  the
primitive  ideal  type,  is  common  to  all  modern  metaphy-
sicians ;  and  we  shall  see  hereafter  that  it  is  only  the
metaphysical  form  of  the  theological  dogma  of  the  degrada-
tion of  the  human  race  by  original  sin.  According  to  such
a  principle,  all  political  reformation  must  be  regarded  as
destined  to  re-estal)lish  that  ])rimitive  state :  and  what
is  that  but  organizing  a  universal  retrogradatiou,  though
with  progressive  intentions?  The  apj^licatious  of  this
doctrine  have  been  in  conformity  to  its  j^liilosophical  con-
stitution. When  it  was  necessary  to  replace  the  feudal
and  catholic  regime,  men  did  not  fix  their  contemplation  on
the  social  future,  but  summoned  up  their  imperfect  remem-
r)rances  of  a  very  distant  past,  trying  to  substitute  for  a
decrepit  system  a  more  ancient  and  decrepit  system  still,
but,  for  that  very  reason,  nearer  to  the  j^i'iniitive  type.
Instead  of  a  worn-out  Catholicism,  they  pro2iosed  a  sort  of
metaphysical  polytheism,  at  the  same  time  that,  in  polity,
they  desii'ed  to  replace  the  Middle  Age  system  by  the
radically  inferior  rcijinie  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  The
very  elements  of  modern  civilization,  the  only  possible
germs  of  a  new  social  state,  were  endangered  by  barbaric
condemnation  of  the  industrial  and  artistic  advancement
of  modern  society,  in  the  name  of  primitive  virtue  and  sim-
jtlicity.  Even  the  scientific  spirit,  which  is  the  only  principle
of  intellectual  organization,  was  stigmatized  as  tending  to
institute  an  aristocracy  of  knowledge  which  was  as  incom-
patible as  any  other  aristocracy  with  the  original  equality
that  was  to  be  set  up  again.  Lavoisier  was  the  mai'tyr  of
tliis  state  of  opinion ;  and  it  is  his  case  that  will  illustrate
the  ])eri()d  to  our  njmotest  posterity.  It  is  useless  for  the
metaphysical  school  to  represent  such  results  as  portentous
or  eccentric  incidents.  Tlieir  legitimate  descent  from  the
revolutionary  ]H)lity  is  evident  and  certain  ;  and  we  should
witness  a  rei)etition  of  them  if  it  were  possible  (which  it  is
not)  for  this  polity  to  become  prevalent  again.     The  ten-


IN    ALL    APPLICATIONS.  159

dency  to  social  retrogradatiou,  under  the  idea  of  returninij
to  the  primitive  state,  so  thoroughly  Ijelongs  to  the  lueta-
])hysical  polity,  that  the  new  sects  wlio,  in  their  lirief  day,
have  most  haughtily  censured  the  revolutionary  imitation
of  Greek  and  Roman  types,  have  unconsciously  reproduced
the  same  error  in  a  far  more  marked  way  by  striving  to  re-
establish the  confusion  between  the  temporal  and  spiritual
power,  and  extolling,  as  the  highest  social  pei'fection,  a
return  to  the  Egyptian  or  Hebrew  theocracy,  founded  on
fetichism,  disguised  under  the  name  of  pantheism.

As  the  metaphysical  doctrine  was  the  issue  .  ,.  .
of  the  theological,  and  destined  to  modify  it,  ^j^g  ■worn-out
it  was  a  matter  of  course  that  it  should  vindi-
cate the  general  foundations  of  the  old  system,  even  after
having  destroyed  its  chief  conditions  of  existence.  Every
reformer,  for  three  centuries  past,  while  urging  the  develop-
ment of  the  critical  spirit  further  than  his  predecessors,
assumed  to  set  immutable  bot^nds  to  it ;  deriving  his  limita-
tions from  the  old  system.  All  the  absolute  rights  pro-
claimed as  the  basis  of  the  new  doctrine  were  guaranteed
by  a  sort  of  religious  consecration,  in  the  last  resort ;  and
this  was  indispensable,  if  their  efficacy  was  not  to  be  im-
paired by  continual  discussion.  It  was  always  with  an  in-
vocation of  the  principles  of  the  old  polity  on  their  lips
that  the  reformers  proceeded  to  demolish  the  spiritual  and
temporal  institutions  in  which  they  were  embodied;  and
the  whole  reijime  fell  through  the  conflict  of  its  chief
elements.  Hence  there  arose,  in  the  intellectual  region,  a
Christianity  more  and  more  attenuated  or  sim|ilified.  and
reduced  at  last  to  that  vague  and  impotent  theism  which,
by  a  monstrous  conjunction  of  terms,  metaphysicians  have
entitled  Natural  Religion,  as  if  all  religion  were  not  neces-
sarily supernatural.  The  pretension  to  direct  a  social  re-
organization by  tliis  strange  conception  is  merely  a  recur-
rence to  the  old  principle  that  social  order  must  rest  on  a
theological  basis.  This  is  now  the  most  fatal  inconsistency
of  the  revolutionary  school ;  and  while  armed  with  such  a
concession,  the  advocates  of  Catholicism  will  always  have
an  incontestable  logical  superiority  over  the  irrational  de-
famers  of  tlie  old  faith,  who  ])roclaim  the  need  of  a  religious
organization,  and  yet  disallow  all  the  necessary  conditions.


160  POSITIVE    PIIILOSOl'lIY.

It  is  clear  that  soc-iety  would  be  coudeniued  to  a  perpetuity
of  the  intellectual  anarchy  which  characterizes  it  at  present
if  it  were  to  be  for  ever  made  up  of  minds  Avhich  admit
the  want  of  a  theological  regime  on  the  one  hand,  while,  on
the  other,  they  reject  its  principal  conditions  of  existence  ;
and  those  who  thus  acknowledge  themselves  incapable  have
no  right  to  disci'edit  the  only  rational  way  to  reorganization
which  remains  open,  and  by  which  every  other  order  of
human  conceptions  has  been  happily  retrieved  and  estab-
lished. The  social  apj^lication  of  the  positive  philosophy
remains  as  the  resource,  and  the  only  resource,  after  the
failure  of  both  the  preceding  systems.

^  In   its  tempoi'al   ap]>lication  the  inctmsis-

Kecurrence  to,  p.,  ±      ^       ■     t    i     ±  ■

^^,  tency  ot  the  metaphysical  doctrme  is  as  con-

spicuous as  in  the  spiritvial.  It  strives  to
preserve,  if  not  the  feudal,  at  least  the  military  spirit,  in
which  the  feudal  had  its  origin.  The  French  nation  did,  it
is  true, in  their  revolutionary  enthusiasm,  prosei'ibe  war  from
that  time  forward  :  but  when  the  armed  coalition  of  the
retrograde  forces  of  Europe  brought  out  an  immense
amount  of  energy  for  self-defence,  for  the  sake  of  the  pro-
gressive movement,  the  sentiment,  which  was  grounded  on
no  principle,  soon  disappeared,  and  France  was  distin-
guished by  the  most  conspicuous  military  activity,  invested
with  its  most  oppressive  characteristics.  The  military
spirit  is  in  fact  so  congenial  with  the  critical  doctrine  that
any  pretext  will  serve  for  its  indulgence  :  as  for  instance,
when  it  is  proposed  to  regulate  by  war  the  action  of  the
more  advanced  nations  upon  the  less  advan(.'ed.  The  true
logical  consequence  of  this  would  be  a  universal  uproar ;
but,  happily,  the  nature  of  modern  civilization  saves  us
from  danger.  The  tendency  of  Ihe  critical  rrgime  in  this
respect  is  shown  by  the  perj^etual  endeavours  of  the  various
sections  of  the  i*evolutionary  school  to  reinstate  the  memory
of  the  man  who,  of  all  others,  strove  for  political  retro-
gradation,  by  wasting  an  enormous  amount  of  power  in
the  restoration  of  the  military  and  theological  system.
Prinoiiile  of  Before  quitting  the  subject  of  the  incon-

Political  Ccn-  sistencies  of  this  school,  I  must,  in  jiistice,
trali/iition.  point  out  one  more  contradiction  which,  as
being  of  a   progressive  character,  is  honourable  to  those


POLITICAL   CENTRALIZATIOX.  161

most  advanced  minds  whicli  entertain  it,  and  which  alone
understand  its  necessity,  opposed  as  it  is  to  the  dogmas  of
independence  and  isohition  which  constitute  the  spirit  of
the  critical  schooL  I  refer  to  the  principle  of  political
centralization.  The  two  parties  seem  here  to  have  changed
sides.  The  retrograde  doctrine,  notwithstanding  its  proud
pretensions  to  order  and  luiity,  preaches  the  distribution
of  political  centres,  in  the  secret  hope  of  preserving  the
old  system  yet  a  while  longer  among  the  most  backward  of
the  populations,  by  keeping  them  aloof  from  the  general
centres  of  civilization ;  while  the  revolutionary  policy,  on
the  other  hand,  proud  of  having  withstood,  in  France,  the
coalition  of  the  old  powers,  discards  its  own  maxims  to
recommend  the  subordination  of  the  secondary  to  the
jjrincipal  centres  by  which  such  a  noble  stand  has  already
been  made,  and  whicli  must  become  a  most  valuable
auxiliary  of  reorganization.  Thus  alone  can  the  reorganiza-
tion be,  in  the  first  place,  restricted  to  a  choice  population.
In  brief,  the  revolutionary  school  alone  has  understood
that  the  increasing  anarchy  of  the  time,  intellectual  and
moral,  requires,  to  prevent  a  complete  dislocation  of  society,
a  growing  concentration  of  political  action,  properly  so
called.

Thus,  after  three  centuries,  employed  in  the  necessary
demolition  of  the  ancient  regime,  the  critical  doctrine  show.s
itself  as  incapable  of  other  application,  and  as  inconsistent
as  we  have  now  seen  it  to  be.  It  is  no  more  fit  to  secure
Progress,  than  the  old  doctrine  to  maintain  Order.  But.
feeble  as  they  are  apart,  they  actually  sustain  each  other
by  their  very  antagonism.  It  is  imiversally  undei'stood
that  neither  can  ever  again  achieve  a  permanent  triumph :
but,  so  strong  is  the  apprehension  of  even  the  tenip(.)rarv
preponderance  of  either,  that  the  general  mind,  for  want
of  a  more  rational  point  of  support,  employs  each  doctrine
in  turn  to  restrain  the  encroachments  of  the  other.  This
miserable  oscillation  of  our  social  life  must  proceed  till  a
real  doctrine,  as  truly  organic  as  progressive,  shall  reconcile
for  us  the  two  aspects  of  the  great  political  problem.
Then,  at  last,  the  two  opposite  doctrines  will  disappear  for
ever  in  the  new  conception  that  will  be  seen  to  be  coni-
])letely  adapted  to  fulfil  the  destination  of  both.    Often  has

II.  M


162  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

each  party,  lilinded  by  some  temporarv  success,  believed
that  it  had  annihilated  the  other  ;  and  never  has  the  event
failed  to  mock  tlie  ii^morant  exultation.  The  critical  doctrine
seemed  to  have  humbled  for  ever  the  catholic-feudal  school ;
but  that  school  arose  again.  Napoleon  thoiis^ht  he  had
accomplished  a  retrograde  reaction  ;  but  the  very  energy  of
his  efforts  caused  a  reaction  in  favour  of  revolutionary
principles.  And  thus  society  continues  to  vibrate  between
conflicting  influences  ;  and  those  influences  continue  to
exist  only  by  their  mutual  neutralization.  For  that  purpose
only,  indeed,  are  they  now  ever  applied.  Neither  could  be
spared  before  the  advent  of  the  state  which  is  to  succeed
them.  Without  the  one,  we  should  lose  the  sentiment  of
Order,  and  without  the  other,  that  of  Progress :  and  the
keeping  alive  this  sentiment,  on  either  hand,  is  the  only
Iiractical  efficacy  which  now  remains  to  them.  Feeble
as  the  conception  must  be,  in  the  absence  of  any  principle
which  unites  the  two  requisites,  it  is  preserved  by  the  pre-
sence of  the  two  decaying  systems ;  and  tliey  keep  before
the  minds  of  both  philosophers  and  the  public  the  true
conditions  of  social  reorganization,  which  otherwise  our
feeble  nature  might  misconceive  or  lose  sight  of.  Having
the  two  types  before  us,  we  see  the  solution  of  the  great
problem  to  be,  to  form  a  doctrine  which  shall  be  more
organic  than  the  theological,  and  more  jii'ogressive  than
the  metaphysical.

The  old  political  system  can  be  no  pattern  for  a  rrgime
suitalde  to  a  widely  different  civilization ;  but  we  ai'e  not
under  the  less  obligation  to  study  it,  in  order  to  learn  what
are  the  essential  attributes  of  all  social  organization,  wliich
must  reappear  in  an  improved  state  in  the  future.  The
general  conception  of  the  theological  aiid  military  system
even  seems  to  me  to  have  passed  too  much  out  of  sight.
And.  as  to  the  Critical  system,  there  can  be  no  question  of
its  affording,  by  its  progressive  character,  and  its  exposure
of  the  preceding  rrgiwe,  a  most  valuable  stimulus  to  society
to  seek  for  something  better  than  mere  modifications  of
systems  that  have  failed.  The  common  complaint  that  it
renders  all  government  impossible,  is  a  mere  avowal  of
impotence  on  the  ])art  of  those  who  utter  it.  Whatever
are  its  imperfections,  it  fulfilled  for  a  time  one  of  the  two


SOCIAL   OSCILLxVTIONS.  163

requisites :  its  abolition  would  in  uo  way  assist  the  re-
establisliment  of  Order ;  aud  uo  declamations  against  the
revolutionary  philosophy  will  affect  the  instinctive  attach-
ment of  society  to  principles  which,  have  directed  its  political
progress  for  three  centuries  past,  aud  which  are  believed
to  represent  the  indispensable  conditions  of  its  future
development.  Each  of  its  dogmas  affords  an  indication
of  how  the  improvement  is  to  be  effected.  Each  expresses
the  political  aspect  of  certain  high  moral  obligations  which
the  retrograde  school,  with  all  its  pretensions,  was  com-
jielled  to  ignore,  because  its  system  had  lost  all  power  to
fulfil  them.  In  this  way,  the  dogma  of  Free  Inquiry
decides  that  the  spiritual  reorganization  must  result  from
purely  intellectual  action,  providing  for  a  final  voluntary
and  unanimous  assent,  without  the  disturbing  intervention
of  any  heterogeneous  power.  Again,  the  dogmas  of
Equality  and  the  Sovereignty  of  the  people  devolve  on  the
new  powers  and  classes  of  society  the  duty  of  a  public-
spirited  social  conduct,  instead  of  working  the  many  for  the
interests  of  the  few.  The  old  system  practised  these  mo-
ralities in  its  best  days  ;  but  they  are  now  maintained  only
by  the  revolutionary  doctrine,  which  it  would  be  fatal  to
part  with  till  we  have  some  substitute  in  these  particular
respects  ;  for  the  effect  would  be  that  we  should  be  delivered
over  to  the  dark  despotism  of  the  old  system  ; — to  the  re-
storers of  religions,  for  instance,  who,  if  proselytism  failed,
would  have  recourse  to  tyranny  to  compel  unity,  if  once
the  principle  of  free  inquiry  were  lost  from  among  us.

It  is  useless  to  declaim  agaiust  the  critical  philosophy,
and  to  deplore,  in  the  name  of  social  order,  the  dissolving
energy  of  the  spirit  of  analysis  and  inquiry.  It  is  only  by
their  use  that  we  can  obtain  materials  for  reorganization  ;
materials  which  shall  have  been  thoroughly  tested  by  free
discussion,  carried  on  till  general  conviction  is  secured.
The  philosophy  which  will  arise  out  of  this  satisfaction  of
the  public  reason  will  then  assign  the  rational  limits  whicli
must  obviate  the  abuse  of  the  analytical  spirit,  by  establish-
ing that  distinction  in  social  matters,  between  the  field  of
reasoning  and  that  of  pure  observation,  which  we  have
found  already  marked  out  in  regard  to  every  other  kind  of
science.


164  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

Though  consigned ,  by  the  course  of  events,  to  a  negative
doctrine  for  awhile,  society  has  never  renounced  the  laws
of  human  reason  :  and  when  the  proper  time  arrives,  society
will  use  the  rights  of  this  reason  to  organize  itself  anew,
on  principles  which  will  then  have  been  ascertained  and
estimated.  The  existing  state  of  no-government  seems
necessary  at  present,  in  order  to  that  ascertainment  of
principles  ;  but  it  does  not  at  all  follow,  as  some  eccentric
individuals  seem  to  think,  that  the  right  of  inquiry  imposes
the  duty  of  never  deciding.  The  prolonged  indecision
proves  merely  that  the  principles  which  are  to  close  the
deliberation  are  not  yet  sufficiently  established.  In  the
same  way,  because  society  claims  the  right  of  choosing  and
varying  its  institutions  and  governing  powers,  it  by  no
means  follows  that  the  right  is  for  ever  to  be  used  in
choosing  and  varying,  when  its  indefinite  use  shall  have
become  injuri<ius.  When  the  right  conditions  shall  have
been  ascertained,  society  will  submit  its  choice  to  the  rules
which  will  secure  its  efficacy ;  and  in  the  interval,  nothing
can  be  more  favoiirable  to  future  order  than  that  the
political  course  should  be  kept  open,  to  admit  of  the  free
rise  of  the  new  social  system.  As  it  happens,  the  peoples
have,  thus  far,  erred  on  the  side  of  too  hasty  a  desire  for
reorganization,  and  a  too  generous  confidence  in  every
promise  of  social  order,  instead  of  having  shown  the  sys-
tematic distrust  attributed  to  the  revolutionary  doctrine  by
those  whose  worn-out  claims  will  not  bear  discussion.  There
is  more  promise  of  political  reorganization  in  the  revolu-
tionary doctrine  than  in  the  retrograde,  though  it  is  the
supreme  claim  of  the  latter  to  be  the  safeguard  of  social
Order.

Such  is  the  vicious  circle  in  which  we  are
doctrine  ^  "  "^  ^^'  P^^sent  confined.  We  have  seen  what  is
the  antagonism  of  two  doctrines  that  are
powerless  apart,  and  have  no  operation  but  in  neutralizing
each  other.  They  have  lost  their  activity  as  pre])ond(!rating
influences,  and  are  seen  now  in  the  form  of  political  debate,
which  they  daily  direct  by  the  one  furnishing  all  the  essen-
tial ideas  of  government,  and  the  other  the  principles  of
opposition.  At  shorter  and  shorter  intervals,  a  2>artial  and
transient  suj)eriority  is  allowed  to  the  one  or  the  other.


THE   STATIONARY   SCHOOL.  165

when  its  antagouist  tlireatens  danger.  Out  of  these  oscil-
lations a  third  opinion  has  arisen,  •which  is  constructed  out
of  their  ruins,  and  takes  its  station  lietween  them.  I
suppose  we  must  give  the  name  of  Doctrine  to  this  inter-
mediate opinion,  l)astard  and  inconsistent  as  is  its  character;
for  it  is  presented  by  very  earnest  doctors,  who  urge  it
upon  us  as  a  type  of  the  final  political  philosophy.  We
must  call  it  the  Stationary  Doctrine ;  and  we  see  it,  in
virtue  of  that  quality,  occupying  the  scene  of  politics,  among
tlie  most  advanced  people,  for  above  a  quarter  of  a  century.
Essentially  provisional  as  it  is,  the  Stationary  school
naturally  serves  as  a  guide  to  society  in  preserving  the
material  order,  without  which  a  true  doctrine  could  not
have  its  free  growth.  It  may  be  necessary  for  our  weak-
ness that  the  leaders  of  this  school  should  suppose  that
they  have  a  doctrine  which  is  destined  to  triumph  ;  but
whatever  benefits  arise  from  their  action  are  much  impaired
by  the  mistake  of  supposing  our  miserable  transition  state
a  permanent  type  of  the  social  condition.  The  stationary
polity  not  only  contains  inconsistencies,  but  it  is  itself
inconsistency  erected  into  a  principle.  It  acknowledges
the  essential  principles  of  the  other  systems,  but  prevents
their  action.  Disdainful  of  Utopias,  it  proposes  the  wildest
of  them  all; — that  of  fixing  society  for  ever  in  a  contra-
dictory position  between  retrogradation  and  regeneration.
The  theory  serves  to  keep  in  check  the  other  two  philo-
sophies ;  and  this  may  be  a  good :  but,  on  the  other  hand,
it  helps  to  keep  them  alive  ;  and  it  is,  in  so  far,  an  obstacle
to  reorganization.  When  I  present  my  historical  review  of
society,  I  shall  explain  the  special  assemblage  of  social
conditions  which  gave  England  her  parliamentary  monarchy,
so  lauded  by  the  school  of  mixed  doctrine,  but  in  fact,  an
exceptional  institution,  whose  inevitable  end  cannot  be
very  far  off.  When  we  enter  upon  that  analysis,  we  shall
see  how  great  is  the  error  of  philosophers  and  statesmen
when  they  have  taken  up  a  singular  and  transient  case  as
the  solution  of  the  revolutionary  crisis  of  modern  societies,
and  have  endeavoured  to  transplant  on  the  European  con^
tinent  a  purely  local  system,  which  would  be  deprived  in
the  process  of  its  very  roots :  for  it  is  an  organized  Protes-
tantism which  is  its  main  spiritvial  basis  in  England.     The


166  POSTIIVE    PITTLOSOPHY.

expectation  attached  to  this  single  specious  aspect  of  the
stationary  doctrine  will  make  a  future  examination  of  it
important;  and  we  shall  then  see  how^  hopeless  is  the  con-
stitutional metaphysics  of  the  balance  of  powers,  judged
by  that  instance  which  serves  as  the  common  ground  of
such  social  fictions  After  all  the  vast  efforts  made  to
nationalize  elsewheie  the  stationary  compromise,  it  has
never  succeeded  anywhere  but  in  its  native  land  ;  and  this
proves  its  powerlessness  in  regard  to  the  great  social  pro-
blem. The  only  possible  result  is  that  the  mischief  should
pass  from  the  acute  to  the  chronic  state,  becoming  in-
curable by  the  recognition  as  a  j)rinciple  of  the  transient
antagonism  which  is  its  chief  symptom.  Its  principal
merit  is  that  it  admits  the  double  aspect  of  the  social
problem,  and  the  necessity  of  reconciling  Order  and  Pro-
gress :  but  it  introduces  no  new  idea ;  and  its  recognition
amounts  therefore  to  uotliing  more  than  an  equal  sacrifice,
when  necessary,  of  the  one  and  the  other.  The  order  that
it  protects  is  a  merely  material  order ;  and  it  therefore
fails  in  that  function  precisely  in  crises  when  it  is  most
wanted.  On  the  other  hand,  this  function  continues  to  be
attributed  to  royalty,  which  is  the  only  power  of  the  old
polity  that  is  still  active  :  now,  the  balance  which  is  insti-
tuted by  the  stationary  doctrine  surrounds  the  royal  power
with  bonds  that  are  always  tightening,  while  declaring  that
royal  power  to  be  the  chief  basis  of  the  government.  It  is
only  a  question  of  time  when  the  function  of  sovereignty,
thus  embarrassed,  shall  cease,  and  the  j^reteuded  balance
be  destroyed.  This  jiarliamentary  polity  serves  the  cause
of  progress  no  better  than  that  of  order  :  for,  as  it  ]iroposes
no  new  principle,  the  restraints  which  it  puts  upon  tlie
revolutionary  spirit  are  all  derived  from  the  ancient  system,
and  th(>refore  tend  to  become  more  and  more  retrograde
and  (oppressive.  An  example  of  this  is,  the  restrictions
on  the  right  of  election  ;  restrictions  always  derived  from
irrational  material  conditions,  which,  being  arbitrary  in
their  character,  oppress  and  irritate,  without  answering
their  proposed  pur])0se,  and  leave  the  multitude  of  the
excluded  much  more  offended  than  the  small  number  of
the  privileged  are  gratified.

There  is  no  need  to  say  more  in  this  place  of  the  mixed


DA>GERS    OF   THE    CO.XDITIOX.  167

or  Stationary  doctrine,  wliicli  is,  in  fact,  onlj  a  last  j^tase
of  the  metaphysical  polity.  The  reader  cannot  but  see
that  a  theory  so  precarious  and  subaltei*n,  so  far  from
being  able  to  reorganize  modern  society,  can  only  regulate,
by  protracting,  the  political  conflict,  and  discharge  the
negative  office  of  preventing  kings  from  retrograding  and
peoples  from  destroying.  Whatever  the  value  of  this
service  may  be,  we  cannot  expect  regeneration  to  be  accom-
plished by  means  of  impediments.

We  have  now  seen  the  worth  of  these  ^
three  systems.  To  complete  our  conviction  critical  neriod
of  the  need  of  a  better,  we  must  briefly
notice  the  chief  social  dangers  which  result  from  the  de-
plorable protraction  of  such  an  intellectual  condition,  and
which  must,  from  their  nature,  be  aggravated  from  day  to
day.  The  dangers  are  imputable  to  all  the  three  systems ;
though  the  revolutionary  and  stationary  systems  assume
that  the  blame  of  our  disorders  rests  with  the  retrograde
school :  but  they  are  certainly  no  less  guilty ;  for,  power-
less to  discover  the  remedy,  they  protract  the  mischief,  and
embarrass  the  treatment.  And  again,  the  discordance
between  the  movements  of  governments  and  of  their
peoples  is  to  be  attributed  quite  as  much  to  the  hostile
spirit  of  the  directing  power  as  to  the  anarchical  tendency
of  popular  opinions.  The  social  perturbations,  the  aspect
of  which  we  are  about  to  examine,  jiroceed  no  less  from
the  kings  than  from  their  peoples,  with  this  aggravated
disgrace, — that  it  seems  as  if  the  solution  ought  to
emanate  from  the  kings.

The  first,  the  most  fatal,  and  the  most  Intellectual
universal  consecjuence  of  this  situation  is  the  anai-chy.
alarming  and  ever-widening  extent  of  the  intellectual
anarchy  which  all  acknowledge,  however  they  may  differ
about  its  cause  and  termination.  This  evil  is  charged
almost  exclusively  on  the  revolutionary  philosoi^hy  ;  and
that  school  too  readily  admits  the  charge.  But,  as  we
have  seen,  that  doctrine  does  not  prohibit  decision,  when
the  requisite  grounds  are  ascertained :  and  it  is  the
stationary  theory  that  ought  to  bear  the  blame  of  the
absence  of  those  grounds :  and  yet  more  the  retrograde,
which  is  chargeable  with   urging  the   restoration   of   the


168  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

same  woru-out  priuciplos  Avliifh,  by  their  decrepitude,  have
caused  all  this  auarchy.  The  stationary  school  does  not
want  to  hear  of  any  such  ])riuciples,  and  interdicts  them ;
and  the  retrograde  school  insists  that  the  old  ones  "will  do
over  again.  So  that,  if  the  revolutionary  school  first  en-
couraged the  anarchy,  the  other  two  protract  it.

Of  all  questions,  there  are  none  which  have  so  much
claim  as  social  problems  to  lie  consigned  to  a  small  number
of  choice  minds  which  shall  have  been  prepared  by  a  high
order  of  discipline  and  instruction  for  the  investigation
of  questions  so  complex  and  so  mixed  up  with  human
passions.  Such  is,  at  least,  the  natural  state  of  the  human
mind,  in  contrast  with  which  its  condition  in  revolutionary
periods  may  be  regarded  as,  in  a  manner,  pathological,
however  inevitable.  The  social  malady  must  be  very  serious
when  we  see  all  manner  of  persons,  however  inferior  their
intelligence,  and  however  imprepared,  stimulated,  in  the
highest  manner,  and  from  day  to  day,  to  cut  the  knot  of
the  most  intricate  political  questions,  without  any  guidance
or  restraint.  The  wonder  is,  not  that  the  divergence  of
opinion  is  what  it  is,  but  that  any  points  of  agreement  at
all  are  left  amidst  all  this  dissolution  of  social  maxims.
The  evil  has  reached  such  a  point  that  all  political  opinions,
though  of  course  derived  from  one  of  the  three  schools,
differ  through  so  many  degrees  as  to  become  individual ; —
through  all  degrees,  in  fact,  that  the  combiniition  of  three
orders  of  vicious  principles  admits  of.  Except  on  occa-
sion of  emergency,  where  there  is  a  temjtorary  coalition
(amidst  which  each  one  usually  hop(>s  to  have  his  own  way)
it  becomes  more  and  more  ditficult  to  mahe  even  a  very
small  number  of  minds  adhere  to  a  plain  and  explicit  pro-
fession of  political  faith.  This  inability  to  co-operate  pre-
vails in  all  the  three  camps, — as  we  ought  carefully  to
observe :  and  each  party  has  often,  in  its  ingenuous
moments,  bitterly  dei)lored  the  intense  disagreement
with  which  it  supposed  itself  to  be  especially  afflicted ;
whereas,  the  others  were  no  better  organized ;  and  the
chief  difference  in  the  three  cases  was  that  I'adi  was  most
acutely  sensible  of  its  own  misery.

In  countries  where  this  intellectual  anarchy  has  been
sanctioned  by  the  political  i)reponderance  of  Protestantism,


EXISTING    ANARCHY.  169

the  divergences  have  been  more  mxiltiplied  than  elsewhere,
without  being  less  serious.  It  could  not  but  be  so  from
the  tendency  of  the  genei'al  mind,  in  its  then  infantile
state,  to  use  its  new  emancipation  to  plunge  into  the
indefinite  discussion  of  rehgious  opinions — (the  most
vague  and  discordant  of  all), — in  the  absence  of  a  restrain-
ing spiritual  authority.  In  the  United  States,  for  instance,
there  are  hundreds  of  Christian  sects,  radically  discordant,
and  incessantly  parting  off  into  opinions  which  are  really
little  more  than  individual,  which  it  is  impossible  to
classify,  and  which  are  really  becoming  implicated  with
innumerable  political  differences.  The  nations  which,  lilve
the  French,  have  escaped  the  treacherous  stage  of  Protes-
tantism, and  have  passed  at  once  from  the  Catholic  to  the
fully  revolutionary  state,  were  not,  on  that  account,  entirely
exempt  from  the  intellectual  anarchy  inherent  in  any  pi'o-
longed  exercise  of  the  absolute  right  of  free  individual
inquiry.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that  their  aberrations,
without  being  less  anti-social,  have  a  less  vague  character,
and  are  less  in  the  way  of  the  final  reorganization.  They
arise,  take  possession  for  awhile  of  even  healthy  and
well-trained  intellects,  and  then  give  place  to  others  that
have  their  day,  and  in  their  turn  are  superseded.  In  our
time,  we  hear  of  jiroj^osals,  entertained  hei*e  and  there
even  by  men  who  know  what  positive  science  is  in  some
one  dej^artment  of  study,  which  it  is  a  shock  to  one's  hopes
to  see  so  advocated;  ja-oposals,  for  instance,  to  abolish
money  and  recur  to  a  state  of  barter ;  to  destroy  the  great
capitals  in  order  to  restore  rural  innocence ;  to  have  a
fixed  rate  of  wages,  and  the  same  rate  for  every  kind  of
labour,  and  so  forth.  Such  opinions  are  daily  given  out,
side  by  side  Avith  those  which  are  the  most  philosophical
and  the  most  carefully  elaborated ;  and  none  have  any
t'liance  of  being  established  under  the  rule  of  any  intel-
lectual discipline  whatever,  though  the  wise  are  compro-
mised with  the  foolish  in  the  eyes  of  public  reason.  The
inevitable  result  of  such  a  chronic  epidemic  is  the  gradual
destruction  of  the  public  morale,  which  is  not  svistained,
among  the  genei'ality  of  men,  so  much  by  Destruction  of
the  direct  sentiment  as  by  habit,  guided  by  imhlic  mo-
tile uniform  assent  of  individual  wills  to  in-    lidity.


170  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

variable  and  general  rules,  adapted  to  fix,  on  every  serious
occasion,  the  true  idea  of  the  iniblic  good.  So  complex  is
the  nature  of  social  c^uestious  tliat  there  is  much  that  is
to  be  said  on  all  sides  ;  and  there  is  no  institution,  how-
ever indispensable,  which  does  not  involve  serious  and  nu-
merous inconveniences,  more  or  less  jjartial  and  transient;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  Utopia  so  wild  as  not
to  offer  some  incontestable  advantages :  and  few  are  the
minds  which  are  not  so  preoccupied  by  ideas,  or  stimulated
by  passion,  as  to  be  able  to  contemplate  at  once  all  the
aspects  of  any  social  subject.  Thus  it  is  that  almost  all  the
great  maxims  of  public  morality  are  condemned  on  account
of  their  salient  faults,  while  their  determining  grounds  are
hidden  till  exhibited  by  an  exact  analysis,  which  must  in
many  cases  be  extremely  delicate.  Thus,  again,  it  is  that
all  true  moral  order  is  incompatible  with  the  existing
vagabond  liberty  of  individual  minds,  if  such  license  were
to  last ;  for  the  great  social  rules  which  should  become
customary  cannot  be  abandoned  to  the  blind  and  arbitrary
decision  of  an  incompetent  jDublic  without  losing  all  their
efficacy.  The  requisite  convergence  of  the  best  minds
cannot  be  obtained  without  the  voluntary  renimciation,  on
the  part  of  most  of  them,  of  their  sovereign  right  of  free
inquiry,  which  they  will  doubtless  be  willing  to  abdicate,
as  soon  as  they  have  foiind  organs  worthy  to  exercise
appropriately  their  vain  provisional  supremacy.  If  it  is  so
in  problems  of  science,  there  is  every  reason  to  expect  it  in
the  more  difficult  questions  of  social  principle.  Mean-
while, all  vague  notions  of  public  good,  degenerating  into
an  indistinct  philaiithropy,  must  succumb  to  the  energetic
forces  of  a  highly  stimulated  selfishness.  In  the  daily
course  of  our  political  conflicts  we  see  accordingly  the
most  conscientious  men  taxing  each  other  with  wickedness
and  folly ;  and,  on  every  serious  occasion,  the  most  oppo-
site doctrines  maintained  by  persons  equally  worthy  of
confidence :  and,  while  all  deep  and  steady  conviction  is
thus  rendered  impossible,  no  true  political  morality  can  be
hoped  for  by  tliose  who  desire  it  most.

This  public  demoralization  has,  it  must  be  admitted,
been  sensibly  retarded,  in  our  time,  by  the  pre])onderance
of  that  revolutionary  doctrine  which  has  borne  the  imputa-


PERIL   TO    MORALITY.  171

tion  of  causino;  it ;  for  tlie  revolutionary  party,  progressive
ill  character,  could  not  but  be  animated,  more  than  the
others,  by  sincere  convictions,  which,  in  their  depth  and
activity,  must  tend  to  restrain,  and  even  anuihdate,  indi-
vidual selfishness.  This  was  especially  remarkable  during
the  season  when  the  revolutionary  doctrine  was,  by  a
general  illusion,  supposed  to  be  destined  to  reorganize
society.  Under  the  impulse  of  this  persuasion,  the  strongest
social  devotedness  that  can  shed  honour  upon  contemporary
history  was  manifested.  But  this  could  be  only  for  a  time.
As  the  illusion  disappeared,  the  convictions  which  arose
from  it  became  first  weakened,  and  then  mingled  with  the
influences  of  the  stationary,  and  even  the  retrograde  polity  :
and  though  they  are  still  of  a  higher  order  than  those
Avhich  are  inspired  by  the  other  doctrines,  and  especially
among  the  young,  they  have  not  energy  to  resist  the  dis-
solving action  of  the  revolutionary  philosophy,  even  among
its  own  advocates  ;  so  that  this  philosophy  now  contributes,
almost  as  much  as  its  two  antagonists,  to  the  spread  of
political  demoralization.

Private  morality  is,  happily,  much  less  depen-  p  .
dent  on  established  opinions.  Other  conditions  nioralitv.
enter  into  this  case ;  and  in  the  commonest
qtiestions,  natural  sentiment  is  far  more  operative  than
in  public  relations.  Disorganizing  influences  are  strongly
countei'acted  by  the  continuous  amelioration  of  our  manners,
through  a  more  equable  intellectual  development,  by  a
juster  sense  and  more  familiar  taste  for  the  various  fine
arts,  and  by  the  gradual  improvement  of  social  con-
ditions in  consequence  of  steady  industrial  progress.  The
common  rules  of  domestic  and  personal  morality  have
guarded  private  life  longer  than  political  from  the  invasion
of  disorganizing  influences,  and  the  intrusion  of  individual
analysis.  But  the  time  has  arrived  for  these  inevitable
disturbances,  long  concealed,  to  manifest  their  dangerous
activity.  So  long  ago  as  the  first  rise  of  the  revolutionary
state,  this  deleterious  influence  on  morality,  properly  so
called,  began  with  a  serious  innovation  on  the  institution
of  Marriage,  which  -would  have  been  radically  changed,  by
the  permission  of  divorce  in  Protestant  countries,  if  public
decency  and  jirivate  good  sense  had  not,  up  to  this  time,


172  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

weakened  the  pernicious  effects  of  theologico-metapliysical
extravagances.  Still,  private  morality  could  be  reached
only  through  the  destruction  of  political  morals :  and  now,
that  barrier  being  broken  through,  the  dissolving  action
threatens  domestic,  and  even  personal  morality,  which  is
the  necessary  foundation  of  every  other.  Whichever  way
we  look  at  it,  whether  as  to  the  relations  of  the  sexes,  to
those  of  ages,  or  of  conditions,  it  is  clear  that  the  elements
of  all  social  life  are  directly  compromised  by  a  corrosive
discussion  which  is  not  directed  by  true  principles,  and
which  l)rings  into  question,  without  the  possibility  of  solu-
tion, even  the  least  important  ideas  of  duty.  Even  the
Family,  which,  amidst  the  fiercest  revolutionary  tumults,
had  been  on  the  whole  resj^ected,  has  been  assailed  in  our
day  in  its  very  foundations,  by  attacks  on  the  hereditary
principle  and  on  marriage.  We  have  even  seen  the  com-
monest principle  of  personal  morality,  the  subjection  of
the  passions  to  reason,  denied  by  pretended  reformers  who,
in  defiance  of  all  experience  and  such  positive  science  as
we  have,  have  proposed  as  a  fundamental  dogma  of  their
regenerated  morality,  the  systematic  dominion  of  the  pas-
sions, which  they  have  striven,  not  to  restrain,  but  to  excite
by  the  strongest  stimulants.  These  speculations  have  so
far  penetrated  social  life,  that  any  one  is  now  at  liberty  to
make  an  easy  merit  of  the  most  turbulent  passions ;  so
that,  if  such  license  could  last,  insatiable  stomachs  might
at  length  get  to  pride  themselves  on  their  own  voracity.
It  is  in  vain  for  the  retrograde  school  to  throw  the  blame  of
all  this  on  the  revolutionary  school.  The  censure  rests
upon  themselves,  inasmuch  as  they  have  persisted  in  ex-
tolling, as  the  only  intellectual  bases  of  social  duty,  prin-
ciples which  have  betrayed  their  impotence  in  this  very
case ;  for,  if  theological  conceptions  are,  in  truth,  the
immutable  bases  of  future  as  well  as  past  moi'ality,  how  is
it  that  they  now  fail  to  obviate  such  license?  What  are
we  to  think  of  the  attem])t  to  shore  u})  by  laboi'ious  artifices,
the  religious  ])rinciples  which  are  proposed,  after  they  have
lost  their  strength,  as  the  only  supports  of  moral  order?
No  supreme  function  can  be  assigned  to  convictions  that
have  themselves  given  way  before  the  development  of  human
reason,  Avliich  is  not  likely  to  use  its  mature  power  to


TO    PRIVATE   MORALITY.  173

reconstruct  the  bonds  wliicli  it  broke  throiigli  in  the  efforts
of  its  youth.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  license  I  have
spoken  of  has  been  proposed  by  the  ardent  restorers  of
religious  theories,  in  their  exasperation  against  all  positive
philosophy ;  and  this  has,  for  some  time  past,  been  the
case  with  Protestant,  no  less  than  Catholic  advocates.  So
far  from  furnishing  bases  for  morality,  domestic  or  per-
sonal, religious  convictions  have  long  tended  to  its  injury,
both  by  hindering  its  erection  on  more  solid  foundations
among  those  who  are  free  from  their  control,  and  by  being
insufficient  for  their  own  subjects,  without  the  active  inter-
vention of  a  sacerdotal  authority ;  that  authority  mean-
while j^erpetually  losing  its  hold  over  the  more  advanced
populations,  and  being  more  and  more  absorbed  by  the
care  of  its  own  preservation,  instead  of  venturing  upon  any
unpopular  scheme  of  discipline.  Daily  experience  shows
that  the  ordinai-y  morality  of  religious  men  is  not,  at
present,  in  spite  of  our  intellectual  anarchy,  superior  to
that  of  the  average  of  those  who  have  quitted  the  churches.
The  chief  practical  tendency  of  religious  convictions  is,  in
our  jn'esent  social  life,  to  inspire  an  instinctive  and  insur-
mountable hatred  against  all  who  have  emancipated  them-
selves, Avithout  any  useful  emulation  having  arisen  from
the  conflict.  Thus  the  chief  assaults,  direct  and  indirect,
on  ])rivate  as  well  as  public  morality,  are  as  strictly  im-
]nitable  to  the  stationary,  and  yet  more  to  the  retrograde,
than  to  the  revolutionary  philosophy,  which  is  commoidy
made  to  bear  all  the  blame.  It  is  indeed  but  too  evident  that
the  three  doctrines  are  almost  equally  powerless  to  restrain
the  development  of  individual  selfishness,  which  grows
bolder,  from  day  to  day,  in  clamouring  for  the  license  of
the  least  social  passions,  in  the  name  of  universal  intel-
lectual anarchy.

The  second  charactei'istic  of  our  condition        p  i-  •
follows  from  the  first.     It  is  the  systematic         conumion
corruptiou  which  is  set  up  as  an  indispensable
instrument  of  government.     The  three  doctrines  bear  their
share,  though  it  may  be  an  unequal  one,  in  this  disgraceful
residt,  because  all  exclude,  as  we  have  seen,  true  political
convictions.      Amidst    the    absence,    or   the    discredit,   of
general    ideas,  which    have    now   no   power  to    command


174  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

genuine  acts,  there  is  no  other  daily  resource  for  the  main-
tenance of  even  a  rough   and  precarious   order  than  an
appeal,  more  or  less  immediate,  to  personal  interests.    Such
an  influence  is  scarcely  ever  needed  with  men  of  deep  con-
victions.    Even  in  the  lower  order  of  characters,  human
nature  is  rarely  so  debased  as  to  allow  a  course  of  political
conduct  in  o]>position  to  any  strong  convictions;  and  such
contrariety,  if  persevered  in,  would  soon  paralyse  the  facul-
ties.    In  the  scientific  class,  in  which  philosophical  convic-
tions are  at  present  most  common  and  best  marked,  active
corruption  is  scarcely  practicable,  though  minds  are  there
much  of  the  same  ciuality  as  they  are  elsewhere.     Thus,
exceptional  cases  apart,  the  rapid  spread  of  a  corruption
which  avails  itself  of  the  half-convictions  that  are  prevalent
in  the  political  world  must  be  attributed  mainly  to  the
undecided  and  fluctuating  state  in  which  social  ideas  are
kept  by  the  intellectual  anarchy  of  our  time.     Not  only
does  tliis  disorder  of  minds  permit  the  ]iolitical  corruption  :
it  even  recjuires  it,  as  the  only  means  of  obtaining  any  sort
of  practical  convergence,  such  as  is  necessary  for  the  mere
preservation  of  the  social  state  in  its  grossest  interests :
and  we  must  prepare  ourselves  for  the  continuous  extension
of  the  evil,  as  long  as  intellectual  anarchy  goes  on  destroy-
ing all  strong  political  conviction.     Rulers  and  the  ruled
are  alike  guilty  in  regard  to  this  vice :  the  rulers  by  their
disdain  of  all  social  theory ;  by  their  repression  of  mind,
and  by  their  application   of   the  insti'ument  which  they
cannot  dispense  with  to  their  own,  instead  of  the  genei-al
interest ;  and  the  ruled  by  their  acce]>tance  of  the  proffered
corruption,  and  by  their  intellectual  condition  i-endering
the  use  of  it  inevitable.     If  individuals  cannot  co-operate
on  any  other  ground   than  that  of  ])rivate  interest,  tliey
have  no  right  to  complain  that  governments  take  the  same
ground  to  procure  the  assistance  that  they  cannot  dispense
with,  during  a  period  in  wlii(;h  it  is  scarcely  jjossible  to  see
clearly  what  the  public  good  really  consists  in.     All  that
can  be  said  for  such  a  state  of  things  is  that  matters  would
be  worse  if   individual  eccentricities  were  not  somewhat
restrained  by  personal  intei*est,  in  the  absen(;e  of  better
influences  ;  and  that  it  is  the  natural  result  of  the  situation
to  which  it  applies,  and   therefore  certainly   destined   to


TO    PUBLIC    MORALITY.  175

disappear  wlienevei*  society  shall  begin  to  admit  of  a  better
discipline.  Till  then  we  must  expect  to  see  this  miserable
expedient  more  and  more  resorted  to ;  as  is  j^roved  by  the
constant  experience  of  all  peoples  living  under  a  prolonged
constitutional  or  representative  rrgime,  as  we  now  call  it,
always  comjielled  to  organize  in  this  manner  a  certain
material  discipline  in  the  midst  of  a  complete  intellectual,
and  therefore  moral  anarchy.  All  that  we  have  a  right  to
require  is  that  governments,  instead  of  welcoming  this
disastrous  necessity,  and  making  an  eager  use  of  the  facili-
ties it  offers,  should  set  themselves  to  favour,  systematically,
bv  all  the  means  at  their  command,  the  great  philoso])hicaI
elaboration  through  which  modern  society  may  enter  upon
a  better  course.

By  corruption,  I  do  not  mean  only  direct  venality,
nor  yet  the  holding  of  honorary  distinctions  which  are
merely  flattering  to  the  vanity.  The  sco]ie  offered  to
various  kinds  of  ambition  is  a  more  corrupting  influence.
In  some  countries  this  had  been  carried  so  far,  in  the  form
of  creation  of  offices,  that  nations  are  farmed  by  the
functionaries  of  their  governments.  The  danger  of  such  a
course  is  obvious  enough  ;  for  the  number  of  aspirants,
where  offices  are  very  numerous,  must  always  largely
exceed  that  of  the  chosen  ;  and  their  disappointment  must
awaken  passions  anything  but  favourable  to  the  established
regime.  Moreover,  the  practice  must  spread  the  more  it  is
resorted  to ;  and  it  will  go  on  extending  till  the  time  for
social  reorganization  has  arrived.  Here,  again,  all  the
three  schools  must  share  the  blame.  The  Eevolutionary
school  supplied,  as  we  have  seen,  the  dissolving  influence
Avhich  rendered  the  system  of  corruption  necessary.  The
Stationary  school  even  sets  it  up  as  a  type,  declaring  the
equal  admission  of  all  to  public  functions  to  be  the  final
destination  of  the  general  social  movement ;  and  aggra-
vating the  case  by  connecting  the  conditions  of  order  witli
the  mere  possession  of  fortune,  however  obtained.  As  for
the  Retrograde  school,  with  all  its  pretensions  to  moral
purity,  it  employs  corruption  as  fatally  as  the  other  two,
under  the  special  form  Avhich  it  appropriates, — that  of
systematic  hypocrisy.  From  the  opening  of  the  revolu-
tionary period,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  this  system   of


176  rosi'iivE  riii]>()soi'HV.

liypocrisy  lias  been  more  and  more  elaborated  in  practice,
permitting  the  emancipation  of  all  minds  of  a  certain  bear-
ing, on  the  tacit  condition  that  they  should  aid  in  protract-
ing the  submission  of  the  masses.  This  was,  eminently,
the  policy  of  the  Jesuits.  Thus  has  the  retrograde  school
suffered  under  this  vice  as  early  as  the  others  ;  and  it  can-
not but  resort  to  corruption  more  and  more,  in  proportion
to  its  own  opposition  to  the  general  movement  of  the
society  ^Yhich  it  pi'etends  to  rule.

This,  then,  is  our  state.  For  want  of  a  moral  authority,
material  order  requires  the  use  of  either  terror  or  corrup-
tion ;  and  the  latter  is  both  more  durable,  less  incon-
venient, and  more  accordant  with  the  nature  of  modern
soeiety  than  tlie  former.  But,  while  admitting  the  in-
evitable character  of  the  evil,  it  is  im2)ossible  not  to  lament,
bitterly  and  mournfully,  the  blindness  which  prevents  the
social  powers  of  our  time  from  facilitating  to  the  utmost
the  philosophical  evolution  by  which  alone  we  can  issue
into  a  better  state.  It  seems  as  if  statesmen  of  all  parties
were  agreed  to  close  this  sole  avenue  of  safety  by  visiting
with  stiapid  reprobation  all  elaboration  of  social  theories.
This  again,  however,  is  only  another  consequence  of  the
present  state  of  the  most  civilized  nations ;  and,  as  a  con-
sequence, not  less  necessary  or  characteristic  than  those
that  have  gone  before.

Low  aims  of  The  third  symj^tom  of  our  social  situation

political  is  the    growing    preponderance    of  material

questions.  ^nd  immediate  considerations  in  regard  to

political  questions.  There  is  something  more  concerned
here  than  the  ordinary  antagonism  between  theory  and
practice,  aggravated  by  the  weakness  of  attempts  at  theory
in  an  infantile  period  of  social  science.  The  re2)ugnance
to  theory  is  further  attributable  to  the  historical  circum-
stance that  when,  three  centuries  ago,  the  spiritual  power
was  finally  annulled  or  absorbed  by  the  temporal,  all  h)fty
social  speculations  were  more  and  more  devolved  upon
minds  which  were  always  pre-occu})ied  by  practical  affairs.
Thus  kings  and  their  peoples  concurred  in  exalting  the
lower  order  of  considerations ;  and  the  tendency  belonged
to  all  the  three  schools  of  polity.  If  the  crowning
evil  of  our  time  be  its  intellectual  anarchy,  it  is  clear  that


POLITICAL    INSTITrTrONS    FATAL   TO    PROGRESS.     177

we  canuot  too  strongly  lament  this  irrational  iinaniniitv
of  the  political  world  in  closing  the  path  of  progress  by
proscribing  speculative  researches.  We  see  the  ^  i.  i  ^
consequences  in  our  experience  of  the  past  cen-  proc-ress
tury.f  In  seeking  social  reorganization,  men  have
not  first  looked  to  the  doctrines  of  a  new  social  order,
and  then  to  the  corresponding  manners ;  but  have  gone
straight  to  the  construction  of  institutions,  at  a  time  when
we  have  all  possible  evidence  that  institutions  can  be
nothing  more  than  ^provisional,  restricted  to  the  most  indis-
pensable objects,  and  having  no  other  relation  to  the  future
than  such  facility  as  they  may  afford  to  the  j^rocess  of
political  regeneration. ;/  The  making  of  institutions  in  our
day  consists  in  parcelling  out  the  old  political  ])owers,
minutely  organizing  factitious  and  complex  antagonisms
among  them,  rendering  them  more  and  more  precarious  by
submitting  them  to  election  for  terms  ;  but  in  no  way
changing  either  the  general  nature  of  the  ancient  regime
or  the  spirit  which  worked  it.  For  want  of  all  social
doctrine,  nothing  more  has  been  attempted  than  restrain-
ing the  powers  thus  preserved,  till  there  is  every  danger
of  their  being  altogether  annulled,  while  the  principles
which  were  to  dii-ect  their  application  were  left  doubtful
and  obscure.  The  pompous  name  of  a  Constitution  is  then
given  to  this  piece  of  work,  and  it  is  consecrated  to  the
eternal  admiration  of  posterity.  Though  the  average  dura-
tion of  these  constitutions  has  been  at  most  ten  years,  each
new  system,  set  up  on  the  very  ground  of  the  failure  of  the
last,  has  claimed,  under  pains  and  penalties,  a  general
faith  in  its  absolute  and  indefinite  triumph.  The  only
action  of  such  institutions  is  in  preventing  all  social  re-
organization by  fixing  minds  on  puerile  questions  of  poli-
tical forms,  and  by  interdicting  speculations  and  philo-
sophical discussions  which  would  disclose  the  principles  of
reorganization.  By  this  action,  the  character  of  the
disease  has  been  concealed  as  much  as  possible,  and  any
gradual  and  specific  cure  has  been  almost  impracticable.
It  is  strange  that  minds  should  be  so  self-deceived  as  to
disclaim  all  speculative  prejudices  while  they  propose  the
most  absurd  of  all  political  Utopias, — -the  constructioji
of  a  system  of  government  which  rests  upon  no  true  social

II.  N


178  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

doctrine.  Such  an  al)surdity  is  referrible  to  the  cloudy
prevalence  of  the  metaphysical  philosophy,  which  perverts
and  confuses  men's  notions  in  politics,  as  it  did  formerly,
during  its  short  triumph,  in  all  other  orders  of  human
concei^tions.

F-  f  1 1  O  •  1  ■  ■^^  ^^  ^^^^  *^^ib'  ^^  '^^  impediment  to  pro-
gress that  the  preponderance  of  material
conceptions  is  to  l)e  deplored.  It  is  dangerous  to  order.
When  all  political  evils  are  imputed  to  institutions  instead
of  to  ideas  and  social  manners,  which  are  now  the  real
seat  of  the  mischief ;  the  remedy  is  vainly  sought  in
changes,  each  more  serious  than  the  last,  in  institutions
and  existing  jxiwers.  The  failure  of  the  last  change  is
forgotten  ;  and  hopes  are  concentrated  on  the  next,  show-
ing how  ineffectual  are  the  lessons  of  experience  when  the
resvilts  are  not  elucidated  by  a  rational  analysis.  Such
changes  must  occur,  in  our  j^rogress  to  a  better  state.
What  it  is  fair  to  require  in  regard  to  them  is  that  they
should  be  recognized  as  provisional,  and  be  gi;ided  by
some  philosophical  considei'ation  of  the  social  question  at
large.  Another  consequence  of  the  prevalent  preference  of
institutions  to  doctrines  is,  besides  its  2:»rematurity,  its
engendering  errors  of  the  most  serious  kind,  and  of  a  per-
manent character,  by  including  iu  the  domain  of  tem])oral
government  what  belongs  to  the  spiritual.  For  their
neglect  of  this  grand  distinction,  the  various  governments
of  Europe  have  been  punished  by  becoming  responsible  for
all  the  evils  of  society,  whencesoever  they  might  hav<!
arisen.  The  illusion  is  yet  more  injurious  to  society  itself
through  the  disturbances  and  mortifications  which  it  in-
duces. An  illustration  of  the  case  is  presented  by  the
discussions  and  attacks  which  have  so  often  menaced  the
institution  of  Property.  It  is  impossible  to  deny  that,
when  all  exaggerations  are  strij^jied  away,  a.n  Tuupu'stion-
able  amount  of  evil  remains  in  connection  with  jjrojierty.
which  ought  to  be  taken  in  hand,  and  remedied,  as  far  as
our  modern  social  state  permits.  But  it  is  equally  evident
that  the  I'emedy  must  ai'ise  from  opinions,  customs,  and
manners,  and  that  political  regulations  can  have  no  radical
efficacy ;  for  the  question  refers  us  to  ])ublic  prepossessions
and  usages  which  must  habitually  direct,  for  the  interest


FATAL   TO    OIIDEK.  179

of  society,  the  exercise  of  property,  in  whose  hands  soever
it  may  be  lodged.  We  may  see  here  how  futile  and  how
blind,  and  also  how  disturbing,  is  this  tendency  to  refer
everything  to  political  institutions,  instead  of  fixing  expec-
tation on  an  intellectual  and  moral  reorganization.

Thus  we  proceed,  securing  neither  order  nor  progress,
while  we  consider  our  sufferings  to  be  of  a  physical,
whereas  they  are  really  of  a  moral  nature.  Modifications
of  ancient  systems  have  been  tried,  and  have  given  no
relief ;  and  our  ideas  of  political  progress  are  narrowing
down  to  that  of  a  substitution  of  ^^evsous, — the  most  dis-
graceful political  degradation  of  all,  because,  directed  by
no  plan,  it  tends  to  subject  society  to  an  interminable
series  of  catastrophes.  The  material  order,  which  is  all
that  is  contemplated,  is  confided  to  a  power  which  is  re-
garded as  hostile,  and  perpetually  enfeebled  by  a  systematic
antagonism.  The  restricted  view  of  each  of  the  agents  of
such  a  mechanism  prevents  their  co-operation,  except  under
the  immediate  alarm  of  material  anarchy,  when  they  sus-
pend their  useless  controversies  till  the  storm  has  blown
over,  when  they  go  on  as  before,  till  some  catastrophe
ensues,  taking  everybody  by  surj^rise.  though  any  one
might  have  foreseen  it.  In  this  discarding  of  social  specu-
lation for  the  sake  of  material  and  immeliate  considera-
tions, we  see  a  fresh  indication  that  intellectual  anarchy  is
the  main  cause  of  our  social  maladies.

A  fourth  characteristic  of  our  social  con-  Incompetence
dition  is  a  natural  consequence  and  comjile-  of  political
ment  of  the  preceding;  the  incompetence  cf  leader^^.
the  minds  which  occupy  the  chief  political  stations,  during
such  a  condition  of  affairs,  and  even  their  antipathv  to  a
true  reorganization  :  so  that  a  final,  and  not  less  disastrous
illusion  of  modern  society  is  that  the  solution  of  the  pro-
blem may  be  looked  for  from  those  who  can  do  nothing
but  hinder  it.  From  what  we  have  already  seen,  we  must
be  aware  that  the  gradual  demolition  of  all  sorial  maxims,
and,  at  the  same  time,  the  attenuation  of  political  action,
must  tend  to  remove  elevated  minds  and  superior  under-
standings from  such  a  career,  and  to  deliver  over  the  poli-
tical world  to  the  rule  of  charlatanism  and  mediocritv.
The  absence  of  any  distinct  and  large  conception  of  a  social


180  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

future  is  favourable  to  the  more  vulgar  forms  of  ambition ;
aud  presumptuous  aud  euterprisiug*  mediocrity  Las  uever
before  had  so  fortunate  a  chance.  While  social  principles
are  not  even  sought,  charlatanism  will  always  attract  by
the  magnificence  of  its  promises  ;  and  its  transient  suc-
cesses will  dazzle  society,  while  in  a  suffering  condition,
and  deprived  of  all  rational  hope.  Every  impulse  of  noble
ambition  must  turn  the  best  men  away  from  a  field  of
action  where  there  is  no  chance  of  scope  and  permanence,
such  as  are  requisite  to  the  carrying  ovit  of  generous  schemes.
It  is,  as  M.  Guizot  has  well  said,  a  social  period  when  men
will  feebly,  but  desire  immensely.  It  is  a  state  of  half-con-
viction and  half- will,  resulting  from  intellectual  and  moral
anarchy,  offering  many  obstacles  to  the  solution  of  our
difficulties.  It  is  important,  however,  not  to  exaggerate
those  obstacles.  This  very  state  of  half-conviction  and
half -will  tends  to  facilitate  by  anticipation  the  prevalence
of  a  true  conception  of  society  which,  once  prodviced,  will
have  no  active  resistance  to  withstand,  because  it  will  re-
pose on  serious  convictions  :  and  at  present,  the  dispersion
of  social  interests  tends  to  preserve  the  material  order
which  is  an  indis]:)ensable  condition  of  philosophical  growth.
It  would  be  a  mere  satirical  exaggeration  to  describe  exist-
ing society  as  preferring  political  quackery  and  illusion  to
that  wise  settlement  which  it  has  not  had  opportunity  to
obtain.  When  the  choice  is  offered,  it  will  be  seen  whether
the  attraction  of  deceptive  promises,  and  the  power  of
former  habit,  will  j^revent  our  age  from  entering,  with
ardour  and  steadiness,  upon  a  better  course.  Thei'e  are
evident  symptoms  that  the  choice  will  be  a  wise  one,
though  the  circumstances  of  the  time  o]ierate  to  place  the
direction  of  the  movement  in  hands  which  are  anything
hut  fittest  for  the  ])urpose.  This  inconvenience  dates  from
the  beginning  of  the  revolutionary  jH'riod,  and  is  not  a  new,
but  an  aggravated  evil.  For  three  centuries  past,  the  most
(unineut  minds  have  been  chiefly  engaged  with  science,  and
have  neglected  ])olitics ;  thus  differing  Avidely  from  the
wisest  men  in  ancient  times,  and  even  in  tlie  Middle  Ages.
The  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  most  difficult  and  urgent
questions  have  been  committed  to  the  class  which  is  essen-
tiallv  (me  under  two  names, — the  civilians  and  the  meta-


INCOMPETENX'K   OF    POLITlCxVr   LEADERS.  181

physicians,  or,  under  their  commou  title,  the  lawyers  aud
men  of  letters,  whose  position  in  regard  to  statesmanship
is  naturally  a  subordinate  oue.  We  shall  see  hereafter  that .
from  its  origin  to  the  time  of  the  first  French  Revolution,
the  system  of  metaphysical  polity  was  expressed  and  directed
b}^  the  universities  on  the  oue  hand  and  the  great  judiciary
corporations  on  the  other  :  the  first  constituting  a  sort  of
spiritual,  and  the  other  the  temporal  jjower.  This  state  of
things  is  still  traceable  in  most  countries  of  the  continent ;
while  in  France,  for  above  half  a  century,  the  arrangement
has  degenerated  into  such  an  abuse  that  the  judges  are
superseded  by  the  bar,  and  the  doctors  (as  they  used  to  be
called)  by  mere  men  of  letters  ;  so  that  now,  any  man  who
can  hold  a  pen  may  aspire  to  the  spiritual  regulation  of
society,  through  the  press  or  from  the  professional  chair,
unconditionally,  and  whatever  may  be  his  qualifications.
When  the  time  comes  for  the  constitxition  of  an  organic
condition,  the  reign  of  sophists  and  declaimers  will  have
come  to  an  end  ;  but  thei'e  wdll  be  the  impediment  to  sur-
mount of  their  having  been  provisionally  in  possession  of
public  confidence.

The  survey  that  we  have  made  must  convince  us  only
too  well  of  the  anarchical  state  of  existing  society,  under
its  destitution  of  guiding  and  governing  ideas,  and  amidst
its  conflict  of  opinions  aud  passions,  which  there  is  no
power  in  any  of  the  three  schools  to  cure  or  moderate.  As
preliminary  considerations,  these  facts  are  deeply  dis-
heartening ;  and  we  cannot  wonder  that  some  generous
and  able,  but  ill-prepared  minds  should  have  sunk  into  a
kind  of  ]>hilosophical  despair  about  the  future  of  society,
which  appears  to  them  doomed  to  fall  under  a  gloomy
despotism  or  into  mere  anarchy,  or  to  oscillate  between  the
two.  I  trust  that  the  study  we  are  about  to  enter  upon
will  give  rise  to  a  consoling  conviction  that  the  move-
ment of  regeneration  is  going  on,  though  quietly  in  com-
parison with  the  apparent  decomposition,  and  that  the
most  advanced  of  the  human  race  are  at  the  threshold
of  a  social  order  worthy  of  their  natvire  and  their  needs.
I  shall  conclude  this  introduction  by  showing  what  must
necessarily  be  the  intellectual  character  of  the  salutary
philosophy  which  is  to  lead  us  into  this  better  futiire :


182  POSITIYE    PHILOSOPHY.

and  its  dogmatic  exposition  will  follow  in  the  next
chapter.

Advent  of  the  The  preliminary  survey  which  I  have  just
Positive  Phi-  concluded  led  us  necessarily  into  the  domain
losopliy.  0f  politi(-s.      We  must  now  return  from  this

excursion,  and  take  our  stand  again  at  the  point  of  view  of
this  whole  Work,  and  contemplate  the  condition  and  pro-
spects of  society  from  the  ground  of  positive  philosophy.
Every  other  ground  has  been  found  untenable.  The  theo-
logical and  metaphysical  jDliilosophies  have  failed  to  secure
})ermaneut  social  welfare,  while  the  positive  ])hilosophy  has
uniformly  succeeded,  and  conspicuously  for  three  centuries
past,  in  reorganizing,  to  the  unauimous  satisfaction  of  the
intellectual  world,  all  the  anterior  orders  of  human  concep-
tions, which  had  been  till  then  in  the  same  chaotic  state
that  we  now  deplore,  in  regard  to  social  science.  Contem-
porary opinion  regarded  the  state  of  each  of  those  sciences
as  hopeless  till  the  positive  philosophy  brought  them  out
of  it.  There  is  no  reason  why  it  should  fail  in  the  latest
a])plication,  after  having  succeeded  in  all  the  earlier.  Ad-
vancing from  the  less  complex  categories  of  ideas  to  the
more  complex  and  final  one,  and  comparing  with  this
experience  the  picture  just  given  of  our  present  social
condition,  we  cannot  but  see  that  the  ])olitical  analysis  and
the  scientific  concur  in  demonstrating  that  tlie  positive
]»hilosophy,  carried  on  to  its  com[)leti()n,  is  the  only  possible
agent  in  the  reorganization  of  modern  society.  I  wish  to
establish  this  principle  first,  and  in  this  place,  apart  from
all  (;onsiderations  about  my  way  of  proving  my  point  ;  so
that,  if  my  attemj^t  should  be  hereafter  condemned,  no
unfavourable  inference  may  be  drawn  in  regard  to  a
method  which  aloue  can  save  society,  and  that  public
reason  should  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  require  from
hap]">ier  successors  more  effectual  endeavours  in  the  same
direction.  In  all  cases,  and  especially  in  this,  the  method
is  of  even  more  importance  than  the  doctrine  ;  and  it  is  for
this  reason  that  I  think  it  right,  before  closing  my  long
introduction,  to  offer,  in  a  brief  form,  some  last  prefatory
considi^rations.

This  is  not  the  place  in  which  to  enter  upon  any  com-
})arison  between  the  positive  political  phil()soj)hy  and  the


LOGICAL  COHERENCE  OF  POSITIVE  SOCIAL  DOCTRINE.    183

other  social  theories  which  have  been  tried ;  but,  while
still  deferring  the  scientific  appreciation  of  the  positive
method,  and  before  quitting  the  political  ground  on  which
I  have,  for  the  occasion,  taken  my  stand,  I  must  point  out
in  a  direct  and  general  way,  the  relation  of  the  positive
])hilosophy  to  the  two  great  necessities  of  our  age.

The  ascendancy  of  a  positive  social  doctrine  Logical  co-
is  secured  by  its  perfect  logical  coherence  in  lieience  of  the
its  entire  application — a  characteristic  pro-  il'^ctiine.
perty  which  enables  us  at  once  to  connect  the  political  with
the  scientific  point  of  view.  The  positive  polity  will  em-
brace at  once  all  the  essential  aspects  of  the  present  state
of  civilization,  and  will  dissolve  the  deplorable  opposition
that  now  exists  between  the  two  orders  of  social  needs,  the
common  satisfaction  of  which  will  henceforth  depend  on
the  same  principle.  It  will  impart  a  homogeneous  and
rational  character  to  the  desultory  politics  of  our  day,  and
it  will  by  the  same  act  connect  this  co-ordinated  present
with  the  whole  past,  so  as  to  establish  a  general  harmony
in  the  entire  system  of  social  ideas,  by  exhibiting  the
fundamental  uniformity  of  the  collective  life  of  humanity  ;
for  this  conception  cannot,  by  its  nature,  be  applied  to  the
actual  social  state  till  it  has  undergone  the  test  of  explain-
ing, frcmi  the  same  point  of  view,  the  continuous  series  of
the  chief  former  transformatious  of  society.  It  is  impor-
tant to  note  this  difference  between  the  positive  principle
and  that  of  the  two  other  schools.  The  critical  se-hool
treats  all  times  prior  to  the  revolutionary  period  with  a
blind  reprobation.  The  retrograde  school  equally  fails  in
uniting  the  i:»resent  with  the  past,  and  uniformly  dis-
parages the  j^osition  of  modei'n  society  during  the  last
three  centuries.  It  is  the  exclusive  property  of  the  posi-
tive principle  to  recognize  the  fundamental  law  of  con-
tinuous human  development,  representing  the  existing
evolution  as  the  necessary  result  of  the  gradual  series  of
former  transfoi-mations,  by  simply  extending  to  social
phenomena  the  spirit  which  governs  the  treatment  of  all
other  natural  phenomena.  This  coherence  and  houio-
geneousness  of  the  positive  principle  is  further  shown  by
its  operation  in  not  only  ct)mpreheuding  all  the  various
social  ideas  in  one  whole,  but  in  connecting  the  system


184  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

with  the  whole  of  uatural  philosophy,  and  constitutiucr
thus  the  aggregate  of  human  knowledge  as  a  complete
scientific  hierarchy.  We  shall  see  hereafter  how^  this
is  accomplished,  and  I  mention  it  now  to  show  how  the  posi-
tive philosophy,  finding  thus  a  general  fulcrum  in  all
minds,  cannot  but  spread  to  a  universal  extension.  In  the
present  chaotic  state  of  our  political  ideas  we  can  scarcely
imagine  what  mv;st  he  the  irresistible  energy  of  a  philo-
sophical movement,  in  which  the  entire  renovation  of  social
science  will  be  directed  bv  the  same  spirit  w^hicli  is  unani-
mously recognized  as  effectual  in  all  other  dejiartments  of
human  knowledge.  Meantime,  it  finds  some  points  of  con-
tact in  the  most  wilful  minds,  from  whence  it  may  proceed
to  work  a  regeneration  of  views.  It  speaks  to  every  class
of  society,  and  to  every  political  party,  the  language  best
adapted  to  produce  conviction,  while  maintaining  the  in-
vincible originality  of  its  fundamental  character.  It  alone,
embracing  in  its  survey  the  whole  of  the  social  question,
can  render  exact  justice  to  the  conflicting  schools,  by  esti-
mating their  past  and  present  services.  It  alone  can  ex-
hibit to  each  party  its  highest  destination,  prescribing
order  in  the  name  of  progress,  and  progress  in  the  name
of  order,  so  that  each,  instead  of  annulling,  may  strengthen
the  other.  Bringing  no  stains  from  the  past,  this  new
])olity  is  subject  to  no  imputation  of  retrograde  tyranny,  or
of  revolutionary  anarchy^  The  only  charge  that  can  be
brought  against  it  is  that  of  novelty  ;  and  the  answer  is
furnished  by  the  evident  insuflficiency  of  all  existing
theories,  and  by  the  fact  that  for  tw^o  centviries  past  its
success  has  been  uniform  and  complete,  wherever  it  has
been  applied.

As  to  its  oiieration  upon  Order,  it  is  plain
Its  enect  on        at,   a   j  •  i  ii  -4.1+1

Order  ''^^^  ^^'^^^  science  has  no  other  aim  than  the

establishment  of  intellectual  order,  which  is
the  basis  of  every  other.  Disorder  dreads  the  scientific
spirit  even  more  than  the  theological,  and,  in  the  field  of
])olitics,  minds  which  rebelled  against  metapiiysical  hypo-
theses and  theological  fictions  submit  without  difficulty  to
the  discipline  of  tlie  positive  method.  We  even  see  that
while  the  mind  of  our  day  is  accused  of  tending  towards
absolute  scepticism,  it  eagerly  welcomes  the  least  apjiear-


BENEFICIAL    EFFECr    OF    POSIIIVE    POLITY.  185

auce  of  positive  clem onstrat ion,  however  })reiiiature  and
imperfect.  The  eagerness  would  be  fully  as  great  if  the
idea  were  once  formed  that  social  science  might  also  he
conducted  by  the  positive  sjni'it.  The  conception  of  in-
variable natural  laws,  the  foundation  of  every  idea  of
order,  in  all  departments,  would  have  the  same  philo-
sophical efficacy  here  as  elsewhere,  as  soon  as  it  was  suffi-
ciently generalized  to  be  applied  to  social  j^henomena,
thenceforth  referred,  like  all  other  phenomena,  to  such
laws.  It  is  only  by  the  positive  polity  that  the  revolu-
tionary sjiirit  can  be  restrained,  because  by  it  alone  can  the
influence  of  the  critical  doctrine  be  justly  estimated  and
circumscribed.  No  longer  roused  to  resistance,  as  by  the
retrograde  school,  and  seeing  its  work  done  better  than  by
itself,  it  will  merge  in  a  doctrine  which  leaves  it  nothing
to  do  or  to  desire.  Under  the  rule  of  the  positive  spirit,
again,  all  the  difficult  and  delicate  questions  which  now
keep  up  a  perpetual  irritation  in  the  bosom  of  society,  and
which  can  never  be  settled  while  mere  political  solutions
are  proposed,  will  be  scientifically  estimated,  to  the  great
furtherance  of  social  peace.  By  admitting  at  once  that
the  institutions  of  modern  societies  must  necessarily  be
merely  provisional,  the  positive  spirit  will  abate  unreason-
able expectations  from  them,  and  concentrate  effort  upon  a
fundamental  renovation  of  social  ideas,  and  consequently
of  public  morals.  Instead  of  indifference  being  caused  b\
this  carrying  forward  of  political  aims,  there  will  Ije  a  new
source  of  interest  in  so  modifying  modern  institutions  as  to
make  them  contributory  to  the  inevitable  intellectual  and
moral  evolution.  At  the  same  time,  it  will  be  teaching
society  that,  in  the  present  state  of  their  ideas,  no  pt)litical
change  can  be  of  supreme  importance,  while  the  perturba-
tion attending  change  is  supremely  mischievous,  in  the
way  both  of  immediate  hindrance  and  of  diverting  atten-
tion from  the  true  need  and  procedure.  And  again,  order
will  ])rofit  by  the  recognition  of  the  relative  spirit  of  the
])ositive  philosophy,  which  discredits  the  absolute  spirit  of
the  theological  and  metaphysical  schools.  It  cannot  but
dissi]>ate  the  illusion  by  which  those  schools  are  for  ever
striving  to  set  up,  in  all  stages  of  civilization,  their  respec-
tive types  of  immutable  government ;  as  when,  for  instance,


186  I'OSiriVK    PHILOSOPHY.

they  propose  to  civilize  Tahiti  by  a  wholesale  importation
of  Protestantism  and  a  Parliamentary  system.  Again,  the
pc>sitive  spirit  tends  to  consolidate  order,  by  the  rational
development  of  a  wise  resignation  to  incurable  political
evils.  Negative  as  is  the  character  of  this  virtue,  it  affords
an  aid  under  the  pains  of  the  human  lot  which  cannot  be
dispensed  with,  and  which  has  no  place  under  the  meta-
])hysical  polity,  which  regards  political  action  as  indefinite.
Keligious,  and  especially  Christian  resignation  is,  in  plain
tnith,  only  a  prudent  temporizing,  which  enjoins  the
endurance  of  present  suffering  in  view  of  an  ultimate
ineffable  felicity.  A  true  resignation, — that  is,  a  per-
manent disposition  to  endure,  steadily,  and  without  hope
of  compensation,  all  inevitable  evils,  can  proceed  only
from  a  deep  sense  of  the  connection  of  all  kinds  of  natural
phenomena  with  invariable  laws.  If  there  are  (as  I  doubt
not  there  are)  political  evils  which,  like  some  personal
sufferings,  cannot  be  remedied  by  science,  science  at  least
proves  to  us  that  they  are  incurable,  so  as  to  calm  our
restlessness  under  pain  l)y  the  conviction  that  it  is  by
natural  laws  that  they  are  rendered  insurmountable.
Human  nature  suffers  in  its  relations  with  the  astronomi-
<'al  world,  and  the  physical,  chemical,  and  biological,  as
well  as  the  jDolitical.  How  is  it  that  we  turbulently  resist
in  the  last  case,  while,  in  the  others,  we  are  calm  and
resigned,  under  pain  as  signal,  and  as  repugnant  to  our
nature?  Surely  it  is  because  the  positive  philosophy  has
as  yet  developed  our  sense  of  the  natural  laws  only  in
regard  to  the  simpler  phenomena ;  and  when  the  same
sense  shall  have  been  awakened  with  regard  to  the  more
complex  plienomena  of  social  life,  it  will  fortify  us  with  a
similar  resignation,  general  or  special.  })rovisional  or  in-
definite, in  the  case  of  political  suffering.  An  habitual
conviction  of  this  kind  cannot  but  conduce  to  public  tran-
quillity, by  obviating  vain  efforts  for  redress,  while  it
equally  excludes  the  apathy  which  belongs  to  the  passive
character  of  religious  resignation,  by  requiring  submission
to  nothing  but  necessity,  and  encouraging  the  noblest
exercises  of  human  activity,  wherever  the  analysis  of  the
occasion  op«'US  any  prospect  whatever  of  genuine  remedy.
Finally,  the  positive  philosophy  befriends  public  order  by


ON    ()Kl)i:i{    AM)    ON     IMU)GK1-:SS.  187

hringing  back  meu's  uuJerstaudiugs  to  a  normal  state
through  the  influence  of  its  method  alone,  before  it  has
litid  time  to  estal)lish  any  social  theory.  It  dissipates  dis-
order at  once  by  imposing  a  series  of  indisputable  scientific
conditions  on  the  study  of  political  questions.  By  includ-
ing social  science  in  the  scientific  hierarchy,  the  positive
spirit  admits  to  success  in  this  study  only  well-prepared
and  disciplined  minds,  so  trained  in  the  preceding  depart-
ments of  knowledge  as  to  be  fi.t  for  the  complex  problems
of  the  last.  The  long  and  difficult  preliminary  elabora-
tion must  disgust  and  deter  vulgar  and  ill-prepared  minds,
and  subdue  the  most  rebellious.  This  consideration,  if
there  were  no  other,  would  prove  the  eminently  organic
tendency  of  the  new  political  philosophy.

I  have  dwelt  on  this  influence  of  the  Fosi-
five  |)hilosoi)hy,  in  favour  of  Order,  because  Pi^joTess
it  is  that  which  is,  as  yet,  least  recognized,
while  the  retrograde  and  stationary  schools  continue  to
found  their  claims  upon  that  very  point.  There  is  less
mistake  about  its  favourable  influence  on  Progress.  In
all  its  applications,  the  positive  spirit  is  directly  progres-
sive;  its  express  office  being  to  increase  our  knowledge,
and  perfect  the  connection  of  its  parts.  Even  the  illustra-
tions of  progressions  are,  at  the  present  day,  derived  from
the  ])ositive  sciences.  Whatever  rational  idea  of  social
progress  (that  is,  of  continuous  development,  with  a  steady
tendency  towards  a  determinate  end,)  anywhere  exists,
slioidd,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  be  attributed  to  the  un-
perceived  influence  of  the  positive  philosophy,  in  disen-
gaging this  great  notion  from  its  present  vague  and
fluctuating  state  by  clearly  assigning  the  aim  and  the
general  course  of  jjrogress.  Though  Christianity  certainlv
bore  a  part  in  originating  the  sentiment  of  social  progress
by  proclaiming  the  superiority  of  the  new  law  to  the  old,
it  is  evident  that  the  theological  polity,  proceeding  upon
an  immutable  type,  which  was  realized  only  in  the  past,
must  have  become  radically  incompatible  with  ideas  of
continuous  progression,  and  manifests,  on  the  contrary,  a
thoroughly  retrograde  character.  The  metaphysical  polity,
in  its  dogmatic  aspect,  has  the  same  incompatibility,
though   the  feeble  connection   of  its   docti'ines   renders  it


188  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

more  accessible  to  the  spirit  of  our  time.  Indeed,  it  was
only  after  the  decline  of  that  school  had  be^yun,  that  ideas
of  progress  took  any  general  possession  of  the  public
mind.  Thus  the  progressive,  as  well  as  the  organic
instinct,  is  to  be  developed  by  the  positive  philosophy
alone.

The  only  idea  of  progress  which  is  really  proper  to  the
revolutionary  philosophy,  is  that  of  the  continuous  exten-
sion of  liberty  ;  that  is,  in  positive  terms,  the  gradual
expansion  of  human  powers.  Now,  even  in  the  restricted
and  negative  sense  in  which  this  is  true, — that  of  the  per-
petual diminution  of  obstacles, — the  positive  philosophy
is  incontestably  superior:  for  true  liberty  is  nothing  else
than  a  rational  submission  to  the  preponderance  of  the
laws  of  nature,  in  i-elease  from  all  arbitrary  personal  dicta-
tion. Decisions  of  sovereign  assemblies  have  been  called
laws  by  the  metaphysical  polity,  and  have  been  fictitiously
regarded  as  a  manifestation  of  j^opular  will.  But  no  such
homage  paid  to  constitutional  entities  can  disguise  the
arbitrary  tendency  which  marks  all  the  philosophies  but  the
positive.  The  arbitrary  can  never  be  excluded  while
political  phenomena  are  referred  to  Will,  divine  or  human,
instead  of  being  connected  with  invariable  natural  laws  ;
and  liberty  will  remain  illusoi'y  and  precarious,  notwith-
standing all  constitutional  artifices,  and  whatever  be  the
will  to  which  we  pay  our  daily  obedience.  By  substituting
the  empire  of  genuine  convictions  for  that  of  arbitrary
will,  the  positive  philosophy  will  put  an  end  to  the  abso-
lute lilierty  of  the  revolutionary  school, — the  license  of
running  from  one  extravagance  to  another,  —  and,  by
establishing  social  principles,  will  meet  the  need  at  once  of
order  and  of  progress.  The  special  office  of  the  revolu-
tionary philosophy,  that  of  extinguishing  all  but  the
historical  existence  of  the  ancient  political  system,  is
virtually  committed  to  the  positive  principle ;  and,  in  fact,
the  power  exercised  by  the  critical  doctrine  in  this  direc-
tion has  been  owing  to  its  serving  the  purpose  of  a  pro-
visional organ  to  the  positive  philosophy.  In  other  sciemres,
the  critical  action,  however  energetic,  is  only  a  collateral
consequence  of  its  organic  development ;  and  the  organic
development  which  is  fatal  to  the  old  theological  system,


TRUE   FUNCTION    OF   THE    POSITIVE    POLITY.         189

involves  in  the  same  condemnation  the  metaphysical  spirit,
which  is  oven  the  less  logical  of  the  two.  The  most
serious  difficulty  of  contemporary  politics  is  the  condition
of  the  lower  classes ;  and  in  this  case,  the  j^ositive  philo-
sophy affords  practical  amelioration  most  favouraljle  to
progress.  The  revolutionary  polity  opened  only  an  in-
surrectionary issue  to  this  difficulty,  and  merely  shifted
without  solving  the  C[uestion.  The  question  is  not  settled
by  opening  a  way  to  poj^ular  ambition,  the  gratification  of
which  must  be  confined  to  a  few,  (probably  deserters  from
their  class,)  and  can  do  nothing  to  soothe  the  murmurs  of
the  multitude.  The  general  lot  is  even  aggravated  by  the
excitement  of  unreasonalile  hopes,  and  by  the  elevation  of
a  few  by  the  chances  of  the  political  game.  As  it  is  the
inevital>le  lot  of  the  majority  of  men  to  live  on  the  more  or
less  precarious  fruits  of  daily  labour,  the  great  social
prol)lem  is  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  this  majority,
Avithout  destroying  its  classification,  and  disturbing  the
general  economy  :  and  this  is  the  function  of  the  positive
polity,  regarded  as  regulating  the  final  classification  of
modern  society.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  see  hereafter
that  the  mental  reorganization,  by  habitually  interposing  a
common  moral  authority  between  the  working  classes  and
the  leaders  of  society,  will  offer  the  only  regular  basis  of  a
pacific  and  equitable  reconciliation  of  their  chief  conflicts,
nearly  abandoned  in  the  present  day  to  the  savage  disci-
pline of  a  purely  material  antagonism.

In  this  brief  sketcli  of  the  prominent  characteristics  of
the  positive  polity,  we  have  seen  that,  notwithstanding  its
severe  estimate  of  the  different  existing  parties,  it  com-
mands access  to  the  spirit  of  each  by  proving  itself  adapted
to  fulfil  the  aims  wliich  each  has  pursued  too  exclusively.
It  can  also  turn  to  the  profit  of  its  gradual  ascendancy  all
the  important  incidents  of  existing  society  which  it  could
not  intercept.  Whether  in  its  hour  of  exultation,  the  one
school  manifests  its  insufficiency ;  or  whether,  in  the
despair  of  failure,  the  other  shows  a  disposition  to  welcome
new  means  of  political  action  ;  or  whether,  again,  a  Icind  of
universal  torpor  exhibits  in  its  nakedness  the  aggregate  of
social  needs,  the  new  philosophy  can  always  lay  hold  of  a
certain  general  issue  to  introduce,  by  a  daily  application.


190  posirn  I-;  imiilosoi-ii v.

its  fuudamental  instruction.  In  doiuy  this  however,  we
must,  it  seems  to  me,  lay  aside  all  hope  of  a  real  conversion
of  the  retrograde  school.  Setting  aside  some  happy  in-
dividual anomalies,  such  as  always  exist,  and  may  become
more  frequent,  it  remains  indisputable  that  there  is  such
an  antipathy,  in  regard  to  social  questions,  between  the
theological  and  the  positive  philosophies,  that  the  one  can
never  estimate  the  other,  and  must  disappear  before  it,
without  being  able  tt)  undergo  any  radical  modification  of
its  present  form.  It  is.  in  fact,  not  Order  that  the  ancient
rryime  aims  at,  but  only  its  own  preconce|)tion  of  a  unique
order,  connected  with  its  habits  of  minil  and  s])ecial
interests,  outside  of  which  everything  appears  disorderly,
and  therefore  indifferent.  In  the  midst  of  its  pretended
devotion  to  general  order,  the  retrograde  school  has  often
betrayed  its  tendency  to  care  for  the  means  more  than  the
end.  It  is  through  the  stationary  school,  whose  love  of
order  is  at  least  more  imj^artial,  if  not  more  disinterested,
that  the  positive  polity  must  obtain  the  access  which  it
could  not  hope  for  from  the  retrograde  school.  The  meta-
l^hysical  fictions  of  the  parliamentary  or  constitutional
philosophy  may  have  diverted  the  mind  of  the  stationary
school  from  the  true  issue ;  but  they  have  not  attained
such  an  ascendancy  among  the  nations  of  the  European
continent  as  to  render  them  deaf  to  the  rational  voice  of
the  new  philosojihy,  when  it  appeals  to  a  school  so  openly
disposed  as  is  the  stationary  party  to  establish  permanent
order,  on  whatever  principles,  in  modern  society.  Some
useful  action  may  therefore  be  hoped  for  through  this
medium. — Nevertheless,  I  avow  that  it  is  on  the  revolu-
tionary school  alone  that,  in  my  opinion,  we  can  expect
that  the  positive  l)olity  can  exercise  a  predominant  in-
fluence, because  this  school  is  the  only  one  that  is  always
open  to  new  action  on  behalf  of  ju'ogress.  All  its  indis-
pensable provisional  doctrines  will  be  absorbed  by  the  new
philosophy,  while  all  its  anarchical  tendencies  will  be
extinguished.  There  will  be  more  explosions  of  revolu-
tionai'y  doctrine,  as  long  as  there  are  any  remains  of  the
retrograde  system  ;  for  the  natural  course  of  events  does
not  wait  for  our  slow  ])hilosophical  preparation.  Whether
in  virtue  of  our  intellectual  condition,  or  of  faults  com-


ATTITUDE   OF    POSITIVK    POLllV    TO    KEVOLLTION.     191

mitted  by  existing  governments,  such  outbreaks  will  oecur  ;
and  perhaps  they  may  be  necessary  to  the  uprooting  of  all
hoj^e  of  reconstructing  social  order  on  the  old  basis  ;  but
the  positive  philosophv  will  have  foreseen  such  coutlicts,
and  will  take  no  part  in  them,  further  than  to  make  use  of
the  instruction  that  they  aft'ord.  It  will  not  interfere  with
the  last  operations  of  the  revolutionary  preponderance  ; —
knowing  that  they  are  the  last.  Nor  will  it  paralyse  so
important  a  general  disposition  as  that  which  constitiates
the  critical  spirit,  properly  so  called.  By  subordinating  it
for  ever  to  the  organic  spii'it,  it  will  o2:)en  to  it  broad
political  aims  ;  it  will  afford  it  employment  in  destroying-
all  metaphysical  and  theological  intei'ference,  using  for  this
end  the  satirical  faculties  which  ])roduced  nothing  in  the
last  century,  but  which  may  be  of  a  secondary  value  in
influencing  the  development  of  the  political  character  that
will  be  finally  assigned  to  each  school.  On  the  whole,  we
may  hope  that  the  positive  philosophy  will  find  grounds
of  support  among  the  most  advanced  sections  of  the  re-
volutionary school ;  and,  whatever  may  be  the  hopes  of
that  school  from  different  political  parties,  it  will  be  imable
to  dispense  with  the  scientific  superiority  of  the  pjositive
doctrine,  which  is  the  certain  cause  and  guarantee  of  its
gradual  ascendancy.

It  might  have  been  hoped  that  the  renova-  Anarehical
tion  Ave  are  anticipating  Avould  have  been  tendencies  of
largely  aided  by  the  scientific  class  of  society,  the  scientilk-
as  that  wdiich  must  be  most  familiar  with  class,
positive  science.  But  it  is  not  so.  At  present,  the
anarchical  tendencies  of  that  class  appear  to  be  as  strong
as  any.  The  indifference  of  scientitic  men  to  the  most
interesting  and  most  urgent  of  all  classes  of  problems  may
be  partly  accounted  for  by  their  deep  intellectual  disgust
at  the  irrational  character  of  the  social  doctrines  of  their
day  ;  but  there  are  other  reasons,  even  less  honourable  than
this.  TJiey  are  themselves  defective  in  scientific  discipline.
They  abhor  generalities,  and  ha,ve  a  systematic  predilection
for  specialities.  Under  the  idea  of  an  organization  of  labdur,
they  restrict  their  several  pursuits  within  the  narrowest
bounds,  without  providing  for  the  investigation  of  general
relations ;  and  thus,  science  becomes  a  pastime,  grounded


192  I'osiTivK  I'nii.osopiiY.

on  ]io  adequate  prejiaratiou.  It  is  not  wonderful  then  that
they  have  no  interest  in  the  entire  generality  which  is  the
indispensable  attribute  of  any  philosophy  that  aspires  to
the  moral  government  of  mankind.  Daily  experience
shows  that,  when  learned  bodies  are  brought  into  junction,
for  any  political  purpose,  with  sensible  men  who  know
nothing  of  science,  but  are  accustomed  to  general  views,
the  superiority  rests  with  the  latter,  even  in  regard  to
matters  which  particularly  concern  the  scientific  class.  As
long  as  this  is  the  case,  the  scientitic  class  decrees  its  own
political  subordination.  Their  social  sentiment  is  on  a  par
with  their  ideas  ;  and  their  egotism  is  aggravated  by  their
devotion  to  specialities,  when  it  ought  to  be  subdued  by  a
mastery  of  positive  science  ;  and  would  be  so,  if  they  could
admit  its  general  ideas.  This  is  no  fault  of  individuals
among  them.  It  is  imputable  to  the  defective  scientific
education  of  our  time;  aiid  all  that  men  of  science  are
censurable  for  is  their  dogmatic  denial  of  the  need  of  a
better.  We  must,  however,  aliandou  all  hope  of  their  co-
operation in  e.xtending  the  positive  method  to  the  study  of
social  phenomena.  If  we  may  antic-ipate  anything  in  that
direction,  it  must  be  from  a  rising  generation  for  whom  a
more  adequate  training  must  be  provided,  and  who  will  be
led  by  a  really  scientific  education  beyond  the  special  and
isolated  studies  to  which  they  now  conceive  themselves  to
be  destined,  and  which  constitute  at  present  their  only
idea  of  scientific  pursuit.

,,      ,     .  I  have  now  presented  a  view  of  the  chief

points  of  supjiort  which  the  present  state  of
the  social  world  affords  to  the  renovating  influence  of  the
new  political  philosophy.  This  introduction  may  appear
long;  but  it  will  abridge  my  future  labour  by  furnishing
my  readers  with  a  kind  of  rational  programme  of  the  con-
ditions of  the  subject.  Yet  more,  it  indicates  clearly  what
is  apt  to  escape  the  notice  of  minds  habituated  to  the
superfi(;ial  and  irrational  treatment  of  social  questions,—
the  complete  political  efficacy  of  the  positive  philosophy.
The  high  practical  utility  of  the  theory  I  am  al)out.to  offer
4;annot  be  questioned  by  the  haughtiest  politician  when  it
has  once  been  demonstrated  that  the  deepest  want  of
modern  society  is,  in  its  nat\ire,  eminently  theoretical,  and


CONCLUDIN(i    CONSIDERATIONS.  193

that,  consequently,  an  iutellectiial,  and  tlien  a  moral  re-
orij;anization  must  precede  and  direct  the  political. — This
mutual  relation  being  established,  with  a  care  proportionate
to  its  importance,  we  must  now  return, — not  again  to  quit
it, — to  the  strictly  scientific  point  of  view  of  this  work,  and
pursue  the  study  of  the  phenomena  of  social  physics  in  a
disposition  of  mind  as  purely  speculative  as  that  in  which
we  surveyed  the  other  fundamental  sciences,  with  no  other
intellectual  ambition  than  to  discover  the  natural  laws  of  a
final  order  of  phenomena,  remarkable  in  the  extreme,  and
never  before  examined  in  this  way.

Before  proceeding,  however,  to  this  direct  examination,
I  propose  to  consider,  briefly,  the  principal  philosophical
attempts  to  constitute  social  science  ;  as  a  general  estimate
of  this  kind  will  tend  to  illustrate  the  nature  and  spirit  of
this  last  great  department  of  positive  philosophy.


II.


194


CHAPTEE  II.

PRINCIPAL    PHILOSOPHICAL    ATTEMPTS    TO    CONSTITUTE
A    SOCIAL    SYSTEM.

„.  'X  1  /"E  have  seen  that  the  complex  and  special

cial  Science  nature  of  social  phenomena  is  the  chief

reason  why  the  study  has  remained  imperfect
to  the  last ;  it  being  impossible  to  analyse  them  till  the
simpler  dej)artments  of  science  were  understood,  and  till
the  great  discovery  of  cerebral  physiology  had  opened  a
rational  access  to  their  examination.  To  this  main  con-
sideration we  must  now  add  another,  which  explains  more
specially  why  it  has  never  till  now  been  possible  to  establish
social  science  on  a  positive  basis.  This  consideration  is,
that  we  have  not  till  now  been  in  jiossession  of  a  range  of
facts  wide  enough  to  disclose  the  natural  laws  of  social
phenomena.

The  first  rise  of  speculative  doctrine  has  always,  in  all
sciences,  taken  place  from  the  theological  method,  as  I  have
shown.  In  the  case  of  the  anterior  sciences,  this  did  not
preclude  the  formation  of  a  positive  theory,  when  once  there
had  been  a  sufficient  perpetuity  of  phenomena.  The
materials  were  ready  before  thei*e  were  obseiwers  qualified
to  make  a  scientific  use  of  them.  But,  even  if  observers
had  been  ready,  the  phenomena  of  social  life  were  not
am])le  and  various  enough  in  early  days  to  admit  of  their
philosophical  analysis.  Many  and  j^rofound  modifications
of  the  primitive  civilization  were  necessary  to  afford  a  suffi-
cient basis  for  exjteriment.  We  shall  see  hereafter  how
indispensable  was  the  operation  of  the  theological  philo-
sophy in  directing  the  earliest  progress  of  the  human  mind
and  of  society.  Our  present  business  is  to  notice  the
obstacles  which  it  presented  to  the  formation  of  a  true
social  science.  It  was  not,  in  fact,  till  modern  political
revolutions,  and  especially  the  French,   had   j)roved   the


EARLY   IDEA   OF   SOCIAL    PROGRESS.  195

insufficiency  of  the  old  political  system  for  the  social  needs
of  the  age  that  the  great  idea  of  Progress  could  acquire
sufficient  firmness,  distinctness  and  generality,  to  serve  a
scientific  purpose.  The  direction  of  the  social  movement
was  not  determined ;  and  social  speculation  was  embarrassed
by  fanciful  notions  of  oscillating  or  circular  movements,
such  as  even  now  cause  hesitation  in  able  but  ill-prepared
minds  as  to  the  real  nature  of  human  progression.  Till  it
is  known  in  what  this  progression  consists,  the  fact  itself
may  be  disputed ;  since,  from  such  a  point  of  view,  humanity
may  appear  to  be  doomed  to  an  arbitrary  succession  of
identical  phases,  without  ever  experiencing  a  new  transfor-
mation, gradually  directed  towards  an  end  determined  by
the  whole  constitution  of  human  nature.

Thus  all  idea  of  social  progress  was  interdicted  to  the
philosophers  of  antiquity,  for  want  of  materials  of  political
observation.  The  most  eminent  and  sagacious  of  them
were  subject  to  the  common  tendency  to  suppose  the  con-
temporary state  of  things  inferior  to  that  of  former  times.
This  supposition  was  the  more  natural  and  legitimate
because  the  philosoj^hical  works  which  contained  this  view
coincided,  as  to  date,  with  the  decline  of  the  Greek  and
Roman  rpgime.  This  decline,  which,  in  relation  to  the
whole  of  human  history,  was  in  fact  progress,  could  not
appear  so  to  the  ancients,  who  did  not  anticipate  what  was
to  come.  I  have  before  intimated  that  the  first  dawning
sense  of  human  progression  was  inspired  by  Christianity,
which,  by  proclaiming  the  superiority  of  the  law  of  Jesus
to  that  of  Moses,  gave  form  to  the  idea  of  a  more  perfect
state  replacing  a  less  perfect,  which  had  been  necessary  as
a  preparation.  Though  Catholicism^  was,  in  this,  simply
the  organ  of  expression  of  human  reason,  the  service  it  thus
rendered  entitles  it  not  the  less,  as  all  true  philosophers
will  agree,  to  our  eternal  gratitude.     But,  apart  from  the

'  This  great  idea  belongs  essentially  to  Catholicism,  from  which
Protestantism  derived  it  in  an  imperfect  and  corrnpt  manner, — not
only  by  recurring  irrationally  to  the  period  of  the  primitive  Churcli,
but  also  by  offering  for  pojiular  guidance  the  most  barbarous  and
dangerous  i^art  of  the  Scri])turcs — tliat  which  relates  to  Hebrew
antiquity.  Mohammedanism  i)ursued  the  same  practice,  and  thus
instituted  a  mere  imitation  of  Judaic  barltarism,  without  intro-
ducing any  real  amelioration.


196  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

mischief  of  the  mysticism  aud  vague  obscurity  which  be-
long to  all  applications  of  the  theological  method,  such  a
beginning  could  not  possibly  suggest  any  scientific  view  of
social  progi'ession  :  for  any  such  progression  was  barred  at
once  by  the  claim  of  Christianity  to  be  the  ultimate  stage
at  which  the  human  mind  must  stop.  The  social  efficacy
of  the  theological  jjhilosophy  is  now  exhausted,  and  it  has
become  therefore  retrograde,  as  we  have  seen  ;  but  the  con-
dition of  continuity  is  an  indispensable  element  in  the
conception  of  progress ;  an  idea  which  would  have  no
power  to  guide  social  speculation  if  it  represented  progress
as  limited  by  its  nature  to  a  determinate  condition,  attained
long  ago.

It  is  thus  evident  that  the  conception  of  progress  belongs
exclusively  to  the  positive  philosophy.  This  philosophy
alone  can  indicate  the  final  term  which  human  nature  will
be  for  ever  aj^proaching  and  never  attaining  ;  and  it  alone
can  prescribe  the  general  course  of  this  gradual  develop-
ment. Accordingly,  the  only  rational  ideas  of  continuous
advance  are  of  modern  origin,  and  relate  especially  to  the
expansion  of  the  positive  sciences  which  gave  birth  to
them.  It  may  even  be  worth  observing  that  the  first
satisfactory  view  of  general  progression  was  proposed  by  a
philosopher  whose  genius  was  essentially  mathematical ;
and  therefore  conversant  with  the  simplest  form  of  the
scientific  spirit.  Whatever  may  be  the  value  of  this
observation,  it  is  certain  that  Pascal  was  animated  by  a
sense  of  the  progress  of  the  sciences  when  he  uttered  the  im-
mortal aphorism  :  "  the  entire  succession  of  men,  through
the  whole  course  of  ages,  niiist  be  regarded  as  one  man,
always  living  and  incessantly  learning."  Whatever  may
have  been  the  actual  effect  of  this  first  ray  of  light,  it
must  be  admitted  that  the  idea  of  continuous  progress  had
no  scientific  consistency,  or  public  regard,  till  after  the
memorable  controversy,  at  the  beginning  of  the  last
century,  about  a  general  comparison  of  the  ancients  and
moderns.  In  my  view,  that  solemn  discussion  constitutes
a  ripe  event  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  which  thus,
for  the  first  time,  declared  that  it  had  made  an  irreversible
advance.  It  is  needless  to  point  out  that  the  leaders  of
this  great  philosophical  movement  derived  all  the  force  of


RATIONAL   IDEA   OF   PROGRESS   OF   MODERN    ORIGIN.    197

tlieir  ai-guments  from  the  scientific  spirit :  but  it  is  re-
markable that  their  most  illustrious  adversaries  committed
the  inconsistency  of  declaring  that  they  preferred  the
philosophy  of  Descartes  to  that  which  preceded  it. — From
this  scientific  origin  the  conception  spread  more  and  more
in  a  political  direction,  till,  at  length,  the  French  revolu-
tion manifested  the  tendency  of  humanity  toward  a  poli-
tical system,  indeterminate  enough,  but  radically  different
from  the  whole  system.  This  was  the  negative  view  of
social  progress ;  ineffectual  in  itself,  but  necessary  as  a
preparation  for  the  advent  of  the  positive  philosophy,
when  it  should  have  made  its  induction  from  social  pheno-
mena, and  ascertained  their  laws.

Having  thus  seen  how  impossible  was  the  formation  of
social  science  in  ancient  times,  we  are  in  a  condition  to
appreciate  the  attemjjts  which  were  here  and  there  pre-
maturely made.  The  foregoing  analysis  shows  that  the
political  conditions  of  the  subject  are,  generally,  precisely
coincident  with  the  scientific,  so  as  to  retard  by  their  com-
petition the  possibility  of  establishing  social  science  on  a
positive  basis.  This  obstacle  has  existed  even  up  to  our
own  generation,  who  can  only  make  a  mere  beginning  in
seeking  in  the  past  a  basis  for  social  science,  in  virtue  of
their  experience  of  a  revolutionary  period,  and  of  their
opening  perception  of  the  positive  principle,  as  they  see  it
established  in  the  other  departments  of  human  knowledge,
including  that  of  intellectual  and  moral  phenomena.  It
would  be  waste  of  time,  and  a  departure  from  my  object,
to  analyse  fully  the  attempts  of  ancient  philosophers  to
form  a  political  science  which  was  thus  clearly  impractic-
able in  their  day ;  and  I  shall  therefore  merely  point  out
the  essential  vice  of  each  speculation,  thereby  justifying
the  judgment  that  we  have  just  passed  by  anticijiation,
and  disclosing  the  true  nature  of  an  enterprise  which  re-
mains to  be  begun.

The  name  of  Aristotle  first  presents  itself,         a  •  f  +i  '
his  memorable  "  Politics"  being  one  of  the         "Politics  "
finest  productions  of  antiquity,  and  furnish-
ing the  general  type  of  most  of  the  works  on  that  subject
that  have  followed.     This  treatise  could  not  possibly  dis-
close any  sense  of  the  jJi'ogressive  tendencies  of  humanity,


198  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

nor  tlie  slightest  glimpse  of  the  natural  laws  of  civilization ;
and  it  was  necessarily  occupied  by  metaphysical  discussions
of  the  principle  and  form  of  government :  but  it  is  truly
marvellous  that  any  mind  should  have  produced  a  work  so
advanced,  and  even  nearer  to  a  positive  view  than  his  other
works,  at  a  time  when  political  observation  was  restricted
to  a  uniform  and  preliminary  social  state,  and  when  the
nascent  positive  spirit  lived  feebly  in  geometry  alone.  The
analysis  by  which  he  refuted  the  dangerous  fancies  of
Plato  and  his  imitators  about  community  of  property
evidences  a  rectitude,  a  sagacity,  and  a  strength  which,  in
their  application  to  such  sul)jects,  have  been  rarely  equalled,
and  never  surpassed.  Thus  much  I  have  said,  in  the  way
of  homage  to  the  first  manifestation  of  human  genius  on
the  great  subject  of  government,  notwithstanding  the
evident  influence  that  it  has  exercised  uj^on  jihilosophical
meditation,  from  its  own  day  to  this.

The  works  which  succeeded  need  not  detain  us.  They
were  merely  an  accumulation  of  fresh  materials,  classified
by  the  type  that  Aristotle  had  furnished.  The  next  j^eriod
worth  notice  is  that  in  which  the  preponderance  of  the
positive  spirit  in  the  study  of  phenomena  caused  the  first
clear  comprehension  of  the  meaning  of  general  laws,  and
in  which  the  idea  of  human  progress  began  to  assume
some  consistency ;  and,  to  find  these  two  conditions  m
concurrence,  we  can  hardly  go  further  back  than  the
middle  of  the  last  century.  The  first  and  most  important
^     ,         .  sei'ies  of  worlcs  which  then  presents  itself  is

that  of  Montesquieu,  first,  in  his  treatise  on
the  "  G-reatness  and  Decline  of  the  Romans,"  and  after-
wards in  his  "  Spirit  of  Laws."  The  great  strength  of
this  memorable  work  appears  to  me  to  lie  in  its  tendency
to  regard  political  phenomena  as  subject  to  invariable  laws,
like  all  other  ])hen()mena.  This  is  manifested  at  the  very
outset,  in  the  j)reliminary  chapter,  in  which,  for  the  first
time  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  the  general  idea  of
law  is  directly  defined,  in  relation  to  all,  even  to  political
sul)jects,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  is  applied  in  the
simplest  positive  investigations.  The  progress  of  science
whic'h  liad  been  effected  by  the  labours  of  Descartes,
Galileo  and  Kepler,  a  century  befoi'e,   had  rendered  the


MONTES(^UIEU'.S    "SPIRIT   OF   LAWS."  199

most  advanced  minds  familiar  with  an  iucomplete  notion
of  progress.  Montesquieu's  conception  was  a  generaliza-
tion of  this  incomplete  notion  :  and,  instead  of  denying
originality  to  so  eminent  a  service,  we  may  well  be  amazed
that  such  a  conception  should  be  offered,  before  the  posi-
tive method  had  extended  beyond  the  simplest  natural
phenomena, — being  scarcely  admitted  into  the  department
of  chemistry,  and  not  yet  heard  of  in  the  study  of  living
bodies.  And,  in  the  other  view,  a  man  must  have  been  in
advance  of  his  time,  who  could  conceive  of  natural  laws  as
the  basis  of  social  speculation  and  action,  while  all  other
able  men  were  talking  about  the  absolute  and  indefinite
power  of  legislators,  when  armed  with  due  authority,  to
modify  at  will  the  social  state.  The  very  qualities,  how-
ever, which  give  its  pre-eminence  to  Montesquieu's  work
prove  to  us  the  impossibility  of  success  in  an  enterprise  so
premature  in  regard  to  its  proposed  object,  the  very  condi-
tions of  Avhich  were  still  impracticable.  The  j^roject  of  the
work  is  not  fulfilled  in  its  course ;  and,  admirable  as  are
some  of  its  details,  its  falls  back,  like  all  others,  upon  the
primitive  type  offered  by  Aristotle's  treatise.  We  find  no  re-
ference of  social  phenomena  to  the  laws  whose  existence
was  aimounced  at  the  outset ;  nor  any  scientific  selection
and  connection  of  facts.  The  general  nature  of  his  prac-
tical conclusions  seems  to  show  how  far  the  execution  of
his  work  was  from  corresponding  with  his  original  inten-
tion ;  for  his  desultory  review  of  the  whole  mass  of  social
subjects  ends  in  his  setting  up,  as  a  universal  political
type,  the  English  parliamentary  system,  the  insufficiency
of  which,  for  the  satisfaction  of  modern  social  rec^uirements,
was  not,  it  is  true,  so  conspicuous  in  his  day  as  it  is  now,
but  still  discernible  enough,  as  we  shall  have  occasion  to
see.  It  was  honourable  to  Montesquieu.' s  philosophical
character,  that  he  steered  wide  of  the  metaphysical  Utopias
which  lay  in  his  way,  and  resorted  rather  to  the  narrow
anchorage  at  which  he  rested  ;  but  such  a  resort,  so  narrow
and  so  barren,  proves  that  he  had  wandered  away  from  the
course  announced  by  himself.  The  only  part  of  the  book
which  bears  any  true  marks  of  sustained  positivity  is  that
in  which  the  social  influence  of  permanent  local  causes, —
of  that  which  in  political  language  we  may  call  climate, —


200  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

is  considered.  This  view,  evidently  derived  from  Hippo-
crates, manifests  a  tendency  to  attach  observed  phenomena
to  forces  able  to  produce  them,  as  in  natural  philosophy ;
but  the  aim  has  failed.  The  true  political  influence  of
climate  is  misconceived,  and  usually  much  exaggerated,
through  the  common  error  of  analysing  a  mere  modifica-
tion before  the  main  action  is  fully  understood  ;  which  is
much  like  trying  to  determine  planetary  perturbations
before  ascertaining  the  chief  gravitations.  This  error  was
inevitable  under  Montesquieu's  necessary  ignorance  of  the
great  social  laws,  while  he  was  bent  upon  introducing  the
positive  spirit  into  the  domain  of  politics.  He  naturally
betook  himself  to  the  only  class  of  social  specvilations
which  seemed  fit  for  his  purjwse.  Pardonable  or  un-
avoidable as  was  his  failure,  it  is  a  new  evidence  of  the
vast  gap  which  lies  open  at  the  outset  of  the  science.
Montesquieu  did  not  even  perceive,  any  more  than  others,
the  fact  which  should  regulate  the  whole  political  theory
of  climate  ; — that  local  physical  causes,  very  powerfiil  in
the  early  days  of  civilization,  lose  their  force  in  proportion
as  human  development  admits  of  their  being  neutralized  :
— a  view  which  would  certainly  have  occurred  to  Montes-
quieu if  he  had  possessed  himself  of  the  fundamental
notion  of  human  progression  before  he  treated  of  the
political  theory  of  climate.  Tluis,  this  great  philosopher
proposed  a  grand  enterprise  which  was  premature  in  two
senses,  and  in  which  he  could  not  but  fail, — first,  by  bring-
ing social  ])henomena  under  the  operation  of  the  positive
spirit  before  it  had  been  introduced  into  the  system  of
biological  science ;  and  again,  in  proposing  social  reor-
ganization during  a  period  marked  out  for  revolutionary
action.  This  explains  why  a  mind  so  eminent  should  have
exercised,  through  its  very  advancement,  an  immediate  in-
fluence very  inferior  to  that  of  a  mere  sophist,  like  Rous-
seau, whose  intellectual  state,  much  better  adapted  to  the
disposition  of  his  contemporaries,  allowed  him  to  consti-
tute himself,  with  so  remarkable  a  success,  the  natural
organ  of  the  revolutionary  movement  of  the  time.  It  is
by  our  posterity  that  Montesquieu  will  be  duly  estimated,
when  tlie  extension  of  the  positive  philoso])hy  to  social
speculations  will  disclose  the  high  value  of  the  precocious


CONDORCET.  201

attempts  which,  though  doomed  to  failure,  yield  the  light
by  which  the  general  question  must  be  laid  down.

After  Montesquieu,  the  next  great  addi-  Condorcet

tion  to  Sociology  (which  is  the  term  I  may
be  allowed  to  invent  to  designate  Social  Physics)  was
made  by  Condorcet,  proceeding  on  the  views  suggested  by
his  illustrious  friend  Turgot.  Turgot's  suggestions  with
regard  to  the  theory  of  the  perfectibility  of  human  nature
were  doiibtless  the  basis  of  Condorcet's  speculation  ex-
hil)ited  in  his  "  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Progress  of  the
Human  Mind,"  in  which  the  scientific  conception  of  the
social  progression  of  the  race  was,  for  the  first  time,  clearly
and  directly  proposed,  with  a  distinct  assertion  of  its  primary
importance.  The  strength  of  the  work  lies  in  its  introduc-
tion, in  which  Condorcet  exhibits  his  general  idea,  and  pro-
poses his  philosophical  project  of  studying  the  radical  con-
nection of  the  various  social  states  of  mankind.  These  few
immortal  pages  leave  really  nothing  to  be  desired  in  regard
to  the  position  of  the  sociological  cpiestion  at  large,  which
will,  in  my  opinion,  rest,  through  all  future  time,  on  this
admirable  statement.  The  execution  is  far  from  corre-
sponding with  the  greatness  of  the  project ;  but  no  failure
in  the  carrying  out  can  impair  the  value  of  the  design.
The  success  and  the  failure  may  both  be  easily  accounted
for  by  a  consideration  of  the  scientific  and  political  know-
ledge of  the  time.  The  expansion  of  the  natural  sciences,
and  especially  of  chemistry,  during  the  second  half  of  the
last  century,  had  thoroughly  established  in  the  best  minds
of  the  period  the  idea  of  positive  laws  ;  and  the  study  of
living  bodies,  in  the  departments  of  anatomy  and  taxonomy,
if  not  of  physiology,  began  to  assume  a  truly  scientific
character.  Condorcet's  mind  was  rationally  prepared  by
mathematical  study,  under  the  direction  of  D'Alembert :
by  his  philosophical  position  in  society,  he  had  all  the
advantage  of  the  expansion  of  ]ihysico-chemical  science
then  taking  place ;  and  of  the  labours  of  Haller,  Jussieu,
Linuseus,  Buft'on  and  Vicq-d'Azir  in  the  principal  depart-
ments of  biological  knowledge ;  and  it  was  natural  that  he
should  conceive  the  enterprise  of  carrying  into  the  specu-
lative study  of  social  phenomena  the  same  positive  method
which,  from  the  time  of  Descartes,  had  been  regenerating


202  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

the  entire  system  of  liumau  knowledge.  With  equal
advantages,  and  his  higher  order  of  genius,  Montesquieu
would,  no  douljt,  have  achieved  higher  results  than  he  has
left  us.  Still,  even  Condorcet's  project  was  premature,
though  less  so  than  that  of  Montesquieu ;  for  a  great
deficiency  remained  in  the  imjjerfect  state  of  biological
knowledge,  and  especially  in  the  exclusion  of  intellectual
and  moral  phenomena  from  treatment  by  the  positive
method  :  and  the  unfortunate  Condorcet  did  not  live  to
see  them  assume  their  proper  place.  In  their  absence,  he
lost  himself  in  wanderings  after  an  indefinite  perfectibility,
and  chimerical  and  absurd  anticipations.  Such  aberra-
tions, affecting  such  men,  are  a  lesson  to  us  as  to  the
impossibility  of  unaided  reason  overleaping  the  intervals
which  have  not  been  steadily  explored  in  the  gradual
advance  of  the  human  mind.  As  to  the  jiolitical  circum-
stances of  the  time, — the  idea  of  social  progression  was
certainly  more  distinct  and  more  firm  in  Condorcet's  than
in  Montesquieu's  time :  for  the  tendency  of  society  to  re-
linquish the  ancient  social  system  was  becoming  evident,
though  the  new  system  which  was  to  succeed  it  was  but
vaguely  suspected,  even  where  it  was  not  wholly  miscon-
ceived. The  evil  influence  of  the  revolutionary  doctrine  is
singularly  exhibited  in  Condorcet's  work,  in  the  form  of
an  inconsistency  which  must  strike  every  reader.  The
human  race  is  there  represented  as  having  attained  a  vast
degree  of  i)erfection  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,
while  the  author  attributes  an  entirely  retrogressive  in-
fluence to  almost  every  doctrine,  institution  and  pre-
ponderant power  throughout  the  whole  past.  Whereas,
the  total  progress  accomplished  can  be  nothing  else  than
the  result  of  the  various  kinds  of  partial  progress  realized
since  the  beginning  of  civilization,  in  virtue  of  the  gradual
onward  course  of  human  nature.  Such  a  state  of  things
as  Condorcet  describes  would  be  nothing  else  than  a  per-
petual miracle ;  and  it  is  not  to  him,  therefore,  that  we
can  look  for  any  disclosure  of  the  laws  of  human  develop-
ment, any  appreciation  of  the  transitory  nature  of  the
revolutionary  philoso]jhy,  or  any  general  conception  of  the
future  of  society.  Here  again  we  recognize  the  philo-
sophical   superiority   of    Montesquieu,    who,  not    having


POLITICAL   ECONOMY.  203

Condorcet's  opportunities  of  estimating  the  revolutionary
spirit,  had  been  aljle  to  free  his  mind  from  those  critical
prejudices  in  regard  to  the  past  which  formed  the  views
of  all  around  him,  and  had  injured  his  own  earlier  specu-
lations. This  brief  survey  of  the  labours  of  these  great
men  shows  us  that  the  basis  of  true  social  science  can  be
fixed  only  after  the  revolutionary  sjDirit  has  begun  to
decline ;  and  thus  the  political,  as  well  as  the  scientific
indications  of  the  subject  point  to  our  own  time  as  that  in
which  such  a  science  is  to  be  founded.  Condorcet  gave  \;s
a  clear  exposition  of  the  nature  of  the  enterprise ;  but  the
whole  accomplishment  yet  remains  to  be  achieved.

These  two  attempts  are  really  all  that  have  been  made
in  the  right  road  to  social  science ;  for  they  are  the  only
speculations  which  have  been  based  on  the  aggregate  of
historical  facts.  I  shall  have  occasion,  further  on,  to
notice  some  attemj^ts  which  are  not  worthy  to  rank  with
these,  and  which  merely  testify  to  the  existing  need  of
social  science  by  showing  how  various  are  the  directions  in
which  it  is  sought.  On  one  subject,  however,  I  shall  here
make  a  few  observations,  in  order  to  illustrate  further  the
aim  and  spirit  of  my  own  efforts  to  constitute  a  basis  for
social  science.  That  subject  is  the  nature  and  object  of
what  is  called  Political  Economy.

We  cannot  impute  to  political  economists  p  ,•  .
any  design  to  establish  social  science  ;  for  it  jj^j^jy
is  the  express  assertion  of  the  most  classical
among  them  that  their  subject  is  wholly  distinct  from,  and
independent  of  general  political  science.  Yet,  sincere  as
they  doubtless  are  in  their  dogma  of  isolation,  they  are  no
less  sincerely  persuaded  that  they  have  applied  the  positive
spirit  to  economical  science ;  and  they  perpetually  set
forth  their  method  as  the  type  by  which  all  social  theories
will  be  finally  regenerated.  As  this  pretension  has  ob-
tained credit  enough  to  procure  the  establishment  of
several  professorships  for  this  species  of  instruction,  I  find
myself  obliged  to  explain  why  it  is  that  I  cannot,  as  would
be  very  desirable,  propose  to  carry  on  my  enterprise  from
the  point  reached  by  these  jihilosophers,  but  must  begin
from  the  beginning.  My  criticism  on  ])olitical  economy  in
this  place  is  merely  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  it  is


204  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

uot  tlie  jjliilosopliical  creation  that  we  want ;  and  I  must
I'efer  to  my  exjjosition  as  a  whole  any  objectors  to  my
summary  estimate  of  political  economy.

It  is  unfavourable  to  the  philosophical  pretensions  of  the
economists  that,  being  almost  invariably  lawyers  or  literary
men,  they  have  had  no  opjDortuuity  of  discipline  in  that
spirit  of  positive  rationality  which  they  suppose  they  have
introduced  into  their  researches.  Precluded  by  their  edu-
cation from  any  idea  of  scientific  observation  of  even  the
smallest  phenomena,  from  any  motion  of  natural  laws,
from  all  perception  of  what  demonsti-ation  is,  they  must
obviously  be  incapable  of  applying,  impromjitu,  a  method
in  which  they  have  had  no  practice  to  the  most  difficult  of
all  analyses.  The  only  philosophical  preparation  that  they
can  show  is  a  set  of  vague  precepts  of  general  logic,  suscep-
tible of  no  real  use  ;  and  thus,  their  conceptions  present  a
purely  metaphysical  character.  There  is  one  great  excep-
tional case  which  I  must  at  once  exempt  from  this  criticism,
— that  of  the  illustrious  philosopher,  Adam  Smith,  who
made  no  pretension  to  found  a  new  special  science  ;  but
merely  proposed,  (what  he  admirably  achieved)  to  illustrate
some  leading  points  of  social  philosophy  by  luminous
analyses  relating  to  the  division  of  employments,  the  func-
tion of  money,  the  general  action  of  banks,  etc.,  and  other
chief  portions  of  the  industrial  developments  of  the  human
race.  Though  involved,  like  all  his  contemporaries,  in  the
metaphysical  philosophy,  a  mind  of  such  quality  as  his
could  not,  however  distinguished  in  the  metaphysical
school,  be  blinded  by  its  illusions,  because  his  preparatory
studies  had  impressed  him  with  a  sense  of  what  constitutes
a  true  scientific  method,  as  is  clearly  proved  by  the  valu-
able sketches  of  the  philosophical  history  of  the  sciences,
and  of  astronomy  in  particular,  which  are  published  among
his  posthumous  works.  The  economists  have  no  right  to
(•laim  Adam  Smith  as  their  authority  while  the  whole  dog-
matic part  of  their  science  presents  a  merely  metaphysical
character,  dressed  up  with  special  forms  and  a  list  of  scien-
tific terms,  taken  bodily  from  former  philosophical  exposi-
tions,— as,  for  instance,  from  the  theologico-metaphysical
writings  of  Spinoza.  The  contemporary  history  of  this  so-
called  science  confirms  this  judgment  of  its  nature.     The


ITS   LIMITATIONS.  205

most  certain  signs  of  conceptions  being  scientific  are  con-
tiuuousness  and  fertility :  and  when  existing  works,  in-
stead of  being  the  result  and  development  of  those  that
have  gone  before,  have  a  character  as  personal  as  that  of
their  authors,  and  bring  the  most  fundamental  ideas  into
question  ;  and  when,  again,  the  dogmatic  constitution  pro-
vides for  no  real  and  sustained  progress,  but  only  for  a
barren  reproduction  of  old  controversies,  it  is  clear  that  we
are  dealing  with  no  positive  doctrine  whatever,  but  merely
with  theological  or  meta]")hysical  dissertations.  And  this  is
the  spectacle  which  political  economy  has  presented  for
half  a  century  past.  If  our  economists  were  really  the
scientific  successors  of  Adam  Smith,  they  would  show  us
where  they  had  carried  on  and  completed  their  master's
doctrine,  and  what  new  discoveries  they  had  added  to  his
primitive  suiweys  ;  but  looking  with  an  impartial  eye  upon
their  disputes  on  the  most  elementary  ideas  of  value,  utility,
production,  etc.,  we  might  imagine  ourselves  present  at  the
strangest  conferences  of  the  scholists  of  the  Middle  Ages
about  the  attributes  of  their  metaphysical  entities  ;  which
indeed  economical  conceptions  resemble  more  and  more,  in
proportion  as  they  are  dogmatized  and  refined  upon.  The
result  is  both  cases  is,  but  too  often,  the  perversion  of  the
valuable  indication  of  popular  good  sense,  which  become
confused,  inapplicable,  and  jiroductive  only  of  idle  disputes
about  words.  All  intelligent  men,  for  instance,  understand
what  is  meant  by  the  temis  product  and  prodncer ;  but,
from  the  time  that  economical  metaphysics  undertook  to
define  them,  the  idea  of  production  has  become,  through
vicious  generalizations,  so  indeterminate,  that  conscientious
and  clear  writers  are  obliged  to  ixse  circuitous  explanations
to  avoid  the  use  of  terms  which  have  become  obscure  and
equivocal.  Such  abuse  is  analogous  to  that  which  meta-
physics has  introduced  into  the  study  of  the  human  under-
standing, with  regard,  for  instance,  to  the  general  ideas  of
analysis  and  synthesis  and  the  like.  The  avowal  of  the
economists  that  their  science  is  isolated  from  that  of  social
philosophy  in  general,  is  itself  a  sufficient  confirmation  of
my  judgTueut  ;  for  it  is  a  universal  fact  in  social,  as  in  bio-
logical science,  that  all  the  various  general  aspects  of  the
subject  are  scientifically  one,  and  rationally  inseparable,  so


206  POSITIVE  piiiLOsoniv.

that  they  cannot  be  illustrated  but  by  each  other.  Thus,
the  economical  or  industrial  analysis  of  society  cannot  be
effected  in  the  positive  method,  apart  from  its  intellectual,
moral,  and  political  analysis,  past  and  present.  And  thus
does  the  boasted  isolation  of  political  economy  testify  to  its
being  grounded  on  a  metaphysical  basis.

This  is  the  dogmatic  aspect  of  the  science.  But  it  would
be  unjust  to  forget  that,  loolcing  at  this  doctrine  historically,
and  more  with  a  political  than  a  scientific  view,  it  consti-
tutes a  final  essential  part  of  the  system  of  critical  philo-
sophy, which  has  exercised  an  indispensable,  though  tran-
sitory influence  during  the  revolutionary  period.  Political
Economy  has  borne  an  honourable  share  in  this  vast  intel-
lectual conflict,  by  thoroughly  discrediting  the  industrial
polity  of  the  Middle  Ages,  which  became  more  and  more
injurious,  in  its  descent  to  our  time,  to  the  industry  which
it  had  once  protected.  Such  is  the  credit  due  to  Political
Economy.  Its  worst  practical  fault  is  that,  like  the  other
jDortions  of  the  metaphysical  ])hilosopliy,  it  systematizes
anarchy  ;  and  the  danger  is  only  aggravated  by  its  use  of
modern  scientific  forms.  It  has  not  been  satisfied  with
criticising,  in  much  too  absolute  a  way,  the  industrial
polity  of  the  old  European  sovereignties,  Avithout  which  the
industrial  development  of  modern  times  could  never  have
taken  place :  it  goes  far  beyond  this  ;  it  sets  up  as  a  uni-
versal dogma  the  absence  of  all  regulating  intervention
whatever  as  the  best  means  of  promoting  the  spontaneous
rise  of  society ;  so  that,  on  every  serious  occasion,  this  doc-
trine can  res])ond  to  urgent  practical  needs  only  by  the
uniform  reproduction  of  this  systematic  negation.  Because
it  perceives  a  natural  tendency  in  society  to  arrange  itself
in  a  certain  order,  not  seeing  in  this  a  suggestion  of  an
order  to  be  promoted  by  social  arrangements,  it  ])reaches
an  absence  of  regulation  which,  if  carried  out  to  the  limit
of  the  principle,  would  lead  to  the  methodical  al)olition  of
all  government.  But  here  we  meet  tlie  compensating
virtue  that  political  economy  insists  on  all  human  interest  s
being  boxind  up  together,  and  thei'efore  susceptible  of  a
permanent  reconciliation.  Though  this  may  be  simjily  the
expression  of  the  convictions  of  popular  good  sense,  philo-
sophy owes  a  tribute  of  eternal  gratitude  to  the  economists


ITS    DANGEROUS   TENDENCIES.  207

for  their  excellent  service  iu  extinguishing  the  disastrous
and  immoral  prejudice  which  concluded  the  amelioration  of
the  condition  of  some  to  be  obtained  by  the  deterioration  of
the  condition  of  somebody  else  ;  and  that  the  total  amount
of  wealth  was  always  the  same;  which  is  as  much  as
denying  industrial  development  altogether.  Notwithstand-
ing this  great  service,  political  economy  has  dangerous
tendencies  through  its  opposition  to  the  institution  of  all
industrial  discipline.  As  each  serious  ditficulty  arises  in
the  course  of  industrial  development,  political  economy
ignores  it.  In  the  great  question  of  Machinery  this  is
remarkably  illustrated.  This  is  one  of  the  cases  of  incon-
venience inherent  iu  every  industrial  improvement,  from  its
tendency  to  disturb,  more  or  less,  and  for  a  longer  or  shorter
time,  the  mode  of  life  of  the  labouring  classes.  Instead  of
recognizing  in  the  urgent  remonstrances  called  forth  by  this
chasm  in  our  social  order  one  of  the  most  eminent  and
pressing  occasions  for  the  application  of  social  science,  our
economists  can  do  nothing  better  than  rej^eat,  with  pitiless
pedantry,  their  bai-ren  aphorism  of  absolute  industrial
liberty.  Without  considering  that  all  human  questions,
practically  regarded,  are  reducible  to  mere  f[uestions  of
time,  they  venture  to  reply  to  all  complaints  that,  in  the
long  run,  all  classes,  and  especially  the  one  most  injured  on
the  existing  occasion,  will  enjoy  a  real  and  permanent
amelioration  ;  a  I'eply  which  will  be  regarded  as  derisive,  as
long  as  man's  life  is  incapable  of  being  indefinitely
lengthened.  Such  a  doctrine  publishes  its  own  weakness
by  showing  its  want  of  relation  to  the  aggregate  of  our
practical  needs.  Would  the  copyists  who  Avere  thrown  out
of  employment  by  the  invention  of  printing  have  been
completely  consoled  by  being  convinced  that,  in  the  next
generation,  there  would  be  an  equal  number  of  persons
living  bv  printing,  and  many  more  in  succeeding  cen-
turies ?  Yet  such  is  the  consolation  habitually  offered  by
political  economy  ;  and  if  there  were  no  other  evidence,
this  inefficiency  would  prove  its  unfitness  to  direct,  as  it
proposes  to  do,  the  industrial  expansion  of  modern  society.
And  thus  it  stands  condemned,  as  to  its  scientific  preten-
sions, and  in  spite  of  some  important  services,  from  the
political  as  much  as  from  the  scientific  jioiut  of  view.


208  POSITIVE    PIIILOSOl'lIV.

The  temporary  predilection  of  men's  minds  for  political
economy  is,  in  truth,  a  new  and  strong  illustration  of  the
instinctive  need  which  prevails  to  subject  social  researches
to  positive  methods ;  and  if  that  were  once  done,  the
interest  in  political  economy  would  disappear.  Various
other  signs  of  the  times  testify  to  the  same  disposition,
which  indeed  pervades  the  Avhole  action  of  our  intelli-
gences. I  will  refer  to  only  one  among  the  multitude  of
those  signs  ;  but  it  is  one  which  aids  in  bringing  about  the
satisfaction  of  the  need.  I  mean  the  growing  inclination
for  historical  study,  and  the  great  improvement  in  that
kind  of  research  within  two  centuries.

Growth  of  Bossuet  was,  unquestionably,  the  first  who

historical  proposed  to   survey,  from   a  lofty  point   of

study.  view,  the  whole  of  the  past  of  society.     We

cannot  adopt  his  explanations,  easily  derived  from  theolo-
gical resources  ;  but  the  spirit  of  universality,  so  thoroughly
appreciated,  and,  under  the  circumstances,  so  wonderfully
sustained,  will  always  preserve  this  admirable  composition  '
as  a  model,  suggesting  the  true  result  of  historical  analysis; —
the  rational  co-ordination  of  the  great  series  of  human
events,  according  to  a  single  design  ;  which  must  however
be  more  genuine  and  complete  than  that  of  Bossuet.  There
is  no  doubt  that  this  fine  piece  of  instruction  has  contri-
buted, during  both  the  past  and  the  present  century,  to
the  im])rovement  in  the  character  of  the  chief  historical
compositions,  especially  in  France  and  England,  and  after-
wards in  Germany.  Still,  history  has  more  of  a  literary
and  descriptive  than  of  a  scientific  character.  It  does  not
yet  establish  a  rational  filiation  in  the  series  of  social  events,
so  as  to  admit  (as  in  other  sciences,  and  allowing  for  its
greater  complexity)  of  any  degree  of  systematic  prevision
of  their  future  succession.  Perhaps  the  imputation  of
rashness  cast  upon  the  mere  proposal  of  such  a  treatment
of  history  is  the  strongest  confirmation  we  could  have  of
its  j^resent  unscientific  character :  for  such  prevision  is
everywhere  else  admitted  to  be  the  ultimate  scientific  test.
Another  evidence  exists  in  the  easy  credit  daily  obtained
by  misty  historical  theories  which  explain  nothing,  and

^  "Discourse  on  Universal  Historv."


INFLUENX'E   OF    IIISIORY    ON    POLITIC?.  209

wliicli  testify  to  the  literary  and  metaphysical  bias  under
which  history  is  studied,  by  minds  unacquainted  with  the
great  scientific  movement  of  modern  times.  Again,  another
evidence  is  the  dogmatic  separation  which  it  is  attempted
to  keep  lip  between  history  and  politics.  Still,  we  must
admit  the  growing  taste  of  our  age  for  historical  labours
to  be  a  happy  symptom  of  philosophical  regeneration,  how-
ever the  inclination  may  be  wasted  upon  superficial  and
misleading  works,  sometimes  written  with  a  view  to  imme-
diate popularity  by  ministering  to  the  popular  taste.  One
of  the  most  promising  incidents  of  the  time  is  the  intro-
duction into  the  highly  metaphysical  class  of  jurists  of  an
historical  school  which  has  undertaken  to  connect,  during-
every  period  of  history,  the  whole  of  its  legislation  with
the  corresponding  state  of  society.

If  the  preceding  chapter  disclosed  the  destination  of  the
great  philosophical  creation  of  which  I  am  treating,  the
present  exhibits  its  necessity,  and  the  opportuneness  of  the
time.  Attempts  to  constitute  a  science  of  society  would
not  have  been  so  obstinate,  nor  pursued  in  ways  so  various,
if  an  instinctive  need  of  it  had  not  been  deeply  felt.  At
the  same  time,  the  general  analysis  of  the  chief  efforts
hitherto  made  explains  their  failure,  and  convinces  us  that
the  whole  enterprise  remains  to  be  even  conceived  of  in  a
manner  which  will  secure  its  accomplishment.  Nothing
now  prevents  our  going  on  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  pro-
posed task,  by  entering,  in  the  next  chapter,  on  the  study
of  the  method  in  Social  Physics.  We  have  so  ascertained
and  cleared  our  ground,  by  first  taking  a  survey  of  our
condition  from  a  political  point  of  view,  and  then  reviewing
the  preparation  made,  that  we  are  at  full  liberty  to  follow
the  speculative  development  that  will  prevail  throughout
the  rest  of  this  book,  which  will  close  with  the  co-ordination
between  the  theory  and  practice  of  Social  Physics.


il.


210


CHAPTER  III.

CHARACTERISTICS    OF    THE    POSITIVE    METHOD    IN    ITS
APPLICATION    TO    SOCIAL    PHENOMENA.

IN  every  science  conceptions  which  relate  to  method  are
inseparable  from  those  which  relate  to  the  doctrine
under  consideration.  The  method  has  to  be  so  varied  in
its  application,  and  so  largely  modified  by  the  complexity
and  special  nature  of  the  phenomena,  in  each  case,  that
any  general  notions  of  method  would  be  too  indefinite  for
actual  use.  If,  therefore,  we  have  not  separated  the  method
from  the  doctrine  in  the  simpler  departments  of  science,
much  less  should  we  think  of  doing  so  when  treating  of
the  complex  phenomena  of  social  life,  to  say  nothing  of
the  great  featiu'e  of  this  last  case, — its  want  of  positivity.
In  the  formation  of  a  new  science  the  general  spirit  of  it
must  be  seized  before  its  j^articular  parts  can  be  investi-
gated :  that  is,  we  must  have  some  notion  of  the  doctrine
before  examining  the  method,  and  then  the  method  cannot
be  estimated  in  any  other  way  than  by  its  use.  Thus,  I
have  not  to  offer  a  logical  exposition  of  method  in  social
physics  before  proceeding  to  the  science  itself;  but  I  must
follow  the  same  plan  here  as  in  the  case  of  the  anterior
sciences, — ascertaining  its  general  sjnrit,  and  what  are  the
collective  resources  proper  to  it.  Though  these  subjects
may  be  said  to  belong  to  the  science  itself,  we  may  consider
them  as  belonging  to  the  method,  as  they  are  absohitely
necessary  to  direct  our  understandings  in  the  pursuit  of
this  difficult  study.

In  the  higher  order  of  sciences, — in  those  which  are  the
simplest  and  the  most  advanced, — the  philosophical  defini-
tion of  each  was  almost  sufficient  to  characterize  their  con-
dition and  general  resources,  to  which  no  doubt  could
attach.  But  the  case  is  otherwise  with  a  recent  and
extremely  complex  study,  the  very  nature  of  which  has  to
be   settled   by  laborious   discussions,  which   are   happily


INFANTILE   STATE   OF   SOCIAL   SCIENCE.  211

needless  in  regard  to  the  preceding  sciences.  In  treating
of  Biology,  we  found  it  necessary  to  dwell  upon  preparatory
explanations  which  would  have  seemed  puerile  in  any  of
the  foregoing  departments,  because  the  chief  bases  of  a
science  about  which  there  were  still  so  many  disputes  must
be  indisputably  settled  before  it  could  take  rank  in  the
positive  series.  It  is  evident  that  the  same  process  is  even
more  needful,  and  must  be  more  laborious,  in  the  case  of
the  science  of  social  development,  which  has  hitherto  had
no  character  of  positivity  at  all,  and  which  some  of  the
ablest  minds  of  our  time  sentence  never  to  have  any.  We
must  not  be  surprised  then  if,  after  apiilying  here  the
simplest  and  most  radical  ideas  of  positive  philosophy,  such
as  would  indeed  appear  trivial  in  their  formal  application
to  the  more  advanced  sciences,  the  result  should  appear  to
many,  even  among  the  enlightened,  to  constitute  too  bold
an  innovation,  though  the  conditions  may  be  no  more  than
the  barest  equivalent  of  those  which  are  admitted  in  every
other  case.

If  we  look  with  a  philosophical  eye  upon  infantile  state
the  present  state  of  social  science,  we  cannot  of  social
but  recognize  in  it  the  combination  of  all  the  science,
features  of  that  theologico-meta])hysical  infancy  which  all
the  other  sciences  have  had  to  pass  through.  The  present
condition  of  political  science  revives  before  our  eyes  the
analogy  of  what  astrology  was  to  astronomy,  alchemy  to
chemistry,  and  the  search  for  the  universal  panacea  to  the
system  of  medical  studies.  We  may,  for  our  present  pur-
pose, consider  the  theological  and  the  metaphysical  polities
together, — the  second  being  only  a  modification  of  the  first
in  its  relation  to  social  science.  Their  attributes  are  the
same,  consisting,  in  regard  to  method,  in  the  pre]>onderanee
of  imagination  over  observation  ;  and,  in  regard  to  doctrine,
in  the  exclusive  investigation  of  absolute  ideas  ;  the  result
of  both  of  which  is  an  inevitable  tendency  to  exercise  an
arbitrary  and  indefinite  action  over  phenomena  which  are
not  regarded  as  subject  to  invariable  natural  laws.  In
short,  the  general  spirit  of  all  speculation  at  that  stage  is
at  once  ideal  in  its  course,  absolute  in  its  conception,  and
arbitrary  in  its  application ;  and  these  are  unquestionably
the  prevailing  characteristics  of  social  speculation  at  present,


212  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

regarded  from  any  point  of  view  whatever.     If  we  reverse
all  the  three  aspects,  we   shall  have  precisely  the  spirit
which  must  actuate   the  formation  of  positive  sociology,
and  which  must  afterwards  direct  its  continuous  develop-
ment.    The  scientific  spirit  is  radically  distinguished  from
the  theological  and  metaphysical  by  the  steady  subordina-
tion of  the  imagination  to  observation ;  and  though  the
positive  philosophy  offers  the  vastest  and  richest  field  to
lauman  imagination,  it  restricts  it  to  di&covering  and  per-
fecting the  co-ordination  of  observed  facts,  and  the  means
of  effecting  new  researches:  and  it  is  this  habit  of  subject-
ing scientific  conceptions  to  the  facts  whose  connection  has
to  be  disclosed,  which  it  is  above  all  things  necessary  to
introduce   into    social    researches ;    for   the    observations
hitherto  made  have  been  vague  and  ill-circumscribed,  so
as  to  afford  no  adequate  foundation  for  scientific  reasoning  ;
and  they  are  usually  modified  themselves  at  the  pleasure
of    an    imagination    stimulated    by   the    most  fluctuating
jjassions.     From  their  complexity,  and  their  closer  connec-
tion with  human  passions,  political  speculations  must  be
detained  longer  than  any  others  in  this  deplorable  philo-
sophical condition,  in  which  they  are  still  involved,  while
simpler  and  less   stimulating   sciences   have   successively
obtained  emancipation  ;   but  we  must  remember  that  all
other  kinds  of  scientific  conception  have  gone  through  the
same  stage,  from  which  they  have  issued  with  the  more
difficulty  and  delay  exactly  in  proportion  to  their  complexity
and  special  nature.     It  is,  indeed,  only  in  our  own  day  that
the  more  complex  have  issued  from  that  condition  at  all,
as  we  saw  to  be  the  case  with  the  intellectual  and  moral
phenomena  of  individual  life,  which  are  still  studied  in  a
way  almost  as  anti-scientific  as  political  phenomena  them-
selves.    We  must  not,  then,  consider  that  uncertainty  and
vagueness  in  observation  are  proper  to  political  subjects.
It  is  only  that  the  same  imperfection  which  has  had  its
day  throughout  the  whole  range  of  speculation  is  here
more  intense  and  protracted ;  and  the  same  theory  which
shows  how  this  must  be  the  case  gives  us  full  assurance  of
a  philosophical  regeneration  in  this  department  of  science
analogous  to  that  which  has  taken  place  in  the  rest,  though
by  means  of  severer  intellectual  difficulty,  and  the  embar-


PROGKESS  BY  RENDERING  RELATIVE  THE  ABSOLUTE.     213

rassmeut  which  may  arise  from  coUisiou  with  the  pre-
dorainaut  passions  of  men ;  a  liability  which  cannot  but
stimulate  the  endeavours  of  real  thinkers.

If  we  contemplate  the  positive  spirit  in  its  The  relativei
relation  to  scientific  conception,  rather  than  superseiling
the  mode  of  procedure,  we  shall  find  that  ^''^  .absolute,
this  philosophy  is  distinguished  from  the  theologico-
metaphysical  by  its  tendency  to  render  relative  the  ideas
which  were  at  first  absolute.  This  inevitable  passage  from
the  absolute  to  the  relative  is  one  of  the  most  important
philosophical  results  of  each  of  the  intellectual  revolutions
which  has  carried  on  every  kind  of  speculation  from  the
theological  or  metaphysical  to  the  scientific  state.  In  a
scientific  view,  this  contrast  between  the  relative  and  the
absolute  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  decisive  manifesta-
tion of  the  antipathy  between  the  modei'n  philosophy  and
the  ancieut.  All  investigation  into  the  nature  of  beings,
and  their  first  and  final  causes,  must  always  be  absolute ;
whereas  the  study  of  the  laws  of  phenomena  must  be
relative,  since  it  supposes  a  continuous  progress  of  sj^ecu-
lation  subject  to  the  gradual  improvement  of  observation,
without  the  precise  reality  being  ever  fully  disclosed :  so
that  the  relative  character  of  scientific  conceptions  is  in-
separable from  the  true  idea  of  natural  laws,  just  as  the
chimerical  inclination  for  absolute  knowledge  accompanies
every  use  of  theological  fictions  and  metaphysical  entities.
Now,  it  is  obvious  that  the  absolute  spirit  characterizes
social  speculation  now,  wherever  it  exists,  as  the  diffei'ent
schools  are  all  agreed  in  looking  for  an  immutable  political
type,  which  makes  no  allowance  for  the  regular  modifica-
tion of  political  conceptions  according  to  the  variable  state
of  civilization.  This  absolute  spirit,  having  prevailed
through  all  social  changes,  and  their  corresponding  philo-
sophical divergences,  is  now  so  inherent  in  existing  political
science  that  it  affords,  amidst  all  its  enormous  evils,  the
only  means  of  restraining  individual  eccentricities,  and
excluding  the  influx  of  arbitrarily  variable  opinions.  Thus,
such  ^philosophers  as  have  desired  to  emancipate  them-
selves from  this  absolutism,  without  having  risen  to  the
conception  of  a  positive  social  philosophy,  have  justly
incurred  the  reproach  of   representing  political  ideas  as


214  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

uncertain  and  even  ai-bitrary  in  their  nature,  because  they
have  deprived  them  of  whatever  character  of  consistency
they  had,  without  substituting  any  other.  They  have
even  cast  a  sort  of  discredit  upon  all  philosophical  enter-
prise in  the  direction  of  jjolitical  science,  which,  losing  its
absolutism,  seemed  to  lose  its  stability,  and  therefoi'e  its
morality.  A  positive  sociology,  however,  would  put  to
flight  all  these  natural,  though  empirical  fears ;  for  all
antecedent  experience  shows  that  in  other  departments  of
natural  philosophy,  scientific  ideas  have  not  become  arbi-
trary by  becoming  relative,  but  have,  on  the  contrary,
acquii-ed  a  new  consistence  and  stability  by  being  impli-
cated in  a  system  of  relations  which  is  ever  extending  and
strengthening,  and  more  and  more  restraining  all  serious
aberration.  There  is  therefore  no  fear  of  falling  into  a
dangerous  scepticism  by  destroying  the  absolute  spirit,  if
it  is  done  in  the  natural  course  of  passing  on  towards  the
positive  state.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  is  characteristic  of
the  positive  philosophy  to  destroy  no  means  of  intellectual
co-ordination  without  substituting  one  more  effectual  and
more  extended  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  this  transition  from
the  absolute  to  the  relative  offers  the  only  existing  means
of  attaining  to  political  conceptions  that  can  gradually
secui-e  an  unanimous  and  permanent  assent.

The  importance  and  soundness  of  these  conditions  are
less  conspicuous  than  they  might  be,  on  account  of  the
too  close  connection  which,  in  social  science  more  than  any
other,  still  exists  between  theory  and  practice,  in  conse-
quence of  which  all  speculative  and  al)stract  appreciation,
however  supremely  important,  excites  only  a  feeble  interest
and  inadequate  attention.  To  show  how  this  confusion
results  from  the  imperfection  of  social  science,  as  the  most
complex  of  all,  we  must  look  at  the  existing  political  spirit
in  relation  to  its  general  application,  and  not  for  the
moment  in  relation  to  the  science  itself.  In  this  view  we
Piesniiii)tuous  ^*^^  that  the  existing  political  spirit  is  marked
character  of  by  its  disposition  to  exercise  an  illimitable
tlie  existiiij;-  action  over  the  corresponding  phenomena,
political  s])n-it.  ^g  -^  ^^g  QQ(.g  supposed  possible  to  do  in
other  depai'tments  of  philosophy.  Men  were  long  in
learning  that  Man's  jjower  of  modifying  jjhenomena  can


MODERN    POLITICAL   SPIRIl"    PRESUMPTUOUS.        215

result  only  from  his  knowledge  of  their  natural  laws ;  and
in  the  infancy  of  each  science,  they  believed  themselves
able  to  exert  an  unbounded  influence  over  the  phenomena
of  that  science.  As  this  happened  precisely  at  the  period
when  they  had  the  least  power  over  phenomena,  from
ignorance  of  their  laws,  the_y  rested  their  confidence  on
expectations  of  aid  from  supei'natural  agents,  or  mysterious
forces  supposed  to  be  inherent  in  all  that  they  saw.  The
delusion  was  protracted,  and  the  growth  of  true  science
hindered  in  proportion,  by  the  increasing  complexity  of
the  descending  sciences,  as  each  order  of  phenomena
exhibited  less  generality  than  the  last,  and  obscured  the
perception  as  to  what  the  modifying  power  of  Man  really
is.  Social  phenomena  are,  of  course,  from  their  extreme
complexity,  the  last  to  be  freed  from  this  pretension :  but
it  is  therefore  only  the  more  necessary  to  remember  that
the  pretension  existed  with  regard  to  all  the  rest,  in  their
eai'liest  stage,  and  to  anticipate  therefore  that  social  science
will,  in  its  turn,  be  emancipated  from  the  delusion.  It
still  hangs  about  the  class  of  intellectual  and  moral
phenomena ;  but  otherwise  it  is  now  confined  to  social
subjects.  There,  amidst  the  dawning  of  a  sounder  philo-
sophy, we  see  statesmen  and  jjoliticians  still  supposing
that  social  phenomena  can  be  modified  at  will,  the  human
race  having,  in  their  view,  no  spontaneous  impulsion,  but
being  always  ready  to  yield  to  any  influence  of  the  legis-
lator, spiritual  or  tempoi-al,  provided  he  is  invested  with  a
sufficient  authority.  We  see  the  theological  polity,  as
before,  moi'e  consistent  than  the  metaphysical,  explaining
the  monstrous  disproportion  between  slight  causes  and
vast  effects,  by  regarding  the  legislator  as  merely  the
organ  of  a  supernatural  and  absolute  power:  and  again,
we  see  tlie  metaphysical  school  following  the  same  course,
merely  siibstituting  for  Providence  its  unintelligible  en-
tities, and  especially  its  grand  entity,  Nature,  which  com-
prehends all  the  rest,  and  is  evidently  only  an  absti-act
deterioration  of  the  theological  principle.  Goiag  further
than  the  theological  school  in  its  disdain  of  the  subjection
of  effects  to  causes,  it  escapes  from  difficulty  by  attributing
observed  events  to  chance,  and  sometimes,  when  that  method
is  too  obviously  absurd,  exaggerating  ridiculously  the  in-


21G  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

fluence  of  the  individual  mind  upon  the  course  of  human
affairs.  The  result  is  the  same  in  both  cases.  It  re]>re-
sents  the  social  action  of  Man  to  he  indefinite  and  arlii-
trary,  as  was  once  thought  in  regard  to  hiological.  chemical,
physical,  and  even  asti-onomical  phenomena,  in  the  earlier
stages  of  their  respective  sciences.  It  is  easy  to  see  that
true  political  science  would  be  unacceptable,  because  it
must  impose  limits  on  political  action,  by  dissipating  for
ever  the  pretension  of  governing  at  will  this  class  of
phenomena,  and  withdrawing  them  from  human  or  super-
human caprice.  In  close  connection  with  the  tendency  to
absolute  conceptions,  we  must  recognize  in  this  delusion
the  chief  intellectual  cause  of  the  social  disturbance  which
now  exists ;  for  the  human  race  finds  itself  delivered  over,
without  logical  protection,  to  the  ill-regulated  experimenta-
tion of  the  various  political  schools,  each  one  of  which
strives  to  set  up,  for  all  future  time,  its  own  immutable
type  of  government.  We  have  seen  what  are  the  chaotic
results  of  such  a  strife :  and  we  shall  find  that  there  is  no
chance  of  order  and  agreement  but  in  subjecting  social
phenomena,  like  all  others,  to  invariable  natural  laws,
which  shall,  as  a  whole,  prescribe  for  each  period,  with
entire  certainty,  the  limits  and  character  of  j^olitical  ac-
tion : — in  other  words,  introducing  into  the  study  of  social
phenomena  the  same  positive  sj^irit  which  has  regenerated
every  other  branch  of  human  speculation.  Such  a  pro-
cedure is  the  true  scientific  basis  of  human  dignity  ;  as  the
chief  tendencies  of  man's  nature  thus  acquire  a  solemn
character  of  authority  which  must  be  always  respected  by
rational  legislation ;  whereas  the  existing  belief  in  the  in-
definite power  of  political  combinations,  which  seems  at
first  to  exalt  the  imjjortance  of  Man,  issues  in  attril)uting
to  him  a  sort  of  social  automatism  passively  directed  by
some  supremacy  of  either  Providence  or  the  human  ruler.
I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  the  central  difficulty  in
the  task  of  regenerating  political  science  is  to  rectify  such
an  error  of  conception,  at  a  time  when  our  prevailing
intellectual  habits  render  it  difficult  to  seize  social  con-
ceptions in  any  other  than  their  practical  aspect,  and
when  their  scientific,  and  yet  more,  their  logical  relations
are  obscured  by  the  prepossessions  of  the  general  mind.


PREVISION    OF   SOCIAL   PHENOMENA.  217

The  last  of  the  preliminary  considerations  Prevision  of
that  we  have  to  review  is  that  of  the  scientific  social  pheno-
prevision  of  phenomena,  which,  as  the  test  "leiia.
of  true  science,  includes  all  the  rest.  We  have  to  con-
template social  phenomena  as  suscej>tible  of  prevision,  like
all  other  classes,  within  the  limits  of  exactness  compatible
with  their  higher  complexity.  Comprehending  the  three
characteristics  of  political  science  which  we  have  been
examining,  prevision  of  social  phenomena  supjjoses  first,
that  we  have  abandoned  the  region  of  metaphysical  ideali-
ties, to  assume  the  ground  of  observed  realities  by  a
systematic  subordination  of  imagination  to  observation  ;
secondly,  that  political  concej^tions  have  ceased  to  be  abso-
lute, and  have  become  relative  to  the  variable  state  of
civilization,  so  that  theories,  following  the  natural  course
of  facts,  may  admit  of  our  foreseeing  them ;  and,  thirdly,
that  permanent  political  action  is  limited  by  determinate
laws,  since,  if  social  events  were  always  exposed  to  dis-
turbance by  the  accidental  intervention  of  tlie  legislator,
human  or  divine,  no  scientific  prevision  of  them  would  be
possible.  Thus,  we  may  concentrate  the  conditions  of
the  spirit  of  positive  social  philosophy  on  this  one  great
attribute  of  scientific  prevision.  This  concentration  is  all
the  more  apt  for  the  purpose  of  our  inquiry,  because  there
is  no  other  view  in  which  the  new  social  philosophy  is  so
clearly  distinguished  from  the  old.  Events  ordered  by  a
supernatural  will  may  leave  room  for  a  supposition  of
revelation  ;  but  the  very  thought  of  prevision  in  that  case
is  sacrilegious :  and  the  case  is  essentially  the  same  when
the  direction  ©f  events  is  assigned  to  metaphysical  entities,
except  that  it  leaves  the  chance  of  revelation ;  the  exist-
ence of  which  chance  shows  that  the  metaphysical  concep-
tion is  a  mere  modification  of  the  theological.  The  old
conceptions  may  evidently  be  applied  to  explain  opposite
facts  equally  well ;  and  they  can  never  alford  the  slightest
indication  of  those  which  are  yet  future.  And,  if  it  be
objected  that,  at  all  times,  a  great  number  of  secondary
political  facts  have  been  considered  susce])tible  of  prevision,
this  only  proves  that  the  old  philosophy  has  never  been
strictly  universal,  but  has  always  been  tempered  by  an
admixture    of   feeble    and   imperfect   positivism,  without


218  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

more  or  less  of  wliieli  society  could  not  have  held  on  its
course.  This  admixture  has,  however,  been  hitherto  in-
sufficient to  allow  anything  worthy  the  name  of  prevision,
— anything  more  than  a  sort  of  popular  forecast  of  some
secondary  and  partial  matters, — never  rising  above  an  un-
certain and  rough  empiricism,  which  might  be  of  some
provisional  use,  but  could  not  in  any  degree  suj^ply  the
need  of  a  true  political  philosophy.

Having  now  ascertained  the  fundamental  position  of  the
j)roblems  of  political  philosophy,  and  thus  obtained  guid-
ance as  to  the  scientific  aim  to  be  attained,  the  next  step  is
to  exhibit  the  general  spirit  of  Social  Physics,  whose  con-
ditions we  have  been  deciding.

_  .  .,  .„  .  ,  The  philosophical  principle  of  the  science
Spnit  of  Social   ■,     ■        A     •  •   i      i  i  •     j.  j.

«r.;ar.«a  being  that  social  phenomena  ai'e  subiect  to

ocience.  "  _     .1    .         „        .        ,        •' .  .

natural  laws,  admitting  of  rational  prevision,

we  have  to  ascertain  what  is  the  precise  subject,  and  what
the  peculiar  character  of  those  laws.  The  distinction  be-
tween the  Statical  and  Dynamical  conditions  of  the  subject
must  be  extended  to  social  science ;  and  I  shall  treat  of  the
conditions  of  social  existence  as,  in  biology,  I  treated  of
organization  under  the  head  of  anatomy  ;  and  then  of  the
laws  of  social  movement,  as  in  biology  of  those  of  life,
under  the  head  of  physiology.  This  division,  necessary  for
exploratory  purposes,  must  not  be  stretched  beyond  that
use :  and,  as  we  saw  in  Biology,  that  the  distinction  be-
comes weaker  with  the  advance  of  science,  so  shall  we  see
that  when  the  science  of  social  physics  is  fully  constituted,
this  division  will  remain  for  analytical  purposes,  but  not
as  a  real  separation  of  the  science  into  two  parts.  The
distinction  is  not  between  two  classes  of  facts,  but  between
two  aspects  of  a  theory.  It  corresponds  with  the  double
conception  of  order  and  progress :  for  order  consists  (in  a
positive  sense)  in  a  permanent  harmony  among  the  condi-
tions of  social  existence ;  and  progress  consists  in  social
development ;  and  the  conditions  in  the  one  case,  and
the  laws  of  movement  in  the  other,  constitute  the  statics
and  dynamics  of  social  physics. — And  here  we  find  again
the  constant  relation  ])etween  the  science  and  the  art, — the
theory  and  the  pra(;tice.  A  science  which  proposes  a  posi-
tive study  of  the  laws  of  order  and  of  progress  cannot  be


STATICAL   STUDY   OF   SOCIOLOGY.  219

charsjed  witli  spec-ulative  rashness  by  practical  men  of  any
intelligence,  since  it  offers  the  only  rational  basis  for  the
practical  means  of  satisfying  the  needs  of  society,  as  to
order  and  progress ;  and  the  correspondence  in  this  ease
will  be  found  to  be  analogous  to  that  which  we  have  seen
to  exist  between  biological  science  and  the  arts  which
relate  to  it, — the  medical  art  especially. — One  view  of  tlie
deepest  interest  in  this  connection  is  that  tlie  ideas  of
order  and  progress  which  are  in  perpetual  conflict  in  existing
society,  occasioning  infinite  disturbance,  are  thus  reconciled,
and  made  necessary  to  each  other,  becoming  as  truly  insepar-
able as  the  ideas  of  organization  and  life  in  tlie  individual
being.  The  further  we  go  in  the  study  of  the  conditions  of
liuman  society,  the  more  clearly  will  the  organizing  and  pro-
gressive spirit  of  the  positive  pliilosophy  become  manifest.

The  statical  study  of  sociology  consists  in  „,  .  ,  ,  ,
the  investigation  of  the  laws  of  action  and
reaction  of  the  different  parts  of  the  social  system, — apart,
for  the  occasion,  from  the  fundamental  movement  which
is  always  gradiially  modifying  them.  In  this  view,  socio-
logical prevision,  founded  upon  the  exact  general  knowledge
of  those  relations,  acts  by  judging  by  each  other  the
various  statical  indications  of  each  mode  of  social  existence,
in  conformity  with  direct  observation, — just  as  is  done
daily  in  the  case  of  anatomy.  This  view  condemns  the
existing  philosophical  pi'actice  of  contemplating  social
elements  separately,  as  if  they  had  an  independent
existence ;  and  it  leads  us  to  regard  them  as  in  mutual
relation,  and  forming  a  whole  which  com})els  us  to  treat
them  in  combination.  By  this  method,  not  only  are
we  fxirnished  with  the  only  possible  basis  for  the  study  of
social  movement,  but  we  are  put  in  possession  of  an  impor-
tant aid  to  direct  observation  ;  since  many  social  elements
which  cannot  be  investigated  by  immediate  observation  may
be  estimated  by  their  scientific  relation  to  others  already
Icnown.  When  we  have  a  scientific  knowledge  of  the  in-
terior relation  of  the  parts  of  any  science  or  art ;  and
again,  of  the  relations  of  the  sciences  to  each  other:  and
again,  of  the  relations  of  arts  to  their  respective  sciences,
the  observation  of  certain  portions  of  the  scheme  enables
us  to  pronounce  on  the  state  of  other  portions,  with  a  true


220  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

philosophical  security.  The  case  is  the  same  when,  instead  of

study iui,^  the  collective  social  phenomena  of  a  single  nation,

we   include  in  the  study  those  of  contemporary  nations,

whose  reciprocal  influence  cannot  be  disputed,  though  it  is

much  reduced  in  modei'u  times,  and,  as  in  the  instance  of

western  Europe  and  eastern  Asia,  apparently  almost  effaced.

^,    .  ,  ,-,        .         The    only   essential   case   in    which    this
Social  Or&ani-     n       ^  j.  i         i   a-  •  •  ■      j

zation  fundamental    relation    is    misconceived    or

neglected  is  that  "which  is  the  most  im-
jiortant  of  all, — involving,  as  it  does,  social  organization,
properly  so  called.  The  theory  of  social  organization  is
still  conceived  of  as  absolute  and  isolated,  independent
altogether  of  the  general  analysis  of  the  corresponding
civilization,  of  which  it  can,  in  fact,  constitute  only  one  of
the  principal  elements.  This  vice  is  chargeable  in  an
almost  equal  degree  upon  the  most  opposite  political
schools,  which  agree  in  abstract  discussions  of  political
systems,  without  thinking  of  the  coexisting  state  of  civiliza-
tion, and  usually  conclude  with  makiug  their  immutable
political  type  coincide  with  an  infantile  state  of  human
development.  If  we  ascend  to  the  philosophical  source  of
this  error,  we  shall  find  it,  I  thiulc,  in  the  great  theological
dogma  of  the  Fall  of  Man.  This  fundamental  dogma,
which  reappears,  in  one  form  or  another,  in  all  religions,
and  which  is  supported  in  its  intellectual  influence  by  the
natural  propensity  of  men  to  admire  the  past,  tends,
directly  and  necessarily,  to  make  the  continuous  deteriora-
tion of  society  coincide  with  the  extension  of  civilization.
We  have  noticed  before  how,  when  it  passes  from  the
theological  into  the  metaphysical  state,  this  dogma  takes
the  form  of  the  celebrated  hypothesis  of  a  chimerical  state
of  nature,  superior  to  the  social  state,  and  the  more
remote,  the  further  we  advance  in  civilization.  We  cannot
fail  to  perceive  the  extreme  seriousness,  in  a  political  as
well  as  a  philosoj)hical  sense,  of  an  eri'or  so  completely  in-
corporated with  existing  doctrines,  and  so  deeply  in-
fluencing, in  an  unconscious  way,  our  collective  social
speculations, — the  more  disastrously  perhaps  for  not  being
expressly  maintfiined  as  a  general  principle. — If  it  were  so
]n'esented,  it  must  immediately  give  way  before  sound
philosophical  discussion ;  for  it  is  in  direct  contradiction


SOCIAL    ORGANIZATION.  221

to  many  ideas  in  political  philosophy  which,  without  liaviug
attained  any  scientific  consistency,  are  obtaining  some  in-
tellectual ascendancy,  through  the  natural  course  of  events,
or  the  expansion  of  the  general  mind.  For  instance,  all
enlightened  political  writers  acknowledge  more  or  less
mutual  relation  between  political  institutions ;  and  this  is
the  first  direct  step  towards  the  rational  conception  of  the
agreement  of  the  special  system  of  institutions  with  the
total  system  of  civilization.  We  now  see  the  Political  and
best  thinkers  admitting  a  constant  mutual  social  concur-
connection  between  the  political  and  the  civil  lence.
power :  which  means,  in  scientific  language,  that  pre-
ponderating social  forces  always  end  in  assuming  the
dii'ection  of  society.  Such  pai'tial  advances  towards  a
right  view, — such  fortunate  feeling  after  the  right  path,
must  not,  however,  induce  us  to  relax  in  our  requirements
of  a  true  philosophical  conception  of  that  general  social
agreement  which  can  alone  constitute  organization.  Desul-
tory indications,  more  literary  than  scientific,  can  never
supply  the  place  of  a  strict  philosophical  doctrine,  as  we
may  see  from  the  fact  that,  from  Aristotle  downwards,
(and  even  from  an  earlier  period,)  the  greater  number  of
philosophers  have  constantly  reproduced  the  famous
aphorism  of  the  necessary  subordination  of  laws  to
manners,  without  this  germ  of  sound  philosophy  having
had  any  eifect  on  the  general  habit  of  regarding  institu-
tions as  independent  of  the  coexisting  state  of  civiliza-
tion,— however  strange  it  may  seem  that  such  a  contradic-
tion should  live  through  twenty  centuries.  This  is,  how-
ever, the  natural  course  with  intellectual  principles  and
philosophical  opinions,  as  well  as  with  social  manners  and
political  institutions.  When  once  they  have  obtained
possession  of  men's  minds,  they  live  on,  notwithstanding
their  admitted  impotence  and  inconvenience,  giving  occa-
sion to  more  and  more  serious  inconsistencies,  till  the
exj^ansion  of  human  reason  originates  new  jirinciples,  of
equivalent  generality  and  superior  rationality.  We  must
not  therefore  take  for  more  than  their  worth  the  desultorv
attempts  that  we  see  made  in  the  right  direction,  but  must
insist  on  the  princijde  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  everv
scheme  of  social  organization, — the  necessary  participation


222  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

of  the  collective  political  regime  in  the  universal  consensus
of  the  social  body.

The  scientific  principle  of  the  relation  between  the
political  and  the  social  condition  is  simply  this ; — that
there  must  always  be  a  spontaneous  harmony  lietween  the
whole  and  the  parts  of  the  social  system,  the  elements  of
which  must  inevitably  be,  sooner  or  later,  combined  in  a
mode  entirely  conformable  to  their  nature.  It  is  evident
that  not  only  must  political  institutions  and  social  manners
on  the  one  hand,  and  manners  and  ideas  on  the  other,  be
always  mutually  connected  ;  but,  further,  that  this  con-
solidated wdiole  must  be  always  connected,  by  its  nature,
with  the  corresponding  state  of  the  integral  development
of  humanity,  considered  in  all  its  aspects,  of  intellectual,
moral,  and  physical  activity :  and  the  only  object  of  any
political  system  whatever,  temporal  or  spiritual,  is  to
regulate  the  spontaneous  expansion  so  as  best  to  direct  it
towards  its  determinate  end.  Even  during  revolutionary
periods,  when  the  harmony  appears  furthest  from  being
duly  realized,  it  still  exists  :  for  without  it  there  would  be
a  total  dissolution  of  the  social  organism.  During  those
exceptional  seasons,  the  political  rpgime  is  still,  in  the  long
run,  in  conformity  with  the  coiTesponding  state  of  civiliza-
tion, as  the  disturbances  which  are  manifest  in  the  one
proceed  from  equivalent  derangements  in  the  other.  It  is
observable  that  when  the  popular  theory  attributes  to  the
legislator  the  permanent  power  of  infringing  the  harmony
we  are  speaking  of,  it  supposes  him  to  be  armed  with  a
sufficient  authority.  But  every  social  power,  whether
called  authority  or  anything  else,  is  constituted  by  a  cor-
responding assent,  spontaneous  or  deliberate,  explicit  or
implicit,  of  various  individual  wills,  resolved,  from  cei'tain
preparatory  convictions,  to  concur  in  a  common  action,  of
which  this  power  is  first  the  organ,  and  then  the  regulator.
Thus,  authority  is  derived  from  concurrence,  and  not  con-
currence from  authority,  (setting  aside  the  necessary  re-
action :)  so  that  no  great  power  can  arise  otherwise  than
from  the  strongly  prevalent  disposition  of  the  society  in
which  it  exists :  and  when  there  is  no  strong  prepon-
derance, such  powers  as  exist  are  weak  accordingly :  and
the  more  extensive  the  society,  the  more  irresistible  is  the


POLITICAL   AND    SOCIAL    RELATION.  223

correspondence.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  denying^
the  influence  which,  by  a  necessary  reaction,  the  political
system,  as  a  whole,  exercises  over  the  general  system  of
civilization,  and  which  is  so  often  exhibited  in  the  action,
fortunate  or  disastrous,  of  institutions,  measures,  or  purely
political  events,  even  upon  the  course  of  the  sciences  and
arts,  in  all  ages  of  society,  and  especially  the  earliest.  We
need  not  dwell  on  this ;  for  no  one  denies  it.  The  common
error,  indeed,  is  to  exaggerate  it,  so  as  to  place  the  reac-
tion before  the  primary  action.  It  is  evident,  considering
their  scientific  relation  to  each  other,  that  both  concur  in
creating  that  fundamental  agreement  of  the  social  organism
which  I  propose  to  set  forth  in  a  brief  manner,  as  the
philosophical  principle  of  statical  sociology.  We  shall
have  to  advert  repeatedly  to  the  subject  of  the  general
correspondence  between  the  political  regime  and  the  con-
temporary state  of  civilization,  in  connection  with  the
question  of  the  necessary  limits  of  political  action,  and  in
the  chapter  which  I  must  devote  to  social  statics  :  but  I
did  not  think  fit  to  wait  for  these  explanations  before
jiointing  out  that  the  political  system  ought  always  to  be
regarded  as  relative.  The  relative  point  of  view,  substi-
tuted for  the  absolute  tendency  of  the  ordinary  theories,
certainly  constitutes  the  chief  scientific  character  of  the
positive  philosophy  in  its  political  application.  If,  on  the
one  hand,  the  conception  of  this  connection  between
government  and  civilization  presents  all  ideas  of  political
good  or  evil  as  necessarily  relative  and  variable  ( which  is
quite  another  thing  than  being  arbitrary),  ou  the  other
hand,  it  provides  a  rational  basis  for  a  positive  theory  of
the  spontaneous  order  of  human  society,  already  vaguely
perceived,  in  regard  to  some  minor  relations,  by  that  part
of  the  metaphysical  polity  which  we  call  political  economy  ;
for,  if  the  value  of  any  political  system  can  consist  in
nothing  but  its  harmony  with  the  corresponding  social
state,  it  follows  that  in  the  natural  course  of  events,  and
in  the  absence  of  intervention,  such  a  harmony  must
necessarily  be  established.

There   are   two    principal    considerations  Interconnection
which  induce  me  to   insist  on  this  elemen-  of  the  social
tary  idea  of  the  radical  consensus  proper  to  organism.


224  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

the  social  organism  :  first,  the  extreme  philosophical  im-
portance of  this  master-thought  of  social  statics,  which
must,  from  its  nature,  constitute  the  rational  basis  of  any
new  political  philosophy  ;  and,  secondly,  in  an  accessory
way,  that  dynamical  considerations  of  sociology  must
prevail  throughout  the  rest  of  this  work,  as  being  at  pre-
sent more  interesting,  and  therefore  better  understood ;
and  it  is,  on  that  account,  the  more  necessary  to  charac-
terize now  the  general  spirit  of  social  statics,  which  will
henceforth  be  treated  only  in  an  indirect  aiid  implicit  way.
As  all  artificial  and  voluntary  order  is  simply  a  prolonga-
tion of  the  natural  and  involuntary  order  to  which  all
human  society  tends,  every  rational  political  institution
must  rest  upon  an  exact  preparatory  analysis  of  corre-
sponding spontaneous  tendencies,  which  alone  can  furnish
a  sufiiciently  solid  basis.  In  brief,  it  is  our  business  to
contemplate  order,  that  we  may  perfect  it ;  and  not  to
create  it ;  which  would  be  impossible.  In  a  scientific  view,
this  master-thought  of  universal  social  interconnection  be-
comes the  consequence  and  complement  of  a  fundamental
idea  established,  in  our  view  of  biology,  as  eminently
proper  to  the  study  of  living  bodies.  Not  that  this  idea
of  interconnection  is  pecuHar  to  that  study :  it  is  neces-
sarily common  to  all  phenomena;  but  amidst  immense
differences  in  intensity  and  variety,  and  therefore  in  philo-
sophical importance.  It  is,  in  fact,  true  that  wherever
there  is  any  system  whatever,  a  certain  interconnection
must  exist.  The  purely  mechanical  phenomena  of  astro-
nomy offer  the  first  suggestion  of  it ;  for  the  perturbations
of  one  planet  may  sensibly  affect  another,  through  a  modi-
fied gravitation.  But  the  relation  becomes  closer  and  moi'e
marked  in  proportion  to  the  complexity  and  diminished
genei-ality  of  the  phenomena,  and  thus,  it  is  in  organic
systems  that  we  must  look  for  the  fullest  mutual  connec-
tion. Hitherto,  it  had  been  merely  an  accessory  idea ;  but
then  it  becomes  the  basis  of  positive  conceptions  ;  and  it
becomes  more  marked,  the  more  compound  are  the
organisms,  and  the  more  complex  the  phenomena  in  ques-
tion,— the  animal  interconnection  being  more  complete
than  the  vegetable,  and  the  human  more  than  the  brute ;
the  nervous  system  being  the  chief  seat  of  the  biological


ASPECTS    OF   SOCIETY   INTERCOXXECTED.  225

interconnection.  The  idea  must  therefore  be  scientifically
preponderant  in  social  physics,  even  more  than  in  biology,
where  it  is  so  decisively  recognized  by  the  best  order  of
students.  But  the  existing  political  jDhilosophy  suj^poses
the  absence  of  any  such  interconnection  among  the  aspects
of  society :  and  it  is  this  which  has  rendered  it  necessary
for  me  now  to  establish  the  point, — leaving  the  illustra-
tion of  it  to  a  future  portion  of  the  volume.  Its  con-
sideration is,  in  fact,  as  indispensable  in  assigning  its
encyclopsedic  rank  to  social  science  as  we  befoi-e  saw  it  to
be  in  instituting  Social  Physics  a  science  at  all.

It  follows  from  this  attribute  that  there  can  be  no
scientific  study  of  society,  either  in  its  conditions  or  its
movements,  if  it  is  separated  into  jDortions,  and  its  divi-
sions are  studied  apart.  I  have  already  remarked  upou
this,  in  regard  to  what  is  called  political  economy.  Mate-
rials may  be  furnished  by  the  observation  of  different
departments  ;  and  such  observation  may  be  necessary  for
that  oliject:  biat  it  cannot  be  called  science.  The  methodi-
cal division  of  studies  Avhich  takes  place  in  the  simple
inorganic  sciences  is  thoroughly  irrational  in  the  recent
and  complex  science  of  society,  and  can  produce  no  results.
The  day  may  come  when  some  sort  of  subdivision  may  be
practicable  and  desiralile ;  but  it  is  impossible  for  us  uoav
to  anticipate  what  the  princij:)le  of  distribution  may  be  ;
for  the  principle  itself  must  arise  from  the  development  of
the  science ;  and  that  development  can  take  place  no  other-
wise than  by  our  formation  of  the  science  as  a  whole.  The
complete  body  will  indicate  for  itself,  at  the  right  season,
the  particular  points  which  need  investigation ;  and  then
will  be  the  time  for  such  special  study  as  may  be  required.
By  any  other  method  of  proceeding,  we  shall  only  find
ourselves  encumbered  with  special  discussions,  badly  insti-
tuted, worse  pursued,  and  accomplishing  no  other  purpose
than  that  of  impeding  the  formation  of  real  science.  It  is
no  easy  matter  to  study  social  phenomena  in  the  only
right  way, — viewing  each  element  in  the  light  of  the  whole
system.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  exercise  such  vigilance  as
that  no  one  of  the  number  of  contemporary  aspects  shall
be  lost  sight  of.  But  it  is  the  I'ight  and  the  only  way  ;
and  we   may  perceive  in  it  a  clear  suggestion  that  this

II.  Q


226  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

lofty  study  should  be  reserved  for  the  highest  order  of
scientific  minds,  better  prepared  than  others,  by  wise
educational  discipline,  for  sustained  speculative  efforts,
aided  by  an  habitual  subordination  of  the  passions  to  the
reason.  There  is  no  need  to  draw  out  any  lengthened
comparison  between  this  state  of  things  as  it  should  be
and  that  Avhich  is.  And  no  existing  degree  of  social  dis-
turbance can  surprise  us  when  we  consider  how  intellectual
anarchy  is  at  the  bottom  of  such  disturbance,  and  see  how
anarchical  our  intellectual  condition  appears  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  principle  I  have  laid  down.

Before  we  go  on  to  the  subject  of  social
tical  studv  "  dynamics,  I  will  just  remark  that  the  promi-
nent interconnection  we  have  been  consider-
ing prescribes  a  procedure  in  organic  studies  different
from  that  which  suits  inorganic.  The  metaphysicians
announce  as  an  aphorism  that  we  should  always,  in  every
kind  of  study,  proceed  from  the  simple  to  the  compound  :
whereas,  it  appears  most  rational  to  suppose  that  we
should  follow  that  or  the  reverse  method,  as  may  best  suit
our  subject.  There  can  be  no  absolute  merit  in  the  method
enjoined,  apart  from  its  suitableness.  The  rule  should
rather  be  (and  there  jjrobably  was  a  time  when  the  two
rules  were  one)  that  we  must  proceed  from  the  more
known  to  the  less.  Now,  in  the  inorganic  sciences,  the
elements  are  much  better  known  to  us  than  the  whole
which  they  constitute :  so  that  in  that  case  we  must  pro-
ceed from  the  simple  to  the  compound.  But  the  reverse
method  is  necessary  in  the  study  of  Man  and  of  Society ;
Man  and  Society  as  a  whole  being  better  known  to  us,  and
more  accessible  subjects  of  study,  than  the  parts  which
constitute  them.  In  exploring  the  imiverse,  it  is  as  a
Avhole  that  it  is  inaccessible  to  us  ;  whereas,  in  investi-
gating Man  or  Society,  our  difficulty  is  in  penetrating  the
details.  We  have  seen,  in  our  survey  of  biology,  that  the
general  idea  of  animal  nature  is  more  distinct  to  our
minds  than  the  sim])ler  notion  of  vegetable  nature  ;  and
that  man  is  the  biological  unity  ;  the  idea  of  Man  being
at  once  the  most  compound,  and  the  starting-point  of
speculation  in  regard  to  vital  existence.  Thus,  if  we  com-
pare the  two  halves  of  natural  2)hilosophy,  we  shall  find


DYNAMICAL    STUDY    OF   SOCIAL    PHYSICS.  227

that  in  the  one  case  it  is  the  last  degree  of  composition,
and,  in  the  other,  the  last  degree  of  simplicity,  that  is
beyond  the  scope  of  our  research.  As  for  tlae  rest,  it  may
obviate  some  danger  of  idle  discussions  to  say  that  the
positive  philosojihy,  subordinating  all  fancies  to  reality,
excludes  logical  controversies  about  the  absolute  value  of
this  or  that  method,  apart  from  its  scientific  ajiplicatiou.
The  only  ground  of  preference  being  the  superior  adapta-
tion of  any  means  to  the  proposed  end,  this  philosophy
may,  without  any  inconsistency,  change  its  order  of  pro-
ceeding when  the  one  first  tried  is  found  to  be  inferior  to
its  converse: — a  discovery  of  which  there  is  no  fear  in
regard  to  the  question  we  have  now  been  examining.

Passing   on   from    statical    to    dynamical
sociology,  we  will  contemplate  the  philoso-  tu'l'^""*^"

phical  conception  which  should  govern  our
study  of  the  movement  of  society.  Part  of  this  subject  is
already  despatched,  from  the  explanations  made  m  con-
nection with  statics  having  simplified  the  chief  difficulties
of  the  case.  And  social  dynamics  will  be  so  prominent
throughout  the  rest  of  this  work,  that  I  may  reduce  within
very  small  compass  what  I  have  to  say  now  under  that
head.

Though  the  statical  view  of  society  is  the  basis  of  socio-
logy, the  dynamical  view  is  not  only  the  more  interesting
of  the  two,  but  the  more  marked  in  its  philosophical  cha-
racter, from  its  being  more  distinguished  from  biology  by
the  master-thought  of  continuous  progress,  or  rather,  of
the  gradual  development  of  humanity.  If  I  were  writing
a  methodical  treatise  on  political  philosophy,  it  would  be
necessary  to  offer  a  preliminary  analysis  of  the  individual
impulsions  which  make  up  the  progressive  force  of  the
human  race,  by  referring  them  to  that  instinct  Avhich  results
from  the  concurrence  of  all  our  natural  tendencies,  and
which  urges  man  to  develope  the  whole  of  his  life,  physical,
moral,  and  intellectual,  as  far  as  his  circumstances  allow.
But  this  view  is  admitted  by  all  enlightened  philosojihers  ;
so  that  I  must  proceed  at  once  to  consider  the  continuous
succession  of  human  development,  regarded  in  the  whole
race,  as  if  humanity  were  one.  For  clearness,  we  may  take
advantage  of  Condorcet's  device  of  supposing  a  single  nation


228  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

to  which  we  may  refer  all  the  consecutive  social  modifica-
tions actually  witnessed  among  distinct  peoples.  This
rational  fiction  is  nearer  the  reality  than  we  are  accustomed
to  suppose ;  for,  in  a  political  view,  the  true  successors  of
such  or  such  a  people  are  certainly  those  who,  taking  up
and  carrying  out  their  primitive  endeavours,  have  pro-
longed their  social  j^rogress,  whatever  may  be  the  soil
which  they  inhabit,  or  even  the  race  from  which  they
spring.  In  brief,  it  is  political  continuity  which  regulates
sociological  succession,  though  the  having  a  common
country  must  usually  aft'ect  this  continuity  in  a  high
degree.  As  a  scientific  artifice  merely,  however,  I  shall
employ  this  hypothesis,  and  on  the  ground  of  its  manifest
utility.

The  true  general  spirit  of  social  dynamics
^°,?f'?.,„,-f,.  then  consists  in  conceiving  of  each  of  these
consecutive  social  states  as  the  necessary
result  of  the  preceding,  and  the  indispensable  mover  of  the
following,  according  to  the  axiom  of  Leibnitz, — the  present
is  big  ^vitli  the  fnture.  In  this  view,  the  object  of  science  is
to  discover  the  laws  which  govern  this  continuity,  and  the
aggregate  of  which  determines  the  course  of  human  develop-
ment. In  short,  social  dynamics  studies  the  laws  of  suc-
cession, while  social  statics  inquires  into  those  of  co-
existence ;  so  that  the  use  of  the  first  is  to  furnish  the  true
theory  of  progress  to  political  practice,  while  the  second
performs  the  same  service  in  regard  to  order  ;  and  this
suitability  to  the  needs  of  modern  society  is  a  strong
confirmation  of  the  philosophical  character  of  such  a
combination.

If  the  existence  of  sociological  laws  has

„!+'l,"nTio„'-"^  been  established  in  the  more  difiicult  and
ntiiuitii  i(i\v.s.  .  PI  J      •      1  T*   •

uncertain  case  or  the  statical  condition,  we
may  assume  that  they  will  not  be  questioned  in  the  dyna-
mical province.  In  all  times  and  places,  the  oi'diiiary
c  nirse  of  even  our  brief  individual  life  has  disclosed  certain
remarkable  modifications  which  have  occurred,  in  various
ways,  in  the  social  state  ;  and  all  the  most  ancient  repre-
sentations of  human  life  bear  unconscious  and  most  interest-
ing testimony  to  this,  apart  from  all  systematic  estimate  of
the  fact.     Now  it  is  the  slow,  continuoxis  accumulation  of


SOCIAL  CONTINUITY  THE  RESULT  OF  NATURAL  LAWS.    229

these  successive  changes  which  gradually  constitutes  the
social  movement,  whose  steps  are  ordinarily  marked  by
generations,  as  the  most  appreciable  elementary  variations
are  wrought  by  the  constant  renewal  of  adults.  At  a  time
when  the  average  rapidity  of  this  progression  seems  to  all
eyes  to  be  remarkably  accelerated,  the  reality  of  the  move-
ment cannot  be  disputed,  even  by  those  who  most  abhor  it.
The  only  question  is  about  the  constant  subjection  of  these
great  dynamical  phenomena  to  invariable  natural  laws,  a
I^roposition  about  which  there  is  no  question  to  any  one
who  takes  his  stand  on  positive  philosophy.  It  is  easy  how-
ever to  establish,  from  any  jjoint  of  view,  that  the  successive
modifications  of  society  have  always  taken  place  in  a  deter-
minate order,  the  rational  explanation  of  which  is  already
jDOssible  in  so  many  cases  that  we  may  confidently  hope  to
recognize  it  ultimately  in  all  the  rest.  So  remarkable  is
the  steadiness  of  this  order,  moreover,  that  it  exhibits  an
exact  parallelism  of  development  among  distinct  and  inde-
pendent populations,  as  we  shall  see  when  we  come  to  the
historical  portion  of  this  volume.  Since,  then,  the  existence
of  the  social  movement  is  unquestionable,  on  the  one  hand,
and,  on  the  other,  the  succession  of  social  states  is  never
arbitrary,  we  cannot  but  regard  this  continuous  pheno-
menon as  subject  to  natural  laws  as  positive  as  those  which
govern  all  other  phenomena,  though  more  complex.  There
is  in  fact  no  intellectual  alternative ;  and  thus  it  is  evident
that  it  is  on  the  ground  of  social  science  that  the  great
conflict  must  soon  terminate  which  has  gone  on  for  three
centuries  between  the  positive  and  the  theologico-metaphy-
sical  spirit.  Banished  for  ever  from  all  other  classes  of
speculation,  in  jirinciple  at  least,  the  old  philosophies  now
prevail  in  social  science  alone ;  and  it  is  from  this  domain
that  they  have  to  be  excluded,  by  the  conception  of  the
social  movement  being  subject  to  invariable  natural  laws,
instead  of  to  any  will  whatever.

Though  the  fundamental  laws  of  social  interconnection
are  especially  verified  in  this  condition  of  movement,  and
though  there  is  a  necessary  unity  in  this  phenomenon,  it
may  be  usefully  applied,  for  preparatory  purposes,  to  the
separate  elementary  aspects  of  human  existence,  physical,
moral,   intellectual   and,  finally,   political, — their  mutual


230  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

relation  being  kept  in  view.  Now,  in  whichever  of  these
ways  we  regard,  as  a  whole,  the  movement  of  humanity,
from  the  eai-liest  j^eriods  till  now,  we  shall  find  that  the
various  steps  are  connected  in  a  determinate  order  ;  as  we
shall  hereafter  see,  when  we  investigate  the  laws  of  this
succession.  I  need  refer  here  only  to  the  intellectual  evolu-
tion, which  is  the  most  distinct  and  unquestionable  of  all,
as  it  has  been  the  least  impeded  and  most  advanced  of
any,  and  has  therefore  been  usually  taken  for  guidance.
The  chief  pai't  of  this  evolution,  and  that  which  has  most
influenced  the  general  progression,  is  no  doubt  the  develop-
ment of  the  scientific  spirit,  frcmi  the  primitive  labours  of
such  philoso^ihers  as  Thales  and  Pythagoras  to  those  of
men  like  Lagrange  and  Bichat.  Now,  no  enlightened  man
can  doubt  that,  in  this  long  succession  of  efforts  and  dis-
coveries, the  human  mind  has  pursued  a  determinate
course,  the  exact  preparatory  knowledge  of  which  might
have  allowed  a  cultivated  reason  to  foresee  the  progress
proper  to  each  period.  Though  the  historical  considera-
tions cited  in  my  former  volume  were  only  incidental,  any
one  may  recognize  in  them  numerous  and  indisputable
examples  of  this  necessary  succession,  more  comjdex  jier-
haps,  but  not  more  arbitrary  than  any  natural  law,  whether
in  regard  to  the  development  of  each  separate  science,  or
to  the  mutual  influence  of  tlie  different  branches  of  natural
philosophy.  In  accordance  with  the  principles  laid  down
at  the  beginning  of  this  work,  we  have  already  seen  in
various  signal  instances,  that  the  chief  progress  of  each
period,  and  even  of  each  generation,  was  a  necessary  result
of  the  immediately  preceding  state ;  so  that  the  men  of
genius,  to  whom  such  jjrogressiou  has  been  too  exclusively
attributed,  are  essentially  only  the  proper  organs  of  a  pre-
determined movement,  which  would,  in  their  absence,  have
found  other  issues.  We  find  a  verification  of  this  in  history,
which  shows  that  various  eminent  men  were  ready  to  make
the  same  great  discovery  at  the  same  time,  while  the  dis-
covery required  only  one  organ.  All  the  parts  of  the
human  evolution  admit  of  analogous  observations,  as  we
shall  presently  see,  though  they  ai*e  more  complex  and  less
obvious  than  that  which  I  have  just  cited.  The  natural
progression  of  the  arts  of  life  is  abundantly  evident ;  and


SOCIAL    DYNAMICS    SUBJECT   TO   LAWS.  231

in  our  direct  study  of  social  dynamics  we  shall  find  an
explanation  of  the  apparent  exception  of  the  fine  arts,
which  will  be  found  to  oppose  no  contradiction  to  the
general  course  of  human  progression.  As  to  that  part  of  the
movement  which  appears  at  present  to  be  least  reducible
to  natiu-al  laws,  the  political  movement  (still  supposed  to
be  governed  by  wills  of  adequate  power),  it  is  clear  as  in
any  other  case  that  political  systems  have  exhibited  an
historical  succession,  according  to  a  traceable  filiation,  in  a
determinate  order,  which  I  am  prepared  to  show  to  be
even  more  inevitable  than  that  of  the  different  states  of
human  intelligence.

The  interconnection  which  we  have  examined  and  estab-
lished in  a  statical  view  may  aid  us  in  developing  the  con-
ception of  the  existence  of  positive  laws  in  social  dynamics.
Unless  the  movement  was  determined  by  those  laws,  it
would  occasion  the  entire  destruction  of  the  social  system.
Now,  that  interconnection  simplifies  and  strengthens  the
preparatory  indications  of  dj'uamic  order  ;  for,  when  it  has
once  been  shown  iu  any  relation,  we  are  authorized  to  extend
it  to  all  others ;  and  this  unites  all  the  partial  proofs  that
we  can  successively  obtain  of  the  reality  of  this  scientific
conception.  In  the  choice  and  the  application  of  these
verifications,  we  miist  remember  that  the  laws  of  social
dynamics  are  most  recognizable  when  they  relate  to  the
largest  societies,  in  which  secondary  disturbances  have  the
smallest  effect.  Again,  these  fundamental  laws  become
the  more  irresistible,  and  therefore  the  more  appreciable,
in  proportion  to  the  advancement  of  the  civilization  upon
which  they  operate,  because  the  social  movement  becomes
more  distinct  and  certain  with  every  conquest  over  acci-
dental influences.  As  for  the  philosophical  co-ordination
of  these  preparatory  evidences,  the  combination  of  Avliich  is
important  to  science,  it  is  clear  that  the  social  evolution
must  be  more  inevitably  subject  to  natural  laws,  the  more
compound  are  the  phenomena,  and  the  less  perceptible
therefore  the  irregularities  which  arise  from  individual
influences.  This  shows  how  inconsistent  it  is,  for  instance,
to  suppose  the  scientific  movement  to  be  subject  to  positive
laws,  while  the  political  movement  is  regarded  as  arbitrai'v  ;
for  the  latter,  being  more  composite,  must  overrule  indi-


232  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

vidual  disturbaBces,  and  be  therefore  more  evidently  pre-
determined than  the  former,  in  whicli  individual  genius
must  have  more  power.  Any  j^aradoxical  appearance  which
this  statement  may  exhibit  will  disaj^pear  in  the  course  of
further  examination.

If  I  confined  myself  strictly  to  a  scientific  view,  I  might
satisfy  myself  with  proving  the  fact  of  social  progression,
without  taking  any  notice  of  the  question  of  human  per-
fectibility. But  so  much  time  and  effort  are  wasted  in
groundless  speculation  on  that  interesting  question,  argued
as  it  is  on  the  supposition  that  jDolitical  events  are  arbi-
trarily determined,  that  it  may  be  as  well  to  notice  it  in
I^assmg ;  and  the  more,  because  it  may  serve  as  a  natural
transition  to  the  estimate  of  the  limits  of  political  action.
Notion  of  Hii-  We  have  nothing  to  do  here  with  the  nieta-
nian  perfec-  physical  controversy  about  the  absolute  happi-
tibility.  ness  of  Man  at  different  stages  of  civilization.

As  the  happiness  of  every  man  depends  on  the  harmony
between  the  development  of  his  various  faculties  and  the
entire  system  of  the  circumstances  which  govern  his  life ;
and  as,  on  the  other  hand,  this  equilibrium  always  estab-
lishes itself  spontaneously  to  a  certain  extent,  it  is  impos-
sible to  compare  in  a  positive  way,  either  by  sentiment  or
reasoning,  the  individual  welfare  which  belongs  to  social
situations  that  can  never  be  brought  into  direct  comparison  :
and  therefore  the  question  of  the  happiness  of  different
animal  organisms,  or  of  their  two  sexes,  is  merely  imprac-
ticable and  unintelligible.  The  only  question  therefore  is
of  the  effect  of  the  social  evolution,  which  is  so  undeniable
that  there  is  no  reasoning  with  anyone  who  does  not  admit
it  as  the  basis  of  the  inquiry.  The  only  ground  of  disci;s-
sion  is  whether  development  and  improvement, — the  theo-
retical and  the  practical  aspect, — ai'e  one ;  whether  the
development  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  a  corresponding
amelioration,  or  progress,  properly  so  called.  To  me  it  ap-
pears that  the  amelioration  is  as  unquestionable  as  the
development  from  which  it  proceeds,  provided  we  regai'd  it
as  subject,  like  the  development  itself,  to  limits,  general
and  special,  which  science  will  be  found  to  ])rescribe.  The
chimerical  notion  of  unlimited  perfectibility  is  thus  at  once
excluded.     Taking  the  human  race  as  a  whole,  and  not  any


KOTION    OF   HUMAN    PERFECTIBILITY.  233

one  people,  it  appears  that  human  development  hrings  after
it,  in  two  "ways,  an  ever-growing  amelioration,  first,  in  the
radical  condition  of  Man,  which  no  one  disputes  ;  and  next,
in  his  corresponding  faculties,  which  is  a  view  much  less
attended  to.  There  is  no  need  to  dwell  upon  the  improve-
ment in  the  conditions  of  human  existence,  both  by  the  in-
creasing action  of  Man  on  his  environment  through  the
advancement  of  the  sciences  and  arts,  and  by  the  constant
amelioration  of  his  customs  and  manners ;  and  again,  by
the  gradual  improvement  in  social  organization.  We  shall
presently  see  that  in  the  Middle  Ages,  which  are  charged
with  political  retrogression,  the  progress  was  more  political
than  any  other.  One  fact  is  enough  to  silence  sophistical
declamation  on  this  subject ;  the  continuous  increase  of
po])ulation  all  over  the  globe,  as  a  consequence  of  civiliza-
tion, while  the  wants  of  individuals  are,  as  a  whole,  better
satisfied  at  the  same  time.  The  tendency  to  improvement
must  be  highly  spontaneous  and  irresistible  to  have  per-
sevei'ed  notwithstanding  the  enormous  faults, — political
faults  especially, — which  have  at  all  times  absorbed  or
neutralized  the  greater  part  of  our  social  forces.  Even
throughout  the  revolutionary  period,  in  spite  of  the  marked
discordance  between  the  political  system  and  the  general
state  of  civilization,  the  improvement  has  proceeded,  not
only  in  jihysical  and  intellectual,  but  also  in  moral  respects,
though  the  transient  disorganization  could  not  but  disturb
the  natural  evolution.  As  for  the  other  aspect  of  the  ques-
tion, the  gradual  and  slow  improvement  of  human  nature,
within  narrow  limits,  it  seems  to  me  imiiossible  to  reject
altogether  the  principle  proposed  (with  great  exaggeration,
however,)  by  Lamarck,  of  the  necessary  influence  of  a  homo-
geneous and  continuous  exercise  in  producing,  in  every
animal  organism,  and  especially  in  Man,  an  organic  im-
provement, susceptible  of  being  established  in  the  race,
after  a  sufiicient  jiersistence.  If  we  take  the  best  marked
case, — that  of  intellectual  development,  it  seems  to  be  un-
questionable that  there  is  a  superior  aptitude  for  mental
combinations,  independent  of  all  culture,  among  highly
civilized  people ;  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  an  in-
ferior aptitude  among  nations  that  are  less  advanced, — the
average  intellect  of  the  members  of  those  societies  being


234  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

taken  for  observation.  The  intellectual  faculties  are,  it  is
true,  more  modified  than  the  others  by  the  social  evolution :
but  then  they  have  the  smallest  relative  effect  in  the  indi-
vidual human  constitution  :  so  that  we  are  authoi'ized  to
infer  from  their  amelioration  a  proportionate  improvement
in  aptitudes  that  are  more  marked  and  equally  exercised.
In  regard  to  morals,  particularly,  1  think  it  indisputable
that  the  gradual  development  of  humanity  favours  a  grow-
ing preponderance  of  the  noblest  tendencies  of  our  nature,
— as  I  hope  to  prove  further  on.  The  lower  instincts  con-
tinue to  manifest  themselves  in  modified  action,  but  their
less  sustained  and  moi'e  repressed  exercise  must  tend  to
debilitate  them  by  degrees ;  and  their  increasing  regula-
tion certainly  brings  them  into  involuntary  concurrence  in
the  maintenance  of  a  good  social  ectmomy ;  and  especially
in  the  case  of  the  least  marked  organisms,  which  constitute
a  vast  majority.  These  two  aspects  of  social  evolution,
then, — the  development  which  brings  after  it  the  improve-
ment,— we  may  consider  to  be  admitted  as  facts.

Adhering  to  our  relative,  in  opposition  to  the  absolute,
view,  we  must  conclude  the  social  state,  regarded  as  a
whole,  to  have  been  as  perfect,  in  each  period,  as  the  co-
existing condition  of  humanity  and  of  its  envii'onment
would  allow.  Without  this  view,  history  would  be  incom-
prehensible ;  and  the  relative  view  is  as  indisi)ensable  in
regard  to  progress,  as,  in  considering  social  statics,  we  saw
it  to  be  in  regard  to  order.  If,  in  a  statical  view,  the
various  social  elements  cannot  but  maintain  a  spontaneous
harmony,  which  is  the  first  principle  of  order  ;  neither  can
any  of  them  help  being  as  advanced,  at  any  period,  as  the
whole  system  of  influences  permits.  In  either  case,  the
harmony  and  the  movement  are  the  result  of  invariable
natural  laws  which  produce  all  phenomena  whatever,  aiid
are  more  obscure  in  social  science  merely  on  account  of  the
greater  complexity  of  the  phenomena  concerned.

.  And,  now  occurs,  as  the  last  aspect  of  social

tic'd  action  dynamics,  the  question  of  the  general  limits
'of  political  action.  No  enlightened  man  can
be  blind  to  the  necessary  existence  of  such  limits,  which
can  be  ignored  only  on  the  old  theological  STq)])osition  of
the  legislator  being  merely  the  organ  of  a  direct  and  con-


GENERAL   LIMITS    OF    POLITICAL   ACTION.  235

tiuuoiis  Provideuce,  wliicli  admits  of  no  limits.  We  need
not  stop  to  confute  that  liypothesis,  which  has  no  existence
but  in  virtue  of  ancient  habit  of  thought.  In  any  case,
human  action  is  very  limited,  in  spite  of  all  aids  from  con-
currence and  ingenious  methods  ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  per-
ceive why  social  action  should  be  exempt  from  this  restric-
tion, which  is  an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  existence  of
natural  laws.  Through  all  the  self-assertions  of  human
pride,  every  statesman  of  experience  knows  well  the  reality
of  the  bounds  prescribed  to  political  action  by  the  aggre-
gate of  social  influences,  to  which  he  must  attribute  the
failure  of  the  greater  number  of  the  projects  which  he  had
secretly  cherished  ;  and  pei'liaj^s  the  conviction  is  most
thorough,  while  most  carefully  hidden,  in  the  mind  of  the
most  powei'ful  of  statesmen,  because  his  inability  to
struggle  against  natural  laws  must  be  decisive  in  j^roj^or-
tion  to  his  implication  with  them.  Seeing  that  social
science  would  be  impossible  in  the  absence  of  this  principle,
we  need  not  dwell  further  upon  it,  but  may  proceed  to  ascer-
tain the  fitness  of  the  new  political  jihilosophy  to  determine,
with  all  the  precision  that  the  subject  admits,  what  is  the
natui'e  of  these  limits,  general  or  special,  permanent  or
tem})orary.

Two  questions  are  concerned  here :  first,  in  what  way
the  course  of  human  development  may  be  affected  l)y  the
aggregate  of  causes  of  variation  which  may  be  applied  to
it ;  and  next,  what  share  the  voluntary  and  calculated
action  of  our  political  combinations  may  have  among  these
modifying  influences.  The  first  question  is  by  far  the
most  important,  both  because  it  is  a  general  principle,
which  the  second  is  not,  and  because  it  is  fully  accessible,
which,  again,  the  second  is  not.

We  must  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  Social  pheno-
social  phenomena  may,  from  their  complexity,  niena  modi-
be  more  easily  modified  than  any  others,  ^i'll^le.
according  to  the  law  which  was  established  to  that  efl:"ect
in  my  first  volume.  Thus,  the  limits  of  variation  are  wider
in  regard  to  sociological  than  any  other  laws.  If,  then,
human  intervention  holds  the  same  proportionate  rank
among  modifying  influences  as  it  is  natural  at  first  to
suppose,  its  influence  must  be  more  considerable  in  the


236  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

first  case  tliau  in  any  otlier,  all  apj^earances  to  tlie  contrary
notwithstaudiug.  This  is  the  first  scientific  foundation  of
all  rational  hopes  of  a  systematic  reformation  of  humanity  ;
and  on  this  ground  illusions  of  this  sort  certainly  appear
more  excusable  than  on  any  other  subject.  But  though
modifications,  from  all  causes,  are  greater  in  the  case  of
political  than  of  simpler  phenomena,  still  they  can  never
be  more  than  modifications  :  that  is,  they  will  always  be  in
subjection  to  those  fundamental  laws,  whether  statical  or
dynamical,  which  regulate  the  harmony  of  the  social
elements,  and  the  filiation  of  their  successive  variations.
There  is  no  disturbing  influence,  exterior  or  human,  which
can  make  incompatible  elements  co-exist  in  the  political
system,  nor  change  in  any  way  the  natural  laws  of  the
development  of  humanity.  The  inevitable  gradual  pre-
2:»onderance  of  continuous  influences,  however  imperceptible
their  power  may  be  at  first,  is  now  admitted  with  regard
to  all  natural  phenomena;  and  it  must  be  applied  to  social
2"»henomena,  whenever  the  same  method  of  jDhilosoj^hizing  is
extended  to  them.  What  then  are  the  modifications  of
which  the  social  organism  and  social  life  are  susceptible,  if
nothing  can  alter  the  laws  either  of  harmony  or  of  succes-
sion? The  answer  is  that  modifications  act  upon  the
intensity  and  secondary  operation  of  phenomena,  but  with-
out affecting  their  nature  or  their  filiation.  To  suppose
that  they  could,  would  1>e  to  exalt  the  disturbing  above  the
fundamental  cause,  and  would  destroy  the  whole  economy
of  laws.  In  the  political  system  this  princij)le  of  positive
philosophy  shows  that,  in  a  statical  view,  any  possible
variations  can  affect  only  the  intensity  of  the  different
tendencies  belonging  to  each  social  situation,  without  in
any  way  hindering  or  producing,  or,  in  a  word,  changing
the  natm'e  of,  those  tendencies ;  and,  in  the  same  way,  in
a  dynamical  view,  the  progress  of  the  race  must  be  con-
sidei'ed  susce]:)tible  of  modification  only  with  regard  to  its
speed,  and  without  any  reversal  in  the  order  of  develop-
ment, or  any  interval  of  any  imjjortance  being  overleaped.
These  variations  are  analogous  to  those  of  the  animal
organism,  with  the  one  difference  that  in  sociology  they
are  more  complex  ;  and,  as  we  saw  that  the  limits  of  varia-
tion remain  to  be  established  in  biology,  it  is  not  to  be


MODIFICATIONS  OF  THEIR  INTENSITY  OF  ACTION.       237

expected  that  sociology  sliould  be  more  adyanced.  But  all
we  want  here  is  to  obtain  a  notion  of  the  general  spirit  of
the  law,  in  regard  both  to  social  statics  and  dynamics  ;  and
looking  at  it  from  both  points  of  view,  it  seems  to  me
impossible  to  question  its  truth.  In  the  intellectual  order
of  phenomena,  for  instance,  there  is  no  accidental  influence,
nor  any  individual  superiority,  which  can  transfer  to  one
period  the  discoveries  reserved  for  a  subsequent  age,  in  the
natural  course  of  the  human  mind;  nor  can  there  be  the
reverse  case  of  postponement.  The  history  of  the  sciences
settles  the  question  of  the  close  dependence  of  even  the
most  eminent  individual  genius  on  the  contemporary  state
of  the  human  mind  ;  and  this  is  above  all  remarkable  in
regard  to  the  improvement  of  methods  of  investigation,
either  in  the  way  of  reasoning  or  experiment.  The  same
thing  happens  in  regard  to  the  arts ;  and  especially  in
whatever  depends  on  mechanical  means  in  substitution  for
human  action.  And  there  is  not,  in  reality,  any  more
room  for  doubt  in  the  case  of  moral  development,  the
character  of  which  is  certainly  determined,  in  each  period,
by  the  corresponding  stjite  of  the  social  evolution,  whatever
may  be  the  modifications  caused  by  education  or  individual
organization.  Each  of  the  leading  modes  of  social  existence
determines  for  itself  a  certain  system  of  morals  and
manners,  the  common  aspect  of  which  is  easily  recognized
in  all  mdividuals,  in  the  midst  of  their  characteristic
differences  ;  for  instance,  there  is  a  state  of  human  life  in
which  the  best  individual  natures  contract  a  habit  of
ferocity,  from  which  very  inferior  natures  easily  emancipate
themselves,  in  a  better  state  of  society.  The  case  is  the
same,  in  a  political  view,  as  our  historical  analysis  will  here-
after show.  And  in  fact,  if  we  were  to  review  all  tlie  facts
and  reflections  which  establish  the  existence  of  the  limits  of
variation,  whnse  principle  I  have  just  laid  down,  we  shoi;ld
find  ourselves  reproducing  in  succession  all  the  proofs  of
the  subjection  of  social  phenomena  to  invarialde  laws ;
because  the  principle  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  strict
application  of  the  philosophical  conception.

We  cannot  enlarge  upon  the  second  head :  Order  of  mo-
that  is,  the  classification  of  modifying  in-  difying  intlu
flueuces  according  to  their  respective  impor-     ences.


238  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

tance.  If  such  a  classification  is  not  yet  established  in
biolosfv,  it  would  be  premature  indeed  to  attempt  it  in
social  science.  Thus,  if  the  three  chief  causes  of  social
variation  appear  to  me  to  result  from,  first,  race  ;  secondly,
climate ;  thirdly,  political  action  in  its  whole  scientific
extent,  it  would  answer  none  of  our  present  purposes  to
inquire  here  whether  this  or  some  other  is  the  real  order
of  their  impoi'tance.  The  political  influences  are  the  only
ones  really  open  to  our  intervention ;  and  to  that  head
general  attention  must  be  directed,  though  with  great  care
to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  that  class  of  influences  must
be  the  most  important  because  it  is  the  most  immediately
interesting  to  us.  It  is  owing  to  such  au  illusion  as  this
that  observers  who  believe  themselves  emancipated  from
old  prejudices  cannot  obtain  sociological  knowledge,  because
they  enormously  exaggerate  the  power  of  political  action.
Because  political  operations,  temporal  or  spiritual,  can  have
no  social  efiicacy  but  in  as  far  as  they  a,re  in  accordance
with  the  corresponding  tendencies  of  the  human  mind,
they  are  supposed  to  have  produced  what  is  in  reality
occasioned  by  a  spontaneous  evolution,  which  is  less  con-
spicuous, and  easily  overlooked.  Such  a  mistake  proceeds
in  neglect  of  numerous  and  marked  cases  in  history,  in
which  the  most  prodigious  political  authority  has  left  no
lasting  traces  of  its  well-sustained  development,  because  it
]noved  in  a  contrary  direction  to  modern  civilization  ;  as  in
the  instances  of  Julian,  of  Philip  II.,  of  Napoleon  Bona-
parte, etc.  The  inverse  cases,  iuihap]>ily  too  few,  are  still
more  decisive  ;  those  cases  in  which  political  action,  sus-
tained by  an  equally  powerful  authority,  has  nevertheless
failed  in  the  pursuit  of  ameliorations  that  were  premature,
though  in  accordance  with  the  social  movement  of  the
time.  Intellectual  history,  as  well  as  political,  furnishes
examples  of  this  kind  in  abundance.  It  has  been  sensibly
remarked  by  Fergusson,  that  even  the  action  of  one  nation
upon  another,  whether  by  conquest  or  otherwise,  though
the  most  intense  of  all  social  forces,  can  effect  merely  such
modifications  as  are  in  accordance  with  its  existing  tenden-
cies ;  so  that,  in  fact,  the  action  merely  accelerates  or
extends  a  development  which  Avould  have  taken  place
witliout   it.      In   })()litics,  as    in    science,   opportuneness  is


ORDER   OF   MODIFYING   INFLUENCES.  239

always  the  main  condition  of  all  great  and  durable  in-
fluence, whatever  may  be  the  personal  value  of  the  superior
man  to  whom  the  multitude  attribute  social  action  of  which
he  is  merely  the  fortunate  organ.  The  power  of  the  indi-
vidual over  the  race  is  subject  to  these  general  limits,  even
when  the  effects,  for  good  or  for  evil,  are  as  easy  as  possible
to  produce.  In  revolutionary  times,  for  instance,  those
who  are  proud  of  having  aroused  anarchical  passions  in
their  contem2:)oraries  do  not  see  that  their  miserable  triumph
is  due  to  a  sijontaneous  disposition,  determined  by  the
aggregate  of  the  corresponding  social  state,  which  has  pro-
duced a  provisional  and  partial  relaxation  of  the  genei'al
harmony.  As  for  the  rest,  it  being  ascertained  that  there
are  limits  of  variation  among  social  phenomena,  and
modifications  dependent  on  systematic  political  action ;
and  as  the  scientific  principle  which  is  to  describe  such
modifications  is  now  tuown ;  the  influence  and  scope  of
that  principle  must  be  determined  in  each  case  by  the
direct  development  of  social  science,  applied  to  the  appre-
ciation of  the  corresponding  state  of  circumstances.  It  is
by  such  estimates,  empirically  attempted,  that  men  of
genius  have  been  guided  in  all  great  and  profound  action
upon  humanity  in  any  way  whatever;  and  it  is  only  thus
that  they  have  been  able  to  rectify,  in  a  rough  way,  the
illusory  suggestions  of  the  irrational  doctrines  in  which
they  were  educated.  Everywhere,  as  I  have  so  often  said,
foresight  is  the  true  source  of  action.

The  inaccui-ate  intellectual  habits  which  as  yet  prevail
in  political  philosophy  may  induce  an  apprehension  that,
according  to  such  considerations  as  those  just  presented,
the  new  science  of  Social  Physics  may  reduce  us  to  mere
observation  of  human  events,  excluding  all  continuous
intervention.  It  is,  however,  certain  that,  while  dissipating
all  ambitious  illusions  about  the  indefinite  action  of  Man
on  civilization,  the  principle  of  rational  limits  to  ]tolitical
action  establishes,  in  the  most  exact  and  unquestionable
manner,  the  true  point  of  contact  between  social  theory
and  practice.  It  is  by  this  principle  only  that  political
art  can  assume  a  systematic  character,  by  its  release  from
arbitrary  principles  mingled  with  empirical  notions.  It  is
thus  only  that  political  art  can  pass  upwards  as  medical


240  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

art  lias  done ;  the  two  cases  being  strongly  analogous.
As  political  intervention  can  liave  no  efficacy  unless  it
rests  on  corresponding  tendencies  of  the  political  organism
or  life,  so  as  to  aid  its  spontaneous  development,  it  is
absolutely  necessary  to  understand  the  natural  laws  of
harmony  and  succession  which  determine,  in  every  period,
and  under  every  social  aspect,  what  the  human  evolution
is  prepared  to  produce,  pointing  out,  at  the  same  time,  the
chief  obstacles  which  m.ay  be  got  rid  of.  It  would  be
exaggerating  the  scope  of  such  an  art  to  suj^pose  it  capable
of  obviating,  in  all  cases,  the  violent  disturbances  which
are  occasioned  by  impediments  to  the  natural  evolution.
In  the  highly  complex  social  organisiii,  maladies  and  crises
are  necessarily  even  more  inevitable  than  in  the  individual
organism.  But,  though  science  is  powerless  for  the  mo-
ment amidst  wild  disorder  and  extravagance,  it  may
palliate  and  abridge  the  crises,  by  understanding  their
character  and  foreseeing  their  issue,  and  by  more  or  less
intervention,  where  any  is  possible.  Here,  as  in  other
cases,  and  more  than  in  other  cases,  the  office  of  science  is,
Bot  to  govern,  but  to  modify  phenomena ;  and  to  do  this,
it  is  necessary  to  understand  their  laws.

Thus,  then,  we  see  what  is  the  function  of  social  science.
Without  extolling  or  condemning  political  facts,  science
regards  them  as  subjects  of  observation :  it  contemplates
each  phenomenon  in  its  harmony  with  co-existing  pheno-
mena, and  in  its  connection  with  the  foregoing  and  the
following  state  of  human  development :  it  endeavours  to
discover,  from  both  points  of  view,  the  general  relations
which  connect  all  social  phenomena :  and  each  of  them  is
explained,  in  the  scientific  sense  of  the  word,  when  it  has
been  connected  with  the  whole  of  the  existing  situation,
and  the  whole  of  the  preceding  movement.  Favouring  the
social  sentiment  in  the  highest  degree,  this  science  fiilfils
the  famous  suggestion  of  Pascal,  by  representing  the  whole
human  race,  past,  present,  and  future,  as  constituting  a
vast  and  eternal  social  unit,  whose  different  organs,  indi-
vidual and  national,  concur,  in  their  various  modes  and
degrees,  in  the  evolution  of  humanity.  Leading  us  on,
like  every  other  science,  with  as  much  exactness  as  the
extreme  complexity  of  its  phenomena  allows,  to  a  systematic


MEANS   OF   INVESTIGATION    OF   TWO   KINDS.         241

prevision  of  the  events  wliicli  must  resiilt  from  either  a
given  situation  or  a  given  aggregate  of  antecedents,  political
science  enlightens  political  art,  not  only  in  regard  to  the
tendencies  which  should  be  aided,  but  as  to  the  chief  means
that  should  be  employed,  so  as  to  avoid  all  useless  or
ephemeral  and  therefore  dangerous  action ;  in  short,  all
waste  of  any  hind  of  social  force.

This  examination  of  the  general  sjjirit  of
])olitical   philosophy   has   been    much    more    invesd-ation.
difficult  than  the  same  process  in  regard  to  "'

any  established  science.  The  next  step,  now  that  this  is
accomplished,  is  to  examine,  according  to  my  usual  method,
the  means  of  investigation  proper  to  Social  science.  In
virtue  of  a  law  before  recognized,  we  may  expect  to  find
in  Sociology  a  more  varied  and  developed  system  of  re-
sources than  in  any  other,  in  proportion  to  the  complexitv
of  the  i^henomena,  while  yet,  this  extension  of  means  does
not  compensate  for  the  increased  imperfection  arising  from
the  intricacy.  The  extension  of  the  means  is  also  more
difficult  to  verify  than  in  any  prior  case,  from  the  novelty
of  the  subject ;  and  I  can  scai'cely  hope  that  such  a  sketch
as  I  must  present  here  will  command  such  confidence  as
will  arise  when  a  comjilete  survey  of  the  science  shall  have
confirmed  what  I  now  offer.

As  Social  Physics  assumes  a  place  in  the  hierarchy  of
sciences  after  all  the  rest,  and  therefore  dependent  on  them,
its  means  of  investigation  must  be  of  two  kinds :  those
which  are  peculiar  to  itself,  and  which  may  be  called
direct,  and  those  which  arise  from  the  connection  of  socio-
logy with  the  other  sciences ;  and  these  last,  though  indi-
rect, are  as  indisiiensable  as  the  first.  I  t^-  ^
in  .  r^     ,      ii        T       ,  o    JJn-ect  means.

shall   review,   first,    the   direct  resources  oi

the  science.

Here,  as  in  all  the  other  cases,  there  are  three  methods
of  proceeding: — by  Observation,  Experiment  and  Com-
parison.

Yery  imperfect  and  even  vicious  notions      ,,,  ,   . ,  ^•
prevail  at  present  as  to  what    Observation
can  be  and  can  effect  in  social  science.     The  chaotic  state
of  doctrine  of  the  last  century  has  extended  to  Method  ;
and   amidst   our   intellectual    disorganization,    difficulties

II.  K


242  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY,

have  been  magnified  ;  precautionary  methods,  experimental
and  rational,  have  been  broken  up ;  and  even  the  possi-
bility of  obtaining  social  knowledge  l)y  observation  has
been  dogmatically  denied ;  but  if  the  sophisms  put  forth
on  this  subject  were  true,  they  would  destroy  the  certainty,
not  only  of  social  science,  but  of  all  the  simpler  and  more
perfect  ones  that  have  gone  before.  The  ground  of  doubt
assigned  is  the  uncertainty  of  human  testimony ;  but  all
the  sciences,  up  to  the  most  simple,  require  proofs  of  testi-
mony :  that  is,  in  the  elaboration  of  the  most  positive
theories,  we  have  to  admit  observations  which  could  not
be  directly  made,  nor  even  rej^eated,  by  those  who  use
them,  and  the  reality  of  which  rests  only  on  the  faithful
testimony  of  the  original  investigators  ;  there  being  nothing
in  this  to  prevent  the  use  of  such  proofs,  in  concurrence
with  immediate  observations.  In  astronomy,  such  a  method
is  obviously  necessary  ;  it  is  equally,  though  less  obviously
necessary  even  in  mathematics  ;  and,  of  course,  much  more
evidently  in  the  case  of  the  more  complex  sciences.  How
could  any  science  emerge  from  the  nascent  state, — how
could  there  be  any  organization  of  intellectual  labour,  even
if  research  were  restricted  to  the  utmost,  if  every  one  re-
jected all  observations  but  his  own  ?  The  stoutest  advo-
cates of  historical  scepticism  do  not  go  so  far  as  to  advocate
this.  It  is  onl}'  in  the  case  of  social  phenomena  that  the
paradox  is  proposed ;  and  it  is  made  use  of  there  because
it  is  one  of  the  weapons  of  the  philosophical  arsenal  which
the  revolutionary  metaphysical  doctrine  constrvicted  for
the  intellectual  overthrow  of  the  ancient  political  system.
The  next  great  hindrance  to  the  use  of  observation  is  the
empiricism  which  is  introduced  into  it  by  those  who,  in
the  name  of  impartiality,  would  interdict  the  use  of  any
theory  Avhatever.  No  logical  dogma  could  be  more
thoroughly  irreconcilable  with  the  s])irit  of  the  jiositive
philosophy,  or  with  its  special  character  in  regard  to  the
stiidy  of  social  phenomena,  than  this.  No  real  observation
of  any  kind  of  phenomena  is  possible,  except  in  as  far  as
it  is  first  directed,  and  finally  interjtreted,  by  some  theory  :
and  it  was  this  logical  need  which,  in  the  infancy  of  human
reason,  occasioned  the  rise  of  theological  philosophy,  as  we
shall  see  in  the  course  of  our  historical  survey.     The  posi-


OBSERVATION.  243

tive  philosophy  does  not  dissolve  this  obligation,  but,  on
the  contrary,  extends  and  fulfils  it  more  and  more,  the
further  the  relations  of  phenomena  are  multiplied  and
perfected  by  it.  Hence  it  is  clear  that,  scientifically
speaking,  all  isolated,  empirical  observation  is  idle,  and
even  radically  uncertain ;  that  science  can  use  only  those
observations  which  ai-e  connected,  at  least  hypothetically,
with  some  law ;  that  it  is  such  a  connection  which  mates
the  chief  diiference  between  scientific  and  popular  observa-
tion, embracing  the  same  facts,  but  contemplating  them
from  different  points  of  view :  and  that  observations  em-
pirically conducted  can  at  most  supply  provisional  mate-
rials, which  must  usually  undergo  an  ulterior  revision.
The  rational  method  of  observation  becomes  more  necessary
in  proportion  to  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena,  amidst
which  the  observer  would  not  know  what  he  ought  to  look
at  in  the  facts  before  his  eyes,  but  for  the  guidance  of  a
prejiaratory  theory  ;  and  thus  it  is  that  by  the  connection
of  foregoing  facts  we  learn  to  see  the  facts  that  follow.
This  is  undisputed  with  regard  to  astronomical,  physical,
and  chemical  research,  and  in  every  branch  of  biological
study,  in  which  good  observation  of  its  highly  complex
phenomena  is  still  very  rare,  precisely  because  its  positive
theories  are  very  imperfect.  Carrying  on  the  analogy,  it
is  evident  that  in  the  corresponding  divisions,  statical  and
dynamical,  of  social  science,  there  is  more  need  than  any-
where else  of  theories  which  shall  scientifically  connect  the
facts  that  are  happening  with  those  that  have  happened  :
and  the  more  we  reflect,  the  more  distinctly  we  shall  see
that  in  proportion  as  known  facts  are  mutually  connected
we  shall  be  better  able,  not  only  to  estimate,  but  to  per-
ceive, those  which  are  yet  unexplored.  I  am  not  blind  to
the  vast  difficulty  which  this  requisition  imposes  on  the
institution  of  positive  sociology, — obliging  us  to  create  at
once,  so  to  speak,  observations  and  laws,  on  account  of
their  indispensable  connection,  placing  us  in  a  sort  of
vicious  circle,  from  which  we  can  issue  only  by  employing
in  the  first  instance  materials  which  are  badly  elaborated,
and  doctrines  which  are  ill-conceived.  How  I  may  succeed
in  a  task  so  difficult  and  delicate,  we  shall  see  at  its  close ;
but,  however  that  mav  be,  it  is  clear  that  it  is  the  absence


•244  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

of  any  positive  theory  which  at  present  renders  social
observations  so  vague  and  incoherent.  There  can  never  be
any  lack  of  facts  ;  for  in  this  case  even  more  than  in  others,
it  is  the  commonest  sort  of  facts  that  are  most  important,
whatever  the  collectors  of  secret  anecdotes  may  think ;
but,  though  we  are  steeped  to  the  lips  in  them,  we  can
make  no  use  of  them,  nor  even  be  aware  of  them,  for  want
of  speculative  guidance  in  examining  them.  The  statical
observation  of  a  crowd  of  phenomena  cannot  take  place
without  some  notion,  however  elementary,  of  the  laws  of
social  interconnection  :  and  dynamical  facts  could  have  no
fixed  direction  if  they  were  not  attached,  at  least  by  a  y>vo-
visional  hypothesis,  to  the  laws  of  social  development.  The
positive  philosophy  is  very  far  from  discouraging  historical
or  any  other  erudition  ;  but  the  j^recious  night-watchings,
now  so  lost  in  the  laborious  acquisition  of  a  conscientious
but  barren  learning,  may  be  made  available  by  it  for  the
constitution  of  true  social  science,  and  the  increased  honour
of  the  earnest  minds  that  are  devoted  to  it.  The  new
philosophy  will  supply  fresh  and  nobler  subjects,  unhoped-
for insight,  a  loftier  aim,  and  thei'efore  a  higher  scientific
dignity.  It  will  discard  none  but  aimless  labours,  without
jirinciple  and  without  character  ;  as  in  Physics,  there  is  no
room  for  compilations  of  empirical  observations ;  and  at
the  same  time,  philosojjhy  will  render  justice  to  the  zeal  of
students  of  a  jDast  generation,  who,  destitute  of  the  favour-
able guidance  which  we,  of  this  day,  enjoy,  followed  up
their  laborious  historical  researches  v/itli  an  instinctive
perseverance,  and  in  spite  of  the  superficial  disdain  of  the
philosophers  of  the  time.  No  doubt,  the  same  danger
attends  research  here  as  elsewhere:  the  danger  that,  from
the  continuous  use  of  scientific  theoi-ies,  the  observer  may
sometimes  pervert  facts,  by  erroneously  supposing  them  to
verify  some  ill-grounded  speculative  prejudices  of  his  own.
But  we  have  the  same  guard  here  as  elsewhere, — in  the
further  extension  of  the  science :  and  the  case  would  not
be  im]:>roved  by  a  I'ecurrence  to  emjiirical  methods,  which
would  be  merely  leaving  theories  that  may  be  misa])j)lied
but  can  always  be  rectified,  for  imaginary  notions  which
cannot  be  substantiated  at  all.  Our  feeble  reason  may
often  fail   in  the  application  of  positive  theories ;  but  at


EXPERIMENT  :   DIRECT.  245

least  they  transfer  us  from  the  domain  of  imagination  to
that  of  reality,  and  expose  us  infinitely  less  than  any  other
kind  of  doctrine  to  the  danger  of  seeing  in  facts  that  which
is  not.

It  is  now  clear  that  social  science  requires,  more  than  any
other,  the  subordination  of  Observation  to  the  statical  and
dynamical  laws  of  phenomena.  No  social  fact  can  have  any
scientific  meaning  till  it  is  connected  with  some  other  social
fact ;  without  which  connection  it  remains  a  mere  anec-
dote, involving  no  rational  utility.  This  condition  so  far
increases  the  immediate  difficulty  that  good  observers  will
be  rare  at  first,  though  more  abundant  than  ever  as  the
science  expands  :  and  here  we  meet  with  another  confirma-
tion of  what  I  said  at  the  outset  of  this  volume, — that  the
formation  of  social  theories  should  be  confided  only  to  the
best  organized  minds,  j)repared  by  the  most  rational  train-
ing. Explored  by  such  minds,  according  to  rational  views
of  co-existence  and  succession,  social  phenomena  no  doubt
adiuit  of  much  more  varied  and  extensive  means  of  investi-
gation than  phenomena  of  less  complexity.  In  this  view,
it  is  not  only  the  immediate  inspection  or  direct  description
of  events  that  affords  useful  means  of  positive  exploration  ;
but  the  consideration  of  apparently  insignificant  customs,
the  apjireciation  of  various  kinds  of  monuments,  the
analysis  and  comparison  of  languages,  and  a  multitude  of
other  resources.  In  short,  a  mind  suitably  trained  be-
comes able  by  exercise  to  convert  almost  all  impressions
from  the  events  of  life  into  sociological  indications,  when
once  the  connection  of  all  indications  with  the  leading
ideas  of  the  science  is  imderstood.  This  is  a  facility
afforded  by  the  mutual  relation  of  the  various  aspects
of  society,  which  may  partly  compensate  for  the  diffi-
culty caused  by  that  mutual  connection  :  if  it  renders
observation  more  difficult,  it  affords  more  means  for  its
prosecution.

It  might  be  supposed  beforehand  that  the      k  -     •'
second  method  of  investigation.  Experiment,         '
must  be  wholly  inapplicable   in   Social  Science  ;    but  we
shall  find  that  the  science  is  not  entirely  deprived  of  this
resource,  though  it  must  be  one  of  inferior  value.     We
must  remember  (what  was  before  exjilained)  that  there  are


246  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

two  kinds  of  expei'imentation, — the  direct  and  the  indirect :
and  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  i:)hiloso2)hical  character
of  this  method  that  the  circumstances  of  the  jihenomenon
in  question  should  be,  as  is  vulgarly  supposed  in  the  learned
Tvorld,  artificially  instituted.  Whether  the  case  be  natural
or  factitious,  experimentation  takes  place  whenever  the
regular  course  of  the  phenomenon  is  interfex'ed  with  in  any
determinate  manner.  The  spontaneous  nature  of  the
alteration  has  no  effect  on  the  scientific  value  of  the  case,
if  the  elements  are  known.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  experi-
mentation is  possible  in  Sociology.  If  direct  experimenta-
tion had  become  too  difficult  amidst  the  complexities  of
biology,  it  may  well  be  considered  impossible  in  social
science.  Any  artificial  disturbance  of  any  social  element
must  affect  all  the  rest,  according  to  the  laws  both  of
co-existence  and  succession ;  and  the  experiment  would
therefore,  if  it  could  be  institvited  at  all,  be  deprived  of  all
scientific  value,  through  the  impossibility  of  isolating  either
the  conditions  or  the  results  of  the  phenomenon.  But  we
sa.w,  in  our  survey  of  biology,  that  pathological  cases  ai*e
the  true  scientific  equivalent  of  pure  experimentation,  and
why.  The  same  reasons  apply,  with  even  more  force,
to  sociological  researches.  In  them,  pathological  analysis
consists  in  the  examination  of  cases,  unhappily  too  common,
in  which  the  natural  laws,  either  of  harmony  or  of  succes-
sion, are  disturbed  by  any  causes,  si)ecial  or  general,  acci-
dental or  transient ;  as  in  revolutionary  times  especially,
and  above  all,  in  our  own.  These  disturbances  are,  in  the
social  body,  exactly  analogous  to  diseases  in  the  individual
organism :  and  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  analogy
will  be  more  evident  (allowance  being  made  for  the  unequal
complexity  of  the  <n'ganisms)  the  deeper  the  investigation
goes.  In  both  cases  it  is,  as  I  said  once  before,  a  noble  use
to  make  of  our  reason,  to  disclose  the  real  laws  of  our
nature,  individual  or  social,  by  the  analysis  of  its  sufferings.
But  if  the  method  is  imperfectly  instituted  in  regard  to
biological  qv;estions,  much  more  faulty  must  it  be  in  regard
to  the  phenomena  of  social  science,  for  want  even  of  the
rational  conceptions  to  which  they  are  to  be  referred.  "We
see  the  most  disastrous  jjolitical  exjieriments  for  ever
renewed,  with  only  some  insignificant  and  irrational  modi-


EXPERIMENT  :    INDIRECT.  247

fications,  thougli  their  first  operation  slioiild  have  fully
satisfied  us  of  the  uselessness  and  danger  of  the  expedients
proposed.  Without  forgetting  how  much  is  ascribable  to
the  influence  of  human  passions,  we  must  remember  that
the  deficiency  of  an  authoritative  rational  analysis  is  one  of
the  main  causes  of  the  barrenness  imputed  to  social  experi-
ments, the  course  of  which  would  become  much  more
instructive  if  it  were  better  observed.  The  great  natural
laws  exist  and  act  in  all  conditions  of  the  organism  ;  for,  as
we  saw  in  the  case  of  biology,  it  is  an  error  to  suppose  that
they  are  violated  or  sus])ended  in  the  case  of  disease  :  and
we  are  therefore  justified  in  drawing  our  conclusions,  with
due  caution,  from  the  scientific  analysis  of  disturbance
to  the  positive  theory  of  normal  existence.  This  is  the
nature  and  character  of  the  indirect  experimentation  which
discloses  the  real  economy  of  the  social  body  in  a  more
marked  manner  than  simple  observation  could  do.  It  is
applicable  to  all  orders  of  sociological  research,  whether
relating  to  existence  or  to  movement,  and  regarded  under
any  aspect  whatever,  physical,  intellectual,  moral,  or
political;  and  to  all  degrees  of  the  social  evolution,  from
which,  unhappily,  disturbances  have  never  been  absent.
As  for  its  present  extension,  no  one  can  venture  to  offer  any
statement  of  it,  because  it  has  never  been  duly  applied
in  any  investigation  in  political  philosophy  ;  and  it  can
become  customary  only  by  the  institution  of  the  new  science
which  I  am  endeavouring  to  establish.  But  I  could  not
omit  this  notice  of  it,  as  one  of  the  means  of  investigation
proper  to  social  science.

As  for  the  third  of  those  methods.  Com-  Comparison
parison,  the  reader  must  bear  in  mind  the
explanations  offered,  in  our  survey  of  biological  philosophy,
of  the  reasons  why  the  comparative  method  must  prevail  in
all  studies  of  which  the  living  organism  is  the  subject ;  and
the  more  remarkably,  in  pro}>t)rtion  to  the  rank  of  the
organism.  The  same  considerations  apply  in  the  present
case,  in  a  more  conspicuous  degi'ee  ;  and  I  may  leave  it  to
the  reader  to  make  the  application,  merely  pointing  out  the
chief  differences  which  distinguish  the  use  of  the  compara-
tive method  in  sociological  inquiries.

It  is  a  very  irrational  disdain  which  makes  us  object  to


248  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

Comparison  all  comparison  between  human  society  and
Avitli  inferior  the  social  state  of  the  lower  animals.  This
.animals.  unphilosophical  pride  arose  out  of  the  pro-

tracted influence  of  the  theologico-metaphysical  philosoj^hy  ;
and  it  will  be  corrected  by  the  positive  philosophy,  when  we
better  understand  and  can  estimate  the  social  state  of  the
higher  orders  of  mammifers,  for  instance.  We  have  seen
how  im}wrtant  is  the  study  of  individual  life,  in  regard  to
intellectual  and  moral  phenomena, — of  which  social  pheno-
mena are  the  natural  result  and  complement.  There  was
once  the  same  blindness  to  the  importance  of  the  procedure
in  this  case  as  now  in  the  other  ;  and,  as  it  has  given  way
in  the  one  case,  so  it  will  in  the  other.  The  chief  defect  in
the  kind  of  sociological  comparison  that  we  want  is  that  it
is  limited  to  statical  consideration ;  whereas  the  dynamical
are,  at  the  present  time,  the  preponderant  and  direct  sub-
ject of  science.  The  restriction  i-esults  from  the  social  state
of  animals  being,  though  not  so  stationary  as  we  are  apt  to
suppose,  yet  suscejitible  only  of  exti*emely  small  variations,
in  no  way  coin]jarable  to  the  continued  progression  of
humanity  in  its  feeblest  days.  But  there  is  no  doubt  of
the  scientific  utility  of  such  a  comparison,  in  the  statical
province,  where  it  characterizes  the  elementary  laws  of
social  interconnection,  by  exhibiting  their  action  in  the
most  imperfect  state  of  society,  so  as  even  to  suggest  useful
inductions  in  regard  to  human  society.  There  cannot  be  a
stronger  evidence  of  the  natural  character  of  the  chief
social  relations,  which  some  people  fancy  that  they  can
transform  at  pleasure.  Such  so])hists  will  cease  to  regard
the  great  ties  of  the  human  family  as  factitious  and
arbitrary  when  they  find  them  existing,  with  the  same
essential  characteristics,  among  the  animals,  and  more  con-
spicuously, the  nearer  the  organisms  ap]>roach  to  the  hinnan
type.  In  brief,  in  all  that  jnirt  of  sociology  which  is  almost
one  with  intellectual  and  moral  biology,  or  with  the  natural
history  of  Man ;  in  all  that  relates  to  the  first  germs  of  the
social  relations,  and  the  first  institutions  which  were
founded  by  the  unity  of  the  family  or  the  tribe,  there  is  not
only  great  scientific  advantage,  but  real  philosophical
necessity  for  employiug  the  rational  comparison  of  human
with  other  animal  societies.     Pei'haps  it  might  even  be


COMPAEISON   WITH    INFERIOR   ANIMALS.  249

desirable  not  to  confine  the  comparison  to  societies  which
present  a  character  of  voluntary  co-operation,  in  analogy  to
the  human.  They  must  always  rank  first  in  importance :
hut  the  scientific  spirit,  extending  the  process  to  its  final
logical  term,  might  find  some  advantage  in  examining
those  strange  associations,  proper  to  the  inferior  animals,  in
which  an  involuntaiy  co-operation  results  from  an  indis-
soluble organic  union,  either  by  simple  adhesion  or  real
continuity.  If  the  science  gained  nothing  by  this  extension,
the  method  would.  And  there  is  nothing  that  can  compare
with  such  an  habitual  scientific  comparison  for  the  great
service  of  casting  out  the  absolute  spirit  which  is  the  chief
vice  of  political  philosophy.  It  appears  to  me,  moreover,
that,  in  a  practical  view,  the  insolent  pride  which  induces
some  ranks  of  society  to  suppose  themselves  as,  in  a  manner,
of  another  species  than  the  rest  of  mankind,  is  in  close
affinity  with  the  irrational  disdain  that  repudiates  all  com-
parison between  human  and  other  animal  nature.  How-
ever all  this  may  be,  these  considerations  apply  only  to  a
methodical  and  special  treatment  of  social  philosophy.
Here,  where  I  can  offer  only  the  first  conception  of  the
science,  in  which  dynamical  considerations  must  prevail,  it
is  evident  that  I  can  make  little  use  of  the  kind  of  com-
parison ;  and  this  makes  it  all  the  more  necessary  to  point
it  out,  lest  its  omission  should  occasion  such  scientific
inconveniences  as  I  have  just  indicated.  The  commonest
logical  j^rocedures  are  generally  so  characterized  by  their
very  application,  that  nothing  more  of  a  preliminary  nature
is  needed  than  the  simplest  examination  of  their  funda-
mental properties.

To  indicate  the  order  of  importance  of  the    Comparison  of
forms  of  society  which  are  to  be  studied  by   co-existing
the  Comparative  Method,  I  begin  with  the    states  of  so-
chief  method,  which  consists  in  a  comparison    ^'^^^-y-
of  the  different  co-existing  states  of  human  society  on  the
various   parts  of  the  earth's  surface, — those  states  being
completely   independent  of  each  other.     By  this  method,
the  different  stages  of  evolution  may  all  be  observed  at
once.     Though  the  progression  is  single  and  uniform,  in
regard  to  the  whole  race,  some  very  considerable  and  very
various  poi^ulations  have,   from    causes   which   are   little


250  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

understood,  attained  extremely  unequal  degrees  of  develop-
ment, so  that  the  former  states  of  the  most  civilized  nations
are  now  to  be  seen,  amidst  some  partial  differences,  among
contemporary  populations  inhabiting  different  parts  of  the
globe.  In  its  relation  to  Observation,  this  kind  of  com-
parison offers  the  advantage  of  being  applicable  both  to
statical  and  dynamical  inquiries,  verifying  the  laws  of  both,
and  even  furnishing  occasionally  valuable  direct  inductions
in  regard  to  both.  In  the  second  place,  it  exhibits  all
j^ossible  degrees  of  social  evolution  to  our  immediate  obser-
vation. From  the  wretched  inhabitants  of  Tierra  del
Fuego  to  the  most  advanced  nations  of  western  Europe,
there  is  no  social  grade  which  is  not  extant  in  some  points
of  the  globe,  and  usually  in  localities  which  are  clearly
apart.  In  the  historical  part  of  this  volume,  we  shall  find
that  some  interesting  secondary  phases  of  social  develop-
ment, of  which  the  history  of  civilization  leaves  no  per-
ceptible traces,  can  be  known  only  by  this  compai'ative
method  of  study  ;  and  these  are  not,  as  might  be  supposed,
the  lowest  degrees  of  evolution,  which  every  one  admits
can  be  investigated  in  no  other  way.  And  between  the
great  historical  aspects,  there  are  numerous  intermediate
states  which  must  be  observed  thus,  if  at  all.  This  second
part  of  the  comparative  method  verifies  the  indications
afforded  by  historical  analysis,  and  fills  up  the  gai)S  it
leaves  :  and  nothing  can  be  more  rational  than  the  method,
as  it  rests  upon  the  established  principle  that  the  develop-
ment of  the  human  mind  is  uniform  in  the  midst  of  all
diversities  of  climate,  and  even  of  race ;  such  diversities
having  no  effect  upon  anything  more  than  the  rate  of
progress. — But  we  must  beware  of  the  scientific  dangers
attending  the  process  of  comparison  by  this  method.  For
instance,  it  can  give  us  no  idea  of  the  order  of  suc-
cession, as  it  presents  all  the  states  of  development  as
co-existing :  so  that,  if  the  order  of  development  were
not  established  by  other  methods,  this  one  would  in-
fallil)ly  mislead  \is.  And  again,  if  we  were  not  misled  as
to  the  order,  there  is  nothing  in  this  method  which  dis-
closes the  filiation  of  the  different  systems  of  society ;
a  matter  in  which  the  most  distinguished  philosophers
have  been  mistaken  in  various  ways  and  degi'ees.     Again,


WITH   COEXISTING   STATES   OF   SOCIETY.  251

there  is  the  danger  of  mistaking  modifications  for  primary
phases ;  as  when  social  differences  have  been  ascribed
to  the  poHtical  influence  of  climate,  instead  of  that  in-
equality of  evolution  which  is  the  real  cause.  Sometimes,
but  more  rarely,  the  mistake  is  the  other  way.  In-
deed, there  is  nothing  in  the  matter  that  can  show  which
of  two  cases  pi'esents  the  diversity  that  is  observed.  We
are  in  danger  of  the  same  mistake  in  regard  to  races ;  for,
as  the  sociological  comparison  is  instituted  between  peoples
of  different  races,  we  are  liable  to  confound  the  effects  of
race  and  of  the  social  period.  Again,  climate  comes  in  to
offer  a  third  source  of  interpretation  of  comparative  pheno-
mena, sometimes  agreeing  with,  and  sometimes  contra-
dicting the  two  others ;  thus  multiplying  the  chances  of
error,  and  rendering  the  analysis  which  looked  so  promising
almost  impracticable.  Here,  again,  we  see  the  indispens-
able necessity  of  keeping  in  view  the  positive  conception
of  human  development  as  a  whole.  By  this  alone  can  we
be  preserved  from  such  errors  as  I  have  referred  to,  and
enriched  by  any  genuine  results  of  analysis.  We  see  how
absurd  in  theory  and  dangerous  in  practice  are  the  notions
and  declamations  of  the  empirical  school,  and  of  the
enemies  of  all  social  speculation :  for  it  is  precisely  in  pro-
portion to  their  elevation  and  generality  that  the  ideas  of
positive  social  philosophy  become  real  and  effective, — all
illusion  and  uselessness  belouging  to  conceptions  which
are  too  narrow  and  too  sj^ecial,  in  tlae  departments  either  of
science  or  of  reasoning.  But  it  is  a  consequence  from  these
last  considerations  that  this  first  sketch  of  sociological
science,  with  the  means  of  investigation  that  belong  to  it,
rests  immediately  upon  the  primary  use  of  a  new  method  of
observation,  which  is  so  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  the
phenomena  as  to  be  exempt  from  the  dangers  inherent  in
the  others.  This  last  portion  of  the  compai-ative  method  is
the  Historical  Method,  properly  so  called ;  and  it  is  the
only  basis  on  which  the  system  of  political  logic  can  rest.

The  historical  comparison  of  the  consecu-    Comparison  of
tive  states  of  humanity  is  not  only  the  chief   consecutive
scientific  device   of  the  new  political  philo-    states,
sophy.    Its  rational  development  constitutes  the  substratum
of  the  science,  in  whatever  is  essential  to  it.     It  is  this


252  positive:  philosophy.

wliidi  distinguishes  it  tlioroiiglily  from  biological  science,
as  we  shall  presently  see.  The  positive  principle  of  this
separation  results  from  the  necessary  influence  of  human
generations  upon  the  generations  that  follow,  accumulating
continuously  till  it  constitutes  the  preponderating  con-
sideration in  the  direct  study  of  social  development.  As
long  as  this  j^reponderance  is  not  dii'ectly  recognized,  the
positive  study  of  humanity  must  appear  a  simple  pro-
longation of  the  natural  history  of  Man  :  but  this  scientific
character,  suitable  enough  to  the  earlier  generations,  dis-
appears in  the  course  of  the  social  evolution,  and  assumes
at  length  a  wholly  new  as]:)ect,  proper  to  sociological  science,
in  which  historical  considerations  are  of  immediate  impor-
tance. And  this  preponderant  use  of  the  historical  method
gives  its  philosoj)hical  chai'acter  to  sociology  in  a  logical,
as  well  as  a  scientific  sense.  By  the  creation  of  this  new
department  of  the  comparative  method,  sociology  confers  a
benefit  on  the  whole  of  natural  philosophy ;  because  the
positive  method  is  thus  completed  and  perfected,  in  a
manner  which,  for  scientific  importance,  is  almost  beyond
our  estimate.  What  we  can  now  compi*ehend  is  that  the
hist(n'ical  method  verifies  and  applies,  in  the  largest  way,
that  chief  quality  of  sociological  science, — its  proceeding
from  the  whole  to  the  parts.  Without  this  permanent
condition  of  social  study,  all  historical  labour  would  de-
generate into  being  a  mere  compilation  of  provisional
materials.  As  it  is  in  their  development  especially  that
the  various  social  elements  are  interconnected  and  insepar-
able, it  is  clear  that  any  partial  filiation  must  be  essentially
untrue.  Where,  for  instance,  is  the  use  of  any  exclusive
history  of  any  one  science  or  art,  unless  meaning  is  given
to  it  by  first  connecting  it  with  the  study  of  human  progress
generally?  It  is  the  same  in  every  direction,  and  especially
with  regard  to  political  history,  as  it  is  called, — as  if  any
history  could  be  other  than  political,  more  or  less !  The
prevailing  tendency  to  speciality  in  study  would  reduce
history  to  a  mere  accumulation  of  unconnected  delineations,
in  which  all  idea  of  the  true  filiation  of  events  would  be
lost  amidst  the  mass  of  confused  descriptions.  If  the
historical  comparisons  of  the  different  periods  of  civilization
are  to  have  any  scientific  character,  they  must  be  referred


COMPARISON   OF   CONSECUTIVE    STATES.  253

to  the  general  social  evolution :  and  it  is  only  thus  that  we
can  obtain  the  guiding  ideas  by  which  the  special  studies
themselves  must  be  directed.

In  a  practical  view,  it  is  evident  that  the  preponderance
of  the  historical  method  tends  to  develop  the  social  senti-
ment, by  giving  us  an  immediate  interest  in  even  the  earliest
exjjeriences  of  our  race,  through  the  influence  that  they
exercised  over  the  evolution  of  our  own  civilization.  As
Condorcet  observed,  no  enlightened  man  can  think  of  the
battles  of  Marathon  and  Salamis  without  perceiving  the
importance  of  their  consequences  to  the  race  at  large.
This  kind  of  feeling  should,  when  we  are  treating  of
science,  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  sympathetic
interest  which  is  awakened  by  all  delineations  of  human
life, — in  fiction  as  well  as  in  history.  The  sentiment  I  refer
to  is  deeper,  because  in  some  sort  personal ;  and  more
reflective,  because  it  results  from  scientific  conviction.  It
cannot  be  excited  by  popular  history,  in  a  descrij^tive  form  ;
but  only  by  positive  history,  regarded  as  a  true  science,  and
exhibiting  the  events  of  human  experience  in  co-ordinated
series  which  manifest  their  own  graduated  connection.
This  new  form  of  the  social  sentiment  must  at  first  be  the
privilege  of  the  choice  few  ;  but  it  will  be  extended,  some-
what weakened  in  force,  to  the  whole  of  society,  in  pro-
portion as  the  general  results  of  social  physics  become
sufficiently  popular.  It  will  fulfil  the  most  obvious  and
elementary  idea  of  the  habitual  connection  between  indivi-
duals and  contemporary  nations,  by  showing  that  the
successive  generations  of  men  concur  in  a  final  end,  which
requires  the  determinate  participation  of  each  and  all.
This  rational  disposition  to  regard  men  of  all  times  as
fellow-workers  is  as  yet  visible  in  the  case  of  only  the  most
advanced  sciences.  By  the  philosophical  preponderance  of
the  historical  method,  it  will  be  extended  to  all  the  asjiects
of  human  life,  so  as  to  sustain,  in  a  reflective  temper,  that
respect  for  our  ancestors  which  is  indispensable  to  a  sound
state  of  society  and  so  deeply  disturbed  at  present  bv  the
metaphysical  philosophy.

As  for  the  course  to  be  pursued  by  this  method, — it
appears  to  me  that  its  spirit  consists  in  the  rational  use  of
social  series ;  that  is,  in  a  successive  estimate  of  the  dif-


254  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

fereut  states  of  humanity  wliicli  sliall  show  the  growth  of
each  disposition,  physical,  intellectual,  moral,  or  political,
combined  with  the  decline  of  the  opposite  disposition,
whence  we  may  ohtain  a  scientific  prevision  of  the  final
ascendancy  of  the  one  and  extinction  of  the  other, — care
being  taken  to  frame  our  conclusions  according  to  the  laws
of  human  development.  A  considei*able  accuracy  of  pre-
vision may  thus  be  obtained,  for  any  determinate  period,
and  with  any  particular  views ;  as  historical  analysis  will
indicate  the  direction  of  modifications,  even  in  the  most
disturbed  times.  And  it  is  worth  noticing  that  the  pre-
vision will  be  nearest  the  truth  in  proportion  as  the  phe-
nomena in  question  are  more  important  and  more  general ;
because  then  continuous  causes  are  predominant  in  the
social  movement ;  and  disturbances  have  less  power.  From
these  first  general  aspects,  the  same  rational  certainty  may
extend  to  secondary  and  special  aspects,  through  their
statical  relations  with  the  first ;  and  thus  we  may  obtain
conclusions  sutficiently  accurate  for  the  application  of
principles.

If  we  desire  to  familiarize  ourselves  with  this  historical
method,  we  must  employ  it  first  upon  the  past,  by  en-
deavouring to  deduce  every  well-known  historical  situation
from  the  whole  series  of  its  antecedents.  In  every  science
we  must  have  learned  to  predict  the  past,  so  to  speak,
before  we  can  predict  the  future ;  because  the  first  use  of
the  observed  relations  among  fulfilled  facts  is  to  teach  us
by  the  anterior  succession  what  the  future  succession  will
be.  No  examination  of  facts  can  explain  our  existing  state
to  us,  if  we  have  not  ascertained,  hy  historical  study,  the
value  of  the  elements  at  work  ;  and  thus  it  is  in  vain  that
statesmen  insist  on  the  necessity  of  political  observation,
while  they  look  no  further  than  the  present,  or  a  very
recent  past.  The  present  is,  by  itself,  ])urely  misleading,
because  it  is  imj^ossible  to  avoid  confounding  principal  with
secondary  facts,  exalting  conspicuous  transient  manifesta-
tions over  fundamental  tendencies,  which  are  genei'ally  very
quiet ;  and  above  all,  supposing  those  powers,  institutions,
and  doctrines,  to  be  in  the  ascendant,  which  are,  in  fact,  in
their  decline.  It  is  clear  that  the  only  adequate  corrective
of  all  this  is  a  philosophical  understanding  of  the  past ;


VALUE   OF   HISTORICAL   STUDY.  255

that  the  comparison  caunot  be  decisive  unless  it  embraces
the  whole  of  the  past ;  and  that  tlie  sooner  we  stop,  in  travel-
ling up  the  vista  of  time,  the  more  serious  will  be  the  mis-
takes we  fall  into.  Before  our  very  eyes,  we  see  statesmen
going  no  further  back  than  the  last  century,  to  obtain  an
explanation  of  the  confl^sion  in  which  we  are  living :  the
most  abstract  of  politicians  may  take  in  the  preceding
century,  but  the  philosophers  themselves  hardly  venture
l)eyond  the  sixteenth ;  so  that  those  who  are  striving  to
find  the  issue  of  the  revolutionary  period  have  actually
no  conception  of  it  as  a  whole,  though  that  whole  is  itself
only  a  transient  phase  of  the  general  social  movement.

The  most  perfect  methods  may,  however,  be  rendered
deceptive  by  misuse:  and  this  we  must  bear  in  mind.  We
have  seen  that  mathematical  analysis  itself  may  betray  us
into  substituting  signs  for  ideas,  and  that  it  conceals
inanity  of  conception  under  an  imposing  verbiage.  The
difficulty  in  the  case  of  the  historical  method  in  sociology
is  in  applying  it,  on  account  of  the  extreme  complexity  of
the  materials  we  have  to  deal  with.  But  for  this,  the
method  would  be  entirely  safe.  The  chief  danger  is  of  our
supposing  a  continuous  decrease  to  indicate  a  final  extinc-
tion, or  the  reverse  ;  as  in  mathematics  it  is  a  common
sophism  to  confound  continuous  variations,  more  or  less,
with  unlimited  variations.  To  take  a  strange  and  very
marked  example:  if  we  consider  that  part  of  social  develop-
ment which  relates  to  human  food,  we  cannot  but  observe
that  men  take  less  food  as  they  advance  in  civilization.  If
we  compare  savage  with  more  civilized  peoples,  in  the
Homeric  poems  or  in  the  narratives  of  travellers,  or  com-
pare country  with  town  life,  or  any  generation  with  the
one  that  went  before,  we  shall  find  this  curious  result, —
the  sociological  law  of  which  we  shall  examine  hereafter.
The  laws  of  individual  human  nature  aid  in  the  result  liy
making  intellectual  and  moral  action  moi'e  pre^ionderant  as
Man  becomes  more  civilized.  The  fact  is  thus  established,
both  by  the  experimental  and  the  logical  way.  Yet  nobody
sujjposes  that  men  will  ultimately  cease  to  eat.  In  this
case,  the  absurdity  saves  us  from  a  false  conclusion ;  but
in  other  cases,  the  complexity  disguises  much  error  in  the
experiment  and  the  reasoning.     In  the  above  instance,  we


256  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

must  resort  to  the  laws  of  our  nature  for  that  verification
which,  taken  all  together,  they  afford  to  our  sociological
analysis.  As  the  social  phenomenon,  taken  as  a  whole,  is
simply  a  development  of  humanity,  without  any  real
creation  of  faculties,  all  social  manifestations  must  be  to
be  found,  if  only  in  their  germ,  in  the  primitive  type  which
biology  constructed  by  anticipation  for  sociology.  Thus
every  law  of  social  succession  disclosed  by  the  historical
method  must  be  unquestionably  connected,  directly  or  in-
directly, with  the  positive  theory  of  human  nature  ;  and  all
inductions  which  cannot  stand  this  test  will  prove  to  be
illusory,  through  some  sort  of  insufficiency  in  the  observa-
tions on  which  they  are  gi'ounded.  The  main  scientific
strength  of  sociological  demonstrations  must  ever  lie  in
the  accordance  between  the  conclusions  of  historical  ana-
lysis and  the  preparatory  conceptious  of  the  biological
theory.  And  thus  we  find,  look  where  we  will,  a  confirma-
tion of  that  chief  intellectual  character  of  the  new  science,
— the  philosophical  preponderance  of  the  spirit  of  the
whole  over  the  spirit  of  detail.

This  method  ranks,  in  sociological  science,  with  that  of
zoological  comparison  in  the  study  of  individual  life  ;  and
we  shall  see,  as  we  proceed,  that  the  succession  of  social
states  exactly  corresponds,  in  a  scientific  sense,  with  the
gradation  of  organisms  in  biology ;  and  the  social  series,
once  clearly  established,  must  be  as  real  and  as  useful  as
.  the  animal  series.     When  the  method  has

fouTtirn.etirod.  ^"^en  used  long  enough  to  disclose  its  pro-
perties, I  am  disposed  to  think  that  it  will
be  regarded  as  so  very  marked  a  modification  of  positive
research  as  to  deserve  a  separate  place ;  so  that,  in  addition
to  Observation,  properly  so  called.  Experiment,  and  Com-
parison, we  shall  have  the  Historical  Method,  as  a  fourth
and  final  mode  of  the  art  of  observing.  It  will  be  derived,
according  to  the  iisual  course,  from  the  mode  which  imme-
diately precedes  it :  and  it  will  be  ajiplied  to  the  analysis
of  the  most  complex  phenomena.

I  must  be  allowed  to  point  out  that  the  new  political
philosophy,  sanctioning  the  old  leadings  of  popular  reason,
restores  to  History  all  its  scientific  rights  as  a  basis  of  wise
social  speculation,  after  the  metaphysical  p]iiloso})hy  had


THE    HISTORICAL    METHOD.  257

striven  to  induce  us  to  discard  all  large  considerations  of
the  past.  In  the  foregoing  depai-tments  of  natural  phi-
losophy we  have  seen  that  the  positive  spirit,  instead  of
being  disturbing  in  its  tendencies,  is  remarkable  for  con-
firming, in  the  essential  parts  of  every  science,  the  inestim-
able intuitions  of  popular  good  sense ;  of  which  indeed
science  is  merely  a  systematic  prolongation,  and  which  a
barren  metaphysical  philosophy  alone  could  despise.  In
this  case,  so  far  from  restricting  the  influence  which  human
reason  has  ever  attributed  to  history  in  political  combina-
tions, the  new  social  philosophy  increases  it,  radically  and
eminently.  It  asks  from  history  something  more  than
counsel  and  instruction  to  perfect  conceptions  which  are
derived  from  another  source :  it  seeks  its  own  general
direction,  through  the  whole  system  of  historical  con-
clusions.

Having  reviewed  the  general  character  of  Sociology,  and
its  means  of  investigation,  we  must  next  make  out  its
relations  to  the  other  principal  sciences.


II.


268


CHAPTER  IV.

RELATION     OF     SOCIOLOGY     TO     THE    OTHER     DEPARTMENTS
OF    POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

THE  conditions  of  the  positive  philosophy  with  regard
to  this  science  are  not  fulfilled  till  its  relations  with
the  other  sciences  are  ascertained.  Its  estaljlishinent  in
its  proper  place  in  the  hierarchy  is  a  principle  of  such
importance  that  it  may  be  seen  to  comprehend  all  the
philosophical  requisites  for  its  institution  as  a  science :
and  it  is  for  want  of  this  that  all  attempts  in  our  time  to
treat  social  questions  in  a  positive  manner  have  failed.
Whether  we  consider  the  indispensable  data  of  various
kinds  supplied  to  sociology  by  the  other  sciences,  or  the
yet  moi'e  important  requisite  of  the  sound  speculative
habits  formed  by  the  preparatory  study  of  them,  the  daily
spectacle  of  abortive  attempts  to  construct  a  social  science
leaves  no  doubt  that  this  grand  omission  is  the  cause  of
the  failure,  and  of  the  wrong  direction  always  taken,
sooner  or  later,  by  minds  which  seemed  fitted  to  accom-
plish something  better.  We  must,  then,  review  the  rela-
tion of  this  last  of  the  sciences  to  all  the  rest ;  but  our
examination  of  each  of  them,  and  of  l>iology  especially,  has
so  anticipated  this  part  of  my  subject,  that  I  may  pass
over  it  very  briefly.

It  is  a  new  idea  that  the  science  of  society  is  thus  con-
nected with  the  I'est :  yet  in  no  case  is  the  relation  more
unquestionable  or  more  marked.  Social  phenomena
exhibit,  in  even  a  higher  degree,  the  complexity,  speciality,
and  personality  which  distinguish  the  higher  phenomena
of  the  individual  life.  In  order  to  see  how  this  estalJishes
the  connection  in  question,  we  must  remember  that  in  the
social,  as  in  the  biological  case,  tliere  ai'e  two  classes  of
<*onsi(h'rations : — that  of  Man  or  Humanity,  which  consti-
tutes the  phenomenon,  and  that  of  the  medium  or  environ-


RELATION    OF   SOCIOLO(n'   TO   BIOLOGY.  259

nient,  which  mfluences  this  partial  and  secondary  develop-
ment of  one  of  the  animal  races.  Now,  by  the  first  term
of  this  couple,  sociology  is  subordinated  to  the  whole  of
the  organic  philosophy,  which  discloses  to  us  the  laws  of
human  nature :  and  by  the  second,  it  is  connected  with  the
whole  system  of  inorganic  philosophy,  which  reveals  to  us
the  exterior  conditions  of  human  existence.  One  of  the
two  great  divisions  of  philosophy,  in  short,  determines  the
agent  concerned  in  sociological  phenomena,  and  the  other
the  medium  in  which  it  is  developed.  It  is  clear  that  we
here  take  together,  and  treat  as  one,  the  three  sections  of
inorganic  philosophy, — chemistry,  physics,  and  astronomy,
- — as  they  all  relate  equally  to  the  social  medium.  It  will
be  enough  if  we  point  out  tlie  ]:)articipation  of  each,  as  the
occasion  ai'ises.  As  to  the  Method,  properly  so  called,
it  is,  as  we  have  seen,  more  and  more  necessary  to  subject
studies  to  the  graduated  system  of  prior  studies,  in  propor-
tion to  their  increasing  complexity.  These  are  the  two
points  we  have  to  consider  in  surveying  once  more  the
encyclopedical  scale,  beginning,  as  before,  with  the  rela-
tions which  are  the  closest  and  most  direct.  We  shall
afterwards  have  to  exhibit  the  reaction,  scientific  and
logical,  which  sociology,  once  instituted,  must  exercise,  in
its  turn,  on  the  whole  of  the  preceding  sciences : — a  reac-
tion which  is,  as  yet,  even  less  suspected  than  the  primary
action  itself.

The  subordination  of  social  science  to  r,  ^  •
biology  is  so  evident  that  nobody  denies  it  Bfofjlr^"  ^'^
in  statement,  however  it  may  be  neglected
in  practice.  This  contrariety  between  the  statement  and
the  practice  is  due  to  something  else,  besides  the  faulty
condition  of  social  studies  :  it  results  also  from  the  imper-
fection of  biological  science ;  and  especially  from  its  most
conspicuous  imperfection  of  all, — that  of  its  highest  part,
relating  to  intellectual  and  moral  j^henomena.  It  is  by
this  portion  that  biology  and  sociology  are  the  most  closely
connected  ;  and  cerebral  physiology  is  too  recent,  and  its
scientific  state  is  too  immature,  to  have  admitted,  as  yet,
of  any  proper  organization  of  the  relations  of  the  two
sciences.  Whenever  the  time  for  that  jirocess  arrives,  the
connection  will  be  seen  to   hear  two  aspects.     Under  the


260  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

first,  biology  will  be  seen  to  afford  the  starting-point  of  all
social  speculation,  in  accordance  with  the  analysis  of  the
social  faculties  of  Man,  and  of  the  organic  conditions
which  determine  its  character.  But,  moreover,  as  we  can
scarcely  at  all  investigate  the  most  elementary  terms  of
the  social  series,  we  must  construct  them  by  ajjplying  the
positive  theory  of  human  nature  to  the  aggregate  of  corre-
sponding circumstances,- — regarding  the  small  materials
that  we  are  able  to  obtain  as  rather  adapted  to  facilitate
and  improve  this  rational  determination  than  to  show  us
what  society  really  is  at  so  early  a  period.  When  the
social  condition  has  advanced  so  far  as  to  exclude  this  kind
of  deduction,  the  second  aspect  presents  itself;  and  the
biological  theory  of  man  is  implicated  with  the  sociological
in  a  less  direct  and  special  manner.  The  whole  social
evolution  of  the  race  must  proceed  in  entire  accordance
with  biological  laws  ;  and  social  phenomena  must  always
be  founded  on  the  necessary  in  variableness  of  the  human
organism,  the  characteristics  of  which,  physical,  intellec-
tual, and  moral,  are  always  found  to  be  essentially  the
same,  and  related  in  the  same  manner,  at  every  degree  of
the  social  scale,— no  development  of  them  attendant  upon
the  social  condition  ever  altering  their  nature  iu  the  least,
nor,  of  course,  creating  or  destroying  any  faculties  what-
ever, or  transposing  their  influence.  No  sociological  view
can  therefore  be  admitted,  at  any  stage  of  the  science,  or
under  any  appearance  of  historical  induction,  that  is  contra-
dictory to  the  known  laws  of  human  nature.  No  view  can
be  admitted,  for  instance,  which  supposes  a  very  marked
character  of  goodness  or  wickedness  to  exist  in  the
majority  of  men  ;  or  which  represents  the  sympathetic
affections  as  prevailing  over  the  personal  ones  ;  or  the  in-
tellectual over  the  affective  faculties,  etc.  In  cases  like
these,  which  are  more  common  than  the  imperfection  of
the  biological  theory  would  lead  us  to  expect,  all  sociologi-
cal principles  must  be  as  carefully  submitted  to  ulterior
correction  as  if  they  supposed  human  life  to  be  extrava-
gantly long,  or  contravened,  in  any  other  way,  the  physical
laws  of  humanity  ;  because  the  intellectual  and  moral  con-
ditions of  human  existence  are  as  I'eal  and  as  imperative
as  its  material  conditions,  though  more  difficult  to  esti-


TEE  BIOLOGICAL  VIEW  OF  POLITICAL  DOCTRINES.      261

mate,  and  therefore  less  known.  Thus,  in  a  biological
view,  all  existing  political  doctrines  are  radically  vicious,
because,  in  their  irrational  estimate  of  political  phenomena,
they  suppose  qualities  to  exist  among  rulers  and  the  ruled,
— here  an  habitual  perverseness  or  imbecility,  and  there  a
spirit  of  concert  or  calculation, — which  are  incompatible
with  positive  ideas  of  human  nature,  and  which  would
impute  pathological  monstrosity  to  whole  classes  ;  which  is
simply  absurd.  An  example  like  this  shows  what  valuable
resources  positive  sociology  must  derive  from  its  subordi-
nation to  biology ;  and  especially  in  regard  to  cerebral
physiology,  whenever  it  comes  to  be  studied  as  it  ought.

The  students  of  biology  have,  however,  the  same  ten-
dency to  exalt  their  own  science  at  the  expense  of  that
which  follows  it,  that  physicists  and  chemists  have  shown
in  regard  to  biology.  The  biologists  lose  sight  of  histori-
cal observation  altogether,  and  represent  sociology  as  a
mere  corollary  of  the  science  of  Man  ;  in  the  same  way
that  physicists  and  chemists  treat  biology  as  a  mere  deri-
vative from  the  inorganic  philosophy.  The  injury  to
science  is  great  in  both  cases.  If  we  neglect  historical
comparison,  we  can  understand  nothing  of  the  social
evolution ;  and  the  chief  phenomenon  in  sociology, — the
phenomenon  which  marks  its  scientiiic  originality, — that
is,  the  gradual  and  continuous  influence  of  generations
upon  each  other, — would  be  disguised  or  unnoticed,  for
want  of  the  necessary  key — historical  analysis.  From  the
time  that  the  influence  of  former  generations  becomes  the
cause  of  any  modification  of  the  social  movement,  the
mode  of  investigation  must  accord  with  the  nature  of  the
phenomena ;  and  historical  analj'sis  therefore  becomes
preponderant,  while  biological  considerations,  which
explained  the  earliest  movements  of  society,  cease  to  be
more  than  a  valuable  auxiliary  and  means  of  control.  It
is  the  same  thing  as  when,  in  the  study  of  inorganic
science,  men  quit  deduction  for  direct  observation.  It  is
the  same  thing  as  when,  in  biology,  observers  proceed
from  contemplating  the  organism  and  its  medium,  to
analyse  the  ages  of  the  individual  being,  as  a  principal
means  of  investigation.  The  only  difference  is  that  the
change  in  the  instrument  is  the  more  necessary  the  more


262  POSITIVK    PIIILOSOPIIV.

complex  are  tlie  phenomena  to  l)e  studied.  This  would
have  been  seen  at  once,  and  j^olitical  philosophy  would
have  been  admitted  to  depend  on  this  condition  for  its
advance,  but  for  the  prevalence  of  the  vicious  absolute
spirit  in  social  speculation,  which,  neglecting  the  facts  of
the  case,  for  ever  strives  to  subject  social  considerations  to
the  absolute  conception  of  an  immutable  political  type,  no
less  adverse  to  tlie  relative  spii-it  of  positive  philoso^^liy
than  theological  and  metaphysical  types,  though  less  in-
definite. The  consequence  of  this  error  is  that  social
modifications  proper  to  certain  periods,  and  passing  away
with  them,  are  too  often  supposed  to  be  inherent  in
human  nature,  and  therefore  indestructible.  Even  Gall,
attending  only  to  imperfect  physiological  considerations,
and  neglecting  the  social,  wandered  off  into  a  sort  of
scientific  declamation  on  the  subject  of  wa.r,  declaring  the
military  tendencies  of  mankind  to  be  immutable,  notwith-
standing the  mass  of  historical  testimony  which  shows
that  the  warlike  disposition  diminishes  as  human  develop-
ment proceeds.  A  multitude  of  examjiles  of  this  kind  of
mistake  might  be  presented ;  the  most  striking  of  which
are  perhaps  in  connection  with  theories  of  education,  which
are  usually  formed  on  absolute  princij^les,  to  the  neglect  of
the  corresponding  state  of  civilization.

The  true  nature  of  sociology  is  evident  enough  from
what  has  been  said.  We  see  that  it  is  not  an  appendix  to
biology,  but  a  science  by  itself,  founded  upon  a  distinct
basis,  while  closely  connected,  from  first  to  last,  with
liiology.  Such  is  the  scientific  view  of  it.  As  to  the
method,  the  logical  analogy  of  the  two  sciences  is  so  clear
as  to  leave  no  doubt  that  social  phih)sophers  must  prepare
their  understandings  for  their  work  by  due  discijiline  in
biologi(;al  methods.  This  is  necessary,  not  only  to  put
them  in  possession  of  the  general  spirit  of  investigation
proper  to  organic  science,  but  yet  more  to  familiarize
tliem  with  tlie  comparative  method,  which  is  the  grand
resource  of  investigation  in  both  sciences.  Moi'eover,  there
is  a  most  valual)le  philosophical  princij)le  common  to  both
sciences  which  remains  to  be  fully  develo])ed  before  it  can
attain  its  final  prevalence ;- — I  mean  the  positive  version  of
the  dogma  of  final  causes,  discussed  before  in  connection


RELATION    TO    INOKGANIC    PHILOSOPHY.  263

with  the  conditions  of  vital  existence.  This  principle,
being  the  necessary  result  of  the  distinction  betAveen  the
statical  and  the  dynamical  condition,  belongs  eminently  to
the  study  of  living  bodies,  in  -which  that  distinction  is
especially  mai-ked,  and  where  alone  the  general  idea  of  it
can  properly  be  acquired.  But,  great  as  is  its  direct  use
in  the  study  of  individual  life,  it  is  applicable  in  a  much
more  extensive  and  essential  way  in  social  science.  It  is  by
means  of  this  principle  that  the  new  philosophy,  uniting
the  two  philosophical  meanings  of  the  word  necessary,
exhibits  as  inevitable  that  which  first  presents  itself  as
indispensable ;  and  the  converse.  There  must  be  some-
thing in  it  peculiarly  in  harmony  with  social  investigations,
as  we  are  led  up  to  it  by  the  most  opposite  methods  of
approach ;  one  evidence  of  which  is  De  Maistre's  fine
political  aphorism,  "Whatever  is  necessary  exists."

If  sociology  is  thus  subordinated  to  biology,        Eelation  to
it  must  be  scientifically  related  to  the  whole         Inorganic
system    of    inorganic    philosophy,    because        philosophy,
biology  is  so.     But  it  is  also  connected  with  that  system
by  immediate  relations  of  its  own.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  only  by  the  inorganic  philosophy
that  we  can  duly  analyse  the  entire  system  of  exterior  con-
ditions, chemical,  physical,  and  astronomical,  amidst  which
the  social  evolution  proceeds,  and  by  which  its  rate  of  pro-
gress is  determined.  Social  phenomena  can  no  more  be
understood  apart  from  their  environment  than  those  of
individual  life.  All  exterior  disturbances  which  could
affect  the  life  of  individual  Man  must  change  his  social
existence ;  and,  conversely,  his  social  existence  could  not
be  sei'iously  disturbed  by  any  modifications  of  the  medium
which  should  not  derange  his  separate  condition.  I  need,
therefore,  only  refer  to  what  I  have  said  in  regard  to  the
influence  of  astronomical  and  other  conditions  on  vital
existence ;  for  the  same  considerations  bear  on  the  case  of
social  phenomena.  It  is  plain  that  society,  as  well  as
individual  beings,  is  affected  by  the  circumstances  of  the
earth's  daily  rotation  and  annual  movement  ;  and  by
states  of  heat,  moisture,  and  electricity  in  the  surrounding
medium ;  and  by  the  chemical  conditions  of  the  atmo-
sphere, the  waters,  the  soil,  etc.     I  need  only  observe  that


264  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

the  effect  of  these  infli;ences  is  even  more  marked  in
sociology  than  in  biology,  not  only  because  the  organism  is
more  complex,  and  its  phenomena  of  a  higher  order,  but
because  the  social  organism  is  regarded  as  susceptible  of
indefinite  duration,  so  as  to  render  sensible  many  gradual
modifications  which  would  be  disguised  fi'om  our  notice  by
the  brevity  of  individual  life.  Astronomical  conditions,
above  all  others,  manifest  their  importance  to  living  beings
only  by  j^assing  from  the  individual  to  the  social  case.
Much  smaller  disturbances  would  visibly  affect  a  social
condition  than  would  disturb  an  individual  life,  which
requii-es  a  smaller  concuri'ence  of  favourable  circumstances.
For  instance,  the  dimensions  of  the  globe  are  scientifically
more  important  in  sociology  than  in  biology,  because  they
set  bounds  to  the  ultimate  extension  of  population ;  a
circumstance  worthy  of  grave  consideration  in  any  positive
system  of  political  speculation.  And  this  is  only  one  case
of  very  many.  If  we  consider,  in  regard  to  dynamical  con-
ditions, what  would  be  the  effect  of  any  change  in  the
degree  of  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  in  the  stability  of  the
poles  of  rotation,  and  yet  more  in  the  eccentricity  of  the
earth's  orbit,  we  shall  see  that  vast  changes  in  social  life
must  be  produced  by  causes  which  could  not  endanger
individual  existence.  One  of  the  first  reflections  that  pre-
sents itself  is  that  positive  sociology  was  nut  possible  till
the  inorganic  philosophy  had  reached  a  certain  degree  of
precision.  The  very  conceptiom  of  stability  in  human
association  could  not  be  positively  established  till  the  dis-
covery of  gravitation  had  assured  us  of  the  permanence  of
the  conditions  of  life ;  and  till  physics  and  chemistry  had
taught  us  that  the  surface  of  our  planet  has  attained  a
natural  condition,  apart  from  accidents  too  rare  and  too
partial  to  affect  our  estimate;  or,  at  least,  tliat  the  crust  of
the  globe  admits  of  only  variations  so  limited  and  so
gradual  as  not  to  interfere  with  the  natural  course  of  social
development, — a  development  which  could  not  be  hoped
for  under  any  liability  to  violent  and  frequent  physico-
chemical  convulsions  of  any  extent  in  the  area  of  human
life.  There  is  thus  more  I'oom  to  ayjprehend  that  inorganic
])hilosophy  is  not  advanced  enough  to  sujiply  the  con-
ditions of  a  positive  polity,  than  to  suppose  that  any  real


EFFECT       F   INORGANIC    INFLUENCES.  265

political  philosopliy  can  be  framed  in  independence  of  in-
organic science.  We  have  seen  before,  however,  that  there
is  a  perpetual  accordance  between  the  possible  and  the
indispensable.  What  we  must  have,  we  are  able  to  obtain  ;
and  if  there  are,  as  in  the  case  of  the  mutual  action  of
different  starry  systems,  cosmical  ideas  which  are  inac-
cessible to  us,  we  know,  in  regard  to  sociology  now,  as  to
biology  before,  that  they  are  of  no  practical  importance  to
us.  Wherever  we  look,  over  the  whole  field  of  science,  we
shall  find  that,  amidst  the  great  imperfection  of  inorganic
philosophy,  it  is  suflBciently  advanced,  in  all  essential
respects,  to  contribute  to  the  constitution  of  true  social
science,  if  we  only  have  the  prudence  to  postpone  to  a
future  time  investigations  which  would  now  be  premature.
I  observed  in  a  former  chapter  that  no  disturbing  causes,
acting  on  social  development,  could  do  more  than  aft'ect  its
rate  of  progress.  This  is  true  of  the  operation  of  influences
from  the  inorganic  world,  as  of  all  others.  In  our  review
of  biology  we  saw  that  the  human  being  cannot  be  modified
indefinitely  by  exterior  circumstances ;  that  such  modifica-
tions can  affect  ouly  the  degrees  of  phenomena,  without  at
all  changing  their  nature ;  and  again,  that  when  the  dis-
turbing influences  exceed  their  general  limits,  the  organism
is  no  longer  modified,  but  destroyed.  All  this  is,  if  pos-
sible, more  eminently  true  of  the  social  than  of  the  individual
organism,  on  account  of  its  higher  complexity  and  position.
The  course  of  its  development  must  therefore  be  regarded
as  belonging  to  the  essence  of  the  phenomenon  itself,  and
therefore  essentially  identical  in  all  conceivable  hypotheses
about  the  corresponding  medium.  It  is  true  we  can  easily
imagine,  as  I  said  just  now,  that  so  delicate  an  evolution
may  be  prevented  by  external  disturbances,  and  particularly
astronomical  perturbations,  which  would  not  destroy  the
race ;  but  as  long  as  the  evolution  does  proceed,  it  must  be
supposed  subject  to  the  same  essential  laws,  and  varying
only  in  its  speed,  as  it  traverses  the  stages  of  which  it  is
composed,  without  their  succession  or  their  final  tendency
being  ever  changed.  Such  a  change  would  be  beyond  the
power  of  even  biological  causes.  If,  for  instance,  we
admitted  some  marked  alterations  in  the  human  organism,
or,  what  conies  to  the  same  thing,  conceived  of  the  social


266  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

development  of  another  animal  race,  we  must  always  sup-
pose a  common  course  of  general  development.  Such  is
the  philosophical  condition  imposed  In'  the  natui'e  of  the
subject,  which  could  not  become  positive,  except  in  as  far
as  it  could  be  thus  conceived  of ;  and  this  is  much  more
conspicuously  true  in  regard  to  inorganic  causes.  As  to
the  rest,  this  is  only  another  illustration  of  what  we  have
so  often  seen  in  the  course  of  our  survey  of  the  scientific
hierarchy, — that  if  the  less  general  phenomena  occur  under
the  necessary  j^reponderance  of  the  more  general,  this  sub-
ordination cannot  in  any  way  alter  their  proper  laws,  but
only  the  extent  and  duration  of  their  real  manifestations.
Man's  action  One    consideration  remains,  of   the    more

on  the  exter-  importance  because  it  applies  esj^ecially  to
nal  world.  physico-chemical  knowledge,  which  we  seem

to  have  rather  neglected  in  this  sketch  for  astronomical
doctrine :  I  mean  the  considerations  of  Man's  action  on
the  external  world,  the  gradual  development  of  which
affords  one  of  the  chief  aspects  of  the  social  evolution,  and
without  which  the  evolution  could  not  have  taken  place  as
a  whole,  as  it  would  have  been  stopped  at  once  by  the  pre-
ponderance of  the  material  obstacles  proper  to  the  human
condition.  In  short,  all  human  pi'ogi-ess,  political,  moral,
or  intehectual,  is  inseparable  from  material  progression,
in  virtue  of  the  close  interconnection  which,  as  we  have
seen,  characterizes  the  natural  course  of  social  phenomena.
Now,  it  is  clear  that  the  action  of  Man  upon  nature
depends  chiefly  on  his  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  inorganic
phenomena,  though  biological  phenomena  must  also  find  a
place  in  it.  We  must  bear  in  mind,  too,  that  physics,  and
yet  more  chemistry,  form  the  basis  of  human  power,  since
astronomy,  notwithstanding  its  eminent  participation  in  it,
concurs  not  as  an  instrument  for  modifying  the  medium,
but  by  prevision.  Here  we  have  another  ground  on  which
to  exhibit  the  impossibility  of  any  rational  study  of  social
development  otherwise  than  by  combining  sociological
speculations  with  the  whole  of  the  doctrines  of  inorganic
philosophy.

It  cannot  be  necessary  to  repeat  here  that
Fducatton  which  has  been  established  as  true  with  re-

gard to  the  other  sciences,  and  which  is  more


NECESSARY  EDUCxVTIOX  FOll  SOCIOLOGICAL  STUDY.      267

couspicuously  true  as  each  scieuce  becomes  more  complex,
— ^that  au  adequate  general  knowledge  of  all  the  ])receding
sciences  in  the  hierarchy  is  requisite  to  the  understanding
of  the  one  that  follows.  In  the  case  of  sociology  the  ab-
sence of  this  preparation  is  the  obvious  cause  of  the  failure
of  all  attempts  to  regenerate  the  science.  We  desii'e  to  re-
cognize in  it  a  positive  science,  while  we  leave  the  condi-
tions of  positivity  unfulfilled.  We  do  not  even  form  a  just
idea  of  the  attributes  of  positivism,  of  what  constitutes  the
explanation  of  a  phenomenon,  of  the  conditions  of  genuine
investigation,  or  of  the  true  intention  in  which  hypotheses
should  be  instituted  and  employed.  We  must  thoroughly
understand  ail  these  conditions,  and  use  them  in  the  natural
order  of  the  development  of  the  sciences,  venturing  neither
to  select  nor  transpose,  but  following  up  the  increasing
complexity  of  the  sciences,  and  recognizing  the  increase  of
resources  which  accompanies  it,  from  astronomy  with  its
simplicity  of  phenomena  and  of  means  of  research,  to
sociology  with  its  prodigious  complexity  and  abundance  of
resources.  Such  discipline  as  this  may  be  difficult ;  but  it
is  indispensable.  It  is  the  only  preparatory  education  which
can  introduce  the  positive  spirit  into  the  formation  of  social
theories.

It  is  clear  that  this  education  must  rest  on     ,  ,^    ,  .    ,

a  basisot  mathematical  philosophy, even  apart  pi-enaration
fromthe  necessity  of  mathematics  to  thestudy
of  inorganic  philosophy.  It  is  only  in  the  region  of  mathe-
matics that  sociologists,  or  anybody  else,  can  obtain  a  true
sense  of  scientific  evidence,  and  form  the  habit  of  rational
and  decisive  argumentation  ;  can,  in  short,  learn  to  fulfil
the  logical  conditions  of  all  positive  speculations,  by  study-
ing universal  positivism  at  its  source.  This  training,  ob-
tained and  employed  with  the  more  care  on  account  of  the
eminent  difficulty  of  social  science,  is  what  sociologists  have
to  seek  in  mathematics.  As  for  any  application  of  number
and  of  a  mathematical  law  to  sociological  problems,  if  such
a  method  is  inadmissible  in  biology,  it  must  be  yet  more
decisively  so  here,  for  reasons  of  which  I  have  already  said
enough.  The  only  error  of  this  class  which  would  have  de-
served express  notice,  if  we  had  not  condemned  it  by  antici-
pation, is  the  pretension  of  some  geometers  to  render  social


268  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

Pretended  investigations  positive  by  subjecting  them  to
theory  of  a  fanciful  mathematical  theoiy  of  chances,
chances.  This  error  is  in  analogy  with  that  of  biologists

who  would  make  sociology  to  be  a  corollary  or  appendix  to
their  own  science  by  suppressing  the  function  of  historical
analysis.  The  error  of  the  geometers  is  however  by  far  the
worst  of  the  two,  in  itself,  as  well  as  because  mathema-
ticians are  peculiarly  tenacious  of  error,  from  the  abstract
character  of  their  labours,  which  dispenses  them  from  the
close  study  of  nature.  Gross  as  is  the  illusion,  we  must
remember  its  excusable  origin.  It  was  James  Bernouilli
who  first  conceived  the  notion  ;  and  the  notion  affords
evidence  of  the  nascent  need  to  subject  social  theories  to
some  kind  of  positivity.  None  but  a  high  order  of  mind
could  have  so  early  felt  the  need ;  and  if  the  expedient  was
vicious,  there  was  no  better  way  discernible  by  any  possi-
bility at  that  time.  The  error  was  much  less  j^ardonable
when  the  notion  was  reproduced  by  Coudorcet,  in  a  more
direct  and  systematic  way  ;  and  his  expectation  from  it,  as
manifested  in  his  celebrated  posthumous  work,  shows  the
fluctuating  state  of  his  mind  in  regard  to  the  primary  con-
ception of  social  science.  But  there  is  no  excuse  for  La-
place's repetition  of  such  a  philosophical  mistake,  at  a  time
when  the  general  human  mind  had  begun  to  discern  the
true  spirit  of  political  philosophy,  prejjared  as  it  was  for
the  disclosure  by  the  lal>ours  of  Montesquieu  and  Con-
dorcet  himself,  and  powerfully  stimulated  besides  by  a
new  convulsion  of  society.  From  that  time  a  succession  of
imitators  has  gone  on  repeating  the  fancy,  in  heavy  alge-
braic language,  without  adding  anything  new,  abusing  the
credit  which  justly  belongs  to  the  true  mathematical  spirit;
so  that,  instead  of  being,  as  it  was  a  century  ago,  a  token
of  a  premature  instinct  of  scientific  investigation,  this  error
is  now  only  an  involuntary  testimony  to  the  absolute  im-
potence of  the  ])()litical  philosophy  that  would  employ  it.
It  is  impossible  to  conceive  of  a  more  irrational  conception
than  that  which  takes  for  its  basis  or  for  its  operative
method  a  supposed  mathematical  theory,  in  which,  signs
being  taken  for  ideas,  we  subject  numerical  proba])ility  to
calculation,  which  amoiints  to  the  same  thing  as  ottering
our  own  i<jrnorance  as  the  natural  measure  of  the  degree  of


THE   PRETENDED    THEORY   OF   CHANCES.  269

probability  of  our  various  opinions.  While  true  mathe-
matical theories  have  made  great  progress,  for  a  centurv
past,  this  absurd  doctrine  has  undergone  no  improvement,
except  in  some  matters  of  abstract  calculation  which  it  has
given  rise  to.  It  still  abides  in  the  midst  of  its  circle  of
original  errors,  while  mankind  are  learning,  more  and  more,
that  the  strongest  proof  of  the  reality  of  spocidation  in  any
science  whatever  is  the  fruitfulness  of  the  conceptions  lie-
longing  to  it.

It  is  with  a  feeling  of  shame  that  I  revert  so  often  to  the
great  maxims  of  philosophical  pursuit,  and  dwell  on  them
so  long  ;  that  I  should  have  to  announce  at  this  time  of
day  that  we  must  study  simpler  phenomena  before  pro-
ceeding to  the  more  complex  ;  and  that  we  should  acquaint
ourselves  with  the  agent  of  any  phenomenon,  and  with  the
medium  or  circumstances,  before  we  proceed  to  analyse  it.
But  so  different  has  been  the  course  of  political  study  pur-
sued in  the  metaphysical  school,  that  I  rather  apprehend
that  this  high  scientific  connection  will  be  exactly  the  part
of  my  philosophical  doctrine  which  will  be  least  appreciated,
and  perhaps  most  contested,  even  after  all  the  confirmation
which  I  am  about  to  offer.  The  reason  of  this  apprehen-
sion is  that  the  positive  method  is  in  direct  opposition  to
our  political  habit  of  appealing  to  all  sorts  of  minds  on
social  questions,  which  they  are  expected  to  judge  of,  with-
out any  regular  preparation,  as  if  these  problems  were
occasions  for  inspired  decision.  It  is  this  consideration
which  makes  me  attach  so  special  an  importance  to  an  ex-
planation of  the  relation  of  Sociology  to  the  other  sciences.

To  complete  the  account  of  these  encyclo-
pedic  relations,  we  must  look  at  the  connec-        Sodolm^'"
tion  in  an  inverse  way,  estimating  the  philo-        '  "'  '

sophical  reaction  of  social  physics  on  all  the  foregoing
sciences,  in  regard  both  to  doctrine  and  method. — It  must
be  at  the  end  of  the  work  that  I  must  treat  of  Sociology  as
completing  the  whole  body  of  philosophy,  and  showing  that
the  various  sciences  are  branches  from  a  single  trunk  ;  and
thereby  giving  a  character  of  unity  to  the  variety  of  special
studies  that  are  now  scattered  abroad  in  a  fatal  dispersicm.
In  this  place  I  can  only  point  out,  in  a  more  special  manner,
the  immediate  reaction  of  Sociology  on  all  the  rest  of  natural


270  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY,

philosophy  iu  virtue  of  its  own  scientific  and  logical  pro-
perties.

,    ^     ,    ^  .  In  regard  to    the  doctrine,   the    essential

As  to  doctrine.        •      •    i        n    ii  •  ,-         •      <•         i    •      .i

principle   or    this    reaction    is  lound  m  the

consideration  that  all  scientific  speculations  whatever,  in
as  far  as  they  are  human  labours,  must  necessarily  be  sub-
ordinated to  the  true  general  theory  of  human  evolution.
If  we  could  conceive  of  such  a  thing  as  this  theory  being
so  perfected  as  that  no  intellectual  obstacle  should  limit
the  abundance  of  its  most  exact  deductions,  it  is  clear  that
the  scientific  hierarchy  would  be,  as  it  were,  inverted,  and
would  present  the  different  sciences,  in  an  a  priori  way,  as
mere  parts  of  this  single  science.  We  have  no  power  to
realize  such  a  state  of  things  ;  but  the  mere  supposition
may  enable  us  to  comprehend  the  legitimate  general  inter-
vention of  true  social  science  in  all  possible  classes  of
human  speculation  At  first  sight,  it  appears  as  if  this
high  intervention  must  belong  to  the  biological  theory  of
our  nature  ;  and  it  was  by  that  avenue  that  philosophers
first  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  conception :  and  it  is  per-
fectly true  that  the  knowledge  of  the  individual  man  must
exert  a  secret,  but  inevitable  influence  over  all  the  sciences,
because  our  labours  bear  the  ineffaceable  imjwess  of  thefacul-
ties  which  produce  them.  But  a  close  examination  will
convince  us  that  this  universal  influence  must  belong  more
to  the  theory  of  social  evolution  that  to  that  of  individual
Man,  for  the  reason  tliat  the  development  of  the  human
mind  can  take  place  only  througli  the  social  state,  the
direct  consideration  of  which  must  therefore  prevail  when-
ever we  are  treating  of  any  results  of  that  development.
This  is,  then,  in  the  briefest  form,  the  first  philosophical
ground  of  the  intellectual  intervention  of  social  physics  in
the  cultivation  of  all  the  parts  of  natural  philosophy.
There  will  be  more  to  say  about  it  hereafter.

It  is  evident  that  Sociology  must  perfect  the  study  of  the
essential  relations  which  unite  the  dift'erent  sciences,  as  this
inquiry  constitutes  an  essential  part  of  social  statics,  directly
intended  to  disclose  the  laws  of  such  a  connection,  in  the
same  way  as  in  all  cases  of  connection  between  any  of  the
elements  of  our  civilization.  The  most  marked  instance  of
this  operation  of  so(!ial   science  is   in  the  direct  study  of


REACTION  OF  SOCIOLOGY  ON  THE  OTHER  SCIENCES.      271

social  dynamics,  in  virtue  of  the  principle,  so  familiar  to  ns
l>y  this  time,  that  true  co-ordination  must  be  disclosed  by
the  natural  course  of  the  common  development.  All  scien-
tific men  who  have  viewed  their  own  particular  subject  in  a
large  way  have  felt  what  important  benefit  might  be  afforded
by  corresponding  historical  information,  by  regulating  the
spontaneous  expansion  of  scieiatific  discoveries,  and  warn-
ing away  from  deceptive  or  premature  attempts.  I  need
not  set  forth  the  value  that  there  would  be  in  a  history  of
the  sciences,  which  is  keenly  felt  by  all  who  have  made  any
important  discovery  in  any  science  whatever :  but,  as  my
last  chapter  proves,  no  real  scientific  history, — no  theory
of  the  true  filiation  of  eminent  discoveries,  at  present  exists,
in  any  form  or  degree.  We  have  only  compilations  of
materials  more  or  less  rational,  which  may  be  of  some  jiro-
visional  use,  but  which  cannot  be  afterwards  employed  in
the  construction  of  any  historical  doctrine  without  strict
revision,  and  which  are  certainly  in  their  present  state  unfit
to  yield  any  happy  scientific  suggestions.  When  a  true
social  science  shall  have  been  founded,  such  labours  will
assume  the  philosophical  direction  of  which  they  are  at
present  destitute,  and  will  aid  that  development  of  human
genius  which  now,  in  the  form  of  unorganized  erudition,
they  merely  impede.  If  we  remember  that  no  science  can
be  thoroughly  comprehended  till  its  history  is  understood,
we  shall  see  what  special  improvements  this  new  science
must  introduce  into  each  of  the  rest,  as  well  as  into  the  co-
ordination of  them  all.

This  leads  us  to  consider  the  reaction  of     a    i-    at  ^i     i
.   1  ,,         ,,  .  .  ,  ,      As  to  jletliod.

sociology  on  the  other  sciences  in  regard  to

Method.  Without  entering  at  present  upon  the  great
subject  of  a  general  theory  of  the  positive  method,  I  must
just  point  out  the  established  truth  that  each  of  the  funda-
mental sciences  specially  manifests  one  of  the  chief  attri-
butes of  the  universal  positive  method,  though  all  are
present,  in  more  or  less  force,  in  each  science.  The  special
resource  of  sociology  is  that  it  participates  directly  in  the
elementary  composition  of  the  common  ground  of  our  in-
tellectual resources.  It  is  plain  that  this  logical  co-opera-
tion of  the  new  science  is  as  important  as  that  of  any  of
the  anterior  sciences.    We  have  seen  that  sociology  adds  to


272  POSITIVE  PHiLosoi'iir.

our  other  means  of  researcli  that  which  I  have  called  the
historical  method,  and  which  will  hereafter,  when  we  are
sufficiently  habituated  to  it,  constitute  a  fourth  funda-
mental means  of  observation.  But,  though  sociology  has
given  us  this  resource,  it  is  more  or  less  applicable  to  all
orders  of  scientific  speculation.  We  have  only  to  regard
every  discovery,  at  the  moment  it  is  effected,  as  a  true
social  2:)henomenon,  forming  a  part  of  the  general  series  of
human  development,  and,  on  that  ground,  subject  to  the
laws  of  succession,  and  the  methods  of  investigation  which
characterize  that  great  evolution.  From  this  starting-
point,  indisputable  in  its  rationality,  we  comprehend  imme-
diately the  whole  necessary  universality  of  the  historical
method,  thenceforth  disclosed  in  all  its  eminent  intellectual
dignity.  We  can  even  see  that,  by  this  method,  scientific
discoveries  become  in  a  certain  degree  susceptible  of  I'ational
prevision,  by  means  of  an  exact  estimate  of  the  anterior
movement  of  the  science,  interpreted  by  the  laws  of  thf
course  of  the  human  mind.  The  historical  precision  can
hardly  become  very  precise  ;  but  it  may  furnish  jjreparatoi'v
indications  of  the  general  direction  of  the  contemporary
progress,  so  as  to  save  the  vast  waste  of  intellectual  forces
which  is  occasioned  by  conjectural  attempts,  usually
doomed  to  failure.  By  this  process  of  comparison  of  the
present  with  the  past,  in  regard  to  each  science,  it  must
become  possible  to  subject  the  art  of  discovery  to  a  kind  of
rational  theory  which  may  guide  the  instinctive  efforts  of
individual  genius,  which  cannot  hold  its  course  apart  from
the  general  mind,  however  persuaded  it  may  be  of  its
separation.  The  historical  method  will  thus,  by  governing
the  systematic  use  of  all  other  scientific  methods,  impart
to  them  an  amplitude  of  rationality  in  which  they  are  now
deficient,  by  transferring  to  the  whole  that  regulated  pro-
gression which  at  present  belongs  only  to  the  details :  and
the  choice  of  subjects  for  investigation,  till  now  almost
arbitrary,  or,  at  least  thoroughly  empirical,  will  acquire,  in
a  certain  degree,  that  scientific  character  which  now  belongs
only  to  the  partial  investigation  of  each  of  them.— The
method  itself  must,  if  it  is  to  accomplish  these  purposes,  be
subject  to  the  philosophical  conditions  imposed  by  the
positive  spirit  of  sociology.    It  must  never  consider  the


THE    HISTORICAL    METHOD.  273

development  of  each  complete  science,  sej^arately  from  the
total  progression  of  the  human  mind,  or  even  from  the
fundamental  evolution  of  humanity.  Thus  social  physics,
which  supplies  this  method,  must  superintend  its  gradual
apjilicatiou, — at  least,  in  so  far  as  the  general  conception  of
human  development  is  concerned.  Every  partial  or  isolated
use  of  this  method  of  investigation,  such  as  suits  the  desul-
tory character  of  research  in  our  day,  would  be  either
wholly  ineffectual,  or  would  realize  but  little  good.  There
are  some  traces  in  existing  science  of  this  superior  means
of  speculation,  the  positive  method  being  uniform,  and
therefore  to  be  found  everywhere  if  anywhere ;  but  its
complexity  and  its  recent  origin  prevent  our  being  able  to
point  to  examples  at  once  marked  and  varied  enough  to
a:fford  a  decisive  manifestation.  Throughout  the  whole
range  of  our  positive  knowledge,  I  know  of  only  one  un-
questionable example ;  and  that  will  be  found,  where  we
should  naturally  look  for  it,  iii  mathematical  science.  We
find  it  in  the  sublime  prefatory  chapters  of  the  different
sections  of  the  "  Analytical  Mechanics,"  so  little  appreciated
by  ordinary  geometers  because  they  do  not  contain  a  single
formula,  but,  in  my  opinion,  j:)roving  the  eminent  philo-
sophical superiority  of  Lagrange  to  all  mathematicians  since
Descartes  and  Leilaiitz.  By  his  exposition  of  the  filiation
of  the  chief  conceptions  of  the  human  mind  in  regard  to
rational  mechanics,  from  the  origin  of  the  science  to  our
own  time,  Lagrange  certainly  anticipated  the  general  spirit
of  the  historical  method ;  because  he  made  this  estimate
the  basis  of  the  whole  of  his  own  scientific  speculations.
Tliese  remarkable  writings  are  admirable  food  for  medita-
tion not  only  to  geometers,  but  to  all  philosophical  minds,
which  may  find  here  the  only  example  of  what  may  pro-
perly be  called  History,  though  their  author  made  no  pre-
tension to  the  common  title  of  historian.

Thus  we  see  that  the  reaction  of  Sociology  on  the  other
sciences  is  as  important  in  a  logical  as  in  a  scientific  view.
On  the  one  hand,  positive  sociology  mutually  connects  all
the  sciences,  and  on  the  other  hand,  it  adds  to  all  resources
for  investigation,  a  new  and  a  higher  method.  While,
from  its  nature,  dependent  on  all  that  went  before,  Social
Physics  repays  as  much  as  it  receives  by  its  two  kinds  of

II.  T


274  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

service  towards  all  other  knowledge.  We  can  already  per-
ceive that  such  a  science  must  form  the  principal  band  of
the  scientific  sheaf,  irom.  its  various  relations,  both  of  sub-
ordination and  of  direction,  to  all  the  rest.  It  is  in  this
way  that  the  homogeneous  co-ordination  of  real  sciences
proceeds  from  their  positive  development,  instead  of  being
derived  from  any  anti- scientific  eoncejitions  of  a  fanciful
unity  of  different  phenomena,  such  as  have  hitherto  been
almost  exclusively  resorted  to.

Speculative  Social  science  must  always  remain  inferior

rank  of  Socio-  in  all  important  sj^eculative  respects  to  all
lo^y-  the  other  fundamental  sciences.  Yet  we  can-

not but  feel,  after  this  review  of  its  spirit,  its  function,  and
its  resources,  that  the  abundance  of  its  means  of  investiga-
tion may  establish  it  in  a  higher  position  of  rationality  than
the  present  state  of  the  human  mind  might  seem  to
promise.  The  unity  of  the  subject,  notwithstanding  its
prodigious  extent,  the  conspicuous  interconnection  of  its
various  asj^ects,  its  characteristic  advance  from  the  most
general  to  more  and  more  special  researches,  and  finally
the  more  frequent  and  important  use  of  a  priori  considera-
tions through  suggestions  furnished  by  the  anterior  sciences,
and  especially  by  the  biological  theory  of  human  nature,
may  authorize  the  highest  hopes  of  the  speculative  dignity
of  the  science, — higher  hopes  than  can  be  excited  by  such
an  imperfect  realization  as  I  propose  to  sketch  out,  the
purpose  of  which  is  to  embody,  in  a  direct  manner,  and  by
sensible  manifestations,  the  more  al)stract  view  which  I
have  now  taken  of  the  general  nature  of  this  new  political
philosophy,  and  of  the  scientific  spirit  which  should  regu-
late its  ulterior  construction.


275


CHAPTER   V.

SOCIAL    STATICS  ;     OR,    THEORY    OF    THE    SPONTANEOUS
ORDER    OF    HUMAN    SOCIETY.

THOUGH  the  dynamical  part  of  Social  Science  is  the
most  interesting,  the  most  easily  intelligible,  and  the
iittest  to  disclose  the  laws  of  interconnection,  still  the
Statical  part  must  not  be  entirely  passed  over.  We  must
briefly  review  in  this  place  the  conditions  and  laws  of
harmony  of  human  society,  and  complete  our  statical  con-
ceptions, as  far  as  the  nascent  state  of  the  science  allows,
when  we  afterwards  survey  the  historical  development  of
liumanity.

Every  sociological  analysis  supposes  three   rpj  .  .

classes  of  considerations,  each  more  complex
than  the  preceding:  viz.,  the  conditions  of  social  existence
of  the  individual,  the  family,  and  society;  the  last  com-
])rehending,  m  a  scientific  sense,  the  whole  of  the  human
species,  and  chiefly,  the  whole  of  the  white  race.

Gall's  cerebral  theory  has  destroyed  for  ever  the  meta-
physical fancies  of  the  last  century  about  the  origin  of
Man's  social  tendencies,  which  are  now  proved  to  be  in-
herent in  his  natm-e,  and  not  the  result  of  i  hm  t  r
utilitarian  considerations.  The  true  theory  v^iual
has  exploded  the  mistakes  through  which  the
false  doctrine  arose, — the  fanciful  supposition  that  intel-
lectual combinations  govern  the  general  conduct  of  human
life,  and  the  exaggerated  notion  of  the  degree  in  which
wants  can  create  faculties.  Independently  of  the  guidance
afforded  by  Gall's  theory,  there  is  a  conclusive  evidence
against  the  utilitarian  origin  of  society  in  the  fact  that  the
utility  did  not,  and  could  not,  manifest  itself  till  after  a
long  preparatory  development  of  the  society  which  it  was
supposed  to  have  created.  We  shall  the  better  see  how
the  supposition  involves  us  in  a  vicious  circle  if  we  attend


276  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

to  the  character  of  the  early  ages  of  humanity,  in  which
the  individual  advantages  of  association  are  very  doubtful,
if  indeed  we  may  not  safely  say  that,  in  many  cases,  the
burdens  are  greater  than  the  resources,  as  we  see  only  too
jilainiy  in  the  lowest  ranlcs  of  the  most  advanced  societies.
It  is  thus  evident  that  the  social  state  would  never  have
existed  if  its  rise  had  depended  on  a  conviction  of  its  indi-
vidual utility,  because  the  benefit  could  never  have  been
anticipated  by  individuals  of  any  degree  of  ability,  but
could  only  manifest  itself  after  the  social  evokition  had
proceeded  up  to  a  certain  point.  There  are  even  sophists
who  at  this  day  deny  the  utility,  without  being  pronounced
mad ;  and  the  spontaneoi;s  sociability  of  human  nature,
independent  of  all  personal  calculation,  and  often  iu  oppo-
sition to  the  strongest  individual  interests,  is  admitted,  as
of  course,  by  those  who  have  paid  no  great  attention  to
the  true  biological  theory  of  our  intellectual  and  moral
nature.

Passing  over  some  elementary  considerations  which
belong  rather  to  a  special  treatise  on  the  pliysiological
conditions, — such  as  the  natural  nakedness  of  the  human
being,  and  his  helpless  and  protracted  infancy, — which
have  been  much  exaggerated  as  social  influences,  since  they
exist  in  some  animal  races  without  producing  the  same
social  consequences, — I  proceed  to  estimate  the  influence
of  the  most  important  attributes  of  our  nature  in  giving  to
society  the  fundamental  character  which  belongs  to  it,  and
which  remains  permanent  through  all  degrees  of  its  develop-
ment. In  this  view,  the  first  consideration  is  of  the  pre-
ponderance of  the  affective  over  the  intellectual  faculties,
which,  though  less  I'emarkable  in  Man  than  in  other
animals,  yet  fixes  the  first  essential  idea  of  our  true  nature. —
Though  continuous  action  is,  in  all  (;ases,  an  indispensable
condition  of  success,  Man,  like  every  other  animal,  has  a
natural  dislike  to  such  perseverance,  and  at  first  finds
pleasure  only  in  a  varied  exercise  of  his  activity, — the
variety  being  of  more  imjiortance  to  him  than  moderation
in  degree, — especially  in  the  commonest  cases,  in  which  no
strongly-marked  instinct  is  concerned.  The  intellectual
faculties  being  naturally  the  least  energetic,  their  activity,
if  ever  so  little  j^rotracted  beyond  a  certain  degree,  occa-


MAN    AS   THE   INDIVIDUAL.  277

sious  in  most  men  a  fatigue  whicli  soon  becomes  utterly
insupportable ;  and  it  is  in  regard  to  them  chiefly  that
men  of  all  ages  of  civilization  relish  that  state  of  which
the  dolce  far  niente  is  the  most  perfect  expression.  Never-
theless, it  is  on  the  persevering  use  of  these  high  faculties
that  the  modifications  of  human  life,  general  and  individual,
depend,  during  the  course  of  our  social  development,  so
that  we  ai-e  met  at  once  by  the  melancholy  coincidence
that  Man  is  most  in  need  of  precisely  the  kind  of  activity
for  which  he  is  the  least  fit.  His  physical  imperfections
and  moral  necessities  compel  him,  more  than  any  other
animal,  to  employ  his  reason  in  amending  his  primitive
condition ;  Avhile  his  reason  is  so  far  from  being  adequate
to  its  work  that  it  is  subject  to  an  irresistible  fatigue  which
can  be  moderated  only  by  strong  and  constant  stimulus.
Instead  of  lamenting  over  this  discordance,  we  must  receive
it  as  a  first  authentic  information  supplied  to  social  science
by  biology,  and  one  which  must  radically  affect  the  general
character  of  human  society  first,  and  afterwards  the  rate
of  the  social  evolution.  The  consequence  which  imme-
diately concerns  us  here  is,  that  almost  all  men  are
naturally  unfit  for  intellectual  labour,  and  devoted  to
material  activity  ;  so  that  the  speculative  state  cannot  well
be  produced,  much  less  sustained,  in  them  but  by  some
impulse  of  another  kind,  kept  up  by  lower  but  stronger
propensities.  However  important  individual  diiferences
in  this  respect  may  be,  the  differences  are  of  degree  only,
so  that  the  most  eminent  natures  hold  their  place  in  the
comparison  ;  and  men  must  be  classed,  in  a  scientific  sense,
by  the  nobleness  or  increasing  speciality  of  the  affective
faculties  by  which  the  intellectual  incitement  is  produced.
If  we  observe  the  ascending  scale  of  these  faculties,  upon
Gall's  theory,  we  see  that,  among  the  generality  of  men,
the  intellectual  tension  is  (with  some  exceptions  of  that
speculative  impulse  to  which  all  hiiman  beings  are  liable)
habitually  supported  only  by  the  strong  stimulus  derived
from  the  needs  of  the  organic  life,  and  the  commonest
instincts  of  the  animal  life,  the  organs  of  which  lie  at  the
back  of  the  brain.  The  individual  nature  of  man  becomes
lofty  in  proportion  as  the  incitement  proceeds  from  pro-
pensities which  are  of  a  higher  order,  more  peculiar  to  our


278  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

Species,  and  placed,  auatoinicall y ,  furthei-  forward  in  the
brain,  while  yet  the  activity  of  the  intellectvial  region  can
never,  in  the  noblest  cases,  be  independent  of  such  stimuhas,
unless  the  habit  of  meditation  has  actually  become  pre-
ponderant,— a  case  too  rare  to  be  considered  in  a  general
view. — Lest  we  should  form  a  false  philosophical  estimate
of  our  case,  I  may  observe  that,  however  we  may  regret
the  degree  in  which  our  intellectual  faculties  are  less  active
than  the  lower,  we  must  beware  of  wishing  that  the  case
Avas  reversed.  If  our  affective  faculties  were  subordinated
to  the  intellectual,  all  idea  of  improving  the  social  organism
Avould  be  merely  senseless.  It  would  be  like  polishing  o\u-
roads,  instead  of  merely  diminishing  their  friction,  which
would  not  improve  the  accustomed  locomotion,  biit  render
its  mechanism  contradictory  to  the  fundamental  laws  of
motion.  For  our  affective  faculties  must  preponderate,
not  only  to  rouse  our  reason  froni  its  natural  lethargy,  but
to  give  a  permanent  aim  and  direction  to  its  activity,
without  which  it  would  be  for  ever  lost  in  vague  abstract
speculation.  Even  under  our  actual  conditions,  which
subject  the  wildest  reveries  to  more  or  less  control  of
reality,  we  see  how  the  most  mystical  efforts  of  pious
ecstasy  to  conceive  of  an  ideal  state,  exempt  from  organic
wants  and  from  all  human  passions,  have  issued,  even  in
the  highest  minds,  in  conceptions  of  a  sort  of  transcen-
dental idiotcy,  eternally  absorbed  in  a  foolish  and  almost
stupid  contemplation  of  the  divine  majesty.  Our  social
organism  is,  then,  what  it  ought  to  be,  except  as  to  degree  ;
and  we  must  observe  and  remember  that  it  is  in  our  power,
Avithin  certain  narrow  limits,  to  rectify*  this  degree  of
difference ;  or  rather,  that  the  I'ectificatiou  takes  place  in
proportion  to  the  steady  development  of  civilization,  which
tends  to  subordinate  our  propensities  to  our  reason,  more
and  more,  without  giving  us  any  cause  to  apprehend  a
reversal  of  the  order  at  any  future  time.

The  second  consideration  is  that,  besides  the  preponder-
ance of  the  affective  over  the  intellectual  life,  the  lowest
and  most  personal  propensities  have,  in  regard  to  social
relations,  an  unqu(!stionable  ])reponderance  over  the  nobler.
According  to  the  sound  biological  theory  of  man,  our  social
affections  are   inferior  in  strength   and  steadiness  to  the


PERSONAL    PKOPENSITIKS    PKEPOXDEKATE.  27i>

personal,  though  the  common  welfare  must  depend  espe-
eiallv  on  the  regular  satisfaction  of  the  former,  which  first
originate  the  social  state  for  us,  and  then  maintain  it
against  the  divergencies  of  individual  instincts.  To  under-
stand the  sociological  value  of  this  biological  datum,  we
must  observe,  as  in  the  former  case,  that  the  condition  is
necessary,  and  that  it  is  only  its  degree  that  we  have  to
deplore.  In  analogy  with  the  former  case,  personal  in-
stincts must  give  an  aim  and  direction  to  our  social  action.
All  notions  of  public  good  must  be  based  ujjon  those  of
private  advantage,  because  the  former  can  be  nothing  else
than  that  which  is  common  to  all  cases  of  the  latter :  and,
under  no  ideal  refinement  of  our  nature,  could  we  ever
habitually  desire  for  others  anything  else  but  what  we
wish  for  ourselves, — unless  in  those  infinitely  rare  and  very
secondary  cases  in  which  an  excessive  refinement  of  moral
delicacy,  fostered  by  intellectual  meditation,  may  enable  a
man  to  appreciate  for  another  means  of  happiness  which
are  of  little  or  no  value  to  himself.  Our  moral  nature
would  then  be  destroyed,  and  not  improved,  if  it  were
possible  to  repress  our  personal  instincts,  since  our  social
affections,  deprived  of  necessary  direction,  would  degenerate
into  a  vague  and  useless  charity,  destitute  of  all  practical
efiicacy.  When  the  morality  of  an  advanced  society  bids
us  love  our  neighbours  as  ourselves,  it  embodies  in  the
best  way  the  deepest  truth,  with  only  such  exaggeration  as
is  required  in  the  formation  of  a  type,  which  is  always
fallen  short  of  in  practice.  In  this  sublime  precept,  the
personal  instinct  is  the  guide  and  measure  of  the  social ;
and  in  no  other  way  could  the  principle  be  presented ;  for
in  what  respect  and  how  could  any  one  love  another  who
did  not  love  himself  ?  Thus,  again,  we  may  be  satisfied
with  the  iiature  of  Man,  though  not  with  the  degree  of  his
self-regards.  We  must  regret  that  even  in  the  best  natures,
the  social  affections  are  so  overl:)orne  by  the  personal,  as
rarely  to  command  conduct,  in  a  direct  way.  In  this  sense,
we  may  conceive,  after  a  com]iarison  of  the  two  cases  I
have  presented,  that  the  sympathetic  instinct  and  the
intellectual  activity  are  especially  destined  to  compensate
mutually  their  common  social  insufficiency.  We  may  sav,
indeed,  that  if  Man  became  more  benevolent,  that  would


280  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

be  equivalent  in  social  practice  to  his  being  more  intelligent,
not  only  because  he  would  put  his  actual  intelligence  to
better  use,  but  because  it  would  not  be  so  much  absorbed
by  the  discipline  which  it  must  be  constantly  imposing  on
the  strong  preponderance  of  the  personal  propensities.
But  the  converse  supposition  is  not  less  exact,  though  it  is
less  appreciable  ;  for  all  real  intellectual  development  is
finally  equivalent,  in  regard  to  the  conduct  of  life,  to
a  direct  augmentation  of  natural  benevolence,  both  by
strengthening  Man's  empire  over  his  passions,  and  by
refining  the  habitual  sense  of  the  reactions  occasioned  by
various  social  contact.  If  we  admit,  in  the  first  case,  that
no  great  intellect  can  duly  expand  without  a  certain
amount  of  imiversal  benevolence,  by  which  alone  it  can
have  free  impulse,  a  lofty  aim,  and  large  exercise ;  so,
inversely,  we  cannot  doubt  that  all  noble  intellectual  ex-
pansion fortifies  general  sympathy,  not  only  by  casting  out
selfish  instigatioiis,  but  by  inspiring  a  wise  predilection  in
favour  of  social  order,  which  may,  notwdthstanding  its
ordinary  coldness,  concur  as  fortunately  in  the  maintenance
of  social  harmony  as  dispositions  which  are  more  lively
and  less  steady.  The  reciprocal  connection  of  those  two
chief  moderators  of  human  life,  intellectual  activity  and
the  social  instinct,  seems  thus  to  be  unquestionable :  and
the  first  function  of  universal  morals,  in  regard  to  the
individual,  consists  in  increasing  this  double  influence,  the
gradual  extension  of  which  constitutes  the  first  sj^ontaneous
result  of  the  general  development  of  humanity.  And  the
double  opposition  between  Man's  moral  and  material  need
of  intellectual  toil  and  his  dislike  of  it,  and  again,  between
Man's  need,  for  his  own  happiness,  of  the  social  affections,
and  the  necessary  subjection  of  these  to  his  personal  in-
stincts, discloses  the  scientific  germ  of  the  struggle  which
we  shall  have  to  review,  between  the  conservative  and  the
reforming  spirit ;  the  first  of  which  is  animated  by  purely
personal  instincts,  and  the  other  by  the  spontaneous  com-
bination of  intellectual  activity  with  the  various  social
instincts.

So  much  for  the  first  statical  division, — the  Individual.
Next,  we  must  consider  the  Family.

As  every  system  must  be  composed  of  elements  of  the


THE    FAMILY.  281

same  nature  with  itself,  the  scientific  spirit  ,-,  rp,  -p  •.
forbids  lis  to  regard,  society  as  composed  of  "'
individuals.  The  true  social  unit  is  certainly  the  family, —
reduced,  if  necessary,  to  the  elementary  couple  -which  forms
its  basis.  This  consideration  implies  more  than  the  phy-
siological truth  that  families  beconie  tribes,  and  tribes  be-
come nations  :  so  that  the  whole  human  race  might  be
conceived  of  as  the  gradual  develojjment  of  a  single  family,
if  local  diversities  did  not  forbid  such  a  supposition.
There  is  a  political  point  of  view  from  which  also  we  must
consider  this  elementary  idea,  inasmuch  as  the  family  pre-
sents the  true  germ  of  the  various  characteristics  of  the
social  organism.  Such  a  conception  is  intermediate  be-
tween the  idea  of  the  individual  and  that  of  the  species,  or
society.  There  would  be  as  many  scientific  inconveniences
in  passing  it  over  in  a  speculative  sense  as  there  are  dangers
in  ])ractice  in  pretending  to  treat  of  social  life  without  the
inevitable  preparation  of  the  domestic  life.  Whichever  way
we  look  at  it,  this  necessary  transition  always  presents
itself,  whether  in  i*egard  to  elementary  notions  of  funda-
mental harmony,  or  for  the  spontaneous  rise  of  social  senti-
ment. It  is  by  this  avenue  that  Man  comes  forth  from  his
mere  personality,  and  learns  to  live  in  another,  while  obey-
ing his  most  powerful  instincts.  No  other  association  can
be  so  intimate  as  this  primary  combination,  which  causes  a
complete  fusion  of  two  natures  in  one.  Owing  to  the
radical  imperfection  of  the  human  character,  individual
divergencies  are  too  marked  to  admit  of  so  close  an  associa-
tion in  any  other  case.  The  common  experience  of  human
life  teaches  us  only  too  well  that  men  must  not  live  too
familiai-ly  together,  if  they  are  to  bear,  in  miitual  peace,
the  infirmities  of  our  nature,- — whether  of  the  intellect  or
the  affections.  Even  religious  communities,  united  as  they
are  by  a  special  bond,  were,  as  we  know,  perpetually  tor-
mented by  internal  dissensions,  such  as  it  is  impossible  to
avoid  if  we  attempt  to  reconcile  qualities  so  incompatible  as
the  intimacy  and  the  extension  of  human  relations.  Even
in  the  family,  the  intimacy  is  owing  to  the  strong  spon-
taneousness  of  the  common  end,  combined  with  the  equally
natural  institution  of  an  indispensable  subordination.
Whatever  talk   there  may  be,  in  modern  times,  of  social


282  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

equality,  even  the  most  restricted  society  supposes,  not
only  diversities,  but  inequalities  ;  for  there  can  be  no  asso-
ciation without  a  permanent  concurrence  in  a  general  opera-
tion, pursued  by  distinct  means,  mutually  sultordinated.
Now,  the  most  eutire  realization  possible  of  these  elemen-
tary conditions  is  inherent  in  the  family  alone,  where  nature
has  supplied  a.ll  the  requisites  of  the  institution.  Thus,
notwithstanding  the  temporary  abuse  of  the  family  spirit
in  the  way  of  excess,  which  has  occasionally  brought
reproach  on  the  institution,  it  is,  and  will  ever  be,  the  basis
of  the  social  spirit,  through  all  the  gradual  modifications
Avhich  it  may  have  to  undergo  in  the  course  of  the  human
e/olutiou.  The  serious  assaults  upon  this  institution  which
we  witness  in  our  day  must,  therefoi'e,  be  regarded  as  the
most  alarming  symptoms  of  our  temporary  tendency  to
social  disorganization.  But  such  a  direction  of  the  revolu-
tionary spirit  is  a  dangerous  system  only  on  account  of  the
decrepitude  of  the  belief  on  which  the  idea  of  the  Family,
like  every  other  social  idea,  is  made  to  rest.  As  long  as  the
family  relation  has  no  other  intellectual  basis  than  religious
doctrine,  it  will  shai'e  whatever  discredit  belongs  to  that
doctrine  in  the  present  state  of  human  development.  The
Positive  philosophy,  which  reorganizes  whatever  it  touches,
can  alone  re-establish  the  conception  on  an  immutable
foundation,  by  transferring  all  social  speculation  from
the  region  of  vague  ideality  to  the  ground  of  indisputable
reality.

The  constitution  of  the  human  family  has  undergone
modifications  of  a  progressive  kind  which  appear  to  me  to
disclose,  at  each  epoch  of  develojnneut,  the  exact  importance
of  the  change  wrought  in  the  corresponding  social  state.
Thus,  the  polygamy  of  less  advanced  nations  must  give  a
character  to  the  family  wholly  different  from  that  which  it
has  among  nations  which  are  capable  of  that  monogamy  to
which  our  nature  tends.  In  the  same  way,  the  ancient
family,  which  consisted  partly  of  slaves,  must  be  very  un-
like the  modern,  which  is  mainly  reduced  to  the  kindred  of
the  couple,  and  in  which  the  authority  of  the  head  is  com-
paratively small.  But  the  estimate  of  tliese  modifications
will  find  its  right  place  in  my  historical  review.  Our
object  now  is  to  consider  the  elementary  scientific  aspect  of


THE  SEXUAL    RELATION.  283

the  family  ;  tliat  aspect  Avliicli  is  made  common  to  all  social
cases  hy  regarding  the  domestic  as  the  basis  of  all  social
life.  In  this  view,  the  sociological  theory  of  the  family  is
reducible  to  the  investigation  of  two  orders  of  relations,
viz.,  the  subordination  of  the  sexes,  which  institutes  the
family,  and  that  of  ages,  which  maintains  it.  A  certain
amount  of  voluntary  association  takes  place  from  that  de-
gree of  the  biological  scale  at  which  sex  begins ;  and  it  is
always  occasioned  by  the  sexual  union  first,  and  then  by  the
rearing  of  progeny.  If  the  sociological  comparison  must
stop  at  the  two  great  classes  of  superior  animals,  birds  and
mammifers,  it  is  because  none  below  them  present  a  suffi-
ciently complete  realization  of  this  double  elementary
character.

We  cannot  too  reverently  admire  that
universal  natural  disposition,  on  wdiich  all  relation"'^
association  is  grounded,  by  which,  in  the
state  of  marriage,  how^ever  imperfect,  the  strongest  instinct
of  our  animal  nature,  at  once  satisfied  and  discijilined,
occasions  harmony  instead  of  the  disorder  which  would
arise  from  its  license.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that,  when
the  revolutionary  spirit  was  attacking  everything  else,
it  should  allow  marriage  to  escape, — connected  as  it  has
hitherto  been  with  the  theological  philosophy.  When  the
positive  philosophy  shall  have  established  the  subordina-
tion of  the  sexes,  and  in  that,  the  principle  of  marriage  and
of  the  family,  it  will  take  its  stand  on  an  exact  knowledge
of  human  nature,  followed  by  an  appreciation  of  social  de-
velopment as  a  whole,  and  of  the  general  phase  which
it  now  presents  ;  and  in  doing  this  it  will  extinguish  the
fancies  by  which  the  institution  is  at  present  discredited
and  betrayed.  No  doubt  Marriage,  like  every  other  human
concern,  undergoes  modifications  as  human  development
proceeds.  Modern  marriage,  as  constituted  by  Catholicism,
is  radically  different,  in  various  respects,  from  Roman
marriage,  as  that  differed  from  the  Greek,  and  both,  in  a
much  greater  degree,  from  the  Egyptian  or  Oriental,  even
after  the  establishment  of  monogamy.  It  is  undisputed  that
these  modifications  have  not  come  to  any  end,  and  that  the
great  social  reconstitution  for  which  we  are  looking  will
establish  the  general  character  of  the  association,  which  all


284  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

precediug-  modifications  have  progressively  developed.
Meantime,  the  absolute  spirit  of  the  existing  political
]ihilosophy  mistakes  such  modifications  for  an  overthrow  of
the  institution  ;  a  state  of  things  very  analogous  to  that  of
the  ancient  times,  when  the  Greek  philosophy  was  about  to
make  way  for  the  Christian  regeneration  of  the  family  and
of  society,  and  when  fantastical  errors,  caused  by  the  long
intellectual  interregnum  gave  occasion  to  the  famous  satire
of  Aristophanes,  which  we  may  accept  as  a  rude  rebuke  of
our  own  licentiousness.

What  the  ultimate  conditions  of  marriage  will  be,  we
cannot  know  as  yet ;  and  if  we  could,  this  is  not  the  place  to
treat  of  them.  It  is  enough  for  ovir  purpose  to  be  assured
that  they  will  be  consonant  with  the  fundamental  principle
of  the  institution, — the  natui'al  subordination  of  the  woman,
which  has  reappeared  under  all  forms  of  marriage,  in  all
ages,  and  which  the  new  jihilosophy  will  place  on  its  right
ba.sis, — a  knowledge  of  the  individual  organism  first,  and
then  of  the  social  organism.  Biological  philosophy  teache  i
us  that,  through  the  whole  animaJ  scale,  and  while  the
specific  type  is  preserved,  radical  differences,  physical  and
moral,  distinguish"  the  sexes.  Comparing  sex  with  age,
biological  analysis  presents  the  female  sex,  in  the  human
species  especially,  as  constitutionally  in  a  state  of  perpetual
infancy,  in  comparison  with  the  other  ;  and  therefore  more
remote,  in  all  important  respects,  from  the  ideal  tyjje  of
the  race.  Sociology  will  jirove  that  the  equality  of  the
sexes,  of  which  so  much  is  said,  is  incompatible  with
all  social  existence,  by  showing  that  each  sex  has  special
and  permanent  functions  which  it  must  fulfil  in  the  natural
economy  of  the  human  family,  and  which  concur  in  a
common  end  by  different  ways,  the  welfare  which  results
being  in  no  degree  injured  by  the  necessary  subordination,
since  the  happiness  of  every  being  dej^ends  on  the  wise  de-
velopment of  its  proper  nature.

We  have  seen  that  the  preponderance  of  the  affective
faculties  is  less  marked  in  Man  than  in  the  lower  animals,
and  that  a  certain  degree  of  spontaneous  speculative
activity  is  the  chief  cereV)ral  attribute  of  humanity,  as  well
as  the  prime  source  of  the  marked  character  of  our  social
organism.     Now,  the  relative  inferiority  of  Woman  in  this


RELATIVE    INFERIORITY    OF    WOMxVN.  285

view  is  incontestable,  unfit  as  she  is,  in  comparison,  for  tlie
requisite  continuousness  and  intensity  of  mental  labour,
either  from  the  intrinsic  weakness  of  her  reason  or  from  her
more  lively  moral  and  physical  sensibility,  which  are  hostile
to  scientific  abstraction  and  concentration.     This  indubit-
able organic  inferiority  of  feminine  genius  has  been  con-
firmed by  decisive  experiment,  even  in  the  fine  arts,  and
amidst  the  concurrence   of  the   most  favourable    circum-
stances.    As  for  any  functions  of  government,  the  radical
inaptitude  of  the  female  sex  is  there  yet  more  marked,  even
in  regard  to  the  most  elementary  state,  and  limited  to  the
guidance  of  the  mere  family,  the  nature  of  the  task  requir-
ing, above  everything,   an  indefatigable    attention   to  an
aggregate  of  complex  relations,  none  of    which  must  be
neglected,   while  the  mind  must    be   independent    of  the
passions  ;  in  short,  reasonable.     Thus,  the  economy  of  the
human  family  covild  never  be  inverted  without  an  entire
change  in  our   cerebral  organism,   and  the  only    possible
result  of  a  resistance  to  natural  laws  would  be  to  deprive
Woman  of  the  enjoyment  of  her  proper  welfare  by  disturb-
ing the  family  and  society.     Again,  we  have  seen  that,  in
the  affective  life  of  Man,  the  personal  instincts  overrule  the
sympathetic  or  social,  which  last  can,  and  do,  only  modify
the  direction  decided  by  the  first,  without  becoming  the
habitual  moving  powers  of  practical  existence.     Here  again,
by  a  comparative  examination,  vre  can  estimate  the  happy
social  position  appropriated  to  the  female  sex.     It  is  indis-
putable that  women  are,  in  general,  as  superior  to  men  in
a  spontaneous  expansion  of  sympathy  and  sociality,  as  thev
are  inferior  to  men  in  understanding  and  reason.     Their
function  in  the  economy  of  the  family,  and  consequentlv  of
society,  must  therefore  be  to  modify  by  the  excitement  of  the
social  instinct  the  general  direction  necessarily  originated
by  the  cold  and  rough  reason  which  is  distinctive  of  Man.
Apart  from  all  consideration  of  material  differences,  and
contemplating    exclusively   the   noblest  properties   of  our
cerebral  nature,  we  see  that,  of  the  two  attributes  which
separate  the  human  race  from  the  brutes,  the  primary  one
indicates  the  necessary  and  invariable  preponderance  of  the
male  sex,  while  the  other  jDoints  out  the  moderating  func-
tion which  is  appropriate  to  Woman,  even  independentlv  of


286  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

maternal  cares,  whicli  evidently  constitute  her  most  impor-
tant special  destination,  but  which  are  usually  too  ex-
clusively insisted  on,  so  as  to  disguise  the  direct  social  and
personal  vocation  of  the  female  sex.

„,     p   .     .  1  The  other  great   element   of   the   human

relation  ramily  is  the  relation  between   parents  and

children,  which,  spread  abroad  through  the
whole  of  society,  produces  the  natural  subordination  of
ages.  The  discipline  prescribed  by  nature  in  this  relation
is  too  unquestionable  to  admit  of  the  same  attacks  of  the
revolutionary  spirit  which  have  been  directed  towards  the
preceding  relation.  The  ardent  champions  of  the  political
rights  of  women  have  not  yet  offered  an  analogous  doctrine
in  regard  to  children,  who  are  less  able  to  stimulate  the
zeal  of  their  special  champions.  Wild  as  are  the  eccen-
tricities of  our  social  anarchy,  popular  good  sense,  however
imperfect  it  may  still  be,  im2:)oses  some  restraint  on  indi-
vidual absurdities  when  they  go  so  far  as  to  shock  a  pri-
mary instinct.

There  is  certainly  no  natural  economy  more  worthy  of
admiration  than  that  spontaneous  subordination  which,
first  constituting  the  human  family,  then  becomes  the  ty])e
of  all  wise  social  co-ordination.  The  testimony  of  ages  has
done  honour  to  this  type ;  and  when  Man  has  formed  his
conception  of  providential  government  on  the  most  perfect
direction  of  events  that  he  could  conceive,  he  has  taken
this  institution  for  his  model.  There  is  no  other  case
which  offers,  in  the  same  degree,  the  most  respectful  spon-
taneous obedience,  on  the  part  of  the  inferioi',  without  the
least  degradation  ;  an  obedience  imposed  by  necessity  first,
and  then  liy  gratitude ;  and  nowhere  else  do  we  see  in  the
superior  party  the  most  absolute  authority  united  to  entire
devotedness,  too  natural  and  too  genial  to  be  I'egarded  as
duty.  These  characteristics  must  become  weakened  in  the
case  of  wider  and  less  intimate  relations  ;  the  submission
cannot  be  so  complete  and  spontaneous,  nor  the  protection
so  affectionate  and  devoted.  But  family  life  will,  never-
theless, be  eternally  the  school  of  social  life,  both  for
obedience  and  for  command,  which  will  be  excellent  in
proportion  to  their  ap2)roach  to  this  model ;  and  in  the
future,  as    in  the   ])ast,  the  modifications    of  society  will


THE    PARENTAL   RELATION.  287

correspond  with  those  which  human  progression  must
occasion  in  the  domestic  constitution.  In  all  critical
periods,  however,  there  have  been  false  reasoners  Avho  have
argued  from  the  inconveniences  which  attend  this  institu-
tion, like  every  other,  against  the  organization  itself,  and
who  would  mend  it  by  means  of  a  total  inversion, — pro-
posing to  make  society  the  model  of  the  family ;  at  a  time,
too,  when  society  is  in  no  condition  to  serve  as  a  type  for
any  kind  of  orderly  arrangement.  All  domestic  discipline
would  be  impossible  under  a  system  which  would  take
from  parents  the  guidance  and  almost  the  acqiiaintance  of
their  children,  through  a  monstrous  exaggeration  of  the
influence  of  society  on  the  education  of  youth ;  and
children,  of  the  hereditary  transmission  of  their  parents'
property,  accumulated  on  their  behalf, — obedience  and
authoi'ity  being  thus  successively  destroyed.  This  work  is
not  the  place  in  which  to  examine  such  extravagances  ;  but
it  was  necessary  to  refer  to  this  particular  delusion  in  order
to  show  the  fitness  of  the  positive  polity  to  consolidate  all
the  primary  ideas  of  social  order,  amidst  the  confusion
attending  the  decline  of  the  theological  philosophy.  Here,
as  everywhere  else,  we  shall  find  the  positive  philosophy
subordinating  all  schemes  of  artificial  order  to  the  observa-
tion of  natural  order:  and  we  shall  perceive  that  the  modi-
fications wrought  out  by  the  social  evolution  are  superior
to  any  that  the  most  eminent  reformers  would  have
ventured  to  conceive  of  beforehand, — a  fact  which  should
teach  us  not  to  interfere  with  the  succession  of  diiferent
portions  of  the  reorganization  by  attempting  to  renovate
everything  at  once,  down  to  the  smallest  details,  according
to  the  routine  of  modern  constitutions.

We  must  not  omit  the  striking  property  of  domestic
organization, — that  it  estal»lishes  the  elementary  idea  of
social  per])etuity,  by  directly  and  irresistibly  connecting  the
future  with  the  past.  When  duly  generalized,  the  idea  and
the  feeling  pass  on  from  the  immediate  parents  to  ancestors,
and  issue  in  that  universal  respect  for  our  predecessors
which  is  an  indispensable  condition  of  all  social  economy.
There  is  no  social  state  which  does  not  present  evidences  of
it.  The  diminishing  infliience  of  traditions  as  human  deve-
lopment proceeds,  and  the  growing  preference  of  written  to


288  posiTivi:  phii.osophy.

oral  transmission,  must  modify  the  expression  of  the  senti-
ment among  the  moderns,  if  not  the  sentiment  itself ;  but
whatever  point  social  progression  may  attain,  it  will  always
be  supremely  important  that  Man  should  not  regard  him-
self as  a  being  of  yesterday,  and  that  the  whole  of  his
institutions  and  customs  should  connect,  by  a  system  of
intellectual  and  material  tokens,  his  remembrances  of  the
entire  past  with  his  hopes  for  the  future.  The  tendency  of
the  revolutionary  philosophy  is  to  foster  a  disdain  of  the
past,  on  account  of  its  polities ;  and  I  need  not  add  that
the  positive  philosophy,  which  takes  history  for  its  scientific
basis,  which  represents  all  the  men  of  all  times  as  co-
operating in  the  same  evolution,  and  which  perseveringly
connects  all  existing  progress  with  the  whole  of  antecedent
human  action,  is  thoroughly  adapted  to  confirm  the  idea
and  sentiment  of  social  continuity.  In  fact,  we  see  that
the  region  of  the  positive  sciences  is  the  only  one  in  which
this  reverent  co-ordination  of  the  present  with  the  past,  has
withstood  the  encroachments  of  the  revolutionary  philo-
sophy, which,  in  every  other  connection,  would  almost
have  us  believe  that  reason  and  justice  are  creations  of  our
own  day.

It  is  not  necessary  to  enlarge  here  on  the  fraternal  rela-
tion, though  it  would  obtain  its  share  of  attention  if  we
were  engaged  in  forming  a  constitution  of  society.  For  our
purposes  here,  the  brotherly  relation  offers  little  subject  of
remark,  interesting  as  it  is  from  the  sweetness  or  the
bitterness  which  it  sheds  over  private  life.  If  the  brothers
are  neaidy  of  the  same  age,  there  is  little  subordination  in
the  case :  and  if  the  difference  in  age  is  sufficient  to  admit
of  that  subordination,  the  relation  becomes,  for  analytical
purposes,  like  that  of  parent  and  child.  All  that  it  is  in
our  way  to  remark  here  is  that  true  social  science  will  never
fail,  either  in  studying  the  past,  or  speculating  on  the
future,  to  assign  the  rank  of  absolute  requisites  to  all
elements  which  have,  through  all  time,  constituted  an
essential  part  of  the  domestic  hierarchy.  Discarding  all
Utopian  fancies,  and  proposing  to  observe  the  economy  of
real  society,  we  must  bring  into  our  scientific  analysis  all
the  arrangements  which,  by  their  steady  permanence,  indi-
cate their  grave  imjtortance.


THE   DOMESTIC    THE   TYPE   OF   THE   SOCIAL,         289

The  third  head  of  our  statical  analysis  brings  us  to  the
consideration  of  society,  as  composed  of  families  and  not  of
individuals,  and  from  a  point  of  view  which  commands  all
times  and  places.

The  main  cause  of  the  superiority  of  the  „  o  .  ,  ,
social  to  the  individual  organism  is,  according
to  an  established  law,  the  more  marked  speciality  of  the
various  functions  fulfilled  by  organs  more  and  more  dis-
tinct, but  interconnected  ;  so  that  unity  of  aim  is  more  and
more  combined  with  diversity  of  means.  We  cannot,  of
course,  fully  appreciate  a  phenomenon  which  is  for  ever
proceeding  before  our  eyes,  and  in  which  we  bear  a  jmrt ;
but  if  we  withdraw  ourselves  in  thought  from  the  social
system,  and  contemplate  it  as  from  afar,  can  we  conceive
of  a  more  marvellous  spectacle,  in  the  whole  range  of
natural  phenomena,  than  the  regular  and  constant  conver-
gence of  an  innumerable  midtitude  of  human  beings,  each
possessing  a  distinct  and,  in  a  certain  degree,  independent
existence,  and  yet  incessantly  disposed,  amidst  all  the^r
discordance  of  talent  and  character,  to  concur  in  many
ways  in  the  same  general  development,  without  concert,
and  even  consciousness  on  the  part  of  most  of  them,  Avho
believe  that  they  are  merely  following  their  personal  im-
pulses ?  This  is  the  scientific  picture  of  the  phenomenon  :
and  no  temporary  disturbances  can  prevent  its  being,  under
all  circumstances,  essentially  true.  This  reconciliation  of
the  individuality  of  labour  with  co-operation  of  endeavours,
which  becomes  more  remarkable  as  society  grows  more
complex  and  extended,  constitutes  the  radical  chai'acter  of
human  oj^ei'ations  Avhen  we  rise  from  the  domestic  to  the
social  point  of  view.  The  degree  of  association  that  we
observe  among  the  superior  animals  has  something  volun-
tary in  it,  but  there  is  no  organization  which  can  make  it
I'esemble  the  human :  and  the  first  individual  specializing
of  common  functions  is  seen  in  our  simple  domestic  life,
which  is  thus  a  type  of  the  social  organization.  The
division  of  labour  can  never,  however,  be  very  marked  in
the  family,  because  the  members  ai*e  few ;  and  yet  more
because  such  a  division  would  soon  show  itself  to  be  hostile
to  the  spirit  of  the  institution  ;  for  domestic  training,  being
founded  on  imitation,  must  dispose  the  children  to  follow

II.  \J


290  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

parental  employments,  instead  of  undertaking  new  ones :
and  again,  any  very  marked  separation  in  the  employments
of  the  members  must  impair  the  domestic  unity  which  is
the  aim  of  the  association.  The  more  we  look  into  the
subject,  the  more  we  shall  see  that  the  appropriation  of
employments,  which  is  the  elementary  priucijile  of  general
society,  cannot  hold  anything  like  so  important  a  place  in
the  family.  In  fact,  the  domestic  relations  do  not  consti-
tute an  association,  but  a  union,  in  the  full  force  of  the
term  ;  and,  on  account  of  this  close  intimacy,  the  domestic
connection  is  of  a  totally  different  nature  from  the  social.
Its  character  is  essentially  moral,  and  only  incidentally
intellectual ;  or,  in  anatomical  language,  it  corresponds
more  to  the  middle  than  to  the  anterior  part  of  the  brain.
Founded  chiefly  upon  attachment  and  gratitude,  the
domestic  union  satisfies,  by  its  mere  existence,  all  our
sympathetic  instincts,  quite  apart  from  all  idea  of  active
and  continuous  co-operation  towards  any  end,  unless  it  be
that  of  its  own  institution.  Though  more  or  less  co-ordina-
tion of  different  employments  must  exist,  it  is  so  secondary
an  affair  that  when,  unhappily,  it  remains  the  only  principle
of  connection,  the  domestic  union  degenei'ates  into  mere
association,  and  is  even  too  likely  to  dissolve  altogether.
In  society  the  elementary  economy  presents  an  inverse
character,  the  sentiment  of  co-operation  becoming  prepon-
derant, and  the  sympathetic  instinct,  without  losing  its
steadiness,  becoming  secondary.  No  doubt  there  are  a
multitude  of  men  well  enough  organized  to  love  their
fellow-laboiu'ers,  however  numerous  or  remote  they  may
be,  and  however  indirect  may  be  their  co-operation  ;  but
such  a  sentiment,  arising  from  the  reaction  of  the  reason
upon  the  social  feelings,  could  never  be  strong  enough  to
guide  social  life.  Even  under  the  best  circumstances  the
intellectual  mediocrity  of  the  majority  of  men  does  not
allow  them  to  form  any  distinct  idea  of  relations  which
are  too  extensiv(;,  too  indirect,  and  too  foreign  to  their  own
occupations  to  impart  any  sympathetic  stimulus  which
could  be  of  permanent  use.  It  is  only  in  domestic  life  that
Man  can  hal)itually  seek  the  full  and  free  expansion  of  his
social  affections ;  and  perhans  this  is  the  chief  reason  why
it  is  the  last  indispensable  preparation  for  social  life ;  for


SENTIMENT   OF  CO-OPERATIOX    PREPONDERANT.      291

concentration  is  as  necessary  to  tlie  feelings  as  generaliza-
tion to  the  thoughts.  Even  the  most  eminent  men,  who
direct  their  sympathetic  instincts  upon  their  race  at  large
or  the  society  in  which  they  live,  ai*e  usually  impelled  to
this  by  the  moral  disappointments  of  a  domestic  life  which
has  failed  in  some  of  its  conditions  ;  and  however  genial  the
imperfect  compensation  may  be  to  them,  this  abstract  love
of  their  species  admits  of  nothing  like  that  satisfaction  of
the  aft'ectioEs  which  arises  from  a  very  limited,  and  espe-
cially an  individual  attachment.  However  this  may  be,
such  cases  are  besides  too  evidently  exceptional  to  affect
auy  inquiry  into  the  social  economy.  Thus,  though  the
sympathetic  instinct  exists  wherever  there  is  association,
more  or  less,  the  principle  of  co-operation  is  that  which
must  prevail,  when  we  pass  on  from  the  consideration  of
the  family  to  the  general  co-ordination  of  families.  To
attribute  to  it  the  formation  of  the  social  state,  as  it  was  the
fashion  of  the  last  century  to  do,  is  a  capital  error ;  but,
when  the  association  has  once  begun,  there  is  nothing  like
this  principle  of  co-operation  for  giving  consistency  and
character  to  the  combination.  In  the  lower  stages  of  savage
life  we  see  families  combining  for  a  tempoi'arv  purpose,
and  then  returning,  almost  like  the  brutes,  to  their  isolated
independence,  as  soon  as  the  expedition,  which  is  usually
one  of  war  or  the  chase,  is  ended,  though  already  some
common  opinions,  expressed  in  a  certain  uniform  language,
are  preparing  them  for  permanent  union  in  tribes,  more  or
less  numerous.  It  is  upon  the  principle  of  co-ope I'ation,
then,  spontaneous  or  concerted,  that  we  must  found  our
analysis  of  the  last  division  of  social  statics.

We  must  include  in  our  view  of  the  division  t->-      •,     •
of  employments  something  much  more  exten-  tMimlm-m^ents
sive  than  the  material  arrangements  which
the  expression  is  usually  understood  to  convey.     We  must
include  under  it  all  liuman  operations  whatever,  regarding
not  only  individuals  and  classes,  but  also,  in  manv  ways,
diiferent  nations,  as  participating,  in  a  special  mode  and
degree,  in  a  vast  common  work,  the  gradual  development
of  which  connects  the  fellow-labourers    with    the    whole
sei'ies  of  their  predecessors,  and  even  with  their  successors.
This  is  what  is  meant  when  we  speak  of  the  race  being


292  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

bound  up  together  by  the  very  distribution  of  their  occupa-
tions ;  and  it  is  this  distribution  which  causes  the  extent
and  growing  complexity  of  the  social  organism,  which  thus
appears  as  comprising  the  whole  of  the  human  race.  Man
can  hardly  exist  in  a  solitary  state  :  the  family  can  exist  in
isolation,  because  it  can  divide  its  employments  and  provide
for  its  wants  in  a  rough  kind  of  way :  a  spontaneous
approximation  of  families  is  incessantly  exposed  to  tem-
porary rupture,  occasioned  by  the  most  trifling  incidents.
But  when  a  regular  division  of  employments  has  spread
through  any  society,  the  social  state  begins  to  acquire  a
consistency  and  stability  which  place  it  out  of  danger  from
particular  divergencies.  The  habit  of  partial  co-operation
convinces  each  family  of  its  close  dej^endence  on  the  rest,
and,  at  the  same  time,  of  its  own  importance,  each  one
being  then  justified  in  regarding  itself  as  fulfilling  a  real
public  function,  more  or  less  indispensable  to  the  general
economy,  but  inseparable  from  the  system  as  a  whole.  In
this  view  the  social  organization  tends  more  and  more  to
rest  on  an  exact  estimate  of  individual  diversities,  by  so
distributing  employments  as  to  appoint  each  one  to  the
destination  he  is  most  fit  for,  fi'om  his  own  nature  (which
however  is  seldom  very  distinctly  marked),  from  his  educa-
tion and  his  position,  and,  in  short,  from  all  his  qualifica-
tions ;  so  that  all  individual  organizations,  even  the  most
vicious  and  imperfect  (short  of  monstrosity),  may  be  finally
made  use  of  for  the  general  good.  Such  is,  at  least,  the
social  type  which  we  conceive  of  as  the  limit  of  the  existing
social  order,  and  to  which  we  may  be  for  ever  approximat-
ing, though  without  the  hope  of  ever  attaining  it ;  and  it
is,  in  fact,  a  reproduction,  with  a  large  extension,  of  the
domestic  organism,  with  less  power,  in  proportion  to  its
extent,  of  a])pointing  a  due  destination  to  every  member;
so  that  the  social  discipline  must  always  be  more  artificial,
and  therefore  more  imperfect,  than  the  domestic,  which
nature  hei'self  ordains  and  administers.

The  necessities  of  this  co-operation  and  distribution  of
special  ofiices,  cause  inconvenience  which  I  am  compelled  to
advert  to ;  for  it  is  in  the  investigation  of  these  that  we
find  the  scientific  germ  of  the  relation  between  the  idea  of
society  and  that  of  government.


SPECIAL    OFFICES.  293

Some  ecouomists  have  pointed  out,  but  in  j

T  ,  .i  -1       J?  Inconveniences,

a  very  inadequate  way,  the  evils  or  an  ex-

atifi^erated  division  of  material  labour  ;  and  I  have  indicated,
in  res^'ard  to  the  more  important  field  of  scientific  labour,
the  mischievous  intellectual  consequences  of  the  spirit  of
speciality  which  at  present  prevails.  It  is  necessary  to
estimate  directly  the  principle  of  such  an  influence,  in
order  to  understand  the  object  of  the  spontaneous  system
of  requisites  for  the  continuous  preservation  of  society.  In
decomposing,  we  always  disperse  ;  and  the  distribution  of
human  labours  must  occasion  individual  divergencies,  both
intellectual  and  moral,  which  require  a  permanent  disci-
pline to  keep  them  within  bounds.  If  the  separation  of
social  functions  developes  a  useful  spirit  of  detail,  on  the
one  hand,  it  tends,  on  the  other,  to  extinguish  or  to  restrict
what  we  may  call  the  aggregate  or  general  spirit.  In  the
same  way,  in  moral  relations,  while  each  individual  is  in
close  dependence  on  the  mass,  he  is  drawn  away  from  it  by
the  expansion  of  his  special  activity,  constantly  recalling
him  to  his  private  interest,  which  he  but  very  dimly  per-
ceives to  be  related  to  the  public.  On  both  grounds  the
inconveniences  of  the  division  of  functions  increase  with
its  characteristic  advantages,  without  their  being  in  the
same  relation,  throughout  the  spontaneous  course  of  the
social  evolution.  The  growing  speciality  of  habitual  ideas
and  familiar  relations  must  tend  to  restrict  the  under-
standing more  and  more,  while  sharpening  it  in  a  certain
direction,  and  to  sever  more  and  more  the  private  interest
from  a  public  interest  which  is  for  ever  becoming  more
vague  and  indirect ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  social
affections,  gradually  concentrated  among  individuals  of  the
same  profession,  become  more  and  more  alienated  from  all
other  classes,  for  want  of  a  sufficient  analogy  of  ways  and
ideas.  Thus  it  is  that  the  principle  by  whi(;h  alone  gene-
ral society  could  be  developed  and  extended,  threatens,  in
another  view,  to  decompose  it  into  a  multitude  of  uncon-
nected corporations,  which  almost  seem  not  to  belong  to
the  same  species  ;  and  hence  it  is  that  the  gradual  expan-
sion of  human  ability  seems  destined  to  produce  such
minds  as  are  very  common  among  civilized  peoples,  and
prodigiously  admired  by  them, — minds   which   are  very


294  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

able  in  some  one  respect  and  monstrously  incapable  in  all
others.  If  we  have  been  accustomed  to  dej^lore  the  spec-
tacle, among  the  artisan  class  of  a  workman  occupied
during  his  whole  life  in  nothing  else  but  making  knife-
handles  or  pins'  heads,  we  may  find  something  quite  as
lamentable  in  the  intellectual  class,  in  the  exclusive  em-
ployment of  a  human  brain  in  resolving  some  equations,
or  in  classifying  insects.  The  moral  effect  is,  unhappily,
analogous  in  the  two  cases.  It  occasions  a  miserable  in-
dilference  about  the  general  course  of  human  affairs,  as
long  as  there  are  equations  to  resolve  and  pins  to  manu-
facture. This  is  an  extreme  case  of  human  automatism  ;
but  the  frequency,  and  the  growing  frequency,  of  the  evil
gives  a  real  scientific  importance  to  the  case,  as  indicating
the  general  tendency,  and  warning  vis  to  restrain  it.  Thus
it  ap23ears  tc  me  that  the  social  destination  of  government
is  to  guard  against  and  restrain  the  fundamental  disper-
sion of  ideas,  sentiments,  and  interests,  which  is  the
inevitable  result  of  the  very  princij)le  of  human  develop-
ment, and  which,  if  left  to  itself,  would  put  a  stop  to  social
progression  in  all  important  respects.

Here  we  have,  in  my  opinion,  the  basis  of  the  elementary
and  abstract  theory  of  government,  regarded  in  its  com-
Basis  of  the  plete  scientific  extension  ;  that  is,  as  charac-
true  theory  of  terized  by  the  universal  necessary  reaction,
government.  — gj.g^  spontaneous  and  then  regulated, —
of  the  whole  upon  the  parts.  It  is  clear  that  the  only
way  of  preventing  such  a  dispersion  is  by  setting  up
this  reaction  as  a  new  special  function,  which  shall  in-
tervene in  the  performance  of  all  the  various  functions
of  the  social  economy,  to  keep  up  the  idea  of  the  whole,
and  the  feeling  of  the  common  interconnection :  and  the
more  energetically,  the  more  individual  activity  tends
to  dissolve  them.  Not  itself  affecting  any  determinate
social  progress,  it  contributes  to  all  that  society  can
achieve,  in  any  direction  whatever,  and  which  society  could
not  achieve  without  its  concentrating  and  protective  care.
The  very  nature  of  its  action  indicates  that  it  cannot  be
merely  material,  but  also,  and  much  more,  intellectual  and
moral ;  so  as  to  show  the  dou))le  necessity  of  what  has  been
called  the  teraj^oral  and  spiritual  government,  the  rational


RATIONALE   OF   GOVERNMENT.  295

subordination  of  which  was  the  best  feature  of  the  social
organization  that  was  happily  effected  in  its  day,  under
the  influence  of  the  prevalent  Catholicism.  Moreover,  this
ruling  function  must  become  more,  instead  of  less  neces-
sary, as  human  development  proceeds,  because  its  essential
principle  is  inseparable  from  that  of  the  development
itself.  —  Thus,  it  is  the  habitual  predominance  of  the
spirit  of  the  whole  which  constitutes  government,  in  what-
ever way  it  is  regarded.  The  next  consideration  is,  how
such  an  action  arises,  independently  of  all  systematic  com-
bination, in  the  natural  course  of  the  social  economy.

If  the  dispersive  tendency  arising  from  the  „,
distribution  of  functions  naturally  propa-  subordination
gates  itself,  it  is  clear  that  any  influence
capable  of  neutralizing  it  must  also  be  constantly  expand-
ing. In  fact,  an  elementary  subordination  must  always  be
growing  out  of  the  distribution  of  human  operations,
which  gives  birth  to  government,  in  the  bosom  of  society
itself,  as  we  could  easily  discover  by  analysing  any  marked
subdivision  which  has  just  taken  place  in  any  employment
whatever.  This  subordination  is  not  only  material,  but
yet  more  intellectual  and  moral;  that  is,  it  requires,
besides  practical  submission,  a  corresponding  degree  of
real  confidence  in  both  the  capacity  and  the  probity  of  the
special  organs  to  whom  a  function,  hitherto  universal,  is
confided.  Everyone  of  us  relies,  even  for  life  itself,  on  the
aptitude  and  the  morality  of  a  multitude  of  almost  unknown
agents,  whose  folly  or  wickedness  might  aft'ect  the  welfare
of  vast  numbers  of  human  beings.  Such  a  condition
belongs  to  all  modes  of  social  existence.  If  it  is  especially
attributed  to  industrial  societies,  it  is  only  because  it  must
be  most  conspicuous  where  the  division  of  labour  goes
furthest ;  and  it  is  as  certainly  to  be  found  in  purely
military  societies  ;  as  the  statical  analysis  of  an  army,  a  man-
of-war,  or  any  other  active  corporation  shows  in  a  moment.

This  elementary  subordination  discloses  its  own  law  ;
which  is,  that  the  various  ojoerations  in  which  individuals
are  engaged  fall  naturally  under  the  direction  of  those
which  are  next  above  them  in  generality.  We  may  easily
convince  ourselves  of  this  by  analysing  any  special  occupa-
tion at  the  moment  when  it  assumes  a  separate  character :


296  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

because  the  task  thus  sepai'ated  is  necessarily  more  special
than  the  function  from  "which  it  proceeds,  and  to  which  its
own  fulfilment  must  be  subordmated.  This  is  not  the
occasion  on  which  to  expatiate  on  this  law ;  but  its
23olitical  bearing  concerns  us  here, — indicating  as  it  does
the  gei-m  of  a  true  classification  of  social  functions.  We
shall  hereafter  meet  with  a  full  verification  of  this  law  in
regard  to  the  industrial  life  of  modern  societies :  the
eminent  regularity  of  military  associations  renders  the  law
obvious  at  once ;  and  when  the  law  is  once  admitted,  it
discloses  the  spontaneous  connection  of  this  elementary
social  subordination  with  that  political  subordination,  pro-
perly so  called,  which  is  the  basis  of  government,  and
which  presents  itself  as  the  last  degree  in  the  hierarchy
formed  by  the  subjection  of  the  more  special  to  the  more
general  classes  of  phenomena.  For,  as  the  various  par-
ticular functions  of  the  social  economy  are  naturally  im-
plicated in  relations  of  greater  generality,  all  must  at
length  be  subject  to  the  direction  of  the  most  general
function  of  all,  Avhich  is  characterized,  as  Ave  have  seen,  by
the  constant  action  of  the  whole  upon  the  parts.  On  the
other  hand,  the  organs  of  this  direction  must  be  much
strengthened  by  the  encouragement  afforded  to  intellectual
and  moral  inequality  luider  a  system  of  division  of  em-
ployments. It  is  clear  that  while  men  were  obliged  to  do
everything  for  themselves,  they  must  have  been  confined
to  domestic  life,  devoting  all  their  activity  to  supply  the
wants  of  the  family  ;  and  there  could  be  little  expansion  of
individual  ability  and  character.  Though  marked  indivi-
duality must  always  have  made  itself  felt,  in  every  state  of
society,  the  division  of  labour,  and  the  leisure  which  it
brings,  have  been  needful  to  the  conspicuous  development
of  that  intellectual  superiority  on  which  all  political  as-
cendancy must  mainly  rest.  We  must  obsei've,  moreover,
that  there  can  be  no  such  division  of  intellectual  as  of
material  labour  ;  so  that  the  intellectual  functions  must  be
less  affected  than  the  industrial  by  the  dispersive  tendencies
of  such  a  division.  We  are  familiar  with  the  effect  of
civilization  in  developing  moral,  and  yet  more,  intellectual
inequalities;  but  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  moral  and
intellectual  forces  do  not  admit,  like  the  physical,  of  being


FUNCTION    OF   AGGREGATION,  297

accumulated  and  compounded  :  so  that,  eminently  as  they
can  concur,  and  clearly  as  they  are  the  creators  of  social
concurrence,  they  are  much  less  adapted  for  direct  co-
operation. A  sufficient  coalition  of  the  most  insignificant
individuals  can  easily  carry  any  point  of  physical  conflict,
or  of  acquisition  of  wealth,  against  the  highest  superiority
in  an  individual  or  a  family;  so  that,  for  example,  the
most  enormous  private  fortune  cannot  sustain  any  com-
petition with  the  financial  power  of  a  nation,  whose
treasury  is  filled  by  a  multitude  of  the  smallest  contribu-
tions. Bat,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  enterprise  depends  on
a  high  intellectual  power,  as  in  the  case  of  a  great  scientific
or  poetical  conception,  there  can  be  no  association  of
ordinary  minds,  however  extensive,  which  can  compete
with  a  Descartes  or  a  Shakspere.  It  is  the  same  in  the
moral  case  ;  as,  for  instance,  if  society  is  in  need  of  any
great  resource  of  devotedness,  the  want  cannot  be  supplied
by  accumulating  any  amount  of  moderate  zeal  furnished
by  individuals.  The  only  use  of  a  multitude  in  such  a
case  is  that  it  improves  the  chance  of  finding  the  unique
organ  of  the  proposed  function ;  and  when  that  singular
agent  is  once  found,  thei'e  is  no  degree  of  multitude  which
can  weigh  down  its  preponderance.  It  is  through  this
jirivilege  that  intellectual  and  moral  forces  tend  to  an
ever-increasing  social  authority,  from  the  time  when  a
due  division  of  employments  admits  of  their  pro^jer  de-
velopment.

Such  is,  then,  the  elementary  tendency  of  Tendency  of
all  human  society  to  a  spontaneous  govern-  society  to  go-
ment.  This  tendency  accords  with  a  corre-  vernment.
sponding  system,  inherent  in  us  as  individuals,  of  special
dispositions  towards  command  in  some,  and  towards  obedi-
ence in  others.  We  must  not,  with  regard  to  the  first,
confound  the  desire  to  rule  with  the  fitness  to  do  so  ;  though
the  desii-e  is  one  eleiiient  of  the  fitness  :  and,  on  the  other
hand,  there  is  a  much  stronger  inclination  to  obedience  in
the  generality  of  men  than  it  is  customary  in  our  day  to
suppose.  If  men  were  as  rebellious  as  they  are  at  present
represented,  it  would  be  difiicult  to  understand  how  they
could  ever  have  been  disciplined  :  and  it  is  certain  that  we
are  all  more  or  less  disposed  to  respect  any  superiority.


298  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

especially  any  intellectual  or  moral  elevation,  in  our  neigh-
bours, indejjendently  of  any  view  to  our  own  advantage  :
and  this  instinct  of  submission  is,  in  truth,  only  too  often
lavished  on  deceptive  appearances.  However  excessive  the
desire  of  command  may  be  in  our  revolutionary  day,  there
can  be  no  one  who,  in  his  secret  mind,  has  not  often  felt,
more  or  less  vividly,  how  sweet  it  is  to  obey  when  he  can
have  the  rare  privilege  of  consigning  the  burdensome  re-
si^onsibility  of  his  general  self-conduct  to  wise  and  trust-
worthy guidance  :  and  probably  the  sense  of  this  is  strongest
in  those  who  are  best  fitted  for  command.  In  the  midst
of  political  convulsion,  when  the  spirit  of  revolutionary
destruction  is  abroad,  the  mass  of  the  people  manifest  a
scrupulous  obedience  towards  the  intellectual  and  moral
guides  from  whom  they  accept  direction,  and  upon  whom
they  may  even  j^ress  a  temporary  dictatorship,  in  their
primary  and  urgent  need  of  a  jireponderant  autliority.
Thus  do  individual  dispositions  show  themselves  to  be  in
harmony  with  the  course  of  social  relations  as  a  whole,  in
teaching  us  that  political  subordination  is  as  inevitable,
generally  speaking,  as  it  is  indispensable.  And  this  com-
pletes the  elementary  delineation  of  Social  Statics.

My  sketch  has  perhaps  been  so  abstract  and  condensed
that  the  conceptions  of  this  chapter  may  appear  obscure  at
present ;  but  light  will  fall  upon  them  as  we  proceed.  We
may  already  see,  however,  the  practical  advantage  which
arises  from  the  scientific  evolution  of  human  relations.  The
individual  life,  ruled  by  personal  instincts ;  the  domestic,
by  sympathetic  instincts  ;  and  the  social,  by  the  special
development  of  intellectual  influences,  pre})are  for  the
states  of  human  existence  which  ai'e  to  follow :  and  that
which  ensues  is,  first,  personal  morality,  wliich  subjects  the
preservation  of  the  individual  to  a  wise  discipline ;  next,
domestic  morality,  which  subordinates  selfishness  to  sym-
pathy ;  and  lastly,  social  morality,  which  directs  all  di-
vidual tendencies  by  enlightened  reason,  always  having  the
general  economy  in  view,  so  as  to  bring  into  concurrence
all  the  faculties  of  human  nature,  according  to  their  appro-
priate laws.


299


CHAPTER  VI.

SOCIAL   DYNAMICS  ;     OR,   THEORY    OF    THE    NATURAL
PROGRESS    OF    HUMAN    SOCIETY.

IF  we  regai'd  the  course  of  human  develop-  Scientific  view
ment  from  the  highest  scientific  point  of  of  Human
view,  we  shall  perceive  that  it  consists  in  progression,
educing,  more  and  more,  the  characteristic  faculties  of
humanity,  in  comparison  with  those  of  animality ;  and
especially  with  those  which  man  has  in  common  with  the
whole  organic  kingdom.  It  is  in  this  philosophical  sense
that  the  most  eminent  civilization  must  be  pronounced  to
he  fully  accordant  with  nature,  since  it  is,  in  fact,  only  a
more  marked  manifestation  of  the  chief  properties  of  our
species ;  properties  which,  latent  at  first,  can  come  into
play  only  in  that  advanced  state  of  social  life  for  which
they  are  exclusively  destined.  The  whole  system  of  bio-
logical philosophy  indicates  the  natural  progression.  We
have  seen  how,  in  the  brute  kingdom,  the  superiority  of
each  race  is  determined  by  the  degree  of  preponderance  of
the  animal  life  over  the  organic.  In  like  manner,  we  see
that  our  social  evolution  is  only  the  final  term  of  a  pro-
gression which  has  continued  from  the  simplest  vegetables
and  most  insignificant  animals,  up  through  the  higher  rep-
tiles, to  the  birds  and  the  mammifers,  and  still  on  to  the
carnivorous  animals  and  monkeys,  the  organic  characteris-
tics retiring,  and  the  animal  prevailing  more  and  more,  till
the  intellectual  and  moral  tend  towards  the  ascendancy
which  can  never  be  fully  obtained,  even  in  the  highest  state
of  human  perfection  that  we  can  conceive  of.  This  com-
parative estimate  affords  us  the  scientific  view  of  human
progression,  connected,  as  we  see  it  is,  with  the  whole
course  of  animal  advancement,  of  which  it  is  itself  the
highest  degree.  The  analysis  of  our  social  progress  proves
indeed  that,  while  the  radical  dispositions  of  our  nature  are


300  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

necessarily  invariable,  the  highest  of  them  are  in  a  con-
tinuous state  of  relative  development,  by  which  they  rise  to
be  preponderant  powers  of  human  existence,  though  the
inversion  of  the  primitive  economy  can  never  be  absolutely
complete.  We  have  seen  that  this  is  the  essential  character
of  the  social  organism  in  a  statical  view :  but  it  becomes
much  more  marked  when  we  study  its  variations  in  their
gradual  succession.

Course  of  Man's  Civilization  develops,  to  an  enormous  de-
social  develop-  gree,  the  action  of  Man  upon  his  euviron-
J"®"*'-  ment :    and  thus,  it  may  seem,   at   first,  to

concentrate  our  attention  upon  the  cares  of  material  exis-
tence, the  support  and  improvement  of  which  appear  to  be
the  chief  object  of  most  social  occupations.  A  closer
examination  will  show,  however,  that  this  development
gives  the  advantage  to  the  highest  human  faculties,  both
by  the  security  which  sets  free  our  attention  from  physical
wants,  and  by  the  direct  and  steady  excitement  which  it
administers  to  the  intellectual  functions,  and  even  the
social  feelings.  In  Man's  social  infancy,  the  instincts  of
sut)sistence  are  so  preponderant,  that  the  sexual  instinct
itself,  notwithstanding  its  jjrimitive  strength,  is  at  first
controlled  hj  them  :  the  domestic  affections  are  then  much
less  pronounced ;  and  the  social  affections  are  restricted  to
an  almost  imperceptible  fraction  of  humanity,  beyond
which  everything  is  foreign,  and  even  hostile :  and  the
niiilignant  ]>assions  are  certainly,  next  to  the  animal  appe-
tites, the  mainspring  of  human  existence.  It  is  unques-
tionable that  civilization  leads  us  on  to  a  further  and
further  development  of  our  noblest  disjjositions  and  our
most  generous  feelings,  which  are  the  only  possible  basis
of  human  association,  and  which  receive,  by  means  of  that
association,  a  more  and  more  special  culture.  As  for  the
intellectual  faculties, — we  see,  by  the  habitual  impi'ovidence
which  characterizes  savage  life,  how  little  influence  reason
has  over  men  in  that  stage  of  existence.  Those  faculties
are  then  undeveloped,  or  show  some  activity  only  in  the
lowest  oi-der,  which  relate  to  the  exercise  of  the  senses :
the  faculties  of  abstraction  iind  combination  are  almost
wholly  inert,  except  under  some  transient  stimulus  :  the
rude  curiosity  whi(;Ii  the  S2)ectacle  of  nature  involuntarily


DIRECTION   OF   PROGRESS.  301

insi>ires  is  quite  satisfied  with  the  weakest  attempts  at
theological  explanation ;  and  amusements,  chiefly  distin-
guished bv  violent  musculai'  activity,  rising  at  best  to  a
manifestation  of  merely  physical  address,  are  as  little
favourable  to  the  development  of  intelligence  as  of  social
qualities.  The  influence  of  civilization  in  ^perpetually  im-
proving the  intellectual  faculties  is  even  more  unquestion-
able than  its  effect  on  moral  relations.  The  development
of  the  individual  exhibits  to  us  in  little,  both  as  to  time
and  degree,  the  chief  phases  of  social  development.  In  l)oth
cases,  the  end  is  to  subordinate  the  satisfaction  of  the
personal  instincts  to  the  habitual  exercise  of  the  social
facidties,  subjecting,  at  the  same  time,  all  our  j^assions  to
rules  imposed  by  an  ever-strengthening  intelligence,  with
the  view  of  identifying  the  individual  more  and  more  with
the  species.  In  the  anatomical  view,  we  should  say  that
the  process  is  to  give  an  influence  by  exercise  to  the  organs
of  the  cerebral  systems,  increasing  in  proportion  to  their
distance  from  the  vertebral  column,  and  their  nearness  to
the  frontal  region.  Such  is  the  ideal  type  which  exhibits
the  course  of  human  develojDmeut,  in  the  individual,  and,
in  a  higher  degree,  in  the  species.  This  view  enables  us  to
discriminate  the  natural  from  the  artificial  part  of  the  pro-
cess of  development ;  that  part  being  natural  which  raises
the  human  to  a  superiority  over  the  animal  attributes  ;  and
that  part  being  artificial  by  which  any  faculty  is  made  to
prej^onderate  in  proj^ortion  to  its  original  weakness  :  and
here  we  find  the  scientific  exj^lanation  of  that  eternal
struggle  between  our  humanity  and  our  animality  which
has  been  recognized  by  all  who  have  made  Man  their  study,
from  the  earliest  days  of  civilization  till  now,  and  embodied
in  many  forms  before  its  true  character  was  fixed  by  the
positive  philosophy.

This,  then,  is  the  direction  of  the  human
evolution.  The  next  consideration  is  the  ?i5ss^  ^^''^
rate  at  whicli  it  proceeds,  apart  from  any  "
differences  which  may  result  from  climate,  race,  or  other
modifying  causes.  Taking  into  the  account  only  universal
causes,  it  is  clear  that  the  speed  must  be  in  proportion  to
the  combined  influence  of  the  chief  natural  conditions
relating  to    the  human    organism    first,   and    next  to    its


302  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

medium.  The  invariableness, — the  evident  impossibility
of  suspendiiig  these  fundamental  conditions  must  ever
prevent  our  estimating  their  respective  importance,  though
we  may  have  a  general  conviction  that  our  spontaneous
development  must  be  hastened  or  retarded  by  any  change
in  these  elementary  influences,  organic  or  inorganic  ;  su]>-
posing,  for  instance,  our  cerebral  system  to  be  slightly
inferior,  in  the  frontal  region  ;  or  our  j^lanet  to  become
larger  or  more  habitable.  Sociological  analysis  can,  by  its
nature,  reach  only  to  accessory  conditions,  which  are  ren-
dered suscejitible  of  estimate  by  their  variations.
■p,       .  Among  these    secondary  but    permanent   in-

fluences, which  affect  the  rate  of  human  deve-
lopment, ennui  is  the  first  which  presents  itself.  Man,
like  other  animals,  cannot  be  happy  without  a  sufficient
exercise  of  all  his  faculties,  intense  and  persistent  in  pro-
portion to  the  intrinsic  activity  of  each  faculty.  The
greater  difficulty  experienced  by  man  in  obtaining  a  de-
velopment compatible  with  the  special  superiority  of  his
nature  renders  him  more  subject  than  the  other  animals
to  that  remarkable  state  of  irksome  languor  which  indi-
cates at  once  the  existence  of  the  faculties  and  their  in-
sufficient activity,  and  which  would  become  equally  irrecon-
cilable with  a  radical  debility  incapable  of  any  urgent
tendency,  and  with  an  ideal  vigour,  spontaneously  sus-
cejitible  of  indefatigable  exercise.  A  disposition  at  once
intellectual  and  moral,  which  we  daily  see  at  work  in
natures  endowed  with  any  energy,  must  have  powerfully
accelerated  the  human  expansion,  in  the  infancy  of
humanity,  by  the  iineasy  excitement  it  occasioned  either
in  the  eager  search  for  new  sources  of  emotion,  or  in  the
more  intense  development  of  direct  human  activity.  This
secondary  influence  is  not  very  marked  till  the  social  state
is  sufiiciently  advanced  to  make  men  feel  a  growing  need
to  exercise  the  highest  faculties,  which  are,  as  we  have
seen,  the  least  energetic.  The  sti'ongest  faculties,  which
ai*e  the  lowest,  are  so  easily  exercised  that  in  ordinary
circumstances  they  can  hardly  generate  the  ennm  which
would  produce  a  favourable  cerebral  reaction.  Savages,
like  children,  are  not  subject  to  much  eniiui  while  their
physical  activity,  which  alone  is  of  any  importance  to  them,


DURATION   OF   HUMAN   LIFE.  303

is  not  interfered  with.  An  easy  and  protracted  sleep  pre-
vents them,  as  if  they  were  mere  animals,  from  feeling
their  intellectual  torpor  in  any  irksome  way.  This  brief
notice  of  the  influence  of  ennui  was  necessary,  to  show
what  its  operation  really  amounts  to  in  accelerating  the
speed  of  our  social  evolution.  But  perhaps  the  most
important  of  all  accelerating  influences  is  the  ordinary
duration  of  human  life,  which  I  mention  in  t\  •  v
the  second  place.  There  is  no  denying  that  human  Hfe
our  social  progression  rests  upon  death.  I
mean,  the  successive  steps  suppose  the  steady  renewal  of
the  agents  of  the  general  movement,  which  is  almost
imperceptible  in  the  course  of  any  single  life,  and  becomes
marked  only  on  the  succession  of  a  new  generation.  Here
again  the  social  resembles  the  individual  organism, — being
under  the  same  necessity  to  throw  off  its  constituent  parts
as  they  become,  by  the  vital  action  itself,  unfit  for  further
use,  and  must  be  replaced  by  new  elements.  To  illustrate
this,  we  need  not  go  so  far  as  to  suppose  an  indefinite
duration  of  human  life,  which  would  presently  put  a  stop
to  all  progression  whatever.  It  is  enough  to  imagine  it
lengthened  tenfold  only,  its  respective  periods  jjreserving
their  pi*esent  proportions.  If  the  general  constitution  of
the  brain  remained  the  same  as  now,  there  must  be  a
retardation,  though  we  know  not  how  great,  in  our  social
development:  for  the  perpetual  conflict  which  goes  on
between  the  conservative  instinct  that  belongs  to  age  and
the  innovating  instinct  which  distinguishes  youth  would
be  much  more  favourable  than  now  to  the  former.  From
the  extreme  imperfection  of  the  higher  parts  of  our  nature,
even  those  who,  in  their  prime,  have  contributed  most  to
human  progress  cannot  preserve  their  due  social  eminence
very  long  without  becoming  more  or  less  hostile  to  the
further  progress  which  they  cannot  assist.  But  an  ephemeral
life  would  be  quite  as  mischievous  as  a  too  j^rotracted  one,
by  giving  too  much  power  to  the  instinct  of  innovation.
The  resistance  which  this  instinct  now  meets  with  from
the  conservatism  of  age  compels  it  to  accommodate  its
efforts  to  the  whole  of  what  has  been  already  done.  With-
out this  check,  our  feeble  nature,  which  has  a  strong
repugnance  to  irksome  and  continuous  labour,  would  be


304  rOSlTlVJC    PHILOSOPHY".

for  ever  proposing  incomplete  views  and  crude  attempts,
that  could  never  ri])en  into  mature  projects  and  feasil»le
acts :  and  this  would  be  the  inevitahle  state  of  things,  if
huuiaii  life  were  reduced  to  a  quarter,  or  even  to  half  its
present  length.  Such  would  be  the  consequences,  in  either
ease,  if  we  suppose  the  constitution  of  the  human  brain
to  be  much  what  it  is  now :  and  to  su2:)pose  it  essentially
changed,  would  be  to  eiirrj  us  over  into  the  region  of
hypothesis.

No  justification  is  however  afforded  by  these  considera-
tions to  the  optimism  of  the  advocates  of  final  causes :  for
if,  in  this  as  in  every  other  case,  the  actual  order  is  neces-
sarily more  or  less  accordant  with  the  course  of  the  pheuo-
mena,  it  is  very  far  from  l)eing  true  that  the  arrangement
of  the  natural  economy  is  as  good  for  its  purposes  as  we
can  easily  conceive.  The  slowness  of  our  social  develo}i-
ment  is  no  doubt  partly  owing  to  the  extreme  imperfection
of  our  organism  ;  but  it  is  owing  nearly  as  much  to  the
brevity  of  human  life :  and  thei'e  would  be  no  risk  to  any
other  great  arrangement  if  the  dui'ation  of  our  life,  while
still  limited  by  the  conditions  just  specified,  were  doubled
or  trebled.  We  have  hardly  thirty  years  (and  those  beset
with  impediments)  to  devote  to  other  jjurposes  than  jire-
pai'ation  for  life  or  for  death  ;  and  this  is  a  very  insufficient
balance  between  what  Man  can  devise  and  what  he  can
execute.  Probably  no  one  has  ever  nobly  devoted  himself
to  the  direct  advancement  of  the  human  mind  without
bitterly  feeling  how  time,  employed  to  the  utmost,  failed
him  for  the  working  out  of  more  than  an  insignificant  part
of  his  conceptions.  It  will  not  do  to  say  that  the  rapid
succession  of  coadjutors  compensates  for  this  restriction  of
individual  activity.  Important  as  this  compensation  is,  it
is  very  imperfect,  both  on  account  of  the  loss  of  time  in
preparing  each  successor,  and  because  the  precise  con-
tinuance of  the  work  by  diiferent  persons,  occupying
diffei'ent  points  of  view,  is  impossible,  and  the  more  out
of  the  question  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  tlie
new  coadjutors.  In  the  simplest  material  operations,  no
mail's  work  has  ever  been  carried  on  by  others  precisely  as
he  would  have  done  it  himself  ;  and  the  more  difficult  and
lofty  labours,  which  require  intellectual  and  moral  foi'ces


POPULATION.  305

to  complete  them,  are  much  more  iu  need  of  a  persistent
unity  in  their  management.  These  intellectual  and  moral
forces  no  more  admit  of  partition  and  addition  by  suc-
cessors than  by  contemporaries ;  and,  whatever  the  advo-
cates of  the  indefinite  distribution  of  individual  efforts
may  say,  a  certain  degree  of  concentration  is  necessary  to
the  accomplishment  of  human  progress.

Another  cause   which  affects  the  rate   of        ^  .

.  1  ,        n    •  £  ,  Increase  oi

progress  is   the  natural  increase  of  popula-         poiiulation

tion,  which  contributes  more  than  any  other
influence  to  accelerate  the  speed.  This  increase  has  always
been  regarded  as  the  clearest  symptom  of  the  gradual
amelioration  of  the  human  condition  ;  and  nothing  can  be
more  imquestionable  when  we  take  the  whole  race  into  the
account ;  or  at  least,  all  the  nations  which  have  any  mutual
interest :  but  this  is  not  the  view  with  which  my  argument
is  concerned.  I  have  to  consider  only  the  jii'ogressive  con-
densation of  our  species  as  a  last  general  element  con-
curring in  the  regulation  of  our  rate  of  social  progress.  It
is  clear  that  by  this  condensation,  and  especially  in  its
early  stages,  such  a  division  of  employments  is  favoured
as  could  not  take  place  among  smaller  numbers  :  and  again,
that  the  faculties  of  individuals  are  stimulated  to  find  sub-
sistence by  more  refined  methods :  and  again,  that  society
is  obliged  to  react  with  a  firmer  and  better  concerted
energy  against  the  expansion  of  individual  divergences.
In  view  of  these  considerations,  I  speak,  not  of  the  increase
of  the  numbers  of  mankind,  but  of  their  concentration
upon  a  given  space,  according  to  the  special  expression
which  I  have  made  use  of,  and  which  is  particularly
ap2:>licable  to  the  great  centres  of  population,  whence,  in
all  ages,  human  progression  has  started.  By  creating  new
wants  and  new  difficulties,  this  gradual  concentration
develops  new  means,  not  only  of  progress  but  of  order,  by
neutralizing  physical  ineciualities,  and  affording  a  growing
ascendency  to  those  intellectual  and  moral  forces  which
are  suppressed  among  a  scanty  population.  If  we  go  on
to  inquire  into  the  effect  of  a  quicker  or  slower  concentra-
tion, we  shall  perceive  that  the  social  movement  is  further
accelerated  by  the  disturbance  given  to  the  old  antagonism
between  the  conservative  and  the  innovating  instincts, —

II.  X


306  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

the  last  beiuj^  strongly  reinforced.  In  this  sense  the
sociological  influence  of  a  niore  rapid  increase  of  popula-
tion is  in  analogy  with  that  which  we  have  just  been
considering  in  regard  to  the  duration  of  life ;  for  it  is  of
little  consequence  whether  the  more  frequent  renewal  of
individuals  is  caused  by  the  short  life  of  some,  or  the
speedier  multiplication  of  others ;  and  what  was  said  in
the  former  case  will  sufl&ce  for  the  latter.  It  must  be
observed,  however,  that  if  the  condensation  and  rapidity
were  to  pass  beyond  a  certain  degree,  they  would  not
favour,  but  impede  this  acceleration.  The  condensation,
if  carried  too  far,  would  render  the  support  of  human  life
too  difficult ;  and  the  rapidity,  if  extreme,  would  so  affect
the  stability  of  social  enterprises  as  to  be  equivalent  to  a
considerable  shortening  of  our  life.  As  yet,  however,  the
increase  of  population  has  never  nearly  reached  the  natural
limits  at  which  such  inconveniences  will  begin ;  and  we
have  really  no  experience  of  them,  unless  in  a  few  excep-
tional cases  of  distui-bance  caused  by  migrations,  ill-
managed  as  to  their  extent  of  numbers  and  of  time.  In
an  extremely  distant  future,  our  posterity  will  have  to  con-
sider the  question,  and  with  much  anxiety  ;  becai;se,  from
the  smallness  of  the  globe,  and  the  necessary  limitation  of
human  resources,  the  tendency  to  increase  will  become
extremely  important,  when  the  human  race  will  be  ten
times  as  numerous  as  at  present,  and  as  much  condensed
everywhere  as  it  now  is  in  the  west  of  Europe.  When-
ever that  time  comes,  the  more  complete  development  of
human  nature,  and  the  more  exact  knowledge  of  the  laws
of  hviman  evolution,  will  no  doubt  supply  new  means  of
resistance  to  the  danger ;  means  of  which  we  can  form  no
clear  conception,  and  about  which  it  is  not  for  us  to
decide  whether  they  will,  o:i  the  Avhole,  afford  a  sufficient
com])ensation.

These  are  not  all  the  accelerating  influences  which
could  be  mentioned  ;  but  they  are  the  chief  ;  and  they  are
enough  for  us,  in  our  abstract  view  of  our  subject.  I
have  now  only  to  exhibit  tlie  main  subordination  which
the  different  aspects  of  hunuin  development  must  mutually
J  (resent.

Thoutch  tlie  elements  of  our  social  evolution  are  con-


LAW   OF   SUCCESSION.  307

nected,  and  always  acting  on  each  other,  one
must  be  preponderant,  in  order  to  give  an  im-  evohition^  ^
pulse  to  the  rest,  though  they  may,  in  their
turn,  so  act  upon  it  as  to  cause  its  further  expansion.  We
must  find  out  this  superior  element,  leaving  the  lower  degrees
of  subordination  to  disclose  themselves  as  we  proceed  :  and
we  have  not  to  search  far  for  this  element,  as  we  cannot  err
in  taking  that  which  can  be  best  conceived  of  apart  from
the  rest,  notwithstanding  their  necessary  connection,  while
the  consideration  of  it  would  enter  into  the  study  of  the
others.  This  double  characteristic  points  out  the  intellec-
tual evolution  as  the  preponderant  principle.  If  the  intel-
lectual point  of  view  was  the  chief  in  our  statical  study  of
the  organism,  much  more  must  it  be  so  in  the  dynamical
case.  If  our  reason  requii'ed  at  the  outset  the  awakening
and  stimulating  influence  or  the  appetites,  the  passions,
and  the  sentiments,  not  the  less  has  human  progression
gone  forward  under  its  direction.  It  is  only  through  the
more  and  more  marked  influence  of  the  reason  over  the
general  conduct  of  Man  and  of  society,  that  the  gradual
march  of  our  race  has  attained  that  regularity  and  perse-
vering continuity  which  distinguish  it  so  radically  from  the
desultory  and  barren  expansion  of  even  the  highest  of  the
animal  orders,  which  share,  and  with  enhanced  strength,
the  appetites,  the  passions,  and  even  the  primary  senti-
ments of  Man.  If  the  statical  analysis  of  our  social  or-
ganism shows  it  resting  at  length  upon  a  certain  system  of
fundamental  opinions,  the  gradual  changes  of  that  system
must  affect  the  successive  modifications  of  the  life  of
humanity  :  and  this  is  why,  since  the  birth  of  philosophy,
the  history  of  society  has  been  regarded  as  governed  by  the
history  of  the  human  mind.  As  it  is  necessary,  in  a  scien-
tific sense,  to  refer  our  historical  analysis  to  the  prepon-
derant evolution,  whatever  it  may  be,  we  must  in  this  case
choose,  or  rather  preserve,  the  general  history  of  the  human
mind  as  the  natural  guide  to  all  historical  study  of  humanity.
One  consequence  of  the  same  principle, — a  consequence  as
rigorous  but  less  understood, — is  that  we  must  choose  for
consideration  in  this  intellectual  history,  the  most  general
and  abstract  conce])tions,  which  require  the  exercise  of  our
liighest  faculties.     Thus  it  is  the  study  of  the  fundamental


308  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

system  of  liiiinan  opinions  with  regard  to  the  whole  of
phenomena, — in  short,  the  liistory  of  Philosophy,  whatever
may  be  its  character,  theological,  metaphysical,  or  positive.
— which  must  regulate  our  historical  analysis.  No  other
department  of  intellectual  history,  not  even  the  history  of
the  fine  arts,  including  poetry,  could,  however  important  in
itself,  be  employed  for  tlais  oViject ;  because  the  faculties  of
expression,  which  lie  nearer  to  the  affective  faculties,  have
always,  in  their  palmiest  days,  been  subordinated,  in  the
economy  of  social  progress,  to  the  faculties  of  direct  con-
ception. The  danger  (which  is  inherent  in  every  choice,
and  which  is  least  in  the  choice  that  I  have  made,)  of  losing-
sight  of  the  interconnection  of  all  the  parts  of  human  de-
velopment, may  be  jiartly  guarded  against  by  frequently
comparing  them,  to  see  if  the  variations  in  any  one  corre-
sponds with  equivalent  variations  in  the  others.  I  believe
we  shall  find  that  this  confirmation  is  eminently  obtainable
by  my  method  of  historical  analysis.  This  will  be  proved
at  once  if  we  find  that  the  develoj^ment  of  the  highest  part
of  human  interests  is  in  accordance  with  that  of  the  lowest,
— the  intellectual  with  the  material.  If  thei'e  is  an  accor-
dance between  the  two  extremes,  there  must  be  also  between
all  the  intermediate  terms.

We  have  indicated  the  general  direction  of  the  human
evolution,  its  rate  of  pi-ogress,  and  its  necessary  order.
We  may  now  proceed  at  once  to  investigate  the  natural
laws  by  which  the  advance  of  the  human  mind  proci-eds.
The  scientific  principle  of  the  theory  appears  to  me  to  con-
sist in  the  great  philosophical  law  of  the  succession  of  the
three  states: — the  primitive  theological  state,  the  transient
metaphysical,  and  the  final  positive  state,- — through  which
the  human  mind  has  to  ])ass,  in  every  kind  of  speculation.
This  seems  to  be  the  place  in  which  we  should  attempt  the
direct  estimate  of  this  fundamental  law,  taking  it  as  the
basis  of  my  historic  analysis,  which  must  itself  have  for  its
chief  object  to  ex])lain  and  expand  the  general  notion  of
this  law  by  a  more  and  more  extended  and  exact  ap]ilica-
tion  of  it  in  the  review  of  the  entire  past  of  human
history.  I  hope  tli;it  the  frequent  statement  and  appli-
cation of  this  law  throughout  the  preceding  jiart  of  my
work  will   enable   me   to   condense   my  demonstration   of


THE   THREE   PERIODS.  309

it  here,  witlioiit  impairing  its  distinctuess,  or  injuring
its  efficacy  in  such  ulterior  use  as  we  shall  have  to  make
of  it.

The  reader  is  by  this  time  abundantly
familiar  with  the  interpretation  and  destina-  Tiuee  Periods,
tion  of  the  law.  All  thoughtful  persons  can
verify  for  themselves  its  operation  in  individual  develop-
ment, from  infancy  to  manhood,  as  I  pointed  out  at  the
beginning  of  this  work.  We  can  test  it,  as  we  have  tested
other  laws,  by  observation,  experiment,  and  comparison.  I
have  done  so  through  many  years  of  meditation  ;  and  I  do
not  hesitate  to  say  that  all  these  methods  of  investigation
will  be  found  to  concur  in  the  complete  establishment  of
this  historical  proposition,  which  I  maintain  to  be  as  fully
d^'Uionstrated  as  any  other  law  admitted  into  any  other  de-
])artment  of  natural  jjliilosophy.  Since  the  discovery  of
this  law  of  the  three  periods,  all  positive  philosophers  have
agreed  on  its  special  adaptation  to  the  particular  science  in
which  each  was  interested,  though  all  have  not  made  the
a-vowal  with  equal  openness.  The  only  objections  that  I
have  encountered  have  related  merely  to  the  universality
of  its  application.  I  hold  it  to  be  now  implicitly  I'ecog-
uized  with  regard  to  all  the  sciences  which  are  positive :
that  is,  the  triple  evolution  is  admitted  in  regard  to  all
cases  in  which  it  is  accomplished.  It  is  only  in  regard  to
social  science  that  its  application  is  sujiposed  to  be  impos-
sil)le  :  and  I  believe  the  objection  to  signify  nothing  more
than  that  the  evolution  is  in  this  case  incomplete.  Social
science  has,  with  all  its  complexitj^  passed  through  the
theological  state,  and  has  almost  everywhere  fully  attained
the  meta})hysical ;  while  it  has  nowhere  yet  risen  to  the
])Ositive,  except  in  this  book.  I  shall  leave  the  assertion  of
the  laAV  in  regard  to  sociology  to  the  demonstration  which
my  analysis  will  afford  :  for  those  who  cannot  perceive  in
this  volume,  as  a  whole,  the  nascent  realization  of  this  last
|)hilosophical  process  could  not  be  convinced  l)v  argument.
Leaving  the  historical  verification  of  the  hiAv  therefore  to
the  reader,  I  invite  attention  to  its  philosophical  explana-
tion. It  is  not  enough  that  the  succession  of  the  three
states  is  a  general  fact.  Such  generality  would  go  for
moi'e  in  any  other  science  than  in  sociology,  because,  as  we


310  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

have  seen,  our  biological  pliilosopliy  enables  us  to  conceive
of  all  the  main  relations  of  social  phenomena  a  j^rinri,  in-
dependently of  their  direct  investigation,  and  we  need  con-
firmation of  our  conceptions  by  direct  knowledge  of  human
natui'e  and  experience.  An  ci  priori  conception  of  a  law  si>
important  as  this  is  of  the  deepest  interest  in  the  study  of
social  dynamics  ;  and,  to  confirm  it.  we  must  carefully  marlc
the  general  grounds,  derived  from  an  exact  knowledge,
which  have  rendered  indispensable  on  the  one  hand,  and
iuevitaljle  on  the  other,  that  succession  of  social  pheno-
mena which  take  their  course  under  the  operation  of  this
law.  The  logical  grounds  have  already  been  assigned,  at
the  outset  of  the  work,  and  repeatedly  since  :  and  it  is  witli
the  moral  .n.nd  social  that  we  now  have  to  do,  and  we  can
review  them  without  subjecting  ourselves  to  the  reproach
of  severing  the  parts  of  a  philosophical  demonstration  which
are  in  their  nature  bound  up  together.
,  .         The  necessity  of  the  intellectual  evolution

oal  period  "^'^  ^  assert  lies  in  the  primary  tendency  of  Man
to  transfer  the  sense  of  his  own  natui'e  into
the  radical  explanation  of  all  phenomena  whatever.  Philo-
sophers tell  us  of  the  fundamental  difficulty  of  knowing
ourselves  ;  but  this  is  a  remark  which  could  not  have  been
made  till  human  reason  had  achieved  a  considerable
advance.  The  mind  must  have  attained  to  a  refined  state  of
meditation  before  it  could  be  astonished  at  its  own  acts, —
reflecting  vipon  itself  a  speculative  activity  which  must  be
at  first  incited  by  the  external  world.  If,  on  the  one  hand,
Man  must  begin  by  supposing  himself  the  centre  of  all
things,  he  must,  on  the  other  hand,  next  set  himself  up  as
a  laniversal  type.  The  only  way  that  he  can  explain  any
])henomena  is  by  likening  them,  as  much  as  possible,  to  his
own  acts, — the  only  ones  whose  mode  of  produ(!tion  he  can
suppose  himself,  by  the  accompanying  sensations,  to  under-
stand. We  may  therefore  set  up  a  converse  statement,
and  say  that  Man  knows  nothing  but  liimself;  and  thus,
his  ]>hilosophy,  in  his  earliest  stage,  consists  principally  in
transferring  this  spontaneous  unity,  more  or  less  fortu-
nately, into  all  subjects  which  may  present  themselves  to
his  nascent  attention.  It  is  the  highest  proof  of  his  philo-
sophical maturity  when  he  can,  at  length,  apply  the  study


THE   THEOLOGICAL    PERIOD.  311

of  external  nature  to  liis  own.  When  I  laid  this  down  as
the  basis  of  biological  philosophy,  I  intimated  the  extreme
rarity  of  such  an  attainment.  At  the  outset,  under  the  in-
verse process,  the  universe  is  always  subordinated  to  Man,
in  speculative  as  well  as  in  active  respects.  We  shall  not
have  attained  a  truly  rational  position  till  we  can  reconcile
these  two  great  philosophical  views,  at  present  antagonistic,
l)ut  admitting  of  being  made  mutually  complemeutai'y,
and,  in  my  opinion,  prepared  for  being  so,  from  this  time
forward.  Such  a  harmony  is  even  now  barely  conceivable
in  the  brightest  insiglit  of  philosophical  genius,  and  there
could  have  been  no  choice  between  the  two  courses  in  the
earliest  days  of  human  development.  The  starting-point
must  have  been  that  which  alone  was  naturally  possible.
This  was  the  spontaneous  origin  of  the  theological  philo-
sophy, the  elementary  spirit  of  which  consists  in  explaining
the  intimate  nature  of  phenomena,  and  their  mode  of  pi"0-
duction,  and  in  likening  them,  as  much  as  possible,  to  the
acts  of  human  will,  through  our  primary  tendency  to  regard
all  beings  as  living  a  life  analogous  to  our  own,  and  often
superior,  from  their  greater  habitual  energy.  This  pro-
cedure is  so  eminently  exclusive,  that  men  are  unable  to
emancipate  themselves  from  it,  even  in  the  most  advanced
stages  of  evolution,  except  by  abandoning  altogether  these
inaccessible  researches,  and  restricting  themselves  to  the
study  of  the  laws  of  phenomena,  apart  from  their  causes.
Whenever,  at  this  day,  the  human  mind  attempts  to  pass
these  inevitable  limits,  it  involuntai-y  falls  again  into  the
primary  errors,  even  in  regard  to  the  simplest  phenomena,
because  it  recurs  to  an  aim  and  point  of  view  essentially
analogous,  in  attributing  the  production  of  phenomena  to
special  volitions,  internal,  or  more  or  less  external.  One
case  presents  itself  as  an  example,  of  the  simplest  scientific
character, — that  of  the  memorable  philosophical  error  of
the  illustrious  Malebranche  in  regard  to  the  explanation  of
the  mathematical  laws  of  the  elementary  collision  of  solid
bodies.  If  such  a  mind,  in  such  an  age,  could  explain  such
a  theory  in  no  other  way  than  by  an  express  recurrence  to
the  continuous  activity  of  a  direct  and  special  providence,
we  cannot  doubt  the  tendency  of  our  I'eason  towards  a
radically  theological   philosophy   whenever  we  attempt   to


312  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

])enetrate,  on  any  ground  whatever,  the  intimate  nature  of
phenomena.

This  inevitableness  of  the  theological  philosophy  is  its
most  radical  property,  and  the  first  cause  of  its  long
Intellectual  ascendancy.  We  have  seen  befoi-e  that  it  was
influence  of  necessary,  as  the  only  possible  beginning  of
the  Theologi-  our  intellectual  evolution  ;  for  the  facts  which
cal  philosophy,  j^-^^^g^  form  the  basis  of  a  positive  theory
could  not  be  collected  to  any  p)urpose  without  some  pre-
liminary theory  which  should  guide  their  collection.  Our
understanding  cannot  act  without  some  doctrine,  false  or
true,  vague  or  precise,  which  may  concentrate  and  stimu-
late its  efforts,  and  afford  ground  for  enough  speculative
continuity  to  sustain  our  mental  activity.  Our  meteoro-
logical observations,  as  we  call  them,  show  us  how  useless
may  be  vast  compilations  of  facts,  and  how  really  unmean-
ing, while  we  are  destitute  of  any  theory  whatever.  Those
who  expect  that  the  theory  will  he  suggested  by  the  facts,
do  not  understand  what  is  the  course  necessarily  pursued
by  the  human  mind,  which  has  achieved  all  real  resvdts  by
the  oiily  effectual  method, — of  anticipating  scientific  obser-
vations by  some  conception  (hypothetical  in  the  first  in-
stance) of  the  corresponding  phenomena.  Such  a  necessity
has  ah'eady  been  shown  to  be  especially  marked  in  the  case
of  social  speculations,  not  only  from  their  complexity,  but
from  the  peculiarity  that  a  long  preparatory  development
of  the  human  mind  and  of  society  constitutes  the  phe-
nomena of  the  case,  independently  of  all  preparation  of
observers,  and  all  accumulation  of  observations.  It  may
be  worth  observing,  that  all  the  partial  verifications  of  this
f  iindajnental  proposition  that  we  meet  with  in  the  different
sciences  confirm  each  other,  on  account  of  our  tendency  to
unity  of  method  iind  homogeneousness  of  doctrine,  which
would  incline  us  to  extend  the  theological  philosophy  from
one  class  of  speculations  to  another,  even  if  we  should  not
so  treat  each  one  of  them  separately.

The  original  and  indis])ensable  ofiice  of  the  theological
philosophy  is  then  to  lead  forth  the  human  mind  from  the
vicious  circle  in  which  it  was  confined  by  the  two  necessi-
ties of  observing  first,  in  order  to  form  conceptions,  and  of
forming  theories  first,  in  order  to  observe.     The  theoloerical


ITS    INTELLECTUAL    INFLUENCE.  813

philosophy  afforded  an  issue  bv  likeuiug  all  phenomeua
whatever  to  human  acts ;  directly,  in  the  first  instance,  by
supposincr  all  bodies  to  have  a  life  more  or  less  like  our
own,  and  indirectly  afterwards,  by  means  of  the  more
durable  and  suggestive  hypothesis  which  adds  to  the
visible  system  of  things  an  invisible  world,  peopled  by
superhuman  agents,  who  occasion  all  phenomena  by  their
action  on  matter,  otherwise  inert.  The  second  stage  is
especially  suitable  to  the  human  mind  which  Itegins  to  feel
its  difficulties  and  its  needs ;  for  every  new  pbenomenon  is
accounted  for  by  the  supposition  of  a  fresh  volition  in  the
ideal  agent  concerned,  or,  at  most,  by  the  easy  creation  of
a  new  agent.  However  futile  these  speculations  may  now
appear,  we  must  remember  that,  in  all  times  and  every-
where, they  have  awakened  human  thought  by  offering  to
it  the  only  material  which  it  could  at  first  accept.  Besides
that  there  was  no  choice,  the  infant  reason  can  be  interested
l)y  nothing  but  sublime  solutions,  obtained  without  any
deep  and  sustained  conflict  of  thought.  We,  at  this  day,
find  ourselves  able,  after  suitable  training,  to  devote  our-
selves to  the  study  of  the  laws  of  phenomena,  without
heed  to  their  first  and  final  causes :  but  still  we  detect
ourselves  occasionally  yielding  to  the  infantine  curiosity
which  pretends  to  a  power  of  knowing  the  origin  and  the
end  of  all  things.  But  such  severity  of  reason  as  we  are
capable  of  has  become  attainable  only  since  the  accumula-
tion of  our  knowledge  has  yielded  us  a  rational  hope  of
finally  discovering  the  natural  laws  that  were  altogether
out  of  reach,  in  the  early  states  of  the  human  mind ;  and
the  only  alternative  from  total  inactivity  was,  in  those
days,  in  the  pursuit  of  the  inaccessible  subjects  which  are
represented  by  the  theological  philosophy. — The  moral  and
social  grounds  of  this  philosophy  were  as  necessary  as  the
intellectual.  Its  moral  influence  was  to  inspire  Man  with
confidence  enough  for  action,  by  animating  him  with  a
sense  of  a  position  of  supremacy.  There  is  something
astonishing  in  the  contrast  between  the  actual  powers  of
Man  in  an  infant  state  and  the  indefinite  control  which  he
aspires  to  exercise  over  external  nature ;  just  as  there  is  in
his  expectation  of  understanding  matters  which  are  inac-
cessible  to   reason.      The  practical   and   the   speculative


314  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

expectation  alike  belong  to  the  theological  philosophy.
Supposing  all  phenomena  to  be  regulated  by  superhuman
will,  Man  may  hope  to  modify  the  universe  l)y  his  desires ;
not  by  his  personal  resources,  biit  by  the  access  which
he  believes  himself  to  have  to  the  imaginary  beings  whose
})Ower  is  unlimited :  whereas,  if  he  was  aware  from  the
beginning  that  the  universe  is  subject  to  invariable  laws,
the  certainty  that  he  could  no  more  influence  than  under-
stand them  would  so  discourage  him  that  he  would  remain
for  ever  in  his  original  apathy,  intellectual  and  moral.
We  find  ourselves  able  to  dispense  with  supernatural  aid
in  our  difficulties  and  sufferings,  in  proportion  as  we  obtain
a  gradual  control  over  nature  by  a  knowledge  of  her  laws :
but  the  early  races  of  men  were  in  an  opposite  condition.
They  could  obtain  confidence,  and  therefore  courage,  only
from  above,  and  through  the  illusion  of  an  illimitable
power  residing  there,  which  could,  on  any  occasion,  afford
them  irresistible  aid.  I  am  not  referring  now  to  any  hope
of  a  future  life.  We  shall  see  presently  that  it  was  not  till
a  much  later  period  that  that  hope  exercised  any  important
social  influence :  and  even  in  more  recent  times,  we  shall
find  that  the  effect  of  the  religious  spirit  on  the  conduct  of
human  life  proceeds  much  more  from  belief  in  actual  and
special  immediate  aid  than  from  the  luiiform  perspective
of  a  remote  future  existence.  This  seems  to  me  the  lead-
ing aspect  of  the  remarkable  state  which  is  produced  in
the  human  brain  by  the  important  intellectual  and  moral
phenomenon  of  prayer  ;  the  admirable  properties  of  which,
when  it  has  attained  its  full  physiological  efficacy,  are  very
manifest  in  the  earliest  stage  of  progress.  After  a  long-
decline  of  the  religious  spirit,  the  notion  of  iniracle  was
naturally  formed,  to  characterize  the  events  which  had
become  exceptional,  and  were  attributed  to  divine  inter-
vention :  but  the  very  conception  shows  that  the  general
principle  of  natural  laws  had  become  familiar,  and  even
preponderant,  because  the  only  sense  of  miracle  was  a
transient  suspension  of  natural  laws.  While  the  theo-
logical philosophy  was  all  in  all,  there  were  no  miracles,
because  everything  was  equally  marvellous,  as  we  see  by
the  artless  descriptions  of  ancient  poetry,  in  which  the  com-
monest incidents  are  mixed  np  with  the  most  monstrous


THEOLOGICAL    PHILOSOPHY.  315

prodigies,  and  undergo  analogous  explanations.  Minerva
intervenes  to  pick  up  the  whip  of  a  warrior  in  military
games,  as  well  as  to  protect  him  against  a  whole  army :
and  in  our  time,  the  devotee  is  as  importunate  in  praying
for  his  smallest  personal  convenience  as  for  the  largest
human  intei'ests.  In  all  ages,  the  priest  has  been  more
occupied  with  the  solicitations  of  his  flock  about  immediate
favours  of  Providence  than  with  their  care  for  their  eternal
state.  However  this  may  be,  we  see  that  it  is  a  radical
property  of  the  theological  philosophy  to  be  the  sole  sup-
port and  stimulus  of  Man's  moral  courage,  as  well  as  the
awakener  and  director  of  his  intellectual  activity. — To  this
we  must  add.  as  another  attraction  of  Man  to  this  jihilo-
sophy,  that  the  affective  influence  comes  in  to  fortify  the
speculative.  Feeble  as  are  the  intellectual  organs,  rela-
tively considered,  the  attractive  moral  jjerspective  of  an
unbounded  power  of  modifying  the  universe,  by  the  aid  of
supernatural  protectors,  must  have  been  most  important
in  exciting  mental  action.  In  our  advanced  state  of  scien-
tific progress,  we  can  conceive  of  the  perpetual  pursuit  of
knowledge  for  the  sake  of  the  satisfaction  of  intellectual
activity,  joined  to  the  tranquil  pleasure  which  arises  from
the  discovery  of  truth:  yet  it  is  doubtful  Avhether  such
natural  stimulus  as  this  would  always  suffice  without  col-
lateral instigations  of  glory,  of  ambition,  or  of  lower  and
stronger  passions,  excej^t  in  the  case  of  a  very  few  lofty
minds ;  and  with  them,  only  after  training  in  the  requisite
habits.  And  nothing  of  this  kind  can  be  supposed  possible
in  the  early  days,  when  the  intellect  is  torpid  and  feeble,
and  scarcely  accessible  to  the  strongest  stimulus ;  nor  yet
afterwards,  when  science  is  so  far  advanced  as  to  have
attained  some  speculative  success.  In  the  working  out  of
such  speculatiou,  the  mental  activity  can  be  sustained  by
nothing  short  of  the  fictions  of  the  theological  j^liilosophy
about  the  supremacy  of  man  and  his  unbounded  empire
over  external  natui'e ;  as  we  have  seen  in  regard  to  astro-
logy and  alchemy.  In  our  own  time,  when  there  are  en-
lightened men  who  hold  such  delusions  in  regard  to  social
speculations  alone,  we  see  how  irrationally  they  expect  to
modify  at  will  the  whole  course  of  political  phenomena,  in
which  they  could  not  take  any  adequate  scientific  interest


316  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

without  such  an  expectation.  What  we  see  of  tlie  influence
of  this  view  in  maintaining  the  old  polities  may  give  us
some  faint  idea  of  its  power  vfhen  it  pervaded  every  part
of  the  intellectual  system,  and  illusion  beset  the  reason  of
Man,  whichever  way  he  turned.  Such  then  was  the  moral
operation  of  the  theological  philosojihy, — stimulating  Man's
active  enei'gy  by  the  offer,  in  the  midst  of  the  troubles  of
his  infantine  state,  of  absolute  empire  over  the  external
world,  as  the  pi'ize  of  his  speculative  efforts.
Social  influ-  ^^^^  social  evidences  under  this  head  will

ences  of  the  l»e  fully  treated  in  the  following  chapters,  so
Theolotjical  that  we  may  dismiss  them  now  with  a  very
plnlosophy.  short  notice,  important  as  they  are  ;  and  the
more  easily,  Ijccause  this  class  of  evidences  is  the  most
indisputable  of  the  three.  There  are  two  views  which  must
be  considered,  in  relation  to  the  high  social  office  of  the
theological  jihilosophy :  first,  its  function  in  organizing
society  ;  and  next,  its  provision  for  the  permanent  existence
of  a  speculative  class. — As  to  the  first,  we  must  perceive
that  the  formation  of  any  society,  worthy  to  be  so  called,
supposes  a  system  of  common  oi)inions,  such  as  may  restrain
individual  eccentricity ;  and  siicli  an  influence,  if  needful
now,  when  men  are  connected  together  by  such  a  concur-
rence of  obligations  as  high  civilization  introduces,  must
be  absolutely  indispensable  in  the  infancy  of  society,  when
families  adhere  to  each  other  so  feebly,  by  means  of  rela-
tions as  jtrecarious  as  they  are  defective.  No  concurrence
of  interests,  nor  even  sympathy  in  sentiment,  can  give
durability  to  the  smallest  society,  if  there  be  not  intellec-
tual unanimity  enough  to  obviate  or  correct  such  discord-
ance as  must  inevitably  arise.  It  has  been  shown  that,
indolent  as  our  intellectual  faculties  are  in  comparison
with  the  others,  reason  must  rule,  not  domestic  but  social,
and  yet  more  political  life :  for  through  it  alone  can  there
be  any  organization  of  that  reaction  of  society  on  the  indi-
vidual which  appinnts  the  function  of  government,  and
absolutely  requires  a  system  of  common  opinions  about
nature  and  Man.  Such  a  system,  then,  is  a  political  neces-
sity ;  and  especially  in  the  infancy  of  society.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  we  must  admit  that  the  human  mind,  having
thus  furnished  a  basis  for  social  organization,  must  depend


SOCIAL    FUNC'I'IOX    OF   TIIEOLOC;!'.  317

for  its  further  development  on  society  itself,  whose  expan-
sion is  really  inseparable  from  that  of  human  intelligence.
Here  we  see  that  society  is  in  a  vicious  circle  in  a  political,
as  well  as  a  logical  view,  through  the  opposition  of  two
equal  necessities ;  and  here,  again,  the  only  possible  issue
is  afforded  by  the  theological  philosophy.  It  directs  the
first  social  organization,  as  it  first  forms  a  system  of  com-
mon opinions,  and  by  forming  such  a  system.  Because  we
see  it  now  in  such  a  state  of  decomposition  that  its  advo-
cates lose  sight  of  the  unity  of  o]»inions  that  it  once  secured,
and  ai'e  themselves  involved  in  intellectual  discordance,  we
must  not  forget  how,  in  those  days  of  vigour  by  which  it
must  be  judged,  it  established  an  intellectual  communion
which  constituted  its  most  remarkable  political  function.
The  police  consideration  of  a  future  life  is  wrongly  attri-
buted to  this  period  of  human  society.  It  arose  long  after
and  was  of  very  infei'ior  importance  to  the  intellectual
agreement  which  j^receded  it :  and  its  operation  would  not
be  so  erroneously  exaggerated,  but  that  religion  has  so  far
faded  out  of  men's  minds  as  to  leave  no  other  strong
habitual  remembrance  than  of  its  grossest  impressions.

Another  way  in  which  the  theological  ln.stitution  of
j»hIloso2:)liy  was  politically  indispensable  to  a  speculative
human  progress  was  by  instituting,  in  the  class.
midst  of  society,  a  special  class  regularly  devoted  to  specu-
lative activity.  In  this  view,  the  social  supremacy  of  the
theological  philosophy  has  lasted  to  our  own  time.  It  is
scarcely  possible  for  us  to  form  any  but  an  indirect  idea  of
the  difficulty  of  establishing,  in  the  earliest  period  of
society,  any  permanent  division  between  theory  and  prac-
tice, such  as  is  effected  by  the  existence  of  a  class  regularly
occupied  with  speculation.  Even  now,  amidst  all  the
refinement  of  our  mental  habits,  we  find  extreme  difficulty
in  duly  estimating  any  new  operation  which  has  no  imme-
diate practical  bearing:  and  by  this  we  may  imperfectly
understand  how  impossible  it  was,  in  the  remotest  ages,  to
institute  among  populations  of  warriors  and  slaves  a
corporation  that  should  be  disengaged  from  military  and
industrial  employments,  and  whose  activity  should  be
mainly  of  an  intellectual  kind.  Such  a  class  could,  in
those  times,  have  been  neither  established  nor  tolerated  if


818  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

it  bad  not  been  introduced  in  the  natural  course  of  social
movement,  and  invested  with  authority  beforehand  by  the
influence  of  the  theological  philosophy.  The  political
function  of  that  jihilosophy  thus  was  to  establish  a  specu-
lative body  whose  social  existence  not  only  admitted  of  no
preparatory  discussion,  but  was  itself  an  indispensable
prepai'ation  for  the  regular  organization  of  all  other  classes.
Whatever  might  have  been  the  confusion  of  intellectual
labour,  and  the  inanity  of  the  leading  investigations  of
the  sacerdotal  orders,  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  the  human
mind  owes  to  them  the  first  effectual  separation  between
theory  and  practice,  which  could  take  place  in  no  other
manner.  Mental  progress,  by  which  all  other  progress  is
directed,  would  certainly  have  been  destroyed  at  its  birth,
if  society  had  continued  to  be  composed  of  families  engaged
in  the  cai'es  of  material  existence,  or,  as  the  only  alterna-
tive, in  the  excitement  of  a  brutal  military  activity.  Any
spiritual  expansion  supposes  the  existence  of  a  privileged
class,  enjoying  the  leisure  indispensable  to  intellectual
culture,  and  at  the  same  time  urged,  by  its  social  position,
to  develop  to  the  utmost  the  kind  of  speculative  activity
compatible  with  the  primitive  state  of  humanity  ;  and  this
description  is  answered  by  the  sacerdotal  institution  estab-
lished by  the  theological  philosophy.  Though,  in  the
decrepitude  of  the  old  philosophy,  we  see  the  theological
class  sunk  in  mental  lethargy,  we  must  not  forget  that  but
for  their  activity  in  the  days  of  its  prime,  human  society
would  have  remained  in  a  condition  much  like  that  of  a
company  of  superior  monkeys.  By  forming  this  specula-
tive class,  then,  the  theological  philosophy  fulfilled  the
political  conditions  of  a  further  i:)rogressiou  of  the  human
mind.

Such  ai'e  the  qualities,  intellectual,  moral,  and  social,
which  secured  the  supi-emacy  of  the  theological  philosophy,
at  the  outset  of  human  progress.  This  is  the  only  part  of
my  sociological  demonstration  which  is  at  all  open  to  dis-
pute ;  and  this  is  one  reason  why  I  have  dwelt  so  long
upon  it :  but  it  is  not  the  only  reason.  Another  and  a
greater  is  that  this  view  contains  the  radical  principle  of
the  whole  demonstration,  the  remainder  of  which  will  not
detain  us  lontj.


THE   POSITIVE    STAGE.  319

If  this  starting-point  of  Iniman  develop-         .  .  .

ment  has  been  placed  beyond  disj^ute,  the  sta^e
final,  or  positive  stage,  does  not  admit  of  it.
We  have  seen  enough  of  the  establishment  of  the  positive
philosophy  in  other  departments  to  be  satisfied  of  its
destined  prevalence  in  sociology.  For  the  same  reasons
which  explain  and  justify  the  early  supremacy  of  the
theological  philosophy,  we  see  that  it  must  be  a  provisional
state,  for  its  supremacy  was  owing  to  its  aptitude  to  meet
the  needs  of  a  primitive  state  of  humanity ;  and  those
needs  are  not  the  same,  nor  requiring  the  same  philosoj^hy
to  satisfy  them,  as  those  which  arise  in  a  more  advanced
stage  of  the  humau  evolution.  After  having  awakened
human  reason,  and  superintended  its  progress,  in  the
absence  of  a  more  real  philosophy,  theology  began  to
rej^ress  the  human  mind  from  the  first  moment  of  its
coming  into  direct  antagonism  with  the  jjositive  philo-
sophy. And  in  the  same  way,  in  its  moral  relations,  it
imparted  at  first  a  consolatory  confidence  and  active  energy,
which  have  become  transmuted,  by  too  long  a  duration,
into  oppressive  terror  and  a  faint  apathy  which  have  been
ioo  common  a  spectacle  since  it  has  been  driven  to  struggle
to  retain  its  hold,  instead  of  extending  its  dominion.
There  is  no  more  question  of  the  moral  than  of  the  intel-
lectual superiority  and  final  supremacy  of  tlie  positive
philosophy,  capable  as  it  is  of  developing  in  us  an  unshaken
vigour  and  a  deliberate  steadfastness,  directly  derived  from
(jur  own  nature,  Avithout  any  external  assistance,  or  any
imaginary  hindrance.  And  again,  in  regard  to  its  social
bearings,  though  the  ascendancy  of  the  theological  philo-
sophy lasted  longer  on  this  ground  than  on  the  other  two.
it  is  evident  enough  at  present  that,  instead  of  uniting
men,  which  was  its  proper  function  at  first,  it  now  divides
them,  so  that  after  having  created  speculative  activity,  it
has  ended  with  radically  hindering  it.  The  function  of
reuniting,  as  of  stimulating  and  directing,  belongs  more
and  more,  as  religious  belief  declines,  to  the  conceptions  of
])ositive  philosophy,  which  alone  can  establish  that  intellec-
tual community  all  over  the  world  on  which  the  great
t^uture  political  organization  is  to  be  grounded.  The  intel-
lectual destination  of  the  two  philosophies  has  been  suffi-


320  rosiTivE  PiiiLosopiiY.

cieutly  estal>lislied  in  our  review  of  all  the  departments  ol'
natural  philosophy.  Their  moral  and  social  destination
will  be  illustrated  in  succeeding  chapters  of  this  work.
My  historical  analysis  will  explain  to  us  the  continuous
decline  of  the  one  and  the  corresj^onding  rise  of  the  other,
from  the  earliest  pei'iod  of  human  progression.  It  may
appear  paradoxical  to  regard  the  theological  philosophy  as
in  a  steadily  declining  state  intellectually,  at  the  very  timi'
that  it  was  fulfilling  its  most  exalted  political  mission  :
but  we  shall  find  satisfactory  scientific  evidence  that
Catholicism,  its  noblest  social  worlc,  must  necessarily  be
its  last  effort,  on  account  of  the  germs  of  disorganization
which  must  thenceforth  grow  more  and  more  ra])idly.  We
need  here  therefore  only  assign  the  general  principle  of  the
inevitable  tendency  of  the  human  miud  towards  an  exclu-
sive positive  philosophy,  throughout  the  whole  range  of
the  intellectual  system.

A.tteini)toil  ^^^^  general,   like  the    individual   human

union  of  the  mind,  is  governed  by  imagination  first,  and
two  philoso-  then,  after  a  sufficient  exercise  of  the  facul-
P'"®'^-  ties   at   large,   more   and   more   by  reason.

The  same  grounds  on  which  the  process  takes  place  in  the
individual  case  determine  that  of  the  whole  sjtecies  ;  and
with  the  more  certainty  and  power  on  account  of  the
greater  complexity  and  perpetuity  of  the  social  organism.
Supreme  as  the  theological  philosophy  once  was,  it  is  cer-
tain that  such  a  method  of  philosoi>hizing  was  resorted  to
only  because  no  other  was  possible.  Wherever  there  has
been  a  choice,  in  regard  to  any  subject  whatever,  Man  has
always  preferred  the  study  of  the  laws  of  phenomena
to  that  of  their  primary  causes,  though  prior  training,
which  there  has  been  no  rational  education  adapted  to
counteract,  has  often  occasioned  lapse  into  his  old  illusions.
Theological  philosophy  has,  however,  never  been  absolutely
imiversal.  That  is,  the  simplest  and  commonest  facts  in
all  classes  of  phenomena  have  always  been  supposed  sub-
ject to  natural  laws,  and  not  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  su})er-
uatural  agents.  Adam  Smith  made  the  remark  that  there
never  was,  in  any  age  or  country,  a  god  of  Weight.  In
more  complex  cases,  if  only  the  relations  of  phenomena  are
seen  to  be  invariable,  the  most  superficial  observer  recog-


DIMINUTION    OF   SUPERNATURALISM.  321

nizes  the  presence  of  law.  Even  amoug  moral  and  social
phenomena,  where  the  entrance  of  positive  philosophy  has
been  interdicted,  we  are  all  obliged  to  act  daily  on  the
supposition  of  natural  laws,  in  order  to  conduct  the
common  affairs  of  life,  for  all  forecast  would  be  impossible
if  we  supposed  every  incident  to  be  ascribable  to  super-
natural agency,  and  no  other  resource  therefore  possible
than  prayer,  for  influencing  the  course  of  human  actions.
It  is  even  noticeable  that  the  princijile  of  the  theological
philosophy  itself  lies  in  the  transference  to  the  phenomena
of  external  nature  of  the  first  beginnings  of  the  laws  of
human  action ;  and  thus  the  germ  of  the  positive  j^hilosophy
is  at  least  as  primitive  as  that  of  the  theological  philosophy
itself,  though  it  could  not  expand  till  a  much  later  time.
This  idea  is  very  important  to  the  pei'fect  rationality  of  our
Sociological  theory  ;  because,  as  human  life  can  never  pre-
sent any  real  creation,  but  only  a  gradual  evolution,
the  final  spread  of  the  positive  spirit  would  be  scientifically
incomprehensible,  if  Ave  could  not  trace  its  rudiments  from
the  very  beginning.  From  that  scarcely  appreciable  i>ve-
sence  at  the  beginning,  the  rise  of  the  positive  spirit  has
been  recognizable,  in  proportion  to  the  extension  and  gene-
ralization of  our  observations,  and  the  theological  ])hilo-
sophy  has  been  slowly  but  steadily  driven  back  within  the
narrowing  limits  of  phenomena  whose  natural  laws  were
still  unknown.  Thus  was  the  function  of  the  old  philo-
sophy clearly  a  provisional  one, — to  maintain  our  mental
activity  by  the  only  exercise  open  to  it,  till  the  positive
])hilosophy  should  usher  it  into  the  wide  field  of  universal
knowledge,  made  accessible  to  the  whole  race.  This  desti-
nation has  only  recently  exhibited  itself  in  an  unquestion-
able way  since  the  disclosure  of  natural  laws  in  phenomena
so  numerous  and  so  various  as  to  suggest  the  necessary
existence  of  analogous  laws  in  all  other  departments,  how-
ever remote  their  actual  discovery  may  be.

It  does  not  follow,  from  anything  that  I  have  said,  that
the  two  philosophies  were  always  visibly  opposed  to  each
other.  On  the  contrary,  the  physical  study  must  have
succumbed  to  the  theological  spirit  if  they  had  seemed
at  the  outset  to  be  incompatible.  In  fact,  the  study  of  the
laws  of  phenomena  appeared,  for  a  long  course  of  time,  to

II.  Y


322  POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY.

agree  very  well  with  the  investigation  into  their  causes.
It  was  only  when  observations  became  more  connected,  and
disclosed  important  relations,  that  the  radical  opposition  of
the  two  doctrines  began  to  be  felt.  Before  the  antagonism
was  avowed,  the  positive  spirit  manifested  its  repugnance
to  the  futile  absolute  explanations  of  the  theological  philo-
sophy ;  and  the  theological  spirit  lavished  its  disdain  on  the
circumspect  march  and  modest  investigations  of  the  new
school ;  while  still  there  was  no  idea  that  the  study  of  real
laws  was  irreconcilable  with  that  of  essential  causes.
When  natural  laws  of  considerable  scope  were  at  length
discovered,  the  incompatibility  became  clear  between  the
I^rejionderance  of  imagination  and  that  of  reason,  between
the  absolute  spirit  and  the  relative  ;  and,  above  all,  between
the  ancient  hypotliesis  of  the  sovereign  direction  of  events
by  any  arbitrary  will,  and  the  growing  certainty  that  we
can  foresee  and  modify  them  by  the  rational  access  of
lii;man  wisdom.  It  is  only  in  our  own  time  that  the  an-
tagonism has  been  extended  to  all  parts  of  the  intellectual
field  :  and  even  up  to  the  last  moment,  the  students  of
special  subjects  have  believed  that  by  confining  themselves
to  the  investigation  of  natural  laws,  and  paying  no
attention  to  the  nature  of  beings  and  mode  of  production
of  phenomena,  they  might  find  physical  researches  com-
patible with  the  exj^lanations  of  theology  ;  while  theology
made  its  own  concessions  in  the  form  of  a  ])rovisionai
notion  of  a  universal  providence,  combined  with  special
laws  Avhich  it  had  imposed  on  itself.  The  conduct  of
Catholicism,  in  interdicting  the  habitual  use  of  miracle
and  prophecy,  which  ])revailed  so  largely  in  ancient  times,
seems  to  me  to  present,  in  religious  affairs,  a  transient
situation  analogous  to  that  which  is  exhibited  by  what
is  called  the  institution  of  constiti;tional  monarchy  in
the  political  world ;  each  being  in  its  own  Avay  an  indis-
putable symptom  of  decline.  However  this  may  be,  the
insufficiency  of  the  theological  jihilosophy  manifests  itself
to  pojjular  observation  in  that  form  of  popular  evidence
which  can  alone  reach  the  majority  of  mankind, — in  its
comparison  with  its  opponent  in  the  application  of  means.
The  positive  philosophy  enables  us  to  foresee  and  to  modify
natural  events,  and  thus  satisfies,  more  and  more,  as  it


THE    liN'i'ERMEDIATE    STATE.  323

advances,  the  most  urgent  intellectual  needs  of  liumanitv,
while  the  ancient  philosophy  remains  barren  ;  so  that  its
fanciful  explanations  are  more  and  more  neglected,  while
the  new  philosophy  obtains  a  perpetually  firmer  hold  on  the
public  reason.  Those  who  have  remained  faithful  in  their
attachment  to  the  theological  philosophy  mate  no  practical
use  of  it  in  their  daily  life,  and  groi;nd  their  predilection
for  it  on  its  characteristic  generality :  so  that  when  its
antagonist  shall  have  become  systematized  as  fully  as  it  is
destined  to  be,  the  ancient  philosoj^hy  will  have  lost
the  last  attribute  which  has  ever  entitled  it  to  social
supremacy.

We  have  now  only  to  take  a  cursory  sur-  .

vey  of  the  intermediate  state.  I  have  ^^^^^  Period
pointed  out  more  than  once  before,  that
any  intermediate  state  can  be  judged  of  only  after  a
precise  analysis  of  the  two  extremes.  The  present  case  is
a  remarkable  illustration  of  this  necessity  ;  for,  if  it  is
once  admitted  that  the  human  mind  must  set  out  from  the
theological  state,  and  arrive  certainly  at  the  positive,  we
may  easily  understand  how  it  must  pass  through  the
metajihysical,  which  has  no  other  destination  than  to
afford  a  transition  from  the  one  to  the  other.  The  bastard
and  mobile  character  of  the  metaphysical  philosophy  fits  it
for  this  office,  as  it  reconciles,  for  a  time,  the  radical  oppo-
sition of  the  other  two,  adapting  itself  to  the  gradual
decline  of  the  one  and  the  j^reparatory  rise  of  the  other,  so
as  to  spare  our  dislike  of  abrupt  change,  and  to  afford  us  a
transition  almost  imperceptible.  The  metaphysical  philo-
sophy takes  possession  of  the  speculative  field  after  the
theological  has  relinquished  it,  and  before  the  positive
is  ready  for  it :  so  that  in  each  particular  case,  the  dispute
about  the  supremacy  of  any  of  the  three  ]ihilosophies  is
reduced  to  the  mere  question  of  opportuneness,  judged  by
a  rational  examination  of  the  development  of  the  human
mind.  The  method  of  modification  consists  in  substituting
gradually  the  entity  for  a  deity  when  religious  concejitions
become  so  generalized  as  to  diminish  perpetually  the  num-
ber of  supernatural  agents,  as  well  as  their  active  interven-
tion, and  at  length  arrive,  professedly  if  not  really,  at
rigorous  unity.    When  supernatural  action  loses  its  original


324  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

speciality,  it  consigns  the  immediate  direction  of  the  ])he-
nomeuon  to  a  mysterious  entity,  at  first  emanating  from
itself,  but  to  which  daily  custom  trains  the  human  mind  to
refer  more  and  more  exclusively  the  production  of  each
event.  Tliis  strange  process  has  favoured  the  vpithdravs^al
of  supernatural  causes,  and  the  exclusive  consideration  of
phenomena  ;  that  is,  the  decline  of  the  theological  and  the
rise  of  the  positive  spirit.  Beyond  this,  the  general
character  of  this  philosophy  is  that  of  the  theological,
of  which  it  is  only  a  modification,  though  the  chief.  It
has  an  inferior  intellectual  consistency,  and  a  much  less
intense  social  power ;  so  that  it  is  much  better  adapted  for
a  critical  function  than  for  any  real  organization  :  and  it  is
those  very  qualities  which  disable  it  for  resistance  to  the
growth  of  the  positive  spirit.  On  the  one  hand,  the
increasing  subtlety  of  metaphysical  speculations  is  for
ever  reducing  their  characteristic  entities  to  mere  abstract
denominations  of  the  corresponding  phenomena,  so  as
to  render  their  own  impotence  ridiculous  when  they
attempt  exi)lanations  :  a  thing  which  would  not  have  been
possible,  in  an  equal  degree,  with  purely  theological  forms.
On  the  other  hand,  its  deficiency  of  organizing  power,
in  consequence  of  its  radical  inconsistency,  must  prevent  irs
maintaining  any  such  political  struggle  as  theology  main-
tained against  the  spread  of  positive  social  philosophy.
However,  it  obtains  a  res])ite  by  its  own  equivocal  and
mobile  nature,  which  enables  it  to  escajie  from  rational
discussion  even  more  than  the  theological  ])hilosophy  itself,
while  the  positive  spirit  is  as  yet  too  imperfe(^lly  generalized
to  be  able  to  attack  tlie  only  substantial  ground  of  their
common  authority, — the  universality  which  they  can
boast,  but  which  it  has  not.  However  this  may  be,  we
mTist  admit  tlie  aptitude  of  metaphysics  to  sustain,  pro-
visionally, our  speculative  activity  on  all  subjects  till  it  can
receive  more  substantial  aliment ;  at  the  same  time  carry-
ing us  over  from  the  theological  n'gime  further  and  further
in  the  direction  of  the  positive.  The  same  aptitude
appears  in  its  ])olitical  action.  Without  overlooking  the
serious  intellectual  and  moral  dangers  which  distinguish
the  metaphysical  jihilosophy,  its  transitional  quality  accounts
to  us  for  the  universal  ascendancy  which   it  has  provision-


CORRESPONDING    MATERIAL   STATE,  326

ally  obtained  amon|:^  the  most  advanced  societies,  which
cannot  but  have  an  instinctive  sense  of  some  indispensable
office  to  be  fulfilled  by  such  a  philosophy  in  the  evolution
of  humanity.  The  irresistible  necessity  of  this  temporary
phase  is  thus,  on  all  grounds,  as  unquestionable  as  it  could
be  prior  to  the  direct  analysis  to  which  it  will  be  subjected
in  the  course  of  our  historical  review.

During  the  whole  of  our  survey  of  the  sciences,  I  have
endeavoured  to  keep  in  view  the  great  fact  Co-existence
that  all  the  three  states,  theological,  meta-  of  the  tlu-ee
physical,  and  positive,  may  and  do  exist  Periods,
at  the  same  time  in  the  same  mind  in  regard  to  different
sciences.  I  must  once  more  recall  this  consideration,  and
insist  upon  it ;  because  in  the  forgetfulness  of  it  lies  the
only  real  objection  that  can  be  brought  against  the  grand
law  of  the  three  states.  It  must  be  steadily  kept  in  view
that  the  same  mind  may  be  in  the  positive  state  with
regard  to  the  most  simple  and  genei*al  sciences ;  in  the
metaphysical  with  regard  to  the  more  complex  and  special ;
and  in  the  theological  with  regard  to  social  science,  which
is  so  complex  and  special  as  to  have  hitherto  taken  no
scientific  form  at  all.  Any  apparent  contradiction  must
certainly  ai'ise,  even  if  it  could  be  shown  to  exist,  from  the
imperfection  of  our  hierarchical  arrangement,  and  not
from  the  law  of  evolution  itself.  This  once  fully  under-
stood, the  law  itself  becomes  our  guide  in  further  investi-
gation, as  every  proved  theory  does,  by  showing  us  by
anticiimtion,  what  phenomena  to  look  for,  and  how  to  use
those  which  arise :  and  it  supplies  the  place  of  direct
exploration,  wheu  Ave  have  not  the  necessary  means  of
investigation.  We  shall  find  that  by  this  law  alone  can
the  history  of  the  human  mind  be  rendered  intelligible.
Having  convinced  ourselves  of  its  efiicacy  in  regard  to  all
other  sciences,  and  m  interpreting  all  that  has  yet  come  to
])ass  in  human  history,  we  must  adhere  to  it  steadily  in
analysing  the  present,  and  in  forming  such  anticipation  of
the  future  as  sociology,  being  a  real  science,  enables  us  to
rely  upon.

To  complete  my  long  and  difficult  demonstration,  I  have
only  now  to  show  that  material  development,  as  a  whole,
must  follow  a  course,   not  only  analogous,  but  pei'fectly


326  posi'JivE  piiiLosopny.

correspondent  with  that  of  intellectual  development,  which,
as  we  have  seen,  governs  every  other.

CorresiioiKling  ^^1  political  investigation  of  a  rational
niateiial  deve-  kind  proves  the  primitive  tendency  of  man-
loiHiient.  kind,  in  a  general  way,  to  a  military   life  ;

and  to  its  final  issue  in  an  industrial  life.  No  enlightened
mind  disputes  the  continuous  decline  of  the  military  spirit,
and  the  gradual  ascendancy  of  the  industrial.  We  see  now,
under  various  forms,  and  more  and  more  indisputably,
even  in  the  very  heart  of  armies,  the  repugnance  of  modern
society  to  a  military  life.  We  see  that  compulsory  recruit-
ing liecomes  more  and  more  necessary,  and  that  there  is
less  and  less  voluntary  persistence  in  that  mode  of  life.
Notwithstanding  the  immense  exceptional  development  of
military  activity  which  was  occasioned  by  anomalous  cir-
cumstances at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  our
industrial  and  pacific  instincts  have  returned  to  their
regidar  course  of  expansion,  so  as  to  render  us  secure  of
the  radical  tranquillity  of  the  civilized  world,  though  the
peace  of  Europe  must  often  appear  to  be  endangered
through  the  provisional  deficiency  of  any  systematic  or-
ganization of  international  relations  ;  a  cause  which,  though
insufticient  to  produce  war,  keejis  us  in  a  state  of  frequent
uneasiness.  We  need  not  then  go  over  again  the  proof  of
the  first  and  last  terms  of  the  evolution  ;  which  will  be
abundantly  illustrated  by  the  historical  analysis  that  I
shall  offer.  We  have  only  to  refer  the  facts  of  human
experience  to  the  essential  laws  of  human  nature,  and  the
necessary  conditions  of  social  development : — a  scientific
procedure  which  has  never  yet  been  attempted.

...         .  As  long  as  primitive  Man  was  averse  from

fcarTlifr""  '^^^  regular  toil,  the  military  hfe  alone  fur-
nished a  field  for  his  sustained  activity.
Apart  from  cannibalism,  it  offered  the  simplest  means  of
subsistence.  However  deplorable  the  necessity,  its  uni-
versal i)revalence  and  continuous  development,  even  after
subsistence  might  have  been  obtained  by  other  means,
])roves  that  the  military  rrgime  must  have  had  some  indis-
jiensable,  though  jirovisional  oftice  to  fulfil  in  the  pro-
gression of  the  race.  It  Avas  indeed  the  only  one  under
which  human  industry   could  make  a  beginning;  in   the


PRIMITIVE    SLAYEKY.  327

same  way  that  the  scientific  spirit  covild  not  have  arisen
without  the  j^rotection  of  the  religious.  The  industrial
spirit  supposed  the  existence  of  a  considerable  social  de-
velopment, such  as  could  not  have  taken  place  till  iso-
lated families  had  been  connected  by  the  pursuits  of  war.
The  social,  and  yet  more  the  political  properties  of  military
activity  are.  in  their  early  stages,  perfectly  clear  and  de-
cisive, and,  in  short,  fully  appropriate  to  the  high  civilizing
function  which  they  had  to  fulfil.  It  was  thus  that  habits
of  regularity  and  discipline  were  instituted,  and  the  families
of  men  were  brought  into  association  for  warlike  expedi-
tions or  for  their  common  defence.  The  objects  of  associa-
tion could  not  j^ossibly  be  more  obvious  or  urgent,  nor  the
elementary  conditions  of  concurrence  more  irresistible.  In
no  other  school  could  a  primitive  society  learn  order ;  as
we  may  see  at  this  day  in  the  case  of  those  types  of  ancient
humanity, — the  exceptional  individuals  Avho  cannot  now  be
made  amenable  to  industrial  discipline.  This  ascendancy
of  the  military  spirit  was  indispensable,  not  only  to  the
original  consolidation  of  political  society,  but  yet  more  to
its  continuous  extension,  which  could  not  otherwise  have
taken  place  but  with  excessive  slowness ;  and  such  exten-
sion was,  to  a  certain  degree,  indispensable  to  the  final
development  of  human  industry.  Thus,  then,  we  find
humanity  involved  in  the  same  kind  of  vicious  circle  with
regard  to  its  temporal  as  we  saw  it  to  be  with  its  spii'itual
progress  ;  and  in  both  cases  an  issue  was  afforded  by  the
fortunate  expansion  of  a  preliminar}'  tendency.  In  fact,
the  necessary  basis  of  the  militai-y  rrgime  has  everywhere
been  the  individual  slavery  of  the  producing  class,  by
which    warriors    were    allowed    the    full    and  .  .

free  develoj^ment  of  their  activity.  We  shall  yiaverv^^
see  hereafter  that  the  great  social  operation
which  was  to  be  accomplished,  in  due  time,  by  the  con-
tinuous progression  of  a  military  system,  powerfully  insti-
tuted and  wisely  carried  out,  must  have  failed  in  its
earliest  stages.  We  shall  also  see  how  this  ancient  slavery
was  the  necessary  preparation  for  the  final  prevalence  of
the  industrial  life,  by  imposing  on  the  majority  of  the  race,
irresistibly  and  exclusively,  that  toil  to  which  Man  is  con-
stitutionally   averse,  though    an    ultimate    condition    of


328  posri'ivE  philosophy.

laborious  perseverance  was  in  store  for  all.  To  view  the
oase  without  prejudice,  we  must  transport  ourselves  to
those  primitive  times,  and  not  regard  the  slavery  of  that
age  with  the  just  horror  Avith  which  we  view  that  of
modern  times, — the  colonial  slavery  of  our  day,  which  is
truly  a  social  monstrosity,  existing  as  it  does  in  the  heart
of  an  industrial  period,  siibjecting  the  labourer  to  the
capitalist  in  a  manner  equally  degrading  to  both.  The
ancient  slavery  was  of  the  producer  to  the  warrior ;  and
it  tended  to  develope  their  respective  energies,  so  as
to  occasion  their  final  concurrence  in  the  same  social
progression.

The  Military  Necessai'y  as   this  military  regime  was,  it

regime  provi-  was  not  the  less  merely  provisional.  While
.sional.  industrial   activity   has  the    fine    quality   of

bearing  the  most  energetic  extension  among  all  individuals
and  nations  without  making  the  rise  of  the  one  irreconcil-
able with  that  of  the  other,  it  is  evident  that  the  exaltation
of  the  military  life  among  any  considerable  portion  of  the
race  must  occasion  the  restriction  of  all  the  rest ;  this
being,  in  fact,  the  proper  function  of  the  regime  in  regard
to  the  whole  field  of  civilization.  Thus,  while  the  indus-
trial period  comprehends  the  whole  term  of  human  pro-
gress under  natui-al  laws, — that  is,  the  whole  future  that
we  can  conceive  of, — the  military  period  could  last  no
longer  than  the  formation  of  tliose  preparatory  conditions
which  it  was  its  function  to  create.  This  end  was  attained
when  tlie  chief  part  of  the  civilized  world  was  at  length  united
under  the  same  rule ;  that  is,  in  regai'd  to  Euro])e,  when
Kome  had  completed  its  conquests.  From  that  time  forward,
military  activity  had  neither  object  nor  aliment ;  and  from
that  time  forwai'd,  therefore,  it  declined,  so  as  no  longer  to
disguise  that  gradual  rise  of  the  industrial  spirit,  which
had  been  ])roparing  during  the  interval.  But,  notwith-
standing this  connection,  the  industrial  state  was  so  radi-
cally different  from  the  military  as  to  require  an  inter-
mediate term  ;  and  in  the  same  way  that,  in  the  spiritual
evolution,  an  intermediate  term  was  required  between  the
theological  and  the  positive  spirit.  In  both  cases,  the
middle  2:»hase  was  fluctuating  and  equivocal.  We  shall  see
hereafter  that,  in  the  temporal  case,  it  consisted,  first,  in  a


THEOLOGY   AND   WAR,  329

substitution  of  a  defensive  for  an  offensive  military  organi-
zation, and  afterwards  in  an  involuntary  general  subordi-
nation, more  and  more  marked,  of  the  military  spirit  to
the  instinct  of  pi'oduction.  This  transitory  phase  being
the  one  in  which  we  live,  its  proper  nature,  vague  as  it  is.
can  be  estimated  by  indirect  intuition.

Such  is  the  temporal  evolution,  briefly  surveyed  in  its
three  periods.  No  philosophical  mind  can  help  being
struck  by  the  analogy  between  this  indisputable  pro-
gression and  our  primary  law  of  succession  of  the  three
states  of  the  human  mind.  But  our  sociological  demon-
stration requires  that  we  should  establish  the  connection
between  them  by  exhibiting  the  natural  affinity  Avhich  has
always  existed,  first  between  the  theological  aud  the  mili-
tary spirit,  and  afterwards  between  the  scientific  and  in-
dustrial ;  and,  consequently,  between  the  two  transient
functions  of  the  metaphysicians  and  the  legists.  This
elucidation  will  impart  the  last  degree  of  precision  and
consistency  to  my  demonstration,  and  will  thus  establish  it
as  the  rational  basis  of  the  entire  historical  analysis  which
will  follow.

The  occasional  rivalry  between  the  theo-  Atttnity  be-
logical  power  and  the  military,  which  histoi'y  tween  the
])resents,  has  sometimes  disguised  their  radi-  theoloii^ical  ami
<-al  affinity,  even  in  the  eyes  of  philosophers,  military rc^r /,«,..
But.  if  we  consider,  there  can  be  no  real  rivalry  but  among
the  different  elements  of  the  same  political  system,  in  con-
sequence of  that  spontaneous  emulation  which,  in  all  cases
of  hvimau  concurrence,  must  become  more  earnest  and
extensive  as  the  end  is  more  important  and  indirect,  and
therefore  the  means  more  distinct  and  independent,  with-
out the  participation,  voluntary  or  instinctive,  being  thereby
])revented.  When  two  powers,  equally  energetic,  rise,  in-
<-rease,  and  decline  together,  notwithstanding  the  diiferenee
of  their  natures,  we  may  be  assured  that  they  belong  to
the  same  regime,  whatever  may  be  their  habitual  conflicts.
Conflict  indicates  radical  incompatibility  only  when  it  takes
place  between  two  elements  employed  in  analogous  func-
tions, and  when  the  gradual  growth  of  the  one  coincides
with  the  continuous  decline  of  the  other.  As  to  the
})resent  case,   it  is  evident  that,  in  any  political  system,


330  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

there  must  be  an  incessant  rivalry  between  the  sj^eculative
and  the  active  powers,  which,  through  the  imj)erfection  of
our  nature,  must  often  be  inclined  to  ignore  their  neces-
sary co-ordination,  and  to  disdain  the  general  limits  of
their  reciprocal  attributes.  Notwithstanding  the  social
affinity  between  science  and  industry,  we  must  look  for
similar  conflict  between  them  hereafter,  in  j)roi)ortion  to
the  political  ascendancy  which  they  will  obtain  together.
We  see  signs  of  it  already  in  the  intellectual  and  moral
antij^athy  of  Science  to  the  natural  inferiority  of  these
labours  of  Industry  which  yet  are  the  means  of  wealth,
and  in  the  instinctive  repugnance  of  Industry  to  the  ali-
straction  which  characterizes  Science,  and  to  the  just  j^ride
by  which  it  is  animated.

Having  desj^atched  these  objections,  we  may  now  con-
template the  strong  bond  which  unites  the  theological  and
military  powers,  and  which  has  in  all  ages  been  felt  and
honoured  by  all  enlightened  men  who  have  borne  a  part  in
either,  notwithstanding  the  passions  of  political  rivalry.  It
is  j^lain  that  no  military  system  could  arise  and  endure
without  the  countenance  of  the  theological  spirit,  which
must  secure  for  it  the  complete  and  permanent  subordina-
tion essential  to  its  existence.  Each  period  imposes  equal
exigencies  of  this  sort  in  its  special  manner.  At  the  out-
set, when  the  narrowness  and  nearness  of  the  aim  required
a.  less  absolute  submission  of  mind,  social  ties  were  so  weak
that  nothing  could  have  been  done  but  for  the  religious
authority  with  which  military  chiefs  were  naturally  in-
vested. In  more  advanced  times  the  end  became  so  vast
and  remote,  and  the  participation  so  indirect,  that  even
long  habits  of  discipline  w^ouid  not  have  secured  the  neces-
sary co-operation  without  the  aid  of  theological  convictions
occasioning  blind  and  involuntary  confidence  in  military
superiors.  It  was  in  very  ancient  times  that  the  military
spirit  had  its  gTeat  social  function  to  fulfil ;  and  it  was  in
those  ancient  times  that  the  two  2)owers  were  usually  found
concentrated  in  the  same  chiefs.  We  must  observe  also
that  it  was  not  every  spiritual  authority  whatever  that
would  have  sufficiently  suited  the  foundation  and  consoli-
dation of  military  government,  which,  from  its  nature,  re-
quired the  concurrence  of  the  theological  philosophy,  and


SCIENCE    AM)    HISTORY.  331

no  other :  for  instance,  tliougli  natural  philosophy  has
rendered  eminent  service  in  modern  times  to  the  art  of
war,  the  scientific  spirit,  which  encourages  habits  of  rational
discussion,  is  radically  incompatible  with  the  military
spirit ;  and  we  know  that  the  subjection  of  their  art  to  the
principles  of  science  has  always  been  bitterly  deplored  by
the  most  distinguished  soldiers,  on  the  introduction  of
every  change,  as  a  token  of  the  decline  of  the  military
system.  On  this  ground,  then,  the  affinity  of  temporal
military  powers  for  sjjiritual  theological  powers  is  suffi-
ciently accounted  for.  At  the  first  glance  we  might  sup-
pose the  converse  relation  to  be  less  indispensable,  since
purely  theocratic  societies  have  existed,  while  an  exclusively
military  one  has  never  been  known.  But  a  closer  examina-
tion will  always  show  the  necessity  of  the  military  system
to  consolidate,  and  yet  more  to  extend,  the  theological
authority,  developed  in  this  way  by  a  continual  political
application,  as  the  sacerdotal  instinct  has  always  been  well
aware.  We  shall  see  again  that  the  theological  spirit  is  as
hostile  to  the  expansion  of  industry  as  the  military.  Thus
the  two  elements  of  the  jirimitive  political  system  have  not
only  a  radical  affinity,  but  common  antipathies  and  sympa-
thies, as  well  as  general  interests  ;  and  it  must  be  needless
to  enlarge  further  in  this  place  on  the  sociological  principle
of  the  concurrence  of  these  powers,  which  my  historical
analysis  will  present  as  constantly  engaged  in  consolidating
and  correcting  each  other.

The  latest  case  of  political  dualism  is  even       \tHnitv  1k'-
more  unquestionable  than  the  earliest,  and       tween  the
we  are  favourably  circumstanced  for  observ-       i*ositive  and
ing  it, — the  two  elements  not  having  yet  at-       Industrial
tained  their  definite  ascendency,  though  their      ^^^"^  '
social  development  is  sufficiently  marked.     When  the  time
arrives  for  their  political  rivalry,  it  may  be  more  difficult
than  now  to  exhibit  that  resemblance  in  origin  and  desti-
nation, and   that  conformity  of   principles  and  interests,
Avhich  could  not  be    seriously   disputed  as  long  as   their
common  struggle  against  the  old  political  system  acts  as  a
restraint  ujion  their  divergeaicies.     The   most  remarkable
feature  that  we  have  to  contemplate  in  their  case  is  the  aid
which  each  renders  to  the  political  triumph  of  the  other,  by


332  POSITIVE    PHILOSOPHY.

seconding  its  own  ett'oj'ts  against  its  cliief  antagonist.  I
have  ali'eady  noticed,  in  another  connection,  the  secret  in-
compatibility between  tlie  scientific  sj^irit  and  the  military.
There  is  the  same  hostility  between  the  industrial  spirit,
when  sufficiently  developed,  and  the  theological.  The  most
zealous  advocates  of  the  old  rrgime  are  very  far  removed
from  the  old  religious  point  of  view  ;  but  we  can  transport
ourselves  to  it  for  a  moment,  and  see  how  the  voluntary
modification  of  phenomena  by  the  rules  of  human  wisdom
must  thence  appear  as  impious  as  the  rational  prevision  of
them,  as  both  suppose  invariable  laws,  finally  irreconcilable
with  all  arbitrary  will.  According  to  the  rigorous  though
barbarous  logic  of  the  least  civilized  nations,  all  human
intervention  to  improve  the  economy  of  nature  is  an  in-
jurious attack  upon  providential  government.  There  is  no
doubt,  in  fact,  that  a  strong  j^reponderauce  of  the  religious
spirit  benumbs  the  industrial,  by  the  exaggerated  feelings
of  a  stupid  optimism,  as  has  been  abundantly  clear  on
many  decisive  occasions.  That  this  disastrous  effect  has
not  been  more  fatal  is  owing  to  priestly  sagacity,  which
has  so  managed  this  dangerous  power  as  to  educe  its
civilizing  influence,  while  neutralizing  its  injurious  action  by
constant  and  vigilant  effort,  in  a  way  which  I  shall  pre-
sently exhibit.  We  cannot  then  overlook  the  political
influence  by  which  the  gradual  expansion  of  human  in-
dustry must  aid  the  progressive  ascendency  of  the  scientific
spirit,  in  its  antagonism  to  the  religious  ;  to  say  nothing  of
the  daily  stimulus  which  industry  and  science  impart  to
each  other,  when  once  strong  enough  for  mutual  action.
Thvis  far  their  office  has  chiefly  been  to  substitute  them-
selves for  the  ancient  political  powers  which  are  yielding
up  their  social  influence;  and  our  attention  is  necessarily
drawn  chiefly  to  the  aid  they  have  afforded  to  each  other
in  this  operation.  But  it  is  easy  to  perceive  what  force  and
what  efficacy  must  reside  in  their  connection,  when  it  shall
have  assumed  the  organic  character,  in  which  it  is  at  present
deficient,  and  shall  j)roceed  to  the  final  reorganization  of
modern  society.

Now  that  we  have  examined  the  two  ex-

Intermediate      i^emo  states,   the  intermediate   dualism   re-

rcqtrnc.  .  i  • ,   i  •  mi       •  ,  •  /•

quires  little  notice.     The  interconnection  or


INTEKMKDIATK   RE(;1MK.  333

the  convergent  powers,  spiritual  and  temporal,  which  con-
stitutes the  transitory  regime,  is  a  necessary  consequence  of
all  that  we  liave  been  observing.  Indeed,  we  need  but  look
at  the  labours  of  metaphysicians  and  legists  to  see  what
their  affinity  is,  amidst  their  rivalries ;  an  affinity  which
stakes  the  philosophical  ascendency  of  the  one  class  on  the
political  preponderance  of  the  other.  We  may,  then,  regard
as  now  complete  the  necessary  explanation  reqviired  by  our
fundamental  law  of  human  evolution,  in  order  to  its  direct
application  to  the  study  of  this  great  ]>lienomenon.  That
study  will  be  guided  by  the  consideration  of  the  three
dualisms  which  I  have  established  as  the  only  basis  of
sound  historical  philosophy.  It  is  worth  noticing  the  con-
formity of  this  law  of  succession,  at  once  intellectual  and
material,  social  and  political,  with  the  historical  order
which  popular  reason  has  instinctively  established,  by  dis-
tinguishing the  ancient  and  the  modern  world,  separated
and  reunited  by  the  Middle  Ages.  The  sociological  law
which  I  have  pi'opounded  may  be  found  to  have  for  its  de-
stination to  take  up  a  vague  em]>irical  notion,  hitherto
barren,  and  render  it  rational  and  prolific.  I  hail  this
spontaneous  coincidence,  as  giving  a  sanction  to  my  specu-
lative labours ;  and  I  claim  this  confirmation,  in  virtue
of  that  great  aphorism  of  positive  philosophy  which  I  have
quoted  so  often,  which  enjoins  upon  all  sound  scientific
theories  to  start  from  a  point  sufficiently  accordant  with
the  spontaneous  indications  of  popular  reason,  of  which
true  science  is  simply  a  special  prolongation.

The  series  of  views  of  social  dynamics  sketched  out  in
this  chapter  has  established  the  fundamental  law  of  human
development,  and  thei'efore  the  bases  of  historical  |>hil<)-
sophy.  We  had  before  ascertained  the  spirit  and  method
of  that  philoso|)hy  ;  and  we  may  now  therefore  proceed  to
apply  this  great  sociological  conception  to  the  analysis  of
the  history  of  mankind.


CHISWICK    PRESS  :— CHARLES    WHITTINOHAM    AND    CO.
TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY   LANK,    LONDON.


AN


ALPHABETICAL    LIST


O?    BOOKS   CONTAINED   IN


BOHN'S    LIBRARIES.


Detailed  Catalogue,  arranged  according  to  the  various
Libraries,  will  be  sent  on  application.


ADDISON'S  Works.  With  the
Notes  of  Bishop  Hurd,  Portrait,
and  8  Plates  of  Medals  and  Coins.
Edited  by  H.  G.  Bohn.  6  vols.
3 J.  6d.  each.

^SOHYLUS,   The  Dramas  of.

Translated  into  English  Verse  by
Anna  Swanwick.  4th  Edition,
revised.     5^.

The  Tragedies  of.  Trans-
lated into  Prose  by  T.  A.  Buckley,
B.A.     3^.  6d.

ALLEN'S  {Joseph,  B.  N.)  Battles
of  the  British  Navy.  Revised
Edition,  with  57  Steel  Engravings.
2  vols.     5j.  each.

AlvnyiLlNUS  MAROELLINUS.
History  of  Rome  during  the
Reigns  o?  Constantius,  Julian,
Tovianus,  Valentinian,  and  Valens.
Translated  by  Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge,
M.A.     75.  6d.

ANDERSEN'S  Danish  Legends
and  Fairy  Tales.  Translated
by  Caroline  Peachey.  With  120
Wood  Engravings.     5^.

ANTONINUS  (M.  AureUus),  The
Thoughts  of.      Trans,   literally.


with  Notes  and  introduction  by
George  Long,  M.A.     35.  6d.

APOLLONIU3   RHODIUS.

'The  Argonautlca.'  Translated
by  E.  P.  Coleridge,  B.A.    5^.

APPIAN'S  Roman  History.
Translated  by  Horace  White,
M.A.,  LL.D.  With  Maps  and
Illustrations.     2  vols.     6s.  each.

APULEIUS,  The  Works  of
Comprising  the  Golden  Ass,  God
of  Socrates,  Florida,  and  Dis-
course of  Magic.     5.f.

ARIOSTO'S  Orlando  Fiurloso.
Translated  into  English  Verse  by
W.  S.  Rose.  With  Portrait,  and  2  \
Steel  Engravings.  2vols.  55.  each.

ARISTOPHANES'  Comedies.
Translated  by  W.  J.  Hickie.  2
vols.     $s.  ejich,

ARISTOTLE'S  NIoomachean
Ethics.  Translated,  with  Intro-
duction and  Notes,  by  the  Vener-
able Archdeacon  Browne,     ^r.

Politics      and   Economics.

Translated  by  E.  Walford,  M.A.,
with  Introduction  by  Dr.  Gillies.
Ss.


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


AEISTOTLE'S  Metaphysics.
Translated  by  the  Rev.  John  H.
M'Mahon,  M.A.     ^s.

History  of  Animals.    Trans.

by  Richard  Cresswell,  M.A.    5^.

- —  Organon;  or,  Logical  Trea-
tises, and  the  Introduction  of
Porphyry.  Translated  by  the
Rev.  O.  F.  Owen,  M.A.  2  vols.
3 J.  (id.  each.

-^ —  Rhetoric  and  Poetics,
Trans,  by  T.  Buckley,  B.A.     5^.

ABRIANS  Anabasis  of  Alex-
ander,  together  with  the  In-iica.
Translated  by  E.  T-  Chinnock,
M.A.,  LL.D.  With  Maps  and
Plans.     55.

ATHEN^US.  The  Delpnoso-
phlsts;  or,  the  Banquet  of  the
Learned.  Trans,  by  Prof.  C.  D.
Yonge,  M.A.    3  vols.     5^-.  each.

BACON'S  Moral  and  Historical
Works,  including  the  Essays,
Apophthegms,  Wisdom  of  the
Ancients,  New  Atlantis,  Henry
VIL,  Henry  VIH.,  Elizabeth,
Henry  Prince  of  Wales,  History
of  Great  Britain,  Julius  Caesar,
•\nd  Augustus  Casar.  Edited  by
J.  Devey,  M.A.     3.^.  dd.

Novum  Organum  and  Ad-
vancement of  Learning.  Edited
by  J.  Devey,  M.A.     5^.

BASS'S  Lexicon  to  the  Greek
Testament.    2s.

BAX'S  Manual  of  the  History
of  Philosophy,  for  the  use  of
Students.   By  E.  Belfort  Bax.    Ss.

BEAUMONT  and  PLETOHER,

(heir  finest  Scenes,  Lyrics,  and
other  Beautie?,  selected  from  the
whole  of  their  works,  ;  nd  edited
by  Lci^h  Hunt.     35.  6d.


BBCHSTEIN'S  Cage  and
Chamber  Birds,  their  Natural
History,  Habits,  Food,  Diseases,
and  Modes  of  Capture.  Translated,
with  considerable  additions  on
Structure,  Migration,  and  Eco-
nomy, by  H.  G.  Adams.  Together
with  Sweet  British  Warblers.
With  4.3  coloured  Plates  and
Woodcut  Illustrations.     5^'.

BBDE'3  (Venerable)  lioclesias-
tical  History  of  England.  To-
gether with  the  Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle.  Edited  by  J.  A.
Giles,  D.C.L.     With  Map.     S^.

BELL  (Sir  Cbarles).  The  Ana-
tomy and  Philosophy  of  Ex-
pression, as  connected  with
the  Fine  Arts.  By  Sir  Charles
Bell,  K.H.     7th  edition,  revised.

BERKELEY  (George),  Bishop
of  Cloyne,  The  V/orks  of.
Edited  by  George  Sampson.  With
Biographical  Introduction  by  the
Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Baltour,  M.P.
3  vols.     5 J.  each.

BION.    See  Theocritus.

BJORN SON'S  Arne  and  the
Fisher  Lassie.  Translated  by
W.  II.  Low,  M.A.     3J-.  6d.

BLAIR'S  Chronological  Tables
Revised  and  Enlarged.  Compre-
hending the  Chronology  and  His-
toryof  the  World, from  the  Earliest
Times  to  the  Russian  Treaty  of
Peace,  April  1856,  By  J.  Wil-
loughby  Rosse.     Double  vol.  los.

Index  of  Dates.  Com-
prehending the  principal  Facts  in
the  Chronology  and  History  of
the  World,  alphabetically  ar-
ranged ;  being  a  complete  Index
to  Blair's  Chronological  Tables.
By  J.  W.  Rosse,    2  vols.    S^.  each.


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries.


BLEEK,  Introduction  to  the
Cld  Testament.  By  Fjicdrich
Bleek.  Edited  by  Johaun  Bleek
and  Adolf  Kamphausen.  Trans-
lated by  G.  H.  Venables,  under
the  supervision  of  the  Rev.  Canon
Venables.     2  vols.     5^.  each.

BOETHIUS'S  Consolation  of
Philosophy.  King  Alfred's  Anglo-
Saxon  Version  of.  With  a  literal
English  Translation  on  opposite
pages,  Notes,  Introduction,  and
Glossary,  by  Rev.  S.  Fox,  M.A.

BOHN'S  Dictionary  of  Poetical
Quotations.    4th  edition.     6s.

BOHN'S  Handbooks  of  Games.
New  edition.  In  2  vols.,  with
numerous  Illustrations  3^'.  6d.
each.

Vol.  I.-— Table  Games  :— Bil-
liards, Chess,  Draughts,  Back-
gammon, Dominoes,  Solitaire,
Reversi,  Go-Bang,  Rouge  et  Noir,
Roulette,  E.O.,  Hazard,  Faro.

Vol,  II.  —  Card  Games:  —
Whist,  Solo  V/hist,  Poker,  Piquet,
Ecarte,  Euchre,  Bezique,  Crib-
bage,  Loo,  Vingt-et-un,  Napoleon,
Newmarket,  Pope  Joan,  Specula-
tion, &c.,  &c.

BOND'S  A  Handy  Book  of  Hules
and  Tables  for  verifying  Dates
with  the  Christian  Era,  &c.  Giving
an  account  of  the  Chief  Eras  ana
Systems  used  by  various  Nation?  ;
with  the  easy  Methods  for  deter-
mining the  Corresponding  Dates.
By  J.  J.  Bond.     5x.

BONO  MI'S  Nineveh  and  its
Palaces.  7  Plates  and  294  Wood-
cut Illustrations.     51.

BOSWSLL'S  Life  of  Johnson,
with  the  Tour  in  the  Hkbp.ides
and  JOHNSONIANA.  Edited  by
the  Rev.  A.  Napier,  M.A.  "With
Frontispiece  to  each  vol.  6  vols,
3^,  6d.  each.


BRAND'S  Popular  Antiqultiea
of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ire-
land. Arranged,  revised,  and
greatly  enlarged,  by  Sir  Henry
EIUs,  K.H.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  &c.  3
vols.     5^.  each.

BHEMER'S  (Frederika)  Work  a.
Translated  by  Mary  Howitt.  4
vols.     3^.  6d.  each.

BBIDGWATER   TREATISES.

Bell  (Sir  Gkarles)  on  the  Hand.

With  numerous  Woodcuts.     5^.

KIrby  on  the  History,  Habits,
and  Instincts  of  Animals.
Edited  by  T.  Rymer  Jones.
V/ith  upwards  of  100  Woodcuts.
2  vols.     $s.  each.

Kicd  on  the  Adaptation  of  Ex-
ternal Nature  to  the  Physical
Gondition  of  Man.    3.?.  6d.

Chahners  on  the  Adaptation
of  External  Natore  to  the
Moral  and  lintellectual  C^n-
stitution  of  Man.     <^s.

BRINK  (B.  ten)  Early  English
Literature.  By  Bemhard  ten
Brink.  Vol.1.  ToWycIif.  Trans-
lated by  Horace  M.  Kennedy
3^-  6:/.

Vol,  IL  Wyclif,  Chaucer,  Ear-
nest Drama  Renaissance.  Trans-
lated by  W.  Clarke  Robinson,
Ph.D.     y.  6d.

Vol,  III.  From  the  Fourteenth
Century  to  the  Death  of  Surrey.
Edited  by  Dr.  Alois  Brandl.
Trans,  by  L.  Dora  Schmitz.
3^.  6d.

Five  Lectures  on  Shake-
speare. Trans,  by  Julia  Franklin.
y.  6d.

BROTS^NK'S  (Sir  Thomas)  Works
Edited  by  Simon  Wilkin.  3  vols.
y.  6d.  each.


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


BURKE'S  Works.    8  vols.
each.


V-  ^d.


I. — Vindication  of  Natural  So-
ciety— Essay  on  the  Sub-
lime and  Beautiful,  and
various  Political  Miscel-
lanies.

II. — Reflections  on  the  French
Revoiution  —  Letters  re-
lating to  the  Bristol  Elec-
tion —  Speech  on  Fox's
East  India  Bill,  &c.

III. — Appeal  from  the  New  to  the
Old  Wlugs— On  the  Na-
bob of  Arcot's  Debts —
The  Catholic  Claims,  &c.

IV. — Report  on  the  Affairs  of
India,  and  Articles  of
Charge  against  Warren
Hastings.

V.  —Conclusion  of  the  Articles  o;
Ch.arge  against  Warren
Hastings — Political  Let-
ters on  the  American  War,
on  a  Regicide  Peace,  to
the  Empress  of  Russia.

VI. — Miscellaneous  Speeches  —
Letters  and  Fragments —
Abridgments  of  English
History,  &c.  With  a
General  Index.

VII.  &  VIII. — Speeches  on  the  Im-
peachment of  Warren
Hastings ;  and  Letters.
With  Index.  2  vols.
3^.  dd,  each.

Life.     By  Sir  J.  Prior.  35.  dd.

BURNEY'S  Evelina.  By  Frances
Burney  (Mme.  D'Arblay).  With
an  Introduction  and  Notes  by
A.  R.  El  Us.     3  J.  dd.

Ceoilia.  With  an  Introduc-
tion and  Notes  by  A.  R.  Ellis.
2  vols.     3.f.  (>d.  each.


BURN  (R.)  Ancient  Rome  and
Its  Neighbourhoocl.  An  Illus-
trated Handbook  to  the  Ruins  in
the  City  and  the  Campagna,  for
the  use  of  Travellers.  By  Robert
Burn,  M.A.  With  numerous
Illustrations,  Maps,  and  Plans.
7j.  dd.

BURNS  (Robert),  Life  of.  By
J.  G.  Lockhart,  D.C.L.  A
new  and  enlarged  Edition.  Re-
vised by  William  Scott  Douglas.
3^.  dd.

BURTON'S  (Robeift)  Anatomy  of
Melancholy.  Edited  by  the  Rev.
A.  R.  Shilleto,  M.A.  With  In-
troduction by  A.  H.  EuUen,  and
full  Index.    3  vols.    3^.  dd.  each.

BURTON  (Sir  R.  F.)  Personal
Narrative  of  a  Pilgrlmsge  to
Al-Madinah  and  Meooah.  By
Captain  Sir  Richard  F.  Burton,
K.C.M.G.  With  an  Introduction
by  Stanley  Lane-Poole,  and  all
the  original  Illustrations.  2  vols.
3^.  dd.  each.

*»*  This  is  the  copyright  edi-
tion, containing  the  author's  latest
notes.

BUTLER'S  (Bishop)  Analogy  ox
Religion,  Natural  and  Revealed,
to  the  Constitution  and  Course  of
Nature ;  together  with  two  Dis-
sertations on  Personal  Identity  and
on  the  Nature  of  Virtue,  and
Fifteen  Sermons.     3j-.  dd.

BUTLER'S  (Samuel)  Hudibraa.
With  Variorum  Notes,  a  Bio-
graphy, Portrait,  and  28  Illus-
trations.    Si-.

or,  further  Illustrated  with  60

Outline  Portraits.  2  vols.  5^.  each.

G^aESAR.  Commentaries  on  the
Qalilo  and  Civil  Wars,  Trans-
lated by  W.  A.  McDevitte,  B.A.
5^.


Contained  in  Bohns  Libraries.


5


CAMOENS'  Lvialad ;  or,  the  Dis-
covery of  India.  An  Epic  Poem.
Translated  by  W.  J.  Mickle.  5th
Edition,  revised  by  E.  R.  Hodges,
M.C.P.    IS.  6d.

CARAFAS  (The)  of  Maddaloni.

Naples  under  Spanish  Dominion.
Translated  from  the  German  of
Alfred  de  Reumont.     3^.  6d.

CARLYLE'S  French  Revolution.
Edited  by  J.  Holland  Rose,
Litt.D.     Illus.    3  vols.     5^.  each.

Sartor   Resartus.     With   75

Illustrations  by  Edmund  J.  Sul-
livan,    ^s.

CARPENTER'S    (Dr.    W.    B.)

Zoology.      Revised    Edition,   by

\V.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S.     With  very

numerous  Woodcuts.     Vol.1.  6s.

[  Vol.  II.  out  of  print.

OARP ENTER'S  Mechanical
Philosophy,  Astronomy,  and
Horology.     181  Woodcuts.     5^.

Vegetable  Physiology    and

Systematic  Botany.  Revised
Edition,  by  E.  Lankester,  M.D.,
&c.  With  very  numerous  Wood-
cuts.   6i.

Animal  Physiology.   Revised

Edition.  With  upwards  of  300
Woodcuts.     6.f.

CASTLE  (E.)  Schools  and
Masters  of  Fence,  from  the
Middle  Ages  to  the  End  of  the
Eighteenth  Century.  By  Egerton
Castle,  M.A.,  F.S.A.  With  a
Complete  Bibliography.  Illus-
trated with  140  Reproductions  of
Old  Engravings  and  6  Plates  of
Swords,  showing  114   Examples.

CATTERMOLE'S  Evenings  at
Haddon  Hall.  With  24  En-
gravings on  Steel  from  designs  by
Cattermole,  the  Letterpress  by  the
Baroness  de  Carabella.     5^.


CATULLUS,  Tibullus,  and  the
Vigil  of  Venus.  A  Literal  Prose
Translation.     5J.

CELLINI  (Senveauto) .  Me  -
molrs  of,  written  by  Himself.
Translated  by  Thomas  Roscoe.
3^.  bd.

CERVANTES'  Don  Quixote  de
la  Mancha.  Motteaux's  Trans-
lation revised.  2  vols.  31.  dri'.
each.

Galatea.  A  Pastoral  Ro-
mance. Translated  by  G.  \V.  J.
Gyll.     3^.  6,/.

Exemplary  Novels.  Trans-
lated by  Walter  K.  Kelly.  3^.  dd.

CHAUCER'S  Poetical  Works.
Edited  by  Robert  Bell.  Revised
Edition,  wilh  a  Preliminary  Essay
by  Prof.  V/.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  4
vols.     3^.  td.  each.

CHESS  CONGRESS  of  1662.
A  Collection  of  the  Games  played.
Edited  by  J.  Lowenthal.     5^-.

CHEVREUL  on  Colour.  Trans-
lated from  the  French  by  Charles
Martel.  Third  Edition,  with
Plates,  5^. ;  or  with  an  additional
series  of  16  Plates  in  Colours,
1$.  6d.

CHILLINGWORTH'S  ReUgion
cf  Protestants.  A  Safe  Way  to
Salvation.     3^.  6d.

CHINA,    Pictorial,    Descriptive,
i       and  Historical.     Wilh  Map  and
nearly  ico  Illustrations.     5^.

CHRONICLES  OF  THE  CRU-
SADES, Contemporary  Narra-
tives of  the  Crusade  of  Richard
Cceur  de  Lion,  by  Richard  of
Devizes  and  Geoffrey  de  Vinsauf ;
and  of  the  Crusade  at  St.  Louis,
by  Lord  John  de  Joinville.     ^s.

CICERO'S  Orations.  Translated
by  Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.  4
vols.     ^s.  each.


A;i  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


CICERO'S  Letters.  Translated  by
Evelyn  S.  Shuckburgh.  4  vols.
5^.  each.

On    Oratory   and    Orators.

With  Letters  to  Quintus  and
Brutus.  Translated  by  the  Rev.
J.  S.  Watson,  M.A.     S^f.

On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods,

Divination,  Fate,  Laws,  a  Re-
public, Consulship.  Translated
by  Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.,  and
Francis  Barharn.     S-c

Aoademioa,  De  Finibus,  and

Tusculan  Questions.  By  Prof.
C.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.     ^s.

Offices  ;    or,    Moral    Duties.

Cato  Major,  an  Es&y  on  Old
Age ;  Lselius,  an  Essay  on  Friend-
.shtp ;  Scipio's  Dream ;  Paradoxes ;
Letter  to  Quintus  on  Magistrates.
Translated  by  C.   R.  Edmonds.

CORNELIUS    NEPOS.— .$■«

Justin.

CLARK'S  (Hugh)  Introduotlon
to  Heraldry.  iSth  Edition,  Re-
vised and  Enlarged  by  J.  R.
Planch^,  Rouge  Croix.  With
nearly  looo  Illustrations.  5^.  Or
with  the  Illustrations   Coloured,

CLASSIC  TALES,  containing
Rasselas,  Vicar  of  Wakefield,
Gulliver's  Travels,  and  The  Senti-
mental Journey.     3j.  6d.

COLERIDGE'S  (3.  T.)  Friend.
A  Series  of  Essays  on  Morals,
Politics,  and  Religion,     is.  dd.

Aids  to  Reflection,  and  the

Confessions  of  an  Inquiring
Spirit,  to  which  are  added  the
Essays  on  Faith  and  the  Book
OF  Common  Prayer.     3,?.  bd.

Lectures    and    Notes    on

Shakespeare  and  other  English
Poets.   Edited  by  T.  Ashe.  ls.(»d.


COLERIDGE'S  Biographia  Lite-
raria ;  together  with  Two  Lay
Sermons.     S^f.  dd.

Table-Talk   and    Omniana.

Edited  by  T.  Ashe,  B.A.     y.  6d.

Miscellames,  iSsthetio  and

Literary;  to  which  is  added,
The  Theory  of  Like.  Col-
lected and  arranged  by  T.  Ashe,
B.A.     y.  6d.

COMTS'S  Positive  Philosophy.
Translated  and  condensed  by
Harriet  Martineau.  With  Intro-
duction by  Frederic  Harrison.
3  vols.     ^s.  each.

COMTE'S  PMlosophy  of  the
Sciences,  being  an  Exposition  of
the  Principles  of  the  Cours  de
P/ii/oso/Ziie  Positive.  By  G.  H.
Lewes.    5^.

CONDE  S  History  of  the  Do
minion  of  the  Arabs  in  Spain4J
Translated  by  Mrs.  Foster.  3
vols.     3j.  ^d.  each.

COOPER'S    Blogiaphloal   Dio-

tionary.  Containing  Concise
Notices  (upwards  of  15,000)  of
Eminent  Persona  of  all  Ages  and
Countries.  By  Thompson  Cooper,
F.S.A.  With  a  Supplement,
bringing  the  work  down  to  1 883.
2  vols.     S^.  each.

COXE'S  Memoirs  of  the  Duke  of
Marlborough.  With  his  original
Correspondence.  By  W.  Coxe,
M.A.,  F.R.S.  Revised  edition
by  John  Wade.  3  vols.  35.  dd.
each.

*»*  An  Atlas  of  the  plans  of
Marlborough's  campaigns,  4to.
I  Of.  td.

History   of   the    House   of

Austria  (12 18-1792).  With  a
Continuation  from  the  Accession
of  Francis  I.  to  the  Revolution  of
1848.     4  vols.     3i.  dd.  each.


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries.


7


CRAIK'S  (G.  L. )  Pursuit  of  Know-
ledge under  DifBoultles.  Illus-
trated by  Anecdotes  and  Memoirs.
Revised  edition,  v/ith  numerous
Woodcut  Portraits  and  Plates.   5^.

CRUIKSHANK'S  Punch  and
Judy.  The  Dialogue  of  the
Puppet  Show  ;  an  Account  of  its
Origin,  &c.  With  24  Illustra-
tions, and  Coloured  Plates,  de-
signed and  engraved  by  G.  Cruik-
shank,     5^.

CUNNINGHAM'S  Lives  of  tihe
Most  Eminent  British  Painters.
A  New  Edition,  with  Notes  and
Sixteen  fresh  Lives.  By  Mrs.
Heaton.     3  vols.     3^.  6d.  each.

DANTE.  Divine  Comedy.  Trans-
lated by  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Gary,
M.A.     3J.  ed.

Translated  into  English  Verse

by  I.  C.  Wright,  M.A.  3rd  Edi-
tion, revised.  With  Portrait,  and
34  Illustrations  on  Steel,  after
Flaxman.

DANTE.  The  Inferno.  A  Literal
Prose  Translation,  with  the  Text
of  the  Original  printed  on  the  same
page.   By  John  A.  Carlyle,  M.D.

The  Purgatorio.     A  Literal

Prose  Translation,  with  the  Text
printed  on  the  same  page.  By
W.  S.  Dugdale.     5^.

DE  COMMINES  (PhiUp),  Me-
moirs of.  Containing  the  Histories
of  Louis  XI.  and  Charles  VIII.,
Kings  of  France,  and  Charles
the  Bold,  Duke  of  Burgundy.
Together  with  the  Scandalous
Chronicle,  or  Secret  History  of
Louis  XL,  by  Jean  de  Troyes.
Translated  by  Andrew  R.  Scoblc.
With  Portraits.  2  vols.  35.  6d.
each.


DEFOE'S  Novels  and  Misoei-
laneous  Works.  With  Prefaces
and  Notes,  including  those  attri-
buted to  Sir  W.  Sco.t.  7  vols.
31.  ^d.  each.

I. — Captain  Singleton,  and
Colonel  Jack.

II. — Memoirs  of  a  Cavalier,
Captain  Carleton,
Dickory  Cronke,  &c.

III.— Moll  Flanders,  and  the
History  of  the  Devil.

IV. — Roxana,  and  Life  of  Mr.s,
Christian  Davies.

V.  — History  of  the  Great  Plague
of  London,  1665  ;  Th«
Storm  (1703) ;  and  the
True-born  Englishman.

VI. — Dunc0.n  Campbell,  New
Voyage  round  the
World,  and  Political
Tracts.

VII. — Robinson  Crusoe.

DEMMIN'S  History  of  Arms
and  Armour,  from  the  Earliest
Period.  By  Auguste  Demmin.
Translated  by  C.  C.  Black,  M.A.
With  nearly  2000  Illustrations.
7 J.  6d.

DEMOSTHENES'  Orations.
Translated  by  C.  Rann  Kennedy.
5  vols.  Vol.  L,  3^.  6d.',  Vols.
II.-V.,  55.  each.

DE  STAEL'S  Corinae  or  Italy.
By  Madame  de  Stael.  Trans-
lated by  Emily  Baldwin  and
Paulina  Driver.     35.  6d.

DEVEY  S  Logic,  or  the  Science
of  Inference.  A  Popular  Manual.
By  J.  Devey.     5^.

DICTIONARY  of  Latin  and
Greek  Quotations ;  including
Proverbs,  Maxims,  Mottoes,  Law
Terms  and  Phrases.    With  all  the


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


Quantities  marked,  and  English
Translations.  With  Index  Ver-
borum  (622  pages).     5^.

DICTIONARY  of  Obsolete  and
Provlnolal  English.  Compiled
by  Thomas  Wright,  M.A.,  F.S  A.,
&c.     2  vols.     55.  each.  l

DIDRON'S  Cliriatlan  loono-  ]
graphy :  a  History  of  Christian
Art  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Trans-
lated by  E.  J.  Millington  and
completed  by  Margaret  Stokes.
With  240  Illustrations.  2  vols,
5^.  each.

DIOGENES  LAERTIUS.  Lives
and  Opinions  of  the  Ancient
Philosophers.  Translated  by
Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.     5^.

DOBREE'S  Adversaria.  Edited
by  the  late  Prof.  Wagner.  2  vols.
i^s.  each.

D  O  D  D '  S  Epigrammatists.  A
Seleetion  from  the  Epigrammatic
Literature  of  Ancient,  Mediaeval,
and  Modern  Times.  By  the  Rev.
Henry  PhiHp  Dodd,  M.A.  Ox-
ford. 2nd  Edition,  revised  and
enlarged,     ds,

DONALDSON'S  The  Theatre  of
the  Greeks.  A  Treatise  on  the
History  and  Exhibition  of  the
Greek  Drama.  With  numerous
Illustrations  and  3  Plans.  By  John
William  Donaldson,  D.D.     55.

DRAPER'S  History  of  the
Intellectual  Development  of
Europe.  By  John  William  Draper,
M.D.,  LL.D.     2  vols.     51.  each.

DUNLOP'S  History  of  Fiction.
A  new  Edition.  Pvcvised  by
Henry  Wilson.    2  vols.    5 J.  each.

DYER  (Dr.  T.  H.).  Pompeii :  its
Buildings  and  Antiquities.  By
T.  H.  Dyer,  LL.D.    With  nearly


300  Wood  Engravings,  a  large
Map,  and  a  Plan  of  the  Forum.
75.  dd.

. The  City  of  Rome  :  its  History

and  Monuments.  With  Illustra-
tions.    5^.

DYER  (T.  P.  T.)  British  Popular
Customs,  Present  and  Past.
An  Account  of  the  various  Games
and  Customs  associated  with  Dif-
ferent Days  of  the  Year  in  the
British  Isles,  arranged  according
to  the  Calendar.  By  the  Rev.
T.  F.  Thiselton  Dyer,  M.A.     S^-.

EBERS'  Egyptian  Princess.  An
Historical  Novel.  By  George
Ebers.  Translated  by  E.  S.
Buchheim.     3^.  dd.

EDGE"WORTH'S  Stories  for
Children.  With  8  Illustrations
by  L.  Speed.     31.  dd,

ELZE'S   William   Shakespeare.

— See  Shakespeare.

EMERSON'S    Works.      5  vols.
3^.  dd.  each.
I. — Essays   and   Representative

Men.
II.— English  Traits,  Nature,  and
Conduct  of  Life.
III.— Society  and  Solitude— Letters
and    Social     Aims  —  Ad-
dresses.
VI.— Miscellaneous  Pieces.
V. — Poems.

ENNEMOSER'S  History  of
Magic.  Translated  by  William
Howitt.     2  vols.     55.  each.

EPICTETUS,  The  Discourses  of.
With  the  Enciieiridion  and
Fragments.  Translated  by  George
Long,  M.A.     5J.

EURIPIDES.  A  New  Literal
Translation  in  Prose.  By  E  P.
Coleridge,  M.A.   2  vols.   S^.  each.


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries.


EUTROPIUS.— 5«e  Justin.

EUSEBIUS  PAMPHILUS,
Ecclesiastical  History  of.  Trans-
lated by  Rev.  C.F.Cruse.M.  A.  5^.

EVELYN'S  Disry  and  Corre-
spondendence.  Edited  from  tiie
Original  MSS.  by  W.  Bray,
F.A.S.  With  45  engravings,  4
vols.  5^.  each.

FAIRHOLT'S  Costume  in  Eng-
land. A  History  of  Dress  to  the
end  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.
3rd  Edition,  revised,  by  Viscount
Dillon,  V.P.S.A.  Illustrated  with
above  700  Engravings.  3  vols.
5^.  each.

FIELDING'S  AdventTires  of
Joseph  Andrews  and  his  Friend
Mr.  Abraham  Adams.  With
Cruikshank's  Illustrations.   35.  6d.

History  of  Tom    Jones,    a

Foundling.     With  Cruikshank's
Illustrations.  2  vols.  3^.  dd.  each.


—  Amelia.    With
Illustrations.     C".


Cruikshank's


FLAXMAN'S  Lectures  on  Sculp-
ture. By  John  Flaxman,  R.A.
With  Portrait  and  53  Plates.     6s.

FOSTER'S  (John)  Life  and  Cor-
respondence. Edited  by  J.  E.
Ryland.     2  vols.     3^.  6d.  each.

Gritioal  Essays.     Edited  by

J.  E.  Ryland.  2  vols.  3^.  6d.
each.

Essays  :  on  Decision  of  Cha-
racter ;  on  a  Man's  writing  Me-
moirs of  Himself ;  on  the  epithet
Romantic ;  on  the  aversion  of
Men  of  Taste  to  Evangelical  Re-
ligion.    3i.  6d.

Essays  on  the  Evils  of  Popular

Ignorance  ;  to  which  is  added,  a
Discourse  on  the  Propagation  of
Christianity  in  India.     3^.  6d.


FOSTER'S  Essays  on  the  Im-
provement of  Time.  With  Notes
OF  Sermons  and  other  Pieces.
3x.  6d.

GASPARY'S  History  of  Italian
Literaturo.  Translated  by  Her-
man Oelsner,  M.A.,  Ph.D.
Vol.  I.     y.  6d.

GEOFFREY  OF  MONMOUTH,
Chronicle  oL—See  Old  English
Chronicles.

GESTA  R01VLA.N0RUM,  or  En-
tertaining Moral  Stories  invented
by  the  Monks.  Translated  by  the
Rev.  Charles  Swan.  Revised
Edition,  by  Wynnard  Hooper,
B.A.     55.

GILDAS,  Ohronloles  of— See  Old
English  Chronicles.

GIBBON'S  Decline  and  Fall  of
the  Roman  Empire.  Complete
and  Unabridged,  with  Variorum
Notes.  Edited  by  an  English
Churchman.  With  2  Maps  and
Portrait.     7  vols.     y.  6d.  each,

(vJLBART'S  History,  Frinoiples,
and  Practice  of  BanMng.  By
the  late  J.  W.  Gilbart,  F.R.S.
New  Edition,  revised  by  A.  S.
Michie.     2  vols.     lo.^

GIL  BLAS,  The  Adventures  of.
Translated  from  the  French  of
Lesage  by  Smollett.  With  24
Engravii>gs  on  Steel,  after  Smirke,
and  10  Etchings  by  George  Cruik-
shank,     6s.

GIRALDUS  OAMBRENSIS'
Historical  Works.  Translated
by  Th.  Forester,  M.A.,  and  Sir
R.  Colt  Hoare.  Revised  Edition,
Edited  by  Thomas  Wright,  M.A-,
F.S.A.     is.

GOETHE'S  Faust.  Part  I,  Ger-
man Text  with  Hayward's  Prose
Translation  and  Notes.  Revised
by  C.  A.  Buchheim,  Ph.D.     5^.


lO


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


GOETHE'S  Works.  Translated
into  English  by  various  hands.
14  vols.     3^.  dd.  each.

I.  and  II. — Autobiography  and
Annals.
III. —  Faust.      Two    Parts,    com-
plete.    (Swanwick.)
IV. — Novels  and  Tales.
V. — Wilhelm  Meister'h;  Appren-
ticeship.
VI.— Conversations    with   Ecker-
mann  and  Soret.
VIII.—Diamatic  Works.
IX. — Wilhelm  Meister's  Travels.
X. — Tour  in  Italy,  and  Second
Residence  in  Rome.
XI. — Miscellaneous  Travels.
XII. — Early     and     Miscellaneous

Letters,
XIV.—  Reineke  Fox,  West-Eastern
Divan  and  Achilleid.

GOLDSMITH'S  Works,    A  new

Edition,  by  J.  W.  M.  Gibbs.     5
vols.     31.  (yd.  each.

GRAMMONT'S  Memoirs  of  the
Court  of  Charles  II.  Edited  by
Sir  Walter  Scott.  Together  with
the  BoscoBEL  Tracts,  including
two  not  before  published,  &c.
New  Edition.     5j-,

GRAY'S  Letters.  Including  the
Correspondence  of  Gray  and
Mason.  Edited  by  the  Rev.
D.  C.  Tovey,  M.A.  Vols.  I.
and  II.  3^.  dd.  each,

GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.  Trans-
lated by  George  Burges,  M.A.    ^s.

GREEK  ROMANCES  of  Helio-
dorus,  Longus,  and  Achillea
Tatlus — viz.,  The  Adventures  of
Theagenes  &  Chaiiclea  ;  Amours
of  Daphnis  and  Chloe  ;  and  Loves
of  Clitooho  and  Leucippe,  Trans-
lated by  Rev.  R.  Smith,  M-A.
5^.


GREGORY'S  Letters  on  the
Evidences,  Doctrines,  &  Duties
of  the  Christian  Religion.  By
Dr.  OHnthus  Gregory,     y..  6d.

GREENS,  MARLOWE,  and
BEN  JON  SON.  Poems  of.
Edited  by  Robert  Bell.     3^.  6d.

GRIMM'S  TALES.     With  the

Notes  of  the  Original.    Trnnslatfd

1        by  Mrs.  A.  Hunt.     With  Intro-

!       duction  by  Andrew  Lang,  M.A.

I       2  vols.     y.  6d,  each.

i  Gamnaer  Grethel ;  or,  Ger-
man Fairy  Tales  and  Popular
Stories.  Containing  42  Fairy
Tales.  Trans,  by  Edgar  Taylor.
With  numerous  Woodcuts  after
George  Cruikshank  and  Ludwig
Grimm,     y.  6d.

GROSSI'S  Marco  Visoontl.
Translated  by  A.  F.  D.  .  The
Ballaf^s  rendered  into  English
Verse  by  C.  M.  P.     3^.  6d.

GUIZOT'S  History  of  the
English  Revolution  of  1840.
From  the  Accession  of  Charles
I.  to  his  Death.  Translated  by
William  Ilazlitt.     3^.  6d.

History  of  Civilisation,  from

the  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  to
the  French  Revolution.  Trans-
lated by  Willir.ni  Hazlitt.  3  vols.
3 J.  6d.  each.

HALL'S  (Rev.  Robert)  Miscel-
laneous Works  and  Remains.
3s.  6d.

HAMPTON  COURT:  A  Short
History  of  the  Manor  and
Palace.  By  Ernest  Law,  E.A.
With  numerou'^^^  Illustrations,    ijr.

HARD  WICK' 3  History  of  the
Articles  of  Religion.  By  the  late
C.  Ilardwick.  Revised  Ly  the
Rev.  Francis  Procter,  M.A.    ^s.


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries.


II


EAUr-F'S  I'ales.  The  Caravan—
The  Sheik  of  Alexandria — The
Inn  in  the  Spessart.  Trans,  from
thvi  Germcin  by  S.  Mendel.  3^.  6a'.

HAWTHORNE'S  Tales.     4  vols.
3 J.  dd,  each.
I. — Twice-told   Tales,   and   the

Snow  Image.
XL— Si:a.rlet  Letter,  and  the  House
with  the  Seven  Gables.
III. — Transformation  [The  Marble
Faun],  and  Blithedale  Ro-
mance.
IV, — Mosses  from  an  Oid  Manse.

HAZLITT'S  Table-talk.  Essays
on  Men  and  Manners.  By  V/,
Ilazlitt.     ^-.s.  6<i.

Lectm-es  on  the  Lltsratiu-e

of  the  Age  of  TJlizabetli  and  on
Characters  of  Shakespeare's  Plays.
3i-.  6d.

Lectures    on    tho   English

Poets,  and  on  the  English  Comic
Writers.     31. 6d.

The  Plata  Speaker.  Opinions

on  Books,  Men,  and  Things.  3 ',  6d.

Rouzid  Tfeile.     3^.  %d.

— —  Sketches  and  Essavs.
is.  (>d.

The  Spirit  of  the  Aga ;    or.

Contemporary  Portraits.  Edited
by  W.  Carevv  Hazlitt.     3^.  (yd.

View  of  the  English  Stage.

Edited  by  W.  Spencer  Jackson.
3i-.  6d.

HEATON'S  Concise  History  of
Painting.  Now  Edition,  revised
by  Cosmo  Monkhouse.     5;.

HEGEL'S  Laotures  on  the  Philo-
sophy of  History.  Translated  by
J.  Sibree,  M.A.

HEINE'S  Poems,  Complelt
Translated  by  Edgar  A.  Bowring,
C.B.     3.-.  6a'.

Travel-Piotures,  includmg  the

Tour  in  the  Harz,  Norderney,  and


Book  of  Ideas,  together  with  the
Romantic  School.  Translated  by
Francis  Storr.  A  New  Edition,
revised  throug'nout.  With  Appen-
dices and  Maps.     3^.  6d.

HELP'S  Life  of  Christopher
Columbus,  the  Discoverer  of
America.  By  Sir  Arthur  Helps,
K.C.B.     3J.  6d.

Life   of  Hernando   Cortes,

and  the  Conquest  of  Mexico.  2
vols.     3.?.  6d.  each.

Life  of  Fizarro.    3^.  6d.

Life  of  Las  Casas  the  Apostle

of  the  Indie?.     3^.  6d.

HENDERSON  (E.)  Select  His-
torical Documents  of  the  Middle
Ages,  including  the  most  famous
Charters  relating  to  England,  the
Empire,  the  Church,  &.c.,  from
the  6th  to  the  14th  Centuries.
Translated  from  the  Latin  and
edited  by  Ernest  F.  Henderson,
A.B.,  A.M.,  Ph.D.     55;

HENFREY'S  Guide  to  English
Coins,  from  the  Conquest  to  the
present  time.  New  and  revised
Edition  by  C.  F.  Keary,  M.A,,
F.S.A.     6s.

HENRY  OF  HUNTINGDON'S
History  of  tiia  English.  Trans-
liteu  by  T.  Fcreste?,  M.A.     55,

HENRY'S  (Matthew)  Exposition
of  the  Book  of  the  Psalms.     55.

HELIODORUS.  Thsagenes  and
Chariclea.  —  See    Greek    Ro-

MANCFS.

HERODOTUS.  Translated  by  the
Rev.  Henry  Car)',  M.A.     31.  6d.

Notes  on.  Original  and  Se-
lected fn.ni  the  best  Commenta-
tors. By  D.  W.  Turner,  M.A.
With  Coloured  Map.     S^-

Analysis  and  Summary  of

By  J.  T.  Wheeler.     155.


12


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


HESIOD,  CALLIMAOHIJS,  and
THEOGNIS.  Translated  by  the
Rev.  J.  Banks,  M.A.     5^.

HOFFMANN'S  (E.  T.  W.)  The
Serapion  Brethren.  Translated
from  the  German  by  Lt. -Col.  Alex.
Ewing.     2  vols.     3J.  6d.  each.

HOLBEIN'S  Dance  of  Death
and  Bible  Outs.  Upwards  of  150
Subjects,  engraved  in  facsimile,
v/ith  Introduction  and  Descrip-
tions by  Francis  Douce  and  Dr.
Thomas  Frognall  Dibden.     5^.

HOMER'S  Iliad.  Translated  into
English  Prose  by  T.  A.  Buckley,
B.A.     55.

Odyssey.    Hymns,  Epigrams,

and  Battle  of  the  Frogs  and  Mice.
Translated  into  English  Prose  by
T.  A.  Buckley,  B.A.     5^^.

See  also  Pope.

HOOPEil'S  (G.)  Waterloo  :  The
Dov,mfaU  of  the  First  Napo-
leon :  a  History  of  the  Campaign
of  1815.  By  George  Hooper.
With  Maps  and  Plans.     3J.  6d.

The  Campaign  of  Sedan :

The  Downfall  of  the  Second  Em-
pire, August  -  September,  1870.
With  Genera!  Map  and  Six  Plans
of  Battle,     is.  6d.

HORACE.  A  new  literal  Prose
tianslation,  by  A.  Hamilton  Bryce,
LL.D.     3i.  Kid.

HUGO'S  (Victor)  Dramatic
Works.  Hernani— Ruy  Bias —
The  King's  Diversion.  Translated
by  Mrs.  Newton  Crosland  and
F.  L.  Slous.     2>^.  6d.

Poems,  chiefly  Lyrical.  Trans-
lated by  various  Writers,  now  first
collected  by  J.  H.  L.  Williams.
3^.  6d.

HUMBOLDT'S  Cosmos.  Trans-
lated by  E.  C.  Ottd,  B.  IL  Paul,
and  W.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S.  S  vols.
35.  6d.  each,  excepting  Vol.  V.  Jj.


HUMBOLDT'S  Personal  NaiTa-
tive  of  his  Travels  to  the  Equi-
noctial Regions  of  America  during
the  years  1 799- 1 804.  Translated
by  T.  Ross.    3  vols.     55.  each.

Views  of  Nature.  Translated

by  E.  C.  Otte  and  H.  G.  Bohn.

HUMPHREYS'  Coin  Collector's
Manual.  By  H.  N.  Humphreys,
with  upwards  of  140  Illustrations
on  Wood  and  Steel.  2  vols.  $s.
each.

HUNGARY :  its  History  and  Re-
volution, together  with  a  copious
Memoir  of  Kossuth,     y.  6d.

HUTCHINSON  (Colonel).  Me-
moirs of  the  Life  of.  By  his
Widow,  Lucy  :  together  with  hei
Autobiography,  and  an  Account
of  the  Siege  of  Lathom  House.
2s.  6d.

HUNT'S  Poetry  of  Science.  By
Richard  Hunt.  3rd  Edition,  re-
vised and  enlarged,     ^s.

INGULPH'H  Chronicles  of  the
Abbey  of  Groyland,  with  the
Continuation  by  Peter  of  Blois
and  other  Writers.  Translated  by
H.  T.  Riley,  M.A.     as.

IRVINQ'S   (Washington)  Com-
plete Works.  15  vols.  With  Por-
traits, &c.     3^^.  6d.  each.
I. — Salmagundi,      Knicker-
bocker's History  of  New
York.

IL— The  Sketch  Book,  and  the
Life  of  Oliver  Goldsmith.

III. — Eracebridge  Hall,   Abbots-
ford  and  Newstead  Abbey.

IV.-  The  Aihambra,  Tales  of  a
Traveller.

V. — Chronicle  of  the  Conquest
of  Granada,  Legends  of
the  Conquest  of  Spain.


Contained  in  Bokn's  Libraries.


t^


Irving's  (Washington)  Complete

Works  continued.
VI.  &  VII.— Life    and    Voyages  of
Columbus,  together  with
the  Voyages  of  his  Com-
panions.
VIII. — Astoria,    A    Tour    on    the
Prairies.
IX. — Life  of  Mahomet,  Lives  of  the
Successors  of  Mahomet.
X. — Adventures  of  Captain  Bon-
neville, U.S.A.,  Wolfert's
Roost.
XI. — Biographies   and    Miscella-
neous Papers.
XII.-XV.— Life  of  George  Wash-
ington.    4  vols.

Life    and    Letters.     By  his

Nephew,  Pierre  E.  Irving.   2  vols.
3^.  6^.  each.

ISOCRATSS,  The  Orations  of.
Translated  by  J.  H.  Freese,  M.A.
Vol.  I.     5^.

JAMES'S  (G.  P.  R.)  Life  of
Ricbard  Cceiir  do  Lion.  2  vols.
T)S.  6d.  each.

JAMESON'S  (Mrs.)  Shake-
fjpeares  Keroinea.  Character-
istics of  Women :  Moral,  Poetical,
and  Historical.  By  Mrs.  Jameson.
p.  C>d.

JESSE'S  (E.)  Anecdotes  of  Dogs
With  40  Woodcuts  and  34  Steel
Engravings.     55.

JESSE'S  (J.  H.)  Memoirs  of  the
Court  of  England  during  the
Reign  of  the  Stuarts,  including
the  Protectorate.  3  vols.  With
42  Portraits.     5j.  each.

Memoirs  of  the  Pretenders

and  their  Adherents.     With  6
Portraits.     5^.

JOHNSON'S  Lives  of  the  Poets.
Edited  by  Mrs.  Alexander  Napier,
with  Introduction  by  Professor
Hales.     3  vols,     3^.  fyd,  each.


JOSEPHUS  (Plavlus),  The  Works
of.  Whiston's  Translation,  re-
vised by  Rev.  A.  R.  Shilleto,  M.A
With  Topographical  and  Geo.
graphical  Notes  by  Colonel  Sir
C.  W.  WUson,  K.C.B.  5  vols.
3^.  6if.  each.

JOYCES  Scientific  Dialogues.
With  numerous  Woodcuts.     5^.

JUKES-BROV/NE  (A.  J.),  The
Building  of  the  British  Isles:
a  Study  in  Geographical  Evolu-
tion. Illustrated  by  numerous
Maps  and  Woodcuts.  2nd  Edition,
revised,  "]$.  6d.

JULIAN,  the  Emperor.  Contain-
ing Gregory  Nazianzen's  Two  In-
vectives and  Libanus'  Monody,
with  Julian's  extant  Theosophical
Works.  Translated  by  C.  W.
King,  M.A.     S-f.

JUNIUS'S  Letters.  With  all  the
Notes  of  Woodfall's  Edition,  and
important  Additions.  2  vols.
3?.  6d.  each.

JUSTIN  CORNELIUS  NEPOS,
and  EUTROPIUS.  Translated
by  the  Rev.   [.   S.  Watson,  M.A.

JUVENAL,  PERSIUS.  Sr/L^
PICIA  and  LUCILIUS.  Trnns-
l.iled  by  L.  livans,  M.A.     5.5.

KANT'S  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.
Translated  by  J.  M.  D.  Meikle-
john.     5^.

Prolegomena   and  Meta-

phyelcal  Foundations  of  Natural
Science.  Translated  byE.  Belfort
Bax.     5J-.

KEIGHTLEY'S  (Thomas)  My-
thology of  Ancient  Greece  and
Italy.  4th  Edition,  revised  by
Leonard  Schmitz,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.
With  12  Plates  from  the  Antique,


i4


An  Alphahetical  List  of  Boohs


KEIGHTLEY'S  Fairy  Mytho-
logy, illustrative  of  the  Romance
and  Suparstition  of  Various  Coun-
tries. Revised  Edition,  with
Frontispiece  by  Cruikshank.     ^s.

LA  FONTiUNE'S  Fables.  Trans-
lated into  English  Verse  by  Elizur
Wright.  New  Ediiion,  with  Notes
by  J.  W.  M.  Gibbs.     y.  dd.

LAMARTINE'S  History  of  the
Girondista.  Translated  by  H.  T.
Ryde.      3  vols.     35.  6d.  each.

History  of  the  Restoration

of  Monarchy  in  France  (a  Sequel
to  the  History  of  the  Girondists).
4  vols.     35.  6d.  each.

History  of  the  French  Re-

voluti®n  of  1 8 4 8 ,     y.dd.

LAMB'S  (Charles)  Essays  of  Ella
and.  Eliana.  Complete  Edition.
35.  6d.

Specimens  of  English  Dra-
matic Poets  of  the  Time  of
Elizabeth,     y.  dd.

- — -  Memorials  and  Letters  of
Charles  Lamb.  By  Serjeant
Talfourd.  New  Edition,  revised,
by  W.  Carew  Hazlitt.  2  vols.
3;.  fid.  each.

Tales    from     Shakespeare

With  Illustrations  by  Byam  Shaw.
3^.  dd.

LANE'S  Arabian  Nights'  Enter-
tainments. Edited  by  Stanley
Lane-Poole,  M.A.,  Litt.D.  4
vols.     3f.  dd.  each.

LANZI'S  History  of  Painting  in
Italy,  from  the  Period  of  the
Ivevival  of  the  Fine  Arts  to  the
End  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.
Translated  by  Thomas  Roscoe.
3  v.ils.     35.  6i.  each.


LAPPENBERG'S  History  of
England  under  the  Anglo-
Saxon  Kings.  Transl.-i'ed  by
B.  Thorpe,  F.S-A.  New  edition,
revised  by  E,  C.  Otte,  2  vols.
y.  6d.  each.

LECTURES  ON  PAINTING,
by  Barry,  Opie,  Fuseli.  Edited
by  R.  Wornum.     y.

LEONARDO  DA  VINCI'S
Treatise  on  Painting.  Trans-
lated by  J.  F.  Rigaud,  R.A.,
With  a  Life  of  Leonardo  by  John
William  Brown.  With  numerous
Plates,     y.

LEPSIUS'S  Letters  from  Egypt,
Ethiopia,  and  the  Peninsula  of
Sinai.  Translated  by  L.  and
J.  B.  Horner.     With  Maps.     Ss.

LESSING'S  Dramatic  Works,
Complete.  Edited  by  Ernest  Bell,
M.A.  With  Memoir  of  Lessing
by  Helen  Zimmern.  2  vols.
y.  6d.  each.

Laokoon,  Dramatic  Notes,

and  the  Representation  01
Death  by  the  Ancients.  Trans-
lated by  E.  C.  Beaoley  and  Helen
Zimmern.  Edited  by  Edward
Bell,  M.A.  With  a  Frontispiece
of  the  Laokoon  group.     3^.  6d.

LTLIjY'S  Introduction  to  Astro
logy.      With   a    Grammar    of
Astrology  and  Tables  for  Cal
culaling  Nativities,  by  Zadkiel.  5^

LIVY'S  History  of  Rome.  Trans
lated  by  Dr.  Spillan,  C.  Edmonds
and  others.     4  vols.     5^.  each.

LOCKE'S  Philosophical  Works.
Edited  by  J.  A.  St.  John.  2  vols.
31.  6d.  each.

Life  and  Letters:     By  Lord

King.     3.f.  6(/.

LOCKHART  (J.  Q.)-~Sec  Burns.


Contained  in  Bohns  Libraries.


15


LODGE'S  Poi-traitscf  IlliisMous
Personages  of  Great  Bi'itain,
with  Biographical  and  Historical
Memoirs.  240  Portraits  engraved
on  Steel,  with  the  respective  Bio-
graphies unabridged.  8  vols.  51.
each.

LONGFELLOV^'S  Prose
V/orks.  With  16  full- page  Wood
Engravings.     5^.

LOUDON'S  (Mrs.)  Natural
History.  Revised  edition,  by
W.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S.  With
numerous  Woodcut  lUus.     ^s.

L  O  V/  N  D  E  S '  Bibliographer's
Manual  of  English  Literature.
Enlarged  Edition.  By  H.  G.
Bohn.  6  vols,  cloth,  55.  each.
Or  4  vols,  half  morocco,  7.1.  is.

LONGUS.  Baphnls  and  Chloe.
— See  Greek  Ro.mances.

LUCAN'S  Pharsalia.  Translated
by  H.  T.  Riley,  M.A.     5^.

LUG  I  AN' S  Dialogiiss  of  the
Gods,  of  the  Sea  Gods,  and
of  the  Dead.  Translated  by
Howard  Williams,  M.A.     55.

LUCP-ETIUS.  Translated  by  the
Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A.     5^.

LUTHEP.'S  Table-Talk.  Trans-
lated and;  Edited  by  William
Hazlitt.    3^.  (>d.

Autobiography.  ~-  Sa

MiCHELEf.

MACHIAVELLI'S  Hlstoi-y  of
Florence,  together  with  the
Prince,  Savonarola,  various  His-
torical Tracts,  and  a  Memoir  of
Machiavelii.     y.  6a'.

MALLET'S  Northern  Antiqui-
ties, or  an  Historical  Account  of
the  Manners,  Customs,  Religions
and  Laws,  Maritime  Expeditions
and  Discoveries,  Language  and
Literature,  of  the  Ancient  Scandi-
navians. Translated  by  Bishop
Percy.  Revised  and  Enlarged
Edition,  with  a  Translation  of  the
Prose  Edua,  by  J.  A.  Black-
we'l.    5^.


MANTELL'S  (Dr.)  Petrifactions
and  thsir  Teachings.  With  nu-
merous illustrative  Woodcuts    6f.

Wonders  of  Geology.     8th

Edition,  revised  by  T.  Rupert
Jones,  F.G.S.  With  a  coloured
Geological  Map  of  England,
Plates,  and  upwards  ol  200
Woodcuts,    2  vols.    Is.  6d.  each.

MANZONI.  The  Betrothed:
being  a  Translation  of  '  I  Pro-
messi  Sposi.'  By  Alessandro
Manzoni.  With  numerous  Wood-
cuts.    5J-.

iVIARCO  POLO'S  Travels;  the
Translation  of  Marsden  revised
by  T.  Wright,  M.A.,  F.S.A.     5^.

MARRYAT'S  (Capt.  R.N.)
Masterinan  Ready.  With  93
Woodcuts.     3i.  6d.

— r-  Mission ;  or,  Scenes  in  Africa,
Illustrated  by  Gilbert  and  Dalziel.
3..  6d.

Phate  and  Tliree  Cutters.

With  8  Steel  Engravings,  from
Drawings  by  Clarkson  Stanceld,
R.A.     r^  6d.


£.ngray-


Privatoersman.

inga  on  Steel.     3^.  6a

Settlers  In  Canada.  10  En-
gravings by  Gilbert  and  Dalziel.
3  J.  6d.

Poor  Jack,  With  16  Illus-
trations after  Clarkson  Stansfield,
R.A.     3 J.  6d.

Peter  Simple.     With  S  fuU-

page  Illustrations.     3^-.  6d.

Midshipman  Easy.    With  8

full  p^.ge  Illustrations.     3.r.  6d.

MARTIAL'S  Epigrams,  complete.
Translated  into  Prose,  e-^ich  ac-
companied by  one  or  more  Verse
Translations  selected  frorr.  the
Works  of  English  Poets,  and
other  sources.     77.  dd.


1 6


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


MARTIITEAU'S  (Harriet)  His-
tory CI  England,  from  1800-
1815.     zs.  6d.

History  of  the  Thirty  Years'

Peace,  a.d.    1815-46-      4  vols.
3^.  6d.  each.

See  Comte's  Positive  Philosophy,

MATTHEW   PARIS'S    English
History,  from  the  Year  I2J5  to
1273.     Translated  by  Rev.  J.  A.
Giles,  D.C.L.     3  vols.     5^.  each.
MATTHEW     OP    WESTMIN-
STER'S   Flowers   of  History,
from  the  beginning  of  the  World
to  A.D.  1307.  Translated  by  C.  D.
Yonge,  M.A.     2  vols.     5^.  each.
MAXWELL'S  Victories  of  Wel-
ington  and  the  British  Ai'mies.
Frontispiece  and  5  Portraits.     5^.
MBNZEL'S  History  of  Germany,
from  the  Earliest  Period  to  1842.
3  vols.     3J-.  61/.  each.
MICHAEL    ANQELO    AND
RAPHAEL,    their  Lives    and
Works.      By  Duppa  aud  Quatre-
mere  de  Quincy.    With  Portraits,
and  Engravings  on  Steel.     5^.
MICHELET'S    Luther's    Auto-
biography.    Trans,   by  William
Hazlitt.     With  an  Appendix  {no
pages)  of  Notes.     3.^.  61/.
History  of  the  French  Revo-
lution from  its  earliest  indications
to  the  flight  of  the  King  in  1791-
3^.  bd.
MIGNET'SHistoryof  theFrenoh
Revolution,  from  1789  to  1814.
3^.  dd.
MILL  (J.  S.).    Early  Essays  by
John  Stuart  Mill.  Collected  from
various  sources  by  J.  W.  M.  Gibbs.

MILLER  (Professor).  History
Philosophically  Illu3trated,from
the  Fall  of  ihe  Roman  Empire  to
the  French  Revolution.  4  vols.
31.  6t/.  each,


MILTON'S  Prose  Works.  Edited
by  J.  A.  St.  John.  S  vols.  y.  6d.
each.

Poetical  Works,  with  a  Me-
moir and  Critical  Remarks  by
James  Montgomery,  an  Index  to
Paradise  Lost,  Todd's  Verbal  Index
to  all  the  Poems,  and  a  Selection
of  Explanatory  Notes  by  Henry
G.  Bohn.  Illustrated  with  120
Wood  Engravings  from  Drawings
by  W.  Harvey.  2  vols,  3?.  6d.
each.

MITFORD'S  (Miss)  Our  Village
Sketches  of  Rural  Character  and
Scenery.  With  2  Engravings  on
Steel.    2  vols.    3^.  6d.  each.

MOLIERE'S  Dramatic  Works.
A  new  Translation  in  English
Prose,  by  C.  H.  Wall.  3  vols,
3^.  6d.  each.

MONTAGU.  The  Letters  and
Works  of  Lady  Mary  Wortley
Montagu.  Edited  by  her  great-
grandson.  Lord  Wharncliffe's  Edi-
tion, and  revised  by  W.  Moy
Thomas.  New  Edition,  revised,
with  5  Portraits.  2  vols.  5,?.  each.

MONTAIGNE'S  Essays.  Cotton's
Translation,  revised  by  W.  C.
Hazlitt.  New  Edition.  3  vols.
35.  6d.  each.

MONTESQUIEU'S  Spirit  ol
Laws.  New  Edition,  revised  and
corrected.  By  J.  V.  Pritchard,
A.M.     2  vols.     3^-.  6d.  each,

MORPHY'S  Games  of  Chess,
Being  the  Matches  and  best  Games
played  by  theAmerican  Champion,
with  Explanatory  and  Analytical
Notes  by  J.  Lowenthal.     5^.

MOTLEY  (J.  L.).  The  Rise  of
the  Dutch  Republic.  A  History.
By  John  Lothrop  Motley.  New
Edition,  with  Biographical  Intro-
duction by  Moncure  D.  Conway.
3  vols.     3J.  6d.  each.


Contained  in  Bo /ill's  Libraries.


17


MUDIE'S  British  Birds ;  or,  His-
tory of  the  Feathered  Tribes  of  the
British  Islands.  Revised  by  W.
C.  L.  Martin.  With  52  Figures
of  Birds  and  7  Coloured  Plates  of
Eggs.     2  vols.

NEANDER  (Dr.  A.).  History
of  the  Christian  Religion  and
Church.  Trans,  from  the  German
byj.  Torrey.    10  vols.  35.6(/.  each.

Life  of  Jesus  Christ,  Trans-
lated by  J.  McClintock  and  C.
Blumenthal.     35.  6d.

Hletory  of  the  Planting  and

Training  of  the  Christian
Church  by  the  Apostles.
Translated  by  J,  E.  Ryland.
2  vols.     35.  6d.  each.

Memorials  of  Christian  Life

In  the  Early  and  Middle  Ages  ;
including  Light  in  Dark  Places.
Trans,  by  J.  E.  Ryland.     31.  6d.

NIBELUNGEN  LIED.  The
Lay  of  the  Nibelungs,  metrically
translated  from  the  old  German
text  by  Alice  Hoitou,  and  edited
by  Edward  Bell,  M.A.  To  which
is  prefixed  the  Essay  on  1  he  Nibe-
lun^en  Lied  by  Thomas  Carlyle.

NEW  TESTAMENT  (The)  in
Greek.  Griesbach's  Text,  with
various  Readings  at  the  foot  of
the  page,  and  Parallel  References
in  the  margin ;  also  a  Critical
Introduction  and  Chjonolo»jical
Tables.  By  an  eminent  Scholar,
with  a  Greek  and  English  Lexicon.
3rd  Edition,  revised  and  corrected.
Two  Facsimiles  of  Greek  Manu-
scripts.    900  pages.     55.

The  Lexicon  may  be  had  sepa-
rately, price  2s.

NICOLINI'S  History  of  the
Jesviita :  their  Origin,  Progress,
Doctrines,  and  Designs,  With  8
Portraits.     5^.


NORTH  (R.)  Lives  of  the  Right
Hon.  Francis  North,  Baron  Guild-
ford, the  Hon.  Sir  Dudley  North,
and  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Dr.  John
North.  By  the  Hon.  Roger
North.  Together  with  the  Auto-
biography of  the  Author.  Edited
by  Augustus  Jessopp,  D.D.  3  vols.
3^.  6d.  each.

NOGENT'S  (Lord)  Memorials
of  Hampden,  his  Party  and
Times.  With  a  Memoir  of  the
Author,  an  Autograph  Letter,  and
Portrait.     51.

OLD  ENGLISH  CHRON-
ICLES, including  Ethelwerd's
Chronicle,  Asser's  Life  of  Alfred,
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  British
History,  Gildas,  Nennius,  and  the
spurious  chronicle  of  Richard  of
Cirencester.  Edited  by  J,  A.
Giles,  D.C.L.     t,s.

OMAN  (J.  C.)  The  Great  Indian
Epics :  the  Stories  of  the  Rama-
YANA  and  the  Mahabharata.
By  John  Campbell  Oman,  Prin-
cipal of  Khalsa  College,  Amritsar.
With  Notes,  Appendices,  and
Illustrations.     31.  6d.

ORDERICUS  VITALIS'  Eccle-
siastical History  of  England
and  Normandy.  Translated  by
T.  Forester,  M.A.  To  which  is
added  the  Chronicle  of  St.
EvROULT.     4  vols.     5^.  each.

OVID'S  Works,  complete.  Literally
translated  into  Prose.  3  vols.
5f.  each.

PASCAL'S  Thoughts.  Translated
from  the  Text  of  M.  Augustc
Molinier  by  C.  Kegan  Paul.  3rd
Edition.     35.  td.

PAULI'S  (Dr.  R.)  Life  of  Alfred
the  Great.  Translated  from  the
German.  To  which  is  appended
Alfired's  Anglo-Saxon  Version


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


OF  Orosius.  With  a  literal
Translation  interpaged,  Notes,
and  an  Anglo-Saxon  Grammar
and  Glossary,  by  B.  Thorpe,  5t.

PAUSANIAS'  Desoription  of
Greece.  Newly  translated  by  A.  R.
ShilletOj  M.A.     2  vols.     5^.  each.

PEARSON'S  Exposition  of  the
Greed.  Edited  by  E.  Waiford,
M.A.     S-f.

PEPYS'  Diary  and  Correspond-
ence. Deciphered  by  the  Rev.
J.  SKiith,  M.A.,  from  the  original
Shorthand  MS.  in  the  Pepysian
Library.  Edited  by  Lord  Briy-
brooke.  4  vols.  Vv'ith  31  En-
gravings.    5^.  each.

PERCY'S  Rellquea  of  Anc'ent
English  Poetry.  With  an  Essay
on  Ancient  Minstrels  and  a  Glos-
S3.ry.  Edited  by  J.  V.  Pritchard,
A.M.     2  vols.     3J.  6d.  each.

PERSIUS.— ^.-5  JUVFNAL.

PETRARCH'S  Sonnets,  Tri-
uraj>b.3.  and  other  Poems.
Translated  into  English  Verse  by
various  Plands.  With  a  Life  of
the  Poet  by  Thomas  Campbell.
V.'ith  Portrait  and  15  Steel  En-
gravings.    5^.

PHILO  -  JUD^US,  Works  of.
Translated  by  Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge,
M.A.    4  vols.     5^-.  each.

PICKERIITG'S  History  of  rJie
Races  of  Man,  and  (heir  Geo-
graphical Distribution.  With  An
Analytical  Synopsis  of  the
Natur.al  History  of  Man  by
Dr.  Hall.  With  a  Map  of  the
Wct'.d  and  12  coloured  Plates.  5^.

PINDAR.  Translated  into  Prose
by  Dawson  W".  Turner.  To  which
is  added  the  Metrical  Version  by
Abraharn  Moove.     t;^.


PLANGHE.    History  of  British
Costvime,  from  the  Earliest  Time
to  the   Close  of  the  Eighteenth
Century.       By    J.    R.    Planch^,
Somerset  Herald.    With  upwards
of  4.00  Illustrations,     '^s.
PLATO'S  Works.   Literally  trans-
lated,    with     Introduction     and
Notes.     6  vols.     5^.  each.
L — The   Apology  of   Socrates,
Crito,  Phsedo,  Gorgias,  Pro-
tagoras, Phaedrus,  Thecetetus,
Euthypbron,  Lysis.      Trans-
lated by  the  Rev.  H.  Carey,
n. — The  Republic,    Timseus,   and
Critias.  Translated  by  Henry
Davis.
HL— Meno,      Euthydemus,      The
Sophist,  Statesman,  Cratylus,
Parmenides,  and  the  Banquet.
Translated  by  G.  Buvges.
IV. — Philebus,  Charmides,  Laches,
Menexenus,     Hippias,    Ion,
The  Two   Alcihiades,   The-
ages.     Rivals,     Hipparchus,
Minos,    Clitopho,     Epistles.
Translated  by  G.  Burges.
v.— -The    Laws.      Translated    by

G.  Burges.
VI.— I'he  Doubtful  Works.    Trans-
lated by  G.  Burges,

Summary  and  Analysis  of

the  Dlalogvies.    With  Analyticai
Index.     By  A.  Day,  LL.D,     Jx.
PLAUTCrS'S   Comedies.     Trans-
lated by  H.  T.   Riley,  M.A.     2
vols.     5^.  each.
PLINY'S    Natural     History.
Translated    by    the     late     John
Eostock,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  and  H.T.
Riley,  M.A.     6  vols,     55.  each.
PLINY.     The  Letters  of  Pliny
the  Younger.     Melmoth's  trans-
lation, revised  by  the  Rev.  F.  C.
T.  Bosanqnet,  M.A.     5^.
PLOTINUS,    Select    Woi-ks    of.
Translated    by    Thomas  Taylor.
With  an  Introduction  containing
the  substance  of  Porphyry's  Plo-
tinus.     Efilited  by  G.  R.  S.  Mead,
B.A.,  M.R.A.S.     5^.


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries.


19


PLUTAHCH'S  Lives.  Translated
by  A.  Stewart,  M.A.,and  George
Long,  M.A.    4  vols.    3^.  dd.  each.

Morals.  Theoaophical  Essays.

Translated  by  C.  W.  King,  M.A.

Morals.      Ethical    Essays.

Translated  by  the  Rev.  A.  R.
Shilleto,  M.A.     5^.

POETRY  OF  AMERICA.  Se-
lections from  One  Hundred
American  Poets,  from  1776  to
1876.     By  W.  J.  Linton.     3^.  dd.

POLITICAL    CYCLOPEDIA.

A  Dictionary  of  Pohtical,  Con-
stitutional, Statistical,  and  Fo-
rensic Knowledge ;  forming  a
Work  of  Reference  on  subjects  of
Civil  Administration,  Political
Economy,  Finance,  Commerce,
Laws,  and  Social  Relations.  4
vols.     y.  6d.  each.

POPE'S  Poetical  Works.  Edited,
with  copious  Notes,  by  Robert
Carruthers.  With  numerous  Illus-
trations.    2  vols.     St.  each.

Homer's  Iliad.      Edited    by

the  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A.
Illustrated  by  the  entire  Series  of
Flaxmari's  Designs,     ^s.

Homer's  Odyssey,  with  the

Battle  of  Frogs  and  Mice,  Hymns,
&c. ,  by  other  translators.  Edited
by  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A.
With  the  entire  Series  of  Flax-
man's  Designs.    55.

Life,   including   many   of  his

Letters.  By  Robert  Carruthers.
With  numerous  Illustrations.     51.

POUSHKIN'S  Prose  Tales:  The
Captain's  Daughter — Doubrovsky
—  TI\e  Queen  of  Spades  —  An
Amateur  Peasant  Girl — The  Shot
— The  Snow  Stoirn — The  Post-
master —  The  Coffin  Maker  —
Kirdjali — The  Egyptian  Nights —
Peter  the  Great's  Negro,  Trans-
lated by  T.  Keane.     3?.  6d.


PRESCOTT'S  Conqix«33t  of
Mexico.  Copyright  edition,  with
the  notes  by  John  Foster  Kirk,
and  an  introduciion  by  G.  P.
Winship.     3  vols.     3^.  6d.  each.

Conquest  of  Peru.  Copyright

edition,   with  the  notes  of  John
Foster  Kirk.    2  vols.    3j-.  6d.  each.

-—  Reign  of  Ferdinand  and
Isabella.  Copyright  edition,
with  the  notes  of  John  Foster
Kirk.     3  vols.     35.  6d.  each.

PROPERTIUS.  Translated  by
Rev,  P.  J.  F.  Gantiilon,  M.A.,
and  accompanied  by  Poetical
Versions,  from  various  sources.
V-  6d.

PROVERBS,  Handbook  of.  Con-
taining an  entire  Republication
of  Ray's  Collection  of  English
Proverbs,  v/ith  his  additions  from
Foreign  Languages  and  a  com-
plete Alphabetical  Index;  in  which
are  introduced  large  additions  as
well  of  Proverbs  as  of  Sayings,
Sentences,  Maxims,  and  Phrases,
collected  by  H.  G.  Bohn.     5^.

PROVERBS,  A  Polyglot  of
Foreign.  Comprising  French,
Italian,  German,  Dutch,  Spanish,
Portuguese,  and  Danish.  With
English  Translations  &  a  General
Index  by  H.  G.  Bohn.     51.

POTTERY  AND  PORCELAIN,
and  other  Objects  of  Vertu.  Com-
prising an  Illustrated  Catalogue  of
the  Bernal  Collection  of  Works
of  Art,  with  the  prices  at  which
they  were  sold  by  auction,  and
names  of  the  possessors.  To  which
are  added,  an  Introductory  Lecture
on  Pottery  and  Porcelain,  and  an
Engraved  List  of  all  the  known
Marks  and  Monograms.  By  Henry
G.  Bobn.  With  numerous  Wood
Engravings,  5?. ;  or  with  Coloured
Illustrations,  so;.  6d.

PROUT'3  (Father)  Relique.9.  Col-
lected j-.nd  arranged  by  Rev.  F.
Mahony.  New  issue,  with  21
Etchings  by  D.  Maclu;e,  R.A.
Nearly  600  pages.     §-'•


20


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


QUINTILIAN'S  Institutes  of
Oratory,  or  Education  of  an
Orator.  Translated  by  the  Rev.
J.  S.  Watson,  M.A.  2  vols.  5^^
each.

RACINE'S  (Jean)  Dramatic
Works.  A  metrical  English  ver-
sion. By R.  Bruce Boswell,  M.A.
Oxon.     2  vols.     3'.  6d.  each.

KANKE'S  History  of  the  Popes,
their  Church  and  State,  and  espe-
cially of  their  Conflicts  with  Pro-
testantism in  the  i6th  and  17th
centuries.  Translated  by  E.
Foster.     3  vols.    35.  6d.  each.

History  of  Servia  and  the

Servian  Revolution.  With  an
Account  of  the  Insurrection  in
Bosnia.  Translated  by  Mrs.  Kerr.
3.f.  6d.

RECREATIONS  hi  SHOOTING.
By '  Craven.'  With  62  Engravings
on  Wood  after  Harvey,  and  9
Engravings  on  Steel,  chiefly  after
A.  Cooper,  R.A.     5^.

RENNIE'S  Insect  Archl Lecture.
Revised  and  enlarged  by  Rev.
J.  G.  Wood,  M.A.  With  186
Woodcut  Illustrations.     55-.

REYNOLD'S  (Sir  J.)  Literary
Works.  Edited  by  H.W.Beechy.
2  vols.     3j.  6d.  each.

RICARDO  on  the  Principles  of
Political  Economy  and  Taxa-
tion, Edited  by  E.  C.  K.  Conner,
M.A.     55.

RICHTER  (Jean  Paul  Priedrich).
Levana,  a  Treatise  on  Education:
together  with  tlie  Autobiography
(a  Fragment),  and  a  .short  Pre-
fatory Memoir.     3^.  6d.

Flower,  FinjJt,  and   Thorn

Pieces,  or  the  Wedded  Life,  Death,
and  Marriage  of  Firniian  Stanis-
laus Siebenkaes,  l^arish  Advocate
in  the  Parish  oJf  Kuhschnapptel.
Newly  translated  by  Lt.  Col.Alex.
Ev/ing.     3J.  dd.


ROGER  DE  HOVEDEN'S  An-
nals of  English  History,  com-
prising the  History  of  England
and  of  other  Countries  of  Europe
from  A.  D.  732  to  A.  D.  1201.
Translated  by  H.  T.  Riley,  M.A,
2  vols.    5 J.  each.

ROGER  OF  WENDOVER'S
Flowers  of  EQstory,  comprising
the  History  of  England  from  the
Descent  of  the  Saxons  to  A.D.
I235,formerlyascribed  to  Matthew
Paris.  Translated  by  J.  A.  Giles,
D.C.L.     2  vols.     5^-.  each.

ROME  in  the  NINETEENTH
CENTURY.  Containing  a  com-
plete Account  of  the  Ruins  of  the
Ancient  City,  the  Remains  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  the  Monuments
of  Modern  Times.  By  C.A.Eaton.
With  34  Steel  Engravings.  2  vols.
5?.  each.

See  Burn  and  Dyer.

ROSCOE'S  (W.)  Life  and  Ponti-
ficate of  Leo  X.  Final  edition,
revised  by  Thomas  Roscoe.  2
vols.     3f.  6d.  each.

Life  of  Lorenzo  de'  Medici,

called  '  the  Magnificent.'  With
his  i>oenis,  letters,  &c.  lotii
Edition,  revised,  with  Memoir  of
Roscoe  by  his  Son.     3^.  6d.

RUSSIA.  History  of,  from  the
earliest  Period,  compiled  from
the  most  authentic  sources  by
Walter  K.  Kelly.  With  Portraits.
2  vols,     y  6d.  each.

SALLUST,  FLORUS,  and  VEL-
LEIUS  PATERCULUS.
Translated  by  J.  S.Watson,  M.A.

SCHILLER'S  Works.  Translated
by  various  hands.  7  vols.  31.  6d.
each : —

I.— History  of  the  Thirty  Years'
War.


Contained  in  Bokn^s  Libraries.


21


Schiller's  Works  continued.

11. — History  of  the  Revolt  in  the
Netherlands,  the  Trials  of
Counts  Egmont  and  Horn,
the  Siege  of  Antwerp,  and
the  Disturbances  in  France
preceding  the  Reign  of
Henry  IV.

ni. — Don  Carlos,  Mary  Stuart,
Maid  of  Orleans,  Bride  of
Messina,  together  with  the
Use  of  the  Chorus  in
Tragedy  (a  short  Essay).
These  Dramas  are  all
translated  in  metre.

IV.— Robbers  ( with  Schiller's
original  Preface),  Fiesco,
Love  and  Intrigue,  De-
metrius, Ghost  Seer,  Sport
of  Divinity.

The    Dramas    in    this
volume  are  translated  into
Prose.
V. — Poems.

VI. — Essays, /Esthetical  and  Philo-
sophical
VII. — Walienstein's    Camp,    Pic-
colomini   and    Death    of
Wallenstein.WilliamTell.

SCHILLER  and  GOETHE.
Correspondence  between,  from
A.D.  1794-1805.  Translated  by
L.  Dora  Schmitz.  2  vols.  3^.  6d.
each.

SCHLEGEL'S  (F.)  Lectures  on
the  Philosophy  of  Life  and  the
Philosophy  of  Language.  Trans-
lated by  the  Rev.  A.  J.  W.  Mor-
rison, M.A.     35.  6d.

Lectures  on  the  History  of

Literature,  Ancient  and  Modern.

Translated  from  the  German.  3J-.6(7.
Lectiirea  on  the  Philosophy

of  History.     Translated  by  J.  B.

Robertson,     y.  6d.

SCHLEGEL'S  Lectixres  on
Modern  History,  together  with
the  Lectures  entitled  Csesar  and


Alexander,  and  The  Beginning  of
our  History.  Translated  by  L.
Purcell  and  R.  H.  Whitetock.
3s.  dd.

.Esthetic  and  Miscellaneous

Works.  Translated  by  E.  J.
Millington.     31.  6d,

SCHLEGEL  (A.  W.)  Lectures
on  Draraatic  Art  and  Literature.
Translated  by  J.  Black.  Revised
Edition,  by  the  Rev.  A.  J.  W.
Morrison,  M.A.     31.  6d.

SCHOPENHAUER  on  the  Four-
fold Root  of  the  Principle  of
Sufficient  Reason,  and  On  the
Will  in  Nature.  Translated  by
Madame  Hillebrand.     5^.

Essays.  Selected  and  Trans-
lated. With  a  Biographical  Intro-
duction and  Sketch  of  his  Philo-
sophy, by  E.  Belfort  Bax.     5/.

SCHOUW'S  Earth,  Plants,  and
Man.  Translated  by  A.  Henfrey.
With  coloured  Map  of  the  Geo-
graphy of  Plants.     55.

SCHUMANN  (Robert).  His  Life
and  Works,  by  August  Reissmann.
Translated  by  A.  L.  Alger.   3^.  6d.

Early  Letters.  Oiiginaliypub-

blished  by  bis  Wife.  Translated
by  May  Herbcst.  With  a  Preface
by  Sir  George  Grove,  D.C.L.
3^.  6d.

SENECA  on  Benefits.  Newly
translated  by  A.  Stewart,  M.A.
3/.  6d.

Minor  Essays  and  On  Clem-
ency. Translated  by  A.  Stewart,
M.A.     5T.

SHAKESPEARE  DOCU-
MENTS, Arranged  by  D.  H.
Lambert,  B.A.     3^-.  6d,

SHAKESPEARE'S  Dramatic
Art.  The  History  and  Character
of  Shakespeare's  Plays.  By  Dr.
Hermann  Ulrici.  Translated  by
L.  Doia  Schmitz.  2  vols.  35.  6d.
each.


22


A71  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


SHAKESPEARE  (WllUara).  A
Literary  Biography  by  Karl  Elze,
Ph.D.,  LL.D.  Translated  by
L.  Dora  Schmitz.     5^.

SHARPE  (S.)  The  History  of
EgJTPt,  from  the  Earliest  Times
till  the  Conquest  by  the  Arabs,
A.D.  640.  By  Samuel  Sharpe.
2  Maps  and  upwards  of  400  Illus-
trative Woodcuts.  2  vols.  5j".  each.

SHERIDAN'S  Dramatic  V7orks,
Complete.     With  Life  by  G.  G.  S.

SISMONDI'S  History  of  the
Literature  of  the  South  01
Europe.  Translated  by  Thomas
Roscoe.     2  vols.     3^.  dd.  each.

SMITH'S  Synonyms  and.  An-
tonyms, or  Kindred  Words  and
their  Opposite^.  Revised  Edi-
tion.    5^.

Synonyms    Discriminated.

A  Dictionary  of  Synonymous
Words  in  the  English  Language,
showing  the  Accurate  signification
of  words  of  similar  meaning.
Edited  by  the  Rev.  H.  Percy
Smith,  M.A.     ds.

SMITH'S  (Adam)  The  Wealth  of
Nations.  Edited  by  E.  Eelfort
Bax.     2  vols.     3.f.  hd.  each.

Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments.

With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author  by
Dugald  Stewart.     3.1.  dd,

SMYTH'S  (Professor)  Lectures
on  Modern  History.  2  vols.
3^.  6</.  each.

SMYTH'S  (Professor)  Lectures
on  til 9  French  Revolution.
2  vols.     3^.  dd,  each.

SMITH'S  (  Pye )  Geology  and
Scripture.     2nd  Edition,     5^.

SMOLLETT'S  Adventui-es  01
Roderick  Random.  With  short
Memoir  and  Bibliography,  and
Cruikshank's  Illustrations,    y.  6d.


SMOLLETT'S  Adventures  of
Peregrine  Pickle.  With  Biblio-
gvaphy  and  Cruikshank's  Illus-
trations.   2 vols.    3^.  6d.  each.

The   EzpedJtlOtt  of    Hum-

pliry  Clinker.  With  Bibliography
and  Cruikshank's  Illustrations.
Zs.  6d.

SOCRATES  (sumamed  'Soholas-
ticus ').  The  Ecclesiastical  His-
tory of  (a.  d.  305-445).  Translated
from  the  Greek,     ^s.

SOPHOCLES,  The  Trage.lies  of.

A  New  Prose  Translation,  with
Memoir,  Notes,  &c.,  by  E.  P.
Coleridge,  M.A.     $>,

SOUTH ET'S  Life  of  Nelson.
With  Portraits,  Plans,  and  up-
wards of  50  Engravings  on  Steel
and  Wood.     5^.

Life  of  Wesley,  and  the  Rise

and  Progress  of  Methodism.     5^.

Robert  Southey.    The  Story

of  his  Life  written  in  his  Letters.
Edited  by  John  Dennis.     3^.  613',

SOZOMEN'S  Ecclesiastical  His-
tory. Translated  from  the  Greek.
Together  with  the  Ecclesiasti-
cal History  of  Philostor-
Gius,  as  epitomised  by  Photius.
Translated  by  Rev.  E.  Walford,
M.A.     5-.

SPINOZAS  Chief  Works.  Tran.?-
lated,  with  Introduction, by  R. II. M.
Elwes.     2  vols.     Sr.  each.

STANLEY'S  Classified  Synopsis
of  the  Principal  Painters  of  the
Dutch  and  Flemish  Schools.
By  George  Stanley.     55.

STARLING'S  (Miss)  Noble  Deeds
of  Vvomen.  With  14  Steel  En-
gravingu.     5?.

STAUNTON'S  Chess  -  Player's
Handbook.    5,^.

Chess  Praxis.    A  Supplement

to  the  Chess-player's  Iland'uook.


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries.


23


STAUNTON'S  Chess  ■  player's
Companion.  Comprising  a  Trea-
tise on  Odds,  Collection  of  Match
Games,  and  a  Selection  of  Original
Problems.  51.

Chess  Totirnament  of  1851.

With  Introduction  and  Notes.   5^.

STOCKHARDT'S  Experimental
Chemistry.  Edited  by  C.  W.
Keaton,  F.C.S.     5r.

STOWE  (Mrs.H.B.)  Uncle  Tom's
Cabin.     Illustrated.     3^.  dd,

STRABO'3  Geography.  Trans-
lated by  W.  Falconer,  M.A.,
and  H.  C.  Hamilton.  3  vols.
5^^  e.ich.

STRICKLAND'S  (Agnes)  Lives
of  the  Queens  of  England,  from
the  Norman  Conquest.  Revised
Edition.  With  6  Portraits.  6  vols.
5j.  each.

— —  Life  of  Mary  Queen  of  Soots.

2  vols.     5.C.  each.
Lives  of  the  Tudor  and  Stuart

Princesses.    With  Portraits.     51.

STUART  and  REVETT'S  Anti-
quities of  Athens,  and  other
Monuments  of  Greece.  With  71
Plates  engraved  on  Steel,  and
numerous  Woodcut  Capitals.     5^.

SUETONIUS'  Lives  of  the  Twelve
CsBsara  and  Lives  of  the  Gram-
marians. Thomson's  translation,
revised  by  T.  Forester.     t,s,

SWIFT'S  Proso  Works.  Edited
by  Temple  Scott.  With  a  Bio-
graphical Introduction  by  the  Right
Hon.  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  M.'P.
With  Portraits  and  Facsimiles.
!2  vols,     y,  dd.  each.

[  Vols.  I.-X.  ready.
I.— A  Tale  of  a  Tub,  The  Battle
of  the  Books,  and  other
early  works.  Edited  by
Temple  Scott.  With  a
Biographical  Introduction
by  W.  E.  H.  Lecky.


Swift's  Prosk  V^^oViKs'contt7!ued.

II.—TheJournal  to  Stella.  Edited
by  Frederick  Ryland,M.A.
With  2  Portraits  and  Fac-
simile.
III.&  1  v'. — Writings  on  Religion  and
the  Church.
V. — Historical    and     Political

Tracts  (English).
VI. — The  Drapier's   Letters.
With  facsimiles  of  Wood's
Coinage,  &c.
Vn. — Historical      and       Political
Tracts  (Irish).
VIII.— Gulliver's  Travels.      Edited
by  G.  R.  Dennis.     With
Portrait  and  Maps.
IX.  —Contributions  to  Periodicals.
X. — Historical  Writings.
XI. — Literary  Essays.

{In  preparatian,
XII. — Index  and  Bibliography.

\_In  preparation,

TACITUS.  The  Works  of.  Liter-
ally translated.     2  vols.    5^.  each.

TALES  OF  THE  GENII.  Trans-
lated from  the  Persian  by  Sir
Charles  Morell.  Numerous  Wood-
cuts and  12  Steel  Engravings.    5^-.

TASSO'S  Jerusalem  Delivered.
Translated  into  English  Spenserian
Verse  by  J.  H.  Wiffen.  With  8
Engravings  on  Steel  and  24  Wood-
cuts by  Thurston.     5^.

TAYLOR'S  (Bishop  Jeremy)
Holy  Living  and  Djrhig.   3^.  dd.

TEN  BRINK.— .?££  Brink.

TERENCE  and  PH.ffiDRUS.
Literally  translated  by  H.  T.  Riley,
M.A.  To  which  is  added.  Smart's
Metrical  Version  of  Pha;dius.    5?.

THEOCRITUS,  BION,  MOS-
CHUS,  and  TYRTiEUS.  Liter-
ally translated  by  the  Rev.  J.
Banks,  M.A.  To  which  are  ap-
pended the  Metrical  Versions  of
Chapman.     J^.


24


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books


THEODORET  and  EVAGRIUS.

Histories  of  the  Church  from  A.D.
332  to  A.D.  427  ;  and  from  a.d.
431  to  A.D.  544.    Translate  J.     ^s.

THIERRY'S  History  of  the
Conquest  of  England  by  the
Normans.  Translated  by  Wil-
liam Hazlitt.  2  vols.  35.  dd.  each.

THUCYDIDES.  The  Pelopon-
nesian  War.  Literally  translated
by  the  Rev.  II.  Dale.  2  vols.
3^'.  6d.  each.

An  Analysis  and  Summary

of.     By  J.  T.  Wheeler.     5^.

THUDICHUM  (J.  L.  W.)  A  Trea-
tise on  Wines.    Illustrated.     5^.

URE'S  (Dr.  A.)  Cotton  Manufac-
ture of  Great  Britain.  Edited
by  P.  L.  Simmonds.  2  vols.  5.f.
each.

Philosophy  of  Manufactures.

Edited  by  P.  L.  Simmonds.  "js.  6d.

VASARI'S  Lives  of  the  most
Eminent  Painters,  Sculptors,
and  Architects.  Translated  by
Mrs.  J.  Foster,  with  a  Commen-
tary by  J.  P.  Richter,  Ph.D.  6
vols.     3J.  (>d.  each.

VIRGIL.  A  Literal  Prose  Trans-
lation by  A.  Hamilton  Bryce,
LL.D.     With  Portrait.     3j.  dd.

VOLTAIRE'S  Tales.  Translated
by  R.  B.  Boswell.  Containing
Bebouc,  Memnon,  Candide,  L'ln-
f^enu,  and  other  Tales.     31.  6d,

WALTON'S  Complete  Angler.
Edited  by  Edward  Jesse.  With
Portrait  and  203  Engravings  on
Wood  and  26  Engravings  on
Steel.     Sj.

Lives  of  Donne,  Hooker,  &c.

New  Edition  revised  by  A.  H.
Bullen,  with  a  Memoir  of  Izaak
Walton  by  Wm.  Dowling.  With
numerous  Illustrations.     5^.

WELLINGTON,  Life  of.  By  •  An
Old  Soldier.'  From  the  materials
of  Maxwell,  With  Index  and  18
Steel  Engravings.      5;.


WELLINGTON,  Victories  of.
See  Maxwell.

WERNER'S  Templars  in
Cyprus.  Translated  by  E.  A.  M.
Lewis.     35.  6d.

WESTROPP  (H.  M.)  A  Hand-
book of  Archaeology,  Egyptian,
Greek,  Etruscan,  Roman.  Illus-
trated.    5j.

WHITE'S  Natural  History  of
Selborne.  With  Notes  by  Sir
William  Jardine.  Edited  by  Ed-
ward Jesse.  With  40  Portraits
and  coloured  Plates.      5?.

WHEATLEY'S  A  Rational  Illus-
tration of  the  Book  of  Common
Prayer.     3^,  6d.

WHEELER'S  Noted  Names  of
Fiction,  Dictionary  of.     e^s.

WIESELER'S  Chronological
Synopsis  of  the  Pour  Gospels.
Translated  by  the  Rev.  Canon
Venables.     35,  6d.

WILLI  A.MofMALMSSBURY'S
Chronicle  of  the  Kings  of  Eng-
land. Translated  by  the  Rev.  J.
Sharpe.  Edited  by  J.  A.  Giles,
D.C.L.     ss-

XENOPHON'S  Works.  Trans-
lated by  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,
M.A.,  and  the  Rev.  H.  Dale.  In
3  vols.     5j.  each.

YOUNG  (Arthur).  Travels  in
Prance  during  the  years  1787,
1788.  and  1789.  Edited  by
M.  Betham  Edwards.     3^.  6d.

Tour  in  Ireland,  with

General  Observations  on  the  state
of  the  country  during  the  years
1776  -  79.  Edited  by  A.  W,
Ilutton.  With  Complete  Biblio-
graphy by  J.  P.  Anderson,  and
Map.     2  \'o\i.     y.  6d.  each.

YULE-TIDE  STORIES.  A  Col-
lection of  Scandinavian  and  North-
German  Popular  Tales  and  Tra-
ditions.   Edited  by  B.  Thorpe.  5i.


THE  YORK    LIBRARY

A  NEW  SERIES  OF  REPRINTS  ON  THIN  PAPER.

The  volumes  are  printed  in  a  handy  size  (6^  x  4^  in.),   on

thin  but  opaque  paper,  aud  are  simply  and

attractively  bound.

Price,  in  cloth,   2S.  net  ;    in  leather,   3s.  net.

'  The  York  Library  is  noticeable  by  reason  of  the  wisdom  and  intelli-
gence displayed  in  the  choice  of  unhackneyed  classics.  ...  A  most
attractive  series  of  reprints.  .  .  .  The  size  and  style  of  the  volumes  are
exactly  what  they  should  be.' — Bookman.

'  These  books  should  find  their  way  to  every  home  that  owns  any
cultivation.' — Notes  and  Queries.

The  following  volumes  are  noio  ready  :

CHARLOTTE  BRONTE'S  JANE  EYRE.

BURNEY'S  EVELINA.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction  and
Notes,  by  Annie  R.^ine  Ellis.

BURNEY'S    CECILIA.       Edited    by    Annie    Raine    Ellis.

2  vols.

BURTON'S  ANATOMY  OF  MELANCHOLY.  Edited  by  the
Rev.   A.   R.  Shilleto,    M.A.,   with   Introduction  by  A.    H.   BuLLEN.

3  vols.

BURTON'S  (SIR  RICHARD)  PILGRIMAGE  TO  AL-
MADINAH  AND  MECCAH.  With  Introduction  by  Stanley  Lane-
Poole.    2  vols.

CERVANTES'  DON  QUIXOTE.  Motteux's  Translation,  re-
vised.   With  Lockhart's  Life  and  Notes.     2  vols.

CLASSIC  TALES  :  Johnson's  Rasselas,  Goldsmith's  Vicar
ok  Wakefield,  Sterne's  Sentimental  Journey,  Walpole's
Castle  of  Otranto.     With  Introduction  by  C.  S.  Fearenside,  M.A.

COLERIDGE'S  AIDS  TO  REFLECTION,  and  the  Confessions

of  an  Inquiring  Spirit.

COLERIDGE'S  FRIEND.  A  series  of  Essays  on  Morals,
Politics,  and  Religion.

COLERIDGE'S  TABLE  TALK  AND  OMNIANA.  Arranged
and  Edited  by  T.  Ashe,  B.A.

DRAPER'S  HISTORY  OF  THE  INTELLECTUAL  DE-
VELOPMENT OF  EUROPE.     2  vols.

GEORGE  ELIOT'S  ADAM  BEDE.

EMERSON'S  WORKS.  A  new  edition  in  5  volumes,  with  the
Te-xt  edited  and  collated  by  George  Sampson.

FIELDING'S  TOM  JONES.      2  vols.

GASKELL'S  SYLVIAS  LOVERS.


The  York  Library — continued.

GESTA  ROMANORUM,  or  Entertaining  Moral  Stories  in-
vented  by  the  Monks.  Translated  from  the  Latin  by  the  Rev.  CHARLES
Swan.     Revised  edition,  by  Wynnard  Hooper,  M.A.

GOETHE'S  FAUST.      Translated  by  Anna  Swanwick,  LL.D.

Revised  edition,  with  an  Introduction  and  Bibliography  by  Karl  Breul,
Litt.D.,  Ph.D.

HAWTHORNE'S  TRANSFORMATION  (The  Marble  Faun).

IRVING'S  SKETCH  BOOK.

JAMESON'S  SHAKESPEARE'S  HEROINES.  Characteris-
tics of  Women  :  Moral,  Poetical,  and  Historical.

LAMB'S  ESSAYS.  Including  the  Essays  of  Elia,  Last  Essays
of  Elia,  and  Eliana.

MARCUS    AURELIUS    ANTONINUS,   THE    THOUGHTS

OF.      Translated  by  George  Long,   M.A.      With  an  Essay  on  Marcus
Aurelius  by  Matthew  Arnold.

MARRYAT'S  MR.  MIDSHIPMAN  EASY.  With  8  Illustra-
trations  by  E.  T.  Wheeler.

MARRYAT'S  PETER  SIMPLE.  With  8  Illustrations  by  F.  A.
Eraser.

MONTAIGNE'S  ESSAYS.  Cotton's  translation.  Revised  by
W.  C.  Hazlitt.     3  vols.

MORE'S  UTOPIA.  With  the  Life  ot  Sir  Thomas  More,  by
William  Roper,  and  his  Letters  to  Margaret  Roper  and  others.  Edited,
with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  George  Sampson.  [/«  the  Press.

MOTLEY'S  RISE  OF  THE   DUTCH    REPUBLIC.      With  a

Biographical  Introduction  by  MoNCURE  D.  Conway.     3  vols.

PASCAL'S  THOUGHTS.  Translated  from  the  Text  of  M.
Augusts  Mollnier  by  C.  Kegan  Paul.    Tliird  edition.

PLUTARCH'S  LIVES.  Translated,  with  Notes  and  a  Life  by
Aubrey  Stewart,  M.A.,  and  George  Long,  M.A.    4  vols.

SWIFT'S  GULLIVER'S  TRAVELS.    Edited,  with  Introduction

and  Notes,  by  G.  R.  Dennis,  with  facsimiles  of  the  original  illustrations.

SWIFT'S  JOURNAL  TO  STELLA.  Edited,  with  Introduction
and  Notes,  by  F.  Ryland,  M.A.

TROLLOPE'S  THE  WARDEN.  With  an  Introduction  by
Frederic  Harrison.

TROLLOPE'S  BARCHESTER  TOWERS.

TROLLOPE'S  DR.  THORNE.

TROLLOPE'S  FRAMLEY  PARSONAGE.

TROLLOPE'S  SMALL  HOUSE  AT  ALLINGTON.     2  vols.

TROLLOPE'S  LAST  CHRONICLE  OF  BARSET.     2  vols.

ARTHUR  YOUNG'S  TRAVELS  IN  FRANCE,  during  the
years  1787,  1788,  and  1789.  Edited  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  M.
Betham  Edwards.

Other   VoluHici  are  in  Preparation.


BELL'S    HANDBOOKS

OF

THE    GREAT    MASTERS

IN   PAINTING  AND  SCULPTURE.

Edited  by  G.  C.  WILLIAMSON,  Litt.D.
Post  8vo.     With  40  Illustrations  and  Photogravure  Frontispiece.   S^-  ^^^  each.

TAe  following  Volumes  have  been  issued :
BOTTICELLI.     By  A.  Streeter.     2nd  Edition.
BRUNELLESCHI.    By  Leader  Scott.
CORREGGIO.     By  Selwvn  Brinton,  M.A.     2nd  Edition.
CARLO    CRIVELLI.      By  G.  McNeil  Rushforth,  M.A.
DELLA  ROBBIA.     By  the  Marchesa  Borlamacchi.     2nd  Edition.
ANDREA  DEL  SARTO.     By  H.  Guinness.    2nd  Edition.
DONATELLO.     By  Hope  Rea.     2nd  Edition.
GERARD  DOU.     By  Dr.  W.  Martin.     Translated  by  Clara  Bell.
GAUDENZIO  FERRARI.     By  Etkel  Halsey.
FRANCIA.     By  George  C.  Williamson,  Litt.D.
GIORGIONE.    By  IIerbebt  Cook,  M.A.
GIOTTO.     By  F.  Mason  Perkins.
FRANS  HALS.     By  Gerald  S.  Davirs,  M.A.

BERNARDINO  LUINI.  By  George  C.  Williamson,  Litt.D.   3rd  Edition.
LEONARDO  DA  VINCI.     By  Edward  McCurdy,  M.A.
MANTEGNA.     By  Maud  Cruttwell.
MEMLINC.    By  W.  H.  James  Weals.
MICHEL  ANGELO.      By  Lord   Ronald  Sutherland   Gower,    M.A.,

F.S.A.
PERUGINO.     By  G   C.Williamson,  Litt.D.     2nd  Edition.
PIERO  DELLA  FRANCESCA.     By  W.  G.  Waters,  M.A.
PINTORICCHIO.    By  Evelyn  March  Phillipps.
RAPHAEL.     By  H.  Strachey.     2nd  Edition.
REMBRANDT.     By  Malcolm  Bell.    2nd  Edition.
RUBENS.     By  Hope  Rea.

LUCA  SIGNORELLI.    By  Maud  Cruttweli  .    2nd  Edition.
SODOMA.    By  the  Contessa  Lorenzo  Priuli-Bon.
TINTORETTO.     By  J.  B.  Stoughton  Holborn,  M.A.
VAN  DYCK.     By  Lionel  Cust,  M.V.O.,  F.S.A.
VELASQUEZ.    By  R.  A.  M.  Stevenson.    3rd  Edition.
WATTEAU.     By  Edgcumbe  Staley,  B.A.
WILKIE.     By  Lord  Ronald  Sutherland  Gower,  M.A.,  F.S.A.
Oikers  to  follow.


THE


CHISWICK  SHAKESPEARE

Ulustraled  by  BYAM   SHAW
With  Introductions  and  Glossaries  by  JOHN  DENNIS.


Printed  at  the  Chisv/ick  Press,  pott  8vo.,  price  ij-.  dd.  net  per  volume ;

also  a  cheaper  edition,  \s.  net  per  volume  ;  or  2s.  net  in  limp  leather;  also
a  fev;r  copies,  on  Japanese  vellum,  to  be  sold  only  in  sets,  price  5^-.  net  per
volume.

Now  Complete  in  39  Vohnues.

ALL'S  WELL  THAT  ENDS  LOVE'S  LABOUR'S  LOST.

WELL.  MACBETIL

ANTONY  AND  CLEOPATRA.  MEASURE  FOR  MEASURE.

AS  YOU  LIKE  IT.  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE.

COMEDY  OF  ERRORS.  MERRY  WIVES  OF  WINDSOR.

CORIOLANUS.  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S  DREAM.

CYMBELINE.  MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING.

HAMLET.  OTHELLO.

JULIUS  C^SAR.  PERICLES.

KING  HENRY  IV.     Part  I.  ROMEO  AND  JULIET.

KING  HENRY  IV.     Part  II.  THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW.

KING  HENRY  V.  THE  TE?.IPEST,

KING  HENRY  VI.     Part  I.  TIMON  OF  ATHENS.

KING  HENRY  VI.     Part  II.  TITUS  ANDRONICUS.

KING  HENRY  VI.     Part  IH.  TROILUS  AND  CRESSIDA.

KING  HENRY  VIII.  TWELFTH  NIGHT.

KING  JOHN.  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA.

KING  LEAR.  WINTER'S  TALE.

KING  RICHARD  II.  POEMS.

KING  RICHARD  HI.  SONNETS.


'  A  fascinating  little  edition.' — Notes  and  Queries.

'A  cheap,  very  comely,  and  altop;ether  desirable  edition.' — Westinutsier  Gazette.
But  a  few  years  ago  sucli  volumes  would  have  been  deemed  worthy  to  be  considered
Editions  de  luxe.     To-day,  the  low  price  at  which  they  ars  offered  to  the  public  alone
prevents  them  being  so  regarded.' — Studio.

'  Handy  in  shape  and  size,  wonderfully  cheap,  beautifully  printed  from  the  Cam-
bridge text,  atid  illustrated  quaintly  yet  admirably  by  Mr.  Byam  Shaw,  we  have  nothing
but  praise  for  it.  No  one  wlio  wants  a  good  and  convenient  Shakespeare — without
excursuses,  discursuses,  or  even  too  many  notes — can  do  better,  in  our  opinion,  than
subscribe  to  this  issue  :  which  is  saying  a  good  deal  in  these  days  of  cheap  reprints.' —
Vanity  Fair.

'  V/hat  we  like  about  these  elegant  booklets  is  the  attention  that  has  been  paid  to  the
paper,  as  well  as  to  the  print  anddecoration ;  such  stout  laid  paper  will  last  for  ages.
On  this  account  alone,  the  '  Chisv.-ick '  s)wtild  easily  be  first  among  pocket  Shake-
speares.' —  Pall  Mall  Gazette.

* ^  The  Chiswick  Shakespeare  may  also  be  had  bound  in  12  vohimes,
full  ^ilt  back,  price  36^.  net.


(  29


New  Editioue,  fcap.  8to.  2s.  6(2.  e&oh  net.

THE    ALDINE     EDITION


BRITISH     POETS.

•This  eseellent  edition  of  the  English  classica,  with  their  oomplete  texts  and
scholarly  introductions,  are  something  vory  different  from  the  cheap  volumes  of
estractii  which  are  just  now  bo  much  too  common.' — St.  Jamea's  Gazette,

•An  Pieellent  series.    Small,  handy,  and  complete.' — Satwdaii  Revieui.


Akenslde.  Edited  by  Rev.  A.  Dyee.

Seattle.    Edited  by  Eev,  A.  Dyce.

Blake.    Edited  by  W.  M.  Eossetti.

Bums.  Edited  by  G.  A,  Aitken.
3  vols.

Butler.  Edited  by  R.  B.  Johneon.
2  vols.

Oampbell.  Edited  by  His  Son-
in-law,  the  Rev.  A.  W.  Hill.  With
Memoir  by  W.  Allingham.

Chatterton.  Edited  by  the  Rev.
W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.    2  voh.

Chaucer.  Edited  by  Dr.  R.  Morris,
with  Memoir  by  Sir  H.  Nicolas.  6  vols.

Churehlll.  Edited  by  Jas.  Hannay.
2  vols.

Coleridge.     Edited  by    T.  Ashe,

B.A.    2  vols.

Collins.  Edited  by  W.  Moy
Thomas.

Cowper.    Edited  by  John  Briiee.

F.S.A.    3  vols.

Dryden.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  R.
Hooper,  M.A.    5  vols.

Goldsmith.     Revised  Edition  by

Austin  Dobson.     With  Portrait,

Gray.  Edited  by  J.  Bradehaw,
LL.D.

Herbert.  Edited  by  the  Rev  A.  B.
Grosait.

Herrick.       Edited     by     George

Saintsbury.    2  vols.

Keats.  Edited  by  the  late  Lord
Houghton.


Kifke  White.  Edited,  with  a
Memoir,  by  Sir  H.  Nicolas.

Milton.  Edited  by  Dr.  Bradshaw.
2  vols.

Pamell.    Edited  by  G.  A.  Aitken.

Pope.  Edited  by  G.  R.  Dennis,
With  Memoir  by  John  Dennis.    3  vols.

Prior.  Edited  by  R.  B.  Johnson.
2  vole.

Kalelgh  acd  Wotton.  With  Se-
lections from  the  Writings  of  other
COURTLY  POETS  from  15i0  to  1650.
Edited  by  Ven.  Archdeacon  Hannah,
D.O.L.

Rogers.    Edited  by  Edward  Beil,

M.A.
Soott.      Edited  by  John  Dennis.
5  vols.

Shakespeare's  Poems.    Edited  by

Rev.  A.  Dyce.

Shelley.  Edited  by  H.  Buxton
Forman.    5  vols.

Spenser.  Edited  by  J.  Payne  Col-
lier.   5  vols.

Surrey.    Edited  by  J.  Teowell.

Swrift.      Edited    by    the    Rev.    J.

Mitford.    3  vols.
Thomson.    Edited  by  the  Rev.  D.

C.  Tovey.    2  vols.

Vaughan.  Sacred  Poems  and
Pious  Ejaculations.  Edited  by  the
Rev.  H.  Lyte.

Words v?orth.      Edited    by  Prof.

Dowden.    7  vols.

Wyatt.    Edited  by  J.  Teowell.

Yovmg.  2  vols.  Edited  by  the
Rev.  J.  Mitfojd.


THE    ALL-ENGLAND    SERIES.

HANDBOOKS  OF   ATHLETIC   GAMES.

The  only  Series  lesncd  at  a  moderate  prleo,  by  Writers  who  arc  in
the  firat  rawfe  ia  their  respeotiv«  depftrtments.

•  Tht)  best  iiistractiou  on  gamca  and  sports  bj  the  cost  authoritias,  at  the  loweat
prices.' — Oxford  ilagaiiine.

Small  8vo.  cloth,  lUnstratad.    Price  Is.  each.


Cricket.    By  Fked  C.  Holland.
Cricket.    By  the  Hon.  and  Eev.

E.  Lttteltou.
Croquet.    By  Lieut. -Col.  the  Hon.

H.  0.  Needdau.
Lawn    Tonnis.      By    H.  W.    W.

WilBerforce.     With  a  Chapter  for

Ladies,  by  Mrs.  Hilltard.
Squash  Tennis.     By  Eustace  H.

Miles.    D.uWe  vol.    2s.
Tennis  and  Rackets  and  Fives.

By  Julian  Marshall,  M-ijor  J.  Spens,

and  Rev.  J.  A.  Aunan  Tait.
Goif.      By    H.    S.    C.    Everard.

Double  vol.    2f.
Rowing  ar.d  Sculling.     By  Goy

HiXON.

Ro\7ing  and  Soulling.    By  W.  B,

Woodqate.
Sailing.  By  E .  F.  Enight,  dbl.vol,  2s.
SwiriJ.mlng.    By  Mastin  and  J.

BiACSTKE  COr.BSTT.

Camping  out.    By  A,  A.  Maodon-

ELL.    Double  vol.    2s.
Canoeing.    By  Dr.  J,  D.  Kayward.

Double  vol.    2s.
Mountaineering.     By  L'r.  Claude

Wxi.soir.    Donble  vol.    2s.
Athletics.     By  H.  H.  Griffin.
Riding.     By    W.  A.   Kerb,    V.C.

Double  vol.    23.

Ladies' Riding.  ByW.A.KEBR.V.O.

Boxini?.  By  R.  G.  Allanson-Winn.

With  Fiefatory  Note  by  Bat  Mulliua.


Fencing.    By  H.  A.  Colmobe  Ddnn.

Cycling.  ByH.H.  Griffih.L.A.C,
N.C.U.,  O.T.C.  With  a  Chapter  for
Ladies,  by  Miss  AG:sEa  Wood.  Double
vol.    2s.

Wrestling.     By  Walter  Asm-

STRONG.    New  Edition.
Broadsword     and     Singlestick.
By  11.  G.  Allanson-Wikn  and  C.  PniL-

LIPPS-WOLLET.

Gymnastics.     By  A.  F.   Jeskin.

Double  vol.  2s.

Gymnastic  Competition  and  Dis-
play llxercises.  Compiled  by
F.  Graf.

Indian  Clubs.    By  G.  T.  B.  Cob-

BKTT  and  A.  P.  Jenkik.
Dumb-bells.    By  P.  Graf.
Football  —  Rugby    Game.      By

Haery  Vassall.
Football — Association  Game.  By
0.  W.  Alcock.    Eovised  BditioQ,

Kockey.     By    F.    S.    Creswell.

New  Edition.

Skating.  By  Docolab  Adams,
Witli  a  rhaptor  for  Ladiosi,  by  Miss  L.
CrtEETUAM,  and  a  Chapter  on  Speed
Skating,  by  a  Fen  Skater.   Dbl.  vol.  2s.

Baseball.    By  Nkwton  Crane.
Rounders,  Fleldball.  Bowls,

Quoits,   Curling,   Skittles,    &c.

By  J.  M.  Walker  and  C.  0.  Mott.
Dancing.      By   Edward    Soott.

Double  vol.    23,


THE  CLUB  SERIES  OF  CARD  AND  TABLE  GAMES.

'  No  well-regulated  clnb  or  fonntry  house  should  bo  without  this  u'?eful  series  of  books.
iSmail  Svo.  cloth,  Illuttrated.     Price  Is.  each.


Bridge.     By  '  Templar.'
Whist.    By  Dr.  Wm.  Pole,  F.R.S.
Solo  Whist.   By  Hobkb  r  F.  Gubkn.
Billiards.     By  Major-Gen.  A.  W.

Drayson,  F.R.A.3.     With  a  Prof.ice

by  W.  J.  Peall.
Hints    on    Billiards.      By  J.  P.

iJuriiANAN.     Double  vol.     2s,
Chess.     By  Egbert  F.  Green.
The  Two- Move  Chess  Problem,

By  B.  G.  Laws.

Chess  Openings.  By  L  Gcnhbebg.
Draughts  and  Backgammon.

By  '  Berke;ev.*

Reverai  and  Go  Bang.

By  '  Refkelet,'


GMe.
Dominoes  smi  Solitaire.

By  •  SfiHKELEY.'

Boi-ique  and  Cribbage.

By  '  Berkelet,'
ltcart6  and  Euchre.

By  '  Berkeley.'
Piquet  and  Hublcoa  Piquet.

By  '  Berkelet.'
Skat.     By  Louis  Diehl.

*,,*  A  S'liat  Scoriiii^-book.     Is.

Round  Games,  including  Poker,
K.-iPoleon.  Loo,  Vicgt-et-un,  &c.      By

BAiTEH-WnAT.

Parlour  and  Pliiyground  Gamea.
By  Mre.  Lauebkcs  Gohsis,


the  Best  Practical  Working  Dictionary  of  tlie
English  Language.

WEBSTER'S

INTERNATIONAL

DICTIONARY.

2348  PAGES.       5000  ILLUSTRATIONS.

NEW  EDITION,  REVISED  THROUGHOUT  WITH  A

NEW  SUPPLEMENT  OF  25,000  ADDITIONAL

WORDS  AND  PHRASES.


The  Appendices  comprise  a  Pronouncing  Gazetteer  of  the  World,
Vocabularies  of  Scripture,  Greek,  Latin,  and  English  Proper  Names,
a  Dictionary  of  the  Noted  Names  of  Fiction,  a  Brief  History  of  the
English  Language,  a  Dictionary  of  Foreign  Quotations,  Words,  Phrases,
Proverbs,  &c.,  a  Biographical  Dictionary  with  10,000  names,  &c.,  &c.


Dr.  MURRAY,  Editor  of  the  '  Oxjord  English  Dictionary;  sajrs  :— '  In  this  its
latest  form,  and  with  its  large  Supplement  and  numerous  appendices,  it  is  a  wonderful
volume,  which  well  maintains  its  ground  against  all  rivals  on  its  own  lines.  The  '  defini-
tions,' or  more  properly,  '  e.^cplanations  of  meaning'  in  '  Webster'  have  always  struck  me
as  particularly  terse  and  well-put ;  and  it  is  hard  to  see  how  anything  better  could  be
done  within  the  limits.'

Professor  JOSEPH  WRIGHT,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  D.C.I..,  LL.D.,  Editor  oj
the  '  Efigiish  Diaieci  Dictionary,'  says  : — '  The  new  edition  of  ' '  Webster's  International
Dictionary  "  is  undoubtedly  the  most  useful  and  reliable  work  of  its  kind  in  any  country.
No  one  who  has  not  examined  the  work  carefully  would  believe  that  such  a  vast  amount
of  lexicographical  information  could  possibly  be  found  within  so  small  a  compass.'

Profeeaor  A.  H.  SAYCE,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  says:— 'It  is  indeed  a  marvellous
work  ;  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  a  Dictionary'  more  exhaustive  and  complete.  Every-
thing is  in  it-— not  only  what  we  might  e.\pect  to  find  in  such  a  work,  but  also  what  few
of  u>  would  ever  have  thought  of  looking  for.'

Rev.  JOSEPH  WOOD,  p.D.,  Head  Master  oJ  Ha>rou\  says  :— '  I  have  always
thought  very  highly  of  its  merits.  Indeed,  I  consider  it  to  be  far  the  most  accurate
English  Dictionary  in  e.xistence,  and  much  more  reliable  than  the  "Century."  For
daily  and  hourly  reference,  "Webster "  seem';  to  me  unrivalled.'

Prospectuses f  with  Prices  and  Specimen  Pages,  oit  Application.


LONDON  :    GEORGE  BELL  &-  SONS,  YORK  HOUSE,
PORTUGAL  STREET,  W.C.
50,000.    S.  &  S,  11.06.


BELIJS   CATHEDRAL  SERIES.

Profusely  Illustrated^  cloth,  cro'wn  Zvo.    \s.  6d.  net  each.

ENGLISH  CATHEDRALS.  An  Itinerary  and  Description.  Compiled  by  James  G.
Gilchrist,  A.M  ,  M.D.  Revised  and  edited  with  an  liitrbdt'.ction  on  Cathedral
Architecture  by  the  Rev.  T-  Perkins,  IvI.A.,  F.R.A.S.

BANGOR.     By  P.  B.  Ironside  Bax.

BRISTOL.     By  H.  J.  L.  J.  MassiJ,  MA.

CANTERBURY.    By  Hartley  Withers,     sth  Edition.

CARLISLE.     By  C.  King  Eley.

CHESTER.    By  Charles  Hiatt.    3rd  Edition.

CHICHESTER.     By  H.  C.  Corlette,  A.R.I. B.A.     2nd  Edition.

DURHAM.     By  J.  E.  Bygate,  A.R.C.A.    3rd  Edition.

ELY.     By  Rev.  W.  D.  SwEBTiNO,  M.A.     2nd  Edition.

EXETER.    By  Percy  Addleshaw,  B.A.     2nd  Edition,  revised.

GLOUCESTER.     By  H.  J.  L.  J.  Mass^,  M.A.     3rd  Edition.

HEREFORD.    By  A.  Hugh  Fisher,  A.R.E.    znd  Edition,  revised.

LICHFIELD.     By  A.  B.  Clifton.     2nd  Edition.

LINCOLN.     By  A.  F.  Kendrick,  B.J^.     3rd  Edition.

MANCHESTER.     By  Rev.  T.  Perkins,  M.A.

NOP^.VVICH.     By  C.  H.  B.  Quennell.     2nd  Edition.

OXFORD.     By  Rev.  Percy  Dearmer,  M.A.     2nd  Edition,  revised.

PETERBOROUGH.     By  Rev.  \V.  D.  Sweetiiig.     2nd  Edition,  revised.

RIPON.    By  Cecil  Hallett,  B.A.

ROCHESTER.     By  G.  H.  Palmer,  B.A.     2nd  Edition,  revised,

ST.  ALBANS.    By  Rev.  T.  Perkins,  M.A.

ST.  ASAPH.     By  P.  B.  Ironsihe  Bax.

ST.  DAVID'S.    By  Philip  Robson,  A.R.I. B.A.

ST.  PATRICK'S,  DUBLIN.    By  Rev.  J.  H.  Bernard,  M.A.,  D.D.    2nd  Edition.

ST.  PAUL'S.     By  Rev.  Arthur  Dimock,  M.A.     3rd  Edition,  revised.

ST.  SAVIOUR'S,  SOUTHWARK.    By  George  Worley.

SALISBURY.     By  Gleeson  White.     3rd  Edition,  revised,

SOUTHWELL.     By  Rev.  Arthur  Dimock,  M.A.     2nd  Edition,  revised.

WELLS.    By  Rev.  Percy  Dearmkr,  M.A.    3rd  Edition.

WINCHESTER.    By  P.  W.  Sergeant,    3rd  Edition.

WORCESTER.     By  E.  F.  Strange,    and  Edition.

YORK.     By  A.  Clutton-Brock,  M.A.    3rd  Edition.

Uniform  ivith  above  Series,    Now  rendy.     is.  6(i.  ttei  each.

ST.    MARTIN'S    CHURCH,    CANTERBURY.      By  the   Rev.   Canon    Routlsdge,

M.A.,  F.S.A.
BEVERLEY   MINSTER.      By  Charles  Hiatt.
WIMBORNE    MINSTER     and    CHRISTCHURCH    PRIORY,       By    the    Rev.   '1.

Terkins,  M..^.
TEWKESBURY  ABBEY  AND  DEERHURST  PRIORY.    By  H.  J,  L.  J.  Mass6,  M.A.
BATH  ABBEY,  MALMESBURY  ABBEY,  and  BRADFORD-ON-AVON  CHURCH.

By  Rev.  T.  Perkins,  M..\.
WESTMINSTER  ABBEY.    By  Charles  Hiatt.
STRATF0RD-0N-.\V0N  CHURCH.     By  Harold  Baker.

BELL'S    HANDBOOKS    TO    CONTINENTAL    CHURCHES.

Profusely  Illustrated.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d.  net  each.
.'VMIENS      By  the  Rev.  T.  Pkkkins,  M.A,
B.WEUX.     By  the  Rev.  R.  S.  Mylne.

CHARTRES  :  The  Cathedral  and  Other  Churches.    By  H.  J.  L.  J.  MASsi,  M.A.
MONT  ST.  MICHEL.    By  H.  J,  L.  J.  Massi^,  M.A.
PARIS  (NOTRE-DAME).     By  Charles  Hiatt.
ROUKN  :  The  Cathedial  and  Oiber  Churches.  By  the  Rev.  T,  Perkins,  M.A.
