 Russian Federation's
 Constitution of 1993 with
 Amendments through 2014
 Subsequently amended

 Table of contents
 Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 SECTION ONE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 CHAPTER 1. THE BASIS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL SYSTEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 CHAPTER 2. HUMAN AND CIVIL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 CHAPTER 3. THE FEDERAL STRUCTURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 CHAPTER 4. THE PRESIDENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 CHAPTER 5. THE FEDERAL ASSEMBLY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 CHAPTER 6. THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 CHAPTER 7. JUDICIAL AUTHORITY AND PUBLIC PROSECUTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 CHAPTER 8. LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 CHAPTER 9. CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS AND REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION . . . . . . . . . 29
 SECTION TWO. Concluding and interim provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 2

  Motives for writing constitution
  Source of constitutional authority
  Preamble
 Preamble

 We, the multinational people of the Russian Federation,

 united by a common fate on our land,

 establishing human rights and freedoms, civil peace and accord,

 preserving the historically established State unity,

 proceeding from universally acknowledged principles of equality and self-determination
 of peoples,

 revering the memory of ancestors who have passed on to us their love for the
 Fatherland and faith in good and justice,

 reviving the sovereign statehood of Russia and asserting the firmness of its democratic
 basis,

 striving to ensure the well-being and prosperity of Russia,

 proceeding from the responsibility for our Fatherland before present and future
 generations,

 recognizing ourselves to be a part of the world community,

 do hereby adopt THE CONSTITUTION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION.

 SECTION ONE

 CHAPTER 1. THE BASIS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL
 SYSTEM

 Article 1
 1. The Russian Federation - Russia is a democratic federative law-governed state
  Type of government envisioned with a republican form of government.
 2. The names Russian Federation and Russia are equivalent.

 Article 2
 Man, his rights and freedoms shall be the supreme value. The recognition, observance
 and protection of human and civil rights and freedoms shall be an obligation of the State.

 Article 3
 1. The bearer of sovereignty and the sole source of power in the Russian Federation
 shall be its multinational people.
 2. The people shall exercise its power directly, as well as through State government
 bodies and local self-government bodies.
 3. The supreme direct expression of the power of the people shall be referendum
  Referenda and free elections.
 4. Nobody may usurp power in the Russian Federation. The seizure of power or
 usurpation of State authority shall be prosecuted under federal law.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 3

 Article 4
 1. The sovereignty of the Russian Federation shall extend to the entirety of its
 territory.
 2. The Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws shall have
 supremacy on the entire territory of the Russian Federation.
 3. The Russian Federation shall ensure the integrity and inviolability of its territory.

 Article 5
 1. The Russian Federation shall consist of republics, krays, oblasts, cities of federal
 significance, an autonomous oblast and autonomous okrugs, which shall have
 equal rights as constituent entities of the Russian Federation.
 2. A republic (state) shall have its own constitution and legislation. A kray, oblast,
 city of federal significance, autonomous oblast and autonomous okrug shall have
 its own charter and legislation.
 3. The federal structure of the Russian Federation shall be based on its State
  Right to self determination integrity, the unity of the system of State power, the division of matters of
 authority and powers between State government bodies of the Russian
 Federation and State government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian
 Federation, the equality and self-determination of peoples in the Russian
 Federation.
 4. All constituent entities of the Russian Federation shall be equal with one another
 in relations with federal State government bodies.

 Article 6
 1. Citizenship of the Russian Federation shall be acquired and terminated in
  Requirements for birthright citizenship accordance with federal law, and shall be one and equal, irrespective of the
 grounds on which it is acquired.
 2. Every citizen of the Russian Federation shall enjoy all rights and freedoms on its
 territory and shall bear equal responsibilities as envisaged in the Constitution of
 the Russian Federation.
 3. A citizen of the Russian Federation may not be deprived of his (her) citizenship or
  Right to renounce citizenship of the right to change it.
  Conditions for revoking citizenship

 Article 7
 1. The Russian Federation shall be a social state whose policy is aimed at creating
 conditions ensuring a worthy life and a free development of Man.
 2. In the Russian Federation the labour and health of people shall be protected, a
 guaranteed minimum wage shall be established, State support shall be provided
 for the family, maternity, fatherhood and childhood, to the disabled and to elderly
 citizens, the system of social services shall be developed and State pensions,
 allowances and other social security guarantees shall be established.

 Article 8
 1. In the Russian Federation the integrity of economic space, free flow of goods,
 services and financial resources, support of competition, and the freedom of
 economic activity shall be guaranteed.
 2. In the Russian Federation private, State, municipal and other forms of property
 shall be recognized and shall be protected on an equal basis.

 Article 9
 1. Land and other natural resources shall be utilized and protected in the Russian
 Federation as the basis of the life and activity of the peoples living on the
 territories concerned.
 2. Land and other natural resources may be subject to private, State, municipal and
 other forms of ownership.

  Claim of executive independence

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 4

 Article 10
 State power in the Russian Federation shall be exercised on the basis of its division into
 legislative, executive and judicial authority. Bodies of legislative, executive and judicial
 authority shall be independent.

 Article 11
 1. State power in the Russian Federation shall be exercised by the President of the
 Russian Federation, the Federal Assembly (the Council of Federation and the
 State Duma), the Government of the Russian Federation, and the courts of the
 Russian Federation.
 2. State power in constituent entities of the Russian Federation shall be exercised
 by bodies of State government formed by those constituent entities.
 3. The division of authorities and powers among State government bodies of the
 Russian Federation and State government bodies of constituent entities of the
 Russian Federation shall be established by this Constitution, the Federation
 Treaty and other treaties on the division of authorities and powers.

 Article 12
 Local self-government shall be recognized and guaranteed in the Russian Federation.
 Local self-government shall be independent within the limits of its competence. Bodies
 of local self-government shall not form part of the system of State government bodies.

 Article 13
 1. Ideological diversity shall be recognized in the Russian Federation.
 2. No ideology shall be proclaimed as State ideology or as obligatory.
 3. Political diversity and the multi-party system shall be recognized in the Russian
 Federation.
 4. Public associations shall be equal before the law.
 5. The establishment and activities of public associations whose goals and activities
 are aimed at the forcible changing of the basis of the constitutional order and at
 violating the integrity of the Russian Federation, at undermining its security, at
 creating armed units, and at instigating social, racial, national and religious strife
 shall be prohibited.

  Separation of church and state Article 14
 1. The Russian Federation shall be a secular state. No religion may be established
  Official religion as the State religion or as obligatory.
 2. Religious associations shall be separate from the State and shall be equal before
 the law.

 Article 15
 1. The Constitution of the Russian Federation shall have supreme legal force, direct
 effect and shall be applicable on the entire territory of the Russian Federation.
 Laws and other legal acts, which are adopted in the Russian Federation, must not
 contradict the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
 2. State government bodies, local self-government bodies, officials, citizens and
  Duty to obey the constitution their associations shall be obliged to observe the Constitution of the Russian
 Federation and laws.
 3. Laws must be officially published. Unpublished laws shall not have force. Any
 normative legal acts concerning human and civil rights, freedoms and obligations
 shall not have force unless they have been officially published for the information
 of the general public.
 4. Universally recognized principles and norms of international law as well as
  International law international agreements of the Russian Federation should be an integral part of
  Customary international law
  Legal status of treaties
 its legal system. If an international agreement of the Russian Federation
 establishes rules, which differ from those stipulated by law, then the rules of the
 international agreement shall be applied.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 5

 Article 16
 1. The provisions of this Chapter of the Constitution shall constitute the
 fundamental principles of the constitutional order of the Russian Federation and
 may not be changed except in accordance with the procedure established by this
 Constitution.
 2. No other provisions of this Constitution may conflict with the fundamental
 principles of the constitutional order of the Russian Federation.

 CHAPTER 2. HUMAN AND CIVIL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS
 Article 17
 1. In the Russian Federation human and civil rights and freedoms shall be
  Customary international law recognized and guaranteed according to the universally recognized principles and
 norms of international law and this Constitution.
 2. Basic human rights and freedoms shall be inalienable and shall be enjoyed by
  Inalienable rights everyone from birth.
 3. The exercise of human and civil rights and freedoms must not violate the rights
 and freedoms of other people.

 Article 18
 Human and civil rights and freedoms shall have direct force. They shall determine the
 meaning, content and implementation of laws, the functioning of legislative and
 executive authority and of local self-government, and shall be guaranteed by law.

  General guarantee of equality Article 19
 1. All persons shall be equal before the law and the court.
 2. The State guarantees the equality of human and civil rights and freedoms
  Equality regardless of nationality regardless of sex, race, nationality, language, origin, material and official status,
  Equality regardless of financial status
  Equality regardless of origin
 place of residence, attitude to religion, convictions, membership of public
  Equality regardless of religion associations, or of other circumstances. All forms of limitations of human rights
  Equality regardless of gender on social, racial, national, language or religious grounds shall be prohibited.
  Equality regardless of creed or belief
  Equality regardless of race
 3. Men and women shall enjoy equal rights and freedoms and equal opportunities to
  Equality
  Equality regardless
 regardless of
 of gender
 language exercise them.

 Article 20
 1. Everyone shall have the right to life.
  Right to life 2. Capital punishment until its complete abolition may be established by federal law
 as an exclusive form of punishment for particularly grave crimes against life, and
 the accused shall be granted the right to have his case examined by a court with
 the participation of a jury.

 Article 21
 1. Human dignity shall be protected by the State. Nothing may serve as a basis for
  Human dignity its derogation.
 2. Nobody should be subjected to torture, violence, or other severe or humiliating
  Prohibition of corporal punishment treatment or punishment. Nobody may be subjected to medical, scientific or
  Reference to science
  Prohibition of cruel treatment
 other experiments without voluntary consent.
  Prohibition of torture
 Article 22
 1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom and personal inviolability.
 2. Arrest, detention and keeping in custody shall be permissible only under a court
  Protection from unjustified restraint order. A person may not be detained for more than 48 hours without a court
 order.

  Right to privacy

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 6

 Article 23
 1. Everyone shall have the right to the inviolability of his (her) private life, personal
  Right to protect one's reputation and family privacy, and protection of his (her) honour and good name.
 2. Everyone shall have the right to privacy of correspondence, of telephone
 conversations and of postal, telegraph and other communications. This right may
 be limited only on the basis of a court order.

 Article 24
 1. Collecting, keeping, using and disseminating information about the private life of
 a person shall not be permitted without his (her) consent.
 2. State government bodies and local self-government bodies and their officials
  Right to information shall be obliged to provide everyone with access to documents and materials
 directly affecting his (her) rights and freedoms, unless otherwise envisaged by
 law.

  Right to privacy Article 25
 The home shall be inviolable. Nobody shall have the right to enter a dwelling place
 against the will of those residing therein, except in those cases provided for by federal
 laws or on the basis of a court order.

 Article 26
 1. Everyone shall have the right to determine and declare his (her) nationality.
 Nobody shall be forced to determine and declare his (her) nationality.
 2. Everyone shall have the right to use his (her) native language and to a free choice
 of the language of communication, upbringing, education and creative work.

 Article 27
 1. Everyone who is legally present on the territory of the Russian Federation shall
  Freedom of movement have the right to travel freely and freely to choose the place of temporary or
 permanent residence.
 2. Everyone may freely leave the Russian Federation. Citizens of the Russian
 Federation shall have the right freely to return to the Russian Federation.

  Freedom of religion Article 28
 Everyone shall be guaranteed freedom of conscience and religion, including the right to
 profess individually or collectively any religion or not to profess any religion, and freely
 to choose, possess and disseminate religious and other convictions and act in
 accordance with them.

 Article 29
 1. Everyone shall be guaranteed freedom of thought and speech.
  Freedom of expression 2. Propaganda or agitation, which arouses social, racial, national or religious hatred
  Freedom of opinion/thought/conscience
 and hostility shall be prohibited. Propaganda of social, racial, national, religious or
 linguistic supremacy shall also be prohibited.
 3. Nobody shall be forced to express his thoughts and convictions or to deny them.
 4. Everyone shall have the right freely to seek, receive, transmit, produce and
 disseminate information by any legal means. The list of types of information,
 which constitute State secrets, shall be determined by federal law.
 5. The freedom of the mass media shall be guaranteed. Censorship shall be
  Freedom of press prohibited.

 Article 30
 1. Everyone shall have the right of association, including the right to establish trade
  Freedom of association unions for the protection of his (her) interests. The freedom of activity of public
  Right to join trade unions
 associations shall be guaranteed.
 2. Nobody may be compelled to join any association or to stay there.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 7

  Freedom of assembly Article 31
 Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to assemble peacefully, without
 weapons, hold rallies, mass meetings and demonstrations, marches and pickets.

 Article 32
 1. Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to participate in managing
 State affairs both directly and through their representatives.
 2. Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to elect and be elected to
  Municipal government State government bodies and local self-government bodies, as well as to
  Subsidiary unit government
 participate in referendums.
 3. Citizens who are recognized as incapable by a court, and citizens who are kept in
  Restrictions on voting places of imprisonment under a court sentence, shall not have the right to elect
 and be elected.
 4. Citizens of the Russian Federation shall enjoy equal access to State service.
 5. Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to participate in
 administering justice.

  Right of petition Article 33
 Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to appeal in person and make
 individual and collective appeals to State bodies and local self-government bodies.

  Right to establish a business Article 34
 1. Everyone shall have the right to use freely his (her) abilities and property for
 entrepreneurial and other economic activity not prohibited by law.
 2. Economic activity aimed at monopolization and unfair competition shall not be
  Right to competitive marketplace permitted.

 Article 35
 1. The right of private property shall be protected by law.
  Right to own property 2. Everyone shall have the right to have property and to possess, use and dispose
  Right to own property of it both individually and jointly with other persons.
 3. Nobody may be deprived of property except under a court order. Forced
  Protection from expropriation alienation of property for State requirements may take place only subject to prior
 and fair compensation.
 4. The right of inheritance shall be guaranteed.
  Right to transfer property

 Article 36
 1. Citizens and their associations shall have the right to possess land as private
 property.
 2. Possession, utilisation and disposal of land and other natural resources shall be
 exercised by the owners freely provided that this is not detrimental to the
 environment and does not violate the rights and lawful interests of other people.
 3. The conditions and procedure for the use of land shall be determined by federal
 law.

 Article 37
 1. Labour shall be free. Everyone shall have the right freely to use his (her) labour
  Right to choose occupation skills and to choose the type of activity and occupation.
 2. Compulsory labour shall be forbidden.
  Prohibition of slavery 3. Everyone shall have the right to work in conditions, which meet safety and
  Right to safe work environment hygiene requirements, and to receive remuneration for labour without any
  Right to just remuneration
  State support for the unemployed
 discrimination whatsoever and not below the minimum wage established by
 federal law, as well as the right of protection against unemployment.
 4. The right of individual and collective labour disputes with the use of the methods
  Right to strike for their resolution, which are provided for by federal law, including the right to
 strike, shall be recognized.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 8

 5. Everyone shall have the right to rest. For those working under labour contracts
  Right to rest and leisure the duration of work time, days of rest and public holidays and annual paid leave
 established by federal law shall be guaranteed.

 Article 38
 1. Maternity, childhood and family shall be protected by the State.
  Rights of children 2. Care for children and their upbringing shall be the equal right and duty of parents.
 3. Able-bodied children over 18 years of age must take care of disabled parents.

 Article 39
 1. Everyone shall be guaranteed social security for old age, in case of illness,
  State support for the elderly disability and loss of the breadwinner, for the bringing up of children and in other
  State support for the disabled
 cases specified by law.
 2. State pensions and social benefits shall be established by law.
 3. Voluntary social insurance, the creation of additional forms of social security and
 charity shall be encouraged.

  Right to shelter Article 40
 1. Everyone shall have the right to a home. Nobody may be arbitrarily deprived of
 his (her) home.
 2. State government bodies and local self-government bodies shall promote
 housing construction and create conditions for exercising the right to a home.
 3. Low-income citizens and other citizens mentioned in law who are in need of a
 home may receive it either free of charge or for an affordable payment from
 State, municipal and other housing funds according to the norms established by
 law.

 Article 41
 1. Everyone shall have the right to health protection and medical care. Medical care
  Right to health care in State and municipal health institutions shall be rendered to citizens free of
 charge at the expense of the appropriate budget, insurance premiums and other
 proceeds.
 2. In the Russian Federation federal programmes for the protection and
 improvement of the health of the public shall be financed, measures shall be
 taken to develop State, municipal and private healthcare systems, and activities
 shall be encouraged which contribute to the improvement of human health, the
 development of physical education and sport, and ecological, sanitary and
 epidemiological well-being.
 3. The concealment by officials of facts and circumstances, which pose a threat to
 the life and health of people, shall result in liability according to federal law.

 Article 42
 Everyone shall have the right to a favourable environment, reliable information on the
 state of the environment and compensation for damage caused to his (her) health and
 property by violations of environmental laws.

  Free education Article 43
 1. Everyone shall have the right to education.
 2. General access and free pre-school, secondary and secondary vocational
 education in State and municipal educational institutions and at enterprises shall
 be guaranteed.
 3. Everyone shall have the right to receive on a competitive basis free higher
 education in State and municipal educational institutions and at enterprises.
 4. Basic general education shall be compulsory. Parents or guardians shall ensure
  Compulsory education that children receive a basic general education.
 5. The Russian Federation shall establish federal State educational standards and
 shall support various forms of education and self-education.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 9

 Article 44
 1. Everyone shall be guaranteed the freedom of literary, artistic, scientific, technical
  Reference to science and other types of creative activity and teaching. Intellectual property shall be
  Right to academic freedom
  Reference to art
 protected by law.
  Provisions for intellectual property 2. Everyone shall have the right to participate in cultural life and use cultural
  Right to culture establishments, and the right of access to cultural valuables.
 3. Everyone shall be obliged to care for the preservation of the cultural and
 historical heritage, and to protect monuments of history and culture.

 Article 45
 1. State protection of human and civil rights and freedoms in the Russian Federation
 shall be guaranteed.
 2. Everyone shall have the right to protect his (her) rights and freedoms by all
 means not prohibited by law.

 Article 46
 1. Everyone shall be guaranteed protection in court of his (her) rights and freedoms.
 2. Decisions and actions (or inaction) of State government bodies, local self-
 government bodies, public organisations and officials may be appealed against in
 court.
 3. Everyone shall have the right in accordance with international treaties of the
  International organizations Russian Federation to appeal to interstate bodies for the protection of human
 rights and freedoms if all available internal means of legal protection have been
 exhausted.

 Article 47
 1. Nobody may be deprived of the right to have his (her) case heard in the court and
 by the judge within whose competence the case is placed by law.
 2. Any person accused of committing a crime shall have the right to have his (her)
 case examined by a court with the participation of a jury in the cases envisaged
 by federal law.

 Article 48
 1. Everyone shall be guaranteed the right to qualified legal assistance. In the cases
  Right to counsel envisaged by law, legal assistance shall be provided free of charge.
 2. Any person detained, taken into custody or accused of committing a crime shall
 have the right to use the assistance of a lawyer (counsel for the defence) from
 the moment of being detained, placed in custody or accused.

 Article 49
 1. Any person accused of committing a crime shall be considered innocent until his
  Presumption of innocence in trials (her) guilt is proven in accordance with the procedure stipulated by federal law
 and is confirmed by a court sentence which has entered into legal force.
 2. The accused shall not be obliged to prove his (her) innocence.
 3. Irremovable doubts about the guilt of a person shall be interpreted in favour of
 the accused.

 Article 50
 1. Nobody may be convicted twice for one and the same crime.
  Prohibition of double jeopardy 2. In administering justice it shall not be permitted to use evidence received
  Regulation of evidence collection through violating federal law.
 3. Any person convicted of a crime shall have the right to appeal against the verdict
  Right to appeal judicial decisions to a higher court in accordance with the procedure established by federal law, as
 well as to request pardon or mitigation of the punishment.

  Regulation of evidence collection

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 10

 Article 51
 1. Nobody shall be obliged to testify against himself, his (her) spouse or close
  Protection from self-incrimination relatives, the range of whom shall be determined by federal law.
 2. Federal law may establish other cases where the obligation to give evidence may
 be lifted.

  Protection of victim's rights Article 52
 The rights of victims of crimes and of abuses of office shall be protected by law. The
 State shall provide the victims with access to justice and compensation for damage
 sustained.

  Ultra-vires administrative actions Article 53
 Everyone shall have the right to State compensation for damage caused by unlawful
 actions (inaction) of State government bodies and their officials.

 Article 54
 1. A law, which introduces or increases liability, shall not have retroactive force.
 2. Nobody may bear liability for an action, which was not regarded as a crime when
  Principle of no punishment without law it was committed. If, after an offense has been committed, the extent of liability
  Protection from ex post facto laws
 for it is lifted or mitigated, the new law shall be applied.

 Article 55
 1. The enumeration in the Constitution of the Russian Federation of the basic rights
 and freedoms should not be interpreted as a denial or diminution of other
 universally recognized human and civil rights and freedoms.
 2. In the Russian Federation no laws must be adopted which abolish or diminish
 human and civil rights and freedoms.
 3. Human and civil rights and freedoms may be limited by federal law only to the
 extent necessary for the protection of the basis of the constitutional order,
 morality, health, rights and lawful interests of other people, and for ensuring the
 defence of the country and the security of the State.

  Emergency provisions Article 56
 1. In the conditions of a state of emergency, in order to ensure the safety of citizens
 and the protection of the constitutional order and in accordance with federal
 constitutional law, certain restrictions may be imposed on human rights and
 freedoms with an indication of their limits and the period for which they have
 effect.
 2. A state of emergency on the entire territory of the Russian Federation and in
 certain areas thereof may be introduced subject to the circumstances and in
 accordance with the procedure stipulated by federal constitutional law.
 3. The rights and freedoms specified in Articles 20, 21, 23 (part 1), 24, 28, 34 (part
 1), 40 (part 1), and 46-54 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation might
 not be restricted.

  Duty to pay taxes Article 57
 Everyone shall be obliged to pay legally established taxes and levies. Laws, which
 establish new taxes or deteriorate the position of taxpayers, shall not have retroactive
 force.

  Protection of environment Article 58
 Everyone shall have a duty to preserve nature and the environment and to treat natural
 resources with care.

  Duty to serve in the military

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 11

 Article 59
 1. Defence of the Fatherland shall be the duty and obligation of a citizen of the
 Russian Federation.
 2. Citizens of the Russian Federation shall perform military service in accordance
 with federal law.
 3. In the event that their convictions or religious beliefs run counter to military
  Right to conscientious objection service and in other cases established by federal law, citizens of the Russian
 Federation shall have the right to replace it with alternative civilian service.

  Restrictions on voting Article 60
 A citizen of the Russian Federation may exercise all of his (her) rights and duties
 independently from the age of 18 years.

 Article 61
 1. A citizen of the Russian Federation may not be deported from the Russian
 Federation or extradited to another state.
 2. The Russian Federation shall guarantee its citizens protection and patronage
 abroad.

 Article 62
 1. A citizen of the Russian Federation may have citizenship of a foreign state (dual
 citizenship) in accordance with federal law or an international treaty of the
 Russian Federation.
 2. The possession of foreign citizenship by a citizen of the Russian Federation shall
 not diminish his (her) rights and freedoms and shall not release him from
 obligations stipulated for Russian citizenship, unless otherwise specified by
 federal law or an international treaty of the Russian Federation.
 3. Foreign citizens and stateless persons shall enjoy rights and bear obligations in
 the Russian Federation on a par with citizens of the Russian Federation, except in
 those cases envisaged by federal law or by an international treaty of the Russian
 Federation.

  International law Article 63
 1. The Russian Federation shall grant political asylum to foreign citizens and
  Protection of stateless persons stateless persons in accordance with the universally recognized norms of
  Customary international law
 international law.
 2. In the Russian Federation persons who are persecuted for their political
  Extradition procedure convictions or for actions (or inaction) not recognized as a crime in the Russian
 Federation may not be extradited to other states. The extradition of persons
 accused of a crime, as well as the surrender of convicts to serve sentence in
 other states, shall be carried out on the basis of federal law or an international
 treaty of the Russian Federation.

 Article 64
 The provisions of this Chapter shall constitute the fundamental principles of the legal
 status of the individual in the Russian Federation and may not be changed otherwise
 than in accordance with the procedure which is established by this Constitution.

 CHAPTER 3. THE FEDERAL STRUCTURE

 Article 65
 1. The Russian Federation shall be composed of the following constituent entities of
  Municipal government the Russian Federation:
  Subsidiary unit government
  Size of second chamber
 Republic of Adygeya (Adygeya), Republic of Altai, Republic of Bashkortostan,
 Republic of Buryatia, Republic of Crimea, Republic of Daghestan, Republic of

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 12

 1. Ingushetia, Kabardino-Balkarian Republic, Republic of Kalmykia, Karachayevo-
 Cherkessian Republic, Republic of Karelia, Komi Republic, Republic of Marij El,
 Republic of Mordovia, Republic of Sakha(Yakutia), Republic of North Osetia -
 Alania, Republic of Tatarstan (Tatarstan), Republic of Tuva, Udmurtian Republic,
 Republic of Khakasia, Chechen Republic, Chuvashi Republic - Chuvashia;

 Altai kray, Krasnodar kray, Krasnoyarsk kray, Perm kray, Primorie kray,
 Stavropol kray, Khabarovsk kray;

 Amur oblast, Arkhangelsk oblast, Astrakhan oblast, Belgorod oblast, Bryansk
 oblast, Vladimir oblast, Volgograd oblast, Vologda oblast, Voronezh oblast,
 Ivanovo oblast, Irkutsk oblast, Kaliningrad oblast, Kaluga oblast, Kamchatka
 oblast, Kemerovo oblast, Kirov oblast, Kostroma oblast, Kurgan oblast, Kursk
 oblast, Leningrad oblast, Lipets oblast, Magadan oblast, Moscow oblast,
 Murmansk oblast, Nizhni Novgorod oblast, Novgorod oblast, Novosibirsk oblast,
 Omsk oblast, Orenburg oblast, Oryol oblast, Penza oblast, Pskov oblast, Rostov
 oblast, Ryazan oblast, Samara oblast, Saratov oblast, Sakhalin oblast, Sverdlovsk
 oblast, Smolensk oblast, Tambov oblast, Tver oblast, Tomsk oblast, Tula oblast,
 Tyumen oblast, Ulyanovsk oblast, Chelyabinsk oblast, Chita oblast, Yaroslavl
 oblast;

 Moscow, St. Petersburg, Sevastopol - cities of federal significance;

 the Jewish autonomous oblast;

 Nenets autonomous okrug, Khanty-Mansijsk autonomous okrug - Yugra,
 Chukotka autonomous okrug, Yamalo-Nenets autonomous okrug.

 2. Admission into the Russian Federation and creation of a new constituent entity
  Accession of territory shall take place in accordance with the procedure established by federal
  Colonies
 constitutional law.

 Article 66
 1. The status of a republic shall be determined by the Constitution of the Russian
 Federation and the constitution of the republic.
 2. The status of a kray, oblast, city of federal significance, autonomous oblast,
  Municipal government autonomous okrug shall be determined by the Constitution of the Russian
  Subsidiary unit government
 Federation and the charter of the kray, oblast, city of federal significance,
 autonomous oblast and autonomous okrug which is adopted by the legislative
 (representative) body of the corresponding constituent entity of the Russian
 Federation.
 3. On a submission from legislative and executive bodies of an autonomous oblast
  Subsidiary unit government or autonomous okrug, a federal law concerning an autonomous oblast or
  Municipal government
 autonomous okrug may be adopted.
 4. Relations among autonomous okrugs within krays and oblasts may be regulated
 by federal law or by a treaty between State government bodies of the
 autonomous okrug and, accordingly, State government bodies of the kray or
 oblast.
 5. The status of a constituent entity of the Russian Federation may be changed by
  Secession of territory mutual agreement between the Russian Federation and the constituent entity of
 the Russian Federation in accordance with federal constitutional law.

 Article 67
 1. The territory of the Russian Federation shall comprise the territories of its
 constituent entities, inland waters and territorial sea and the air space over
 them.
 2. The Russian Federation shall have sovereign rights and exercise jurisdiction on
 the continental shelf and in the exclusive economic zone of the Russian
 Federation in accordance with the procedure specified by federal law and norms
 of international law.
 3. Borders between constituent entities of the Russian Federation may be changed
 upon their mutual consent.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 13

 Article 68
 1. The Russian language shall be the State language on the entire territory of the
  Official or national languages Russian Federation.
 2. Republics shall have the right to establish their own State languages. In State
  Official or national languages government bodies, local self-government bodies and State institutions of
 republics they shall be used together with the State language of the Russian
 Federation.
 3. The Russian Federation shall guarantee all of its peoples the right to preserve
  Protection of language use their native language and to create conditions for its study and development.

  International law
  Customary international law
 Article 69
 The Russian Federation shall guarantee the rights of indigenous small peoples in
 accordance with the universally recognized principles and norms of international law and
 international treaties of the Russian Federation.

 Article 70
 1. The state flag, emblem and anthem of the Russian Federation, their description
  National anthem and the procedure for the official use thereof shall be established by federal
  National flag
 constitutional law.
 2. The capital of the Russian Federation shall be the city of Moscow. The status of
  National capital the capital shall be established by federal law.

 Article 71
 The Russian Federation shall have jurisdiction over:

 a. the adoption and amending of the Constitution of the Russian Federation and
 federal laws, control over compliance therewith;

 b. the federative structure and the territory of the Russian Federation;

 c. regulation and protection of human and civil rights and freedoms; citizenship in
 the Russian Federation, regulation and protection of the rights of national
 minorities;

 d. establishment of the system of federal legislative, executive and judicial bodies,
 the procedure for their organisation and activities, the formation of federal State
 government bodies;

 e. federal State property and administration thereof;

 f. establishment of the basic principles of federal policy and federal programmes in
 the sphere of State, economic, ecological, social, cultural and national
 development of the Russian Federation;

 g. establishment of the basic legal principles for the unified market; financial,
 currency, credit and customs regulation; money emission; the basic principles of
 pricing policy, federal economic services, including federal banks;

 h. the federal budget, federal taxes and levies, federal funds of regional
 development;

 i. federal power-engineering systems, nuclear power, fissile materials, federal
 transport, railways, information and communication, activities in space;

 j. foreign policy and international relations of the Russian Federation, international
 treaties of the Russian Federation, issues of war and peace;

 k. foreign economic relations of the Russian Federation;

 l. defence and security; military production; determination of the procedure for
 selling and purchasing weapons, ammunition, military equipment and other

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 14

 l. military hardware; production of poisonous substances, narcotic substances and
 the procedure for their use;

 m. determination of the status and protection of the State border, territorial sea, air
 space, the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf of the Russian
 Federation;

 n. the judicial system, public prosecution, criminal and criminal-executive
  Provisions for intellectual property
 legislation, amnesty and remission, civil legislation, procedural legislation, legal
 regulation of intellectual property;

 o. federal collision law;

 p. meteorological service, standards, metric and time systems, geodesy and
 cartography, names of geographical units, official statistics and accounting;

 q. State awards and honorary titles of the Russian Federation;

 r. federal State service.

  Subsidiary unit government
  Municipal government
 Article 72
 1. The following shall be within the joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and
 constituent entities of the Russian Federation:
 a. measures to ensure the correspondence of constitutions and laws of
 republics, the charters, laws and other normative legal acts of krays,
 oblasts, cities of federal significance, autonomous oblast and autonomous
 okrugs to the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws;
 b. protection of human and civil rights and freedoms, protection of the rights
 of national minorities, ensuring lawfulness, law and order, public security;
 border zone regimes;
 c. issues of the possession, utilisation and management of land and of
  Ownership of natural resources subsurface, water and other natural resources;
 d. demarcation of State property;
 e. use of natural resources, protection of the environment and provisions for
  Protection of environment ecological safety; specially protected natural territories, protection of
 historical and cultural monuments;
 f. general issues of upbringing, education, science, culture, physical
  Reference to science education and sport;
 j. coordination of health care issues; protection of the family, maternity,
 fatherhood and childhood, social protection, including social security;
 h. carrying out measures against catastrophes, natural disasters, epidemics
 and rectification of their consequences;
 i. establishment of common principles of taxation and levies in the Russian
 Federation;
 j. administrative, administrative-procedural, labour, family, housing, land,
 water and forest legislation; legislation on subsurface resources and on
 environmental protection;
 k. personnel of judicial and law enforcement bodies; lawyers, notaries;
 l. protection of the traditional habitat and the traditional way of life of small
 ethnic communities;
 m. establishment of general principles of the organisation of the system of
 State government and local self-government bodies;
 n. coordination of international and foreign economic relations of constituent
 entities of the Russian Federation, observance of international
 agreements of the Russian Federation.
 2. The provisions of this Article shall be equally valid for republics, krays, oblasts,
 cities of federal significance, autonomous oblast and autonomous okrugs.

  Subsidiary unit government Article 73.
 Outside the limits of authority of the Russian Federation and the powers of the Russian
 Federation on issues under the joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and
 constituent entities of the Russian Federation, the constituent entities of the Russian
 Federation shall enjoy full State power.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 15

 Article 74.
 1. In the territory of the Russian Federation it shall not be permitted to establish
 custom borders, duties, levies or any other barriers to the free flow of goods,
 services and financial resources.
 2. Restrictions on the movement of goods and services may be introduced in
 accordance with federal law only to ensure security, to protect the life and health
 of people and top reserve nature and cultural values.

 Article 75
 1. The monetary unit in the Russian Federation shall be the rouble. Money emission
  Central bank shall be carried out exclusively by the Central Bank of the Russian Federation.
 The introduction and emission of other currencies in Russia shall not be
 permitted.
 2. Protecting and ensuring the stability of the rouble shall be the principal function
  Central bank of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation, which it shall fulfil independently
 of other State governmental bodies.
 3. The system of taxes paid to the federal budget and the general principles of
 taxation and levies in the Russian Federation shall be determined by federal law.
 4. State loans shall be issued in accordance with the procedure specified by federal
 law and shall be floated on a voluntary basis.

 Article 76
 1. On issues under the jurisdiction of the Russian Federation, federal constitutional
 laws and federal laws shall be adopted. These shall have direct force on the
 entire territory of the Russian Federation.
 2. On issues under the joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and the
 constituent entities of the Russian Federation, in addition to federal laws, laws
 and other normative legal acts of constituent entities of the Russian Federation
 shall be issued which are adopted in accordance with those federal laws.
 3. Federal laws may not conflict with federal constitutional laws.
 4. Outside the limits of authority of the Russian Federation and of the joint
  Municipal government jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and constituent entities of the Russian
  Subsidiary unit government
 Federation republics, krays, oblasts, cities of federal significance, autonomous
 oblast and autonomous okrugs shall exercise their own legal regulation, including
 the adoption of laws and other normative legal acts.
 5. Laws and other normative legal acts of the constituent entities of the Russian
  National vs subnational laws Federation shall not conflict with federal laws which are adopted in accordance
 with parts one and two of this Article. In the event of a conflict between a federal
 law and any other act issued in the Russian Federation, the federal law shall
 prevail.
 6. In the event of a conflict between a federal law and a normative legal act of a
  National vs subnational laws constituent entity of the Russian Federation issued in accordance with part four
 of this Article, the normative legal act of the constituent entity of the Russian
 Federation shall prevail.

  Subsidiary unit government
  Municipal government
 Article 77
 1. The system of State government bodies of republics, krays, oblasts, cities of
 federal significance, autonomous oblast and autonomous okrugs shall be
 established by the constituent entities of the Russian Federation independently
 in accordance with the basic principles of the constitutional order of the Russian
 Federation and the general principles of the organisation of representative and
 executive State government bodies which are established by federal law.
 2. Within the limits of the jurisdiction and powers of the Russian Federation on
 issues under the joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and the constituent
 entities of the Russian Federation federal executive government bodies and
 executive government bodies of the constituent entities of the Russian
 Federation shall form a unified system of executive authority in the Russian
 Federation.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 16

 Article 78
 1. Federal executive government bodies may, in order to exercise their powers,
 establish their own territorial bodies and appoint appropriate officials.
 2. Federal executive government bodies, by agreement with executive government
  Municipal government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation, may delegate some of
  Subsidiary unit government
 their powers to the latter provided that this does not conflict with the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws.
 3. Executive government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation,
  Municipal government by agreement with federal executive government bodies, may delegate some of
  Subsidiary unit government
 their powers to the latter.
 4. The President of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Russian
 Federation shall provide for the implementation of the powers of federal State
 power on the entire territory of the Russian Federation in accordance with the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation.

 Article 79
 The Russian Federation may participate in interstate associations and transfer some of
 its powers to those associations in accordance with international treaties provided that
 this does not entail restrictions on human and civil rights and freedoms and does not
 conflict with the basic principles of the constitutional order of the Russian Federation.

 CHAPTER 4. THE PRESIDENT OF THE RUSSIAN
 FEDERATION
 Article 80
 1. The President of the Russian Federation shall be the Head of State.
  Name/structure of executive(s) 2. The President of the Russian Federation shall be the guarantor of the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation and of human and civil rights and
 freedoms. In accordance with the procedure established by the Constitution of
 the Russian Federation, he (she) shall adopt measures to protect the sovereignty
 of the Russian Federation, its independence and State integrity, and shall ensure
 the coordinated functioning and interaction of State government bodies.
 3. The President of the Russian Federation shall, in accordance with the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws, determine the basic
 objectives of the internal and foreign policy of the State.
 4. The President of the Russian Federation, as the Head of State, shall represent
  Foreign affairs representative the Russian Federation within the country and in international relations.

 Article 81
 1. The President of the Russian Federation shall be elected for six years by citizens
  Head of state selection of the Russian Federation on the basis of universal, equal, direct suffrage by
  Secret ballot
  Claim of universal suffrage
 secret ballot.
  Head of state term length 2. Any citizen of the Russian Federation not younger than 35 years of age who has
  Minimum age of head of state resided in the Russian Federation on a permanent basis for not less than 10
  Eligibility for head of state
 years may be elected President of the Russian Federation.
 3. One and the same person cannot hold the office of the President of the Russian
  Head of state term limits Federation for more than two terms running.
 4. The procedure for elections of the President of the Russian Federation shall be
  Head of state selection determined by federal law.

 Article 82
 1. On assuming office the President of the Russian Federation shall take the
  Oaths to abide by constitution following oath of loyalty to the people:

 "I swear that in exercising the powers of the President of the Russian Federation
 I shall respect and protect human and civil rights and freedoms, observe and
 protect the Constitution of the Russian Federation, protect the sovereignty and
 independence, security and integrity of the State, and faithfully serve the people".

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 17

 2. The oath shall be taken in a solemn ceremony in the presence of members of the
 Council of Federation, deputies of the State Duma and judges of the
 Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation.

  Head of state powers Article 83
 The President of the Russian Federation:

 a. shall appoint, with the consent of the State Duma, the Chairman of the
  Head of government selection
 Government of the Russian Federation;

 b. shall have the right to chair meetings of the Government of the Russian
 Federation;

 c. shall adopt decisions on the resignation of the Government of the Russian
 Federation;

 d. shall nominate to the State Duma a candidate for appointment to the post of
  Central bank
 Chairman of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation; shall raise before the
 State Duma the issue of relieving the Chairman of the Central Bank of the
 Russian Federation of his post;

 e. in accordance with proposals of the Chairman of the Government of the Russian
  Cabinet removal
 Federation, shall appoint and relieve of their post deputy chairmen of the
  Cabinet selection Government of the Russian Federation and federal ministers;

 f. shall present to the Council of Federation candidates for the posts of judges of
  Supreme court selection
 the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, the Supreme Court of the
  Ordinary court selection Russian Federation, shall appoint judges of other federal courts;
  Constitutional court selection
 f1. shall present to the Council of Federation candidates for the posts of Prosecutor
  Attorney general
 General of the Russian Federation and deputies of the Prosecutor General of the
 Russian Federation, shall submit to the Council of Federation proposals to relieve
 the Prosecutor General and deputies of the Prosecutor General of their posts,
 shall appoint and relieve from posts public prosecutors of the constituent entities
 of the Russian Federation, as well as other prosecutors, except for public
 prosecutors of cities, districts and prosecutors equated with them;

 f2. shall appoint and dismiss the representatives of the Russian Federation in the
  Second chamber selection
 Council of the Federation;
  Removal of individual legislators
 g. shall form and head the Security Council of the Russian Federation, the status of
  Advisory bodies to the head of state
 which shall be determined by federal law;

 h. shall approve the military doctrine of the Russian Federation;

 i. shall form the Administration of the President of the Russian Federation;

 j. shall appoint and dismiss plenipotentiary representatives of the President of the
 Russian Federation;

 k. shall appoint and dismiss supreme commanders of the Armed Forces of the
  Selection of active-duty commanders
 Russian Federation;

 l. shall appoint and recall after consultations with appropriate committees and
  International organizations
 commissions of the chambers of the Federal Assembly diplomatic
 representatives of the Russian Federation in foreign States and international
 organisations.

 Article 84
 The President of the Russian Federation:

 a. shall announce elections to the State Duma in accordance with the Constitution
 of the Russian Federation and federal law;

 b. shall dissolve the State Duma in the cases and in accordance with the procedure
  Dismissal of the legislature
 provided for by the Constitution of the Russian Federation;

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 18

 c. shall announce referendums in accordance with the procedure established by
  Referenda
 federal constitutional law;

 d. shall submit draft laws to the State Duma;

 e. shall sign and promulgate federal laws;

 f. shall address the Federal Assembly with annual messages on the situation in the
  Legislative oversight of the executive
 country and on the basic objectives of the internal and foreign policy of the State.

  Head of state powers Article 85
 1. The President of the Russian Federation may use conciliatory procedures to
 resolve disputes between State government bodies of the Russian Federation
 and State government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation,
 and disputes between State government bodies of constituent entities of the
 Russian Federation. In the event that no agreed decision is reached, he (she) shall
 have the right to refer the dispute to the appropriate court.
 2. The President of the Russian Federation shall have the right to suspend acts of
  International law executive government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation in
 the event that these acts conflict with the Constitution of the Russian Federation
 and federal laws or with international commitments of the Russian Federation, or
 violate human and civil rights and freedoms until the issue is resolved by an
 appropriate court.

  Head of state powers Article 86
 The President of the Russian Federation:

 a. shall direct the foreign policy of the Russian Federation;

 b. shall hold negotiations and sign international treaties of the Russian Federation;
  Treaty ratification

 c. shall sign instruments of ratification;

 d. shall receive letters of credence and letters of recall of diplomatic
 representatives accredited to his (her) office.

 Article 87
 1. The President of the Russian Federation shall be the Supreme Commander-in-
  Designation of commander in chief Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
 2. In the event of aggression against the Russian Federation or of a direct threat of
  Emergency provisions aggression, the President of the Russian Federation shall introduce martial law
 on the territory of the Russian Federation or on certain parts thereof and shall
 immediately inform the Council of Federation and the State Duma of this.
 3. The regime of martial law shall be defined by federal constitutional law.
  Emergency provisions
  Emergency provisions Article 88
 The President of the Russian Federation, in the circumstances and in accordance with
 the procedure envisaged by federal constitutional law, shall introduce a state of
 emergency on the territory of the Russian Federation or on certain parts thereof and
 shall immediately inform the Council of Federation and the State Duma of this.

  Head of state powers Article 89
 The President of the Russian Federation:

 a. shall decide on issues of citizenship of the Russian Federation and of granting
 political asylum;

 b. shall bestow State awards of the Russian Federation and confer honorary titles of
 the Russian Federation and supreme military and supreme special titles;

 c. shall grant pardon.
  Power to pardon

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 19

 Article 90
 1. The President of the Russian Federation shall issue edicts and regulations.
  Head of state decree power 2. The edicts and regulations of the President of the Russian Federation shall be
 binding on the entire territory of the Russian Federation.
 3. Edicts and regulations of the President of the Russian Federation must not
 conflict with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws.

  Head of state immunity Article 91
 The President of the Russian Federation shall have immunity.

 Article 92
 1. The President of the Russian Federation shall begin to exercise his (her) powers
 from the moment of taking the oath and shall cease to do so when his (her) term
 of office expires and after a newly-elected the President of the Russian
 Federation has been sworn in.
 2. The President of the Russian Federation shall cease to exercise his (her) powers
  Head of state replacement before the end of his (her) term in the event of his (her) resignation, persistent
 inability for health reasons to carry out the powers invested in him (her), or
 impeachment. Presidential elections shall be held before the expiration of three
 months from the date of the early termination of presidential office.
 3. In all cases where the President of the Russian Federation is unable to fulfil his
 (her) duties, they shall be temporarily delegated to the Chairman of the
 Government of the Russian Federation. The Acting President of the Russian
 Federation shall not have the right to dissolve the State Duma, call a referendum
 or to submit proposals for amendments to and the revision of the provisions of
 the Constitution of the Russian Federation.

  Head of state removal Article 93
 1. The President of the Russian Federation may be impeached by the Council of
 Federation only on the basis of charges of high treason or of another grave crime
 brought by the State Duma and confirmed by a resolution of the Supreme Court
 of the Russian Federation on the existence of indications of a crime in the actions
 of the President of the Russian Federation and by a resolution of the
 Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation confirming that the established
 procedure for bringing charges has been observed.
 2. The decision of the State Duma to bring charges and the decision of the Council
 of Federation to impeach the President must be adopted by two-thirds of votes
 of the total number of members of each chamber on the initiative of not less than
 one third of deputies of the State Duma and on the basis of a resolution of a
 special commission setup by the State Duma.
 3. The decision of the Council of Federation to impeach the President of the Russian
 Federation must be adopted not later than three months after the State Duma
 brings charges against the President. If a decision of the Council of Federation is
 not adopted within this time the charges against the President shall be regarded
 as having been declined.

 CHAPTER 5. THE FEDERAL ASSEMBLY

 Article 94
 The Federal Assembly - parliament of the Russian Federation shall be the
 representative and legislative body of the Russian Federation.

 Article 95
 1. The Federal Assembly shall consist of two chambers - the Council of Federation
  Structure of legislative chamber(s) and the State Duma.
 2. The Council of Federation shall include: two representatives from each
  Second chamber selection constituent entity of the Russian Federation - one from the legislative
  Size of second chamber

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 20

 2. (representative) and one from executive body of state government;
 representatives of the Russian Federation, appointed by the President of the
 Russian Federation, the number of which shall not be more than ten percent of
 the members of the Council of Federation - representatives from legislative
 (representative) and executive bodies of state government of constituent
 entities of the Russian Federation.
 3. A member of the Council of Federation – a representative from legislative
  Term length of second chamber (representative) or executive body of state government of a constituent entity of
 the Russian Federation shall be vested with authority for the term of the relevant
 body of state government of the constituent entity of the Russian Federation.
 4. The President of the Russian Federation shall have no right during the first term
  Removal of individual legislators of his (her) presidency to dismiss a member of the Council of Federation -
 representative of the Russian Federation who was appointed prior to his (her)
 entry into office, except in instances where this is provided for by federal law.
 5. The State Duma shall consist of 450 deputies.
  Size of first chamber

 Article 96
 1. The State Duma shall be elected for a term of five years.
  Term length for first chamber 2. The procedure for forming the Council of Federation and the procedure for
  First chamber selection electing deputies to the State Duma shall be established by federal laws.
  Eligibility for second chamber
  Second chamber selection
 Article 97
 1. Any citizen of the Russian Federation who has reached 21 years of age and who
  Eligibility for first chamber has the right to participate in elections may be elected deputy of the State
  Minimum age for first chamber
 Duma.
 2. One and the same person may not be simultaneously a member of the Council of
  Outside professions of legislators Federation and a deputy of the State Duma. A deputy of the State Duma may
 not be a deputy of other representative State government bodies and local self-
 government bodies.
 3. Deputies of the State Duma shall work on a professional permanent basis.
  Outside professions of legislators Deputies of the State Duma may not be employed in State service or engage in
 other paid activities, except for teaching and scientific and other creative work.

  Immunity of legislators Article 98
 1. Members of the Council of Federation and deputies of the State Duma shall enjoy
 immunity during the whole term of their office. They may not be detained,
 arrested or searched, except in the event of detention at the scene of a crime.
 They may not be subjected to personal searches, except in instances where this
 is provided for by federal law in order to ensure the safety of other people.
 2. The issue of the removal of immunity shall be resolved by an appropriate
 chamber of the Federal Assembly upon submission of the Prosecutor General of
 the Russian Federation.

 Article 99
 1. The Federal Assembly shall be a permanently functioning body.
  Length of legislative sessions 2. The State Duma shall convene its first session on the thirtieth day after election.
  Extraordinary legislative sessions The President of the Russian Federation may convene a session of the State
 Duma earlier than this date.
 3. The first session of the State Duma shall be opened by the oldest deputy.
 4. From the moment that the State Duma of a new convocation begins to work the
 powers of the State Duma of the previous convocation shall expire.

 Article 100
 1. The Council of Federation and the State Duma shall hold separate sessions.
 2. Sessions of the Council of Federation and of the State Duma shall be open. In the
  Public or private sessions cases envisaged by the procedural regulations of a chamber, the latter shall have
 the right to hold closed-door sessions.
 3. The chambers may hold joint sessions to hear messages of the President of the
  Joint meetings of legislative chambers Russian Federation, messages of the Constitutional Court of the Russian
 Federation and speeches of leaders of foreign states.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 21

 Article 101
 1. The Council of Federation shall elect from among its members the Chairman of
  Leader of second chamber the Council of Federation and his (her) deputies. The State Duma shall elect from
  Leader of first chamber
 among its members the Chairman of the State Duma and his (her) deputies.
 2. The Chairman of the Council of Federation and his (her) deputies and the
 Chairman of the State Duma and his (her) deputies shall chair sessions and shall
 be in charge of the internal routine of the chamber.
 3. The Council of Federation and the State Duma shall set up committees and
  Legislative committees commissions and shall hold parliamentary hearings on issues under their
 authority.
 4. Each of the chambers shall adopt its procedural regulations and resolve issues
 relating to the routine procedures for its activities.
 5. To monitor implementation of the federal budget the Council of Federation and
 the State Duma shall set up the Accounts Chamber, whose composition and work
 procedures shall be determined by federal law.

 Article 102
 1. The following shall be within the jurisdiction of the Council of Federation:
 a. approval of border changes between constituent entities of the Russian
 Federation;
 b. approval of edict of the President of the Russian Federation on the
  Emergency provisions introduction of martial law;
 c. approval of edict of the President of the Russian Federation on the
  Emergency provisions introduction of a state of emergency;
 d. deciding on the possibility of using the Armed Forces of the Russian
  Designation of commander in chief Federation outside the territory of the Russian Federation;
 e. announcement of elections of the President of the Russian Federation;
 f. impeachment of the President of the Russian Federation;
 g. appointment of judges of the Constitutional Court of the Russian
  Supreme court selection Federation, of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation;
  Constitutional court selection
 h. appointment and dismissal of the Prosecutor General of the Russian
  Attorney general Federation and deputies of the Prosecutor General of the Russian
 Federation;
 i. appointment and dismissal of the deputy Chairman and half of the
 auditors of the Accounts Chamber.
 2. The Council of Federation shall adopt decrees on issues referred to its authority
 by the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
 3. Decrees of the Council of Federation shall be adopted by a majority of the total
 number of members of the Council of Federation unless another procedure for
 adopting decisions is envisaged by the Constitution of the Russian Federation.

 Article 103
 1. The following shall be within the jurisdiction of the State Duma:
 a. consent to the appointment of the Chairman of the Government of the
  Head of government selection Russian Federation by the President of the Russian Federation;
 b. deciding the issue of confidence in the Government of the Russian
  Cabinet removal Federation;
  Head of government removal
 c. hearing annual reports from the Government of the Russian Federation on
  Legislative oversight of the executive the results of its work, including on issues raised by the State Duma;
 d. appointment and dismissal of the Chairman of the Central Bank of the
  Central bank Russian Federation;
 e. appointment and dismissal of the Chairman and half of the auditors of the
 Accounts Chamber;
 f. appointment and dismissal of the Commissioner for Human Rights, who
  Ombudsman shall act according to federal constitutional law;
 g. announcement of amnesty;
 h. bringing charges against the President of the Russian Federation for his
 (her) impeachment;
 2. The State Duma shall adopt decrees on issues referred to its authority by the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation.
 3. Decrees of the State Duma shall be adopted by a majority of the total number of
 deputies of the State Duma, unless another procedure for adopting decisions is

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 22

 3. envisaged by the Constitution of the Russian Federation.

  Division of labor between chambers Article 104
 1. The right of legislative initiative shall belong to the President of the Russian
  Municipal government Federation, the Council of Federation, members of the Council of Federation,
  Subsidiary unit government
  Initiation of general legislation
 deputies of the State Duma, the Government of the Russian Federation, and
 legislative (representative) bodies of constituent entities of the Russian
 Federation. The right of legislative initiative shall also belong to the
 Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation and the Supreme Court of the
 Russian Federation on issues within their competence.
 2. Bills shall be submitted to the State Duma.
 3. Bills on the introduction or cancellation of taxes, on exemption from taxes, on the
  Tax bills issue of State loans, on changes in the financial obligations of the State, and other
  Finance bills
  Budget bills
 bills envisaging expenses to be covered from the federal budget may be
 submitted only upon a resolution of the Government of the Russian Federation.

  Division of labor between chambers Article 105
 1. Federal laws shall be adopted by the State Duma.
 2. Federal laws shall be adopted by a majority of votes of the total number of
 deputies of the State Duma, unless otherwise envisaged by the Constitution of
 the Russian Federation.
 3. Federal laws adopted by the State Duma shall be submitted within five days for
 examination by the Council of Federation.
 4. A federal law shall be considered to have been approved by the Council of
 Federation if over a half of the total number of members of that chamber have
 voted for it or if the Council of Federation does not examine it within fourteen
 days. In the event that the Council of Federation rejects a federal law, the
 chambers may set up a conciliatory commission to settle differences, after which
 the federal law shall be reconsidered by the State Duma.
 5. In the event that the State Duma disagrees with the decision of the Council of
 Federation a federal law shall be considered to have been adopted if in the
 second vote not less than two thirds of the total number of deputies of the State
 Duma has voted in favour of it.

 Article 106
 Federal laws adopted by the State Duma on the following issues must compulsorily be
 examined by the Council of Federation:

 a. the federal budget;
  Budget bills

 b. federal taxes and levies;
  Tax bills

 c. financial, currency, credit and customs regulation, money emission;

 d. ratification and denunciation of international treaties of the Russian Federation;
  International law

  Treaty ratification e. the status and protection of the State border of the Russian Federation;

 f. war and peace.

  Approval or veto of general legislation Article 107
 1. An adopted federal law shall be submitted within five days to the President of the
 Russian Federation for signing and promulgation.
 2. The President of the Russian Federation shall sign the federal law and
 promulgate it within fourteen days.
 3. If the President of the Russian Federation rejects a federal law within fourteen
  Veto override procedure days of receiving it, the State Duma and the Council of Federation shall
 reconsider that law in accordance with the procedure established by the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation. If upon reconsideration the law is
 approved in the previously adopted wording by a majority of not less than two
 thirds of the total number of members of the Council of Federation and of

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 23

 3. deputies of the State Duma, it must be signed by the President within seven days
 and promulgated.

 Article 108
 1. Federal constitutional laws shall be adopted on issues envisaged by the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation.
 2. A federal constitutional law shall be considered to have been adopted if it is
  Supermajority required for legislation approved by a majority of not less than three quarters of the total number of
 members of the Council of Federation and not less than two-thirds of the total
 number of deputies of the State Duma. An adopted federal constitutional law
 shall be signed by the President of the Russian Federation and promulgated
 within fourteen days.

  Dismissal of the legislature Article 109
 1. The State Duma may be dissolved by the President of the Russian Federation in
 the cases envisaged by Articles 111 and 117 of the Constitution of the Russian
 Federation.
 2. In the event that the State Duma is dissolved, the President of the Russian
 Federation shall announce the date of elections so that a newly-elected State
 Duma may be convened not later than four months after the dissolution.
 3. The State Duma may not be dissolved on the grounds envisaged in Article 117 of
 the Constitution of the Russian Federation during the year following its election.
 4. The State Duma may not be dissolved from the moment that it brings charges
 against the President of the Russian Federation until the Council of Federation
 adopts a decision on the issue.
 5. The State Duma may not be dissolved while a state of emergency or martial law
  Emergency provisions is in effect on the whole territory of the Russian Federation, or during the last six
 months of the term of office of the President of the Russian Federation.

 CHAPTER 6. THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN
 FEDERATION
  Establishment of cabinet/ministers Article 110
 1. Executive power in the Russian Federation shall be exercised by the Government
 of the Russian Federation.
 2. The Government of the Russian Federation shall consist of the Chairman of the
  Name/structure of executive(s) Government of the Russian Federation, deputy chairmen of the Government of
 the Russian Federation and federal ministers.

  Head of government selection
  Head of government replacement
 Article 111
 1. The Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation shall be appointed
 by the President of the Russian Federation with the consent of the State Duma.
 2. Nominations for the Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation shall
 be submitted not later than two weeks after a newly-elected President of the
 Russian Federation assumes office or after the resignation of the Government of
 the Russian Federation or within one week after the State Duma has rejected a
 nomination.
 3. The State Duma shall consider the candidate nominated by the President of the
 Russian Federation for the post of Chairman of the Government of the Russian
 Federation within one week after the submission of the nomination.
 4. In the event that the State Duma rejects the candidates for the post of Chairman
  Dismissal of the legislature of the Government of the Russian Federation three times, the President of the
 Russian Federation shall appoint the Chairman of the Government of the Russian
 Federation, dissolve the State Duma and announce new elections.

 Article 112
 1. The Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation shall, not later than
 one week after appointment, submit to the President of the Russian Federation
 proposals on the structure of federal executive government bodies.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 24

 2. The Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation shall propose to the
  Cabinet selection President of the Russian Federation candidates for the posts of deputy chairmen
 of the Government of the Russian Federation and federal ministers.

  Head of government powers Article 113
 The Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation, in accordance with the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal laws and edicts of the President of the
 Russian Federation, shall determine the basic objectives of the activities of the
 Government of the Russian Federation and shall organize its work.

 Article 114
 1. The Government of the Russian Federation:
  Powers of cabinet a. shall develop and submit to the State Duma a federal budget and provide
  Budget bills for its implementation; shall submit to the State Duma a report on the
  Legislative oversight of the executive
 implementation of the federal budget; and shall submit to the State Duma
 annual reports on the results of its work, including on issues raised by the
 State Duma;
 b. shall ensure the implementation in the Russian Federation of a uniform
 financial, credit and monetary policy;
 c. shall ensure the implementation in the Russian Federation of a uniform
  Reference to science State policy in the sphere of culture, science, education, health, social
 security and ecology;
 d. shall carry out the administration of federal property;
 e. shall carry out measures to secure the defense of the country, State
 security, and implementation of the foreign policy of the Russian
 Federation;
 f. shall implement measures to ensure lawfulness and civil rights and
 freedoms, protect property and public order, and combat crime;
 g. shall exercise other functions, which are entrusted to it by the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal laws and edicts of the
 President of the Russian Federation.
 2. The procedure for the activities of the Government of the Russian Federation
 shall be determined by federal constitutional law.

  Head of government decree power Article 115
 1. On the basis of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal laws and
 normative edicts of the President of the Russian Federation and for the purpose
 of their implementation, the Government of the Russian Federation shall issue
 decrees and regulations and ensure their implementation.
 2. Decrees and regulations of the Government of the Russian Federation shall be
 binding in the Russian Federation.
 3. In the event that decrees and regulations of the Government of the Russian
 Federation conflict with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal laws
 and edicts of the President of the Russian Federation, they may be abolished by
 the President of the Russian Federation.

 Article 116
 The Government of the Russian Federation shall resign its powers before a newly-
 elected President of the Russian Federation.

  Head of government removal
  Cabinet removal
 Article 117
 1. The Government of the Russian Federation may offer its resignation and the
 President of the Russian Federation shall either accept or reject it.
 2. The President of the Russian Federation may decide on the resignation of the
 Government of the Russian Federation.
 3. The State Duma may express no confidence in the Government of the Russian
  Dismissal of the legislature Federation. A resolution of no confidence in the Government shall be adopted by
 a majority of votes of the total number of deputies of the State Duma. After the
 State Duma has expressed no confidence in the Government of the Russian
 Federation, the President of the Russian Federation shall have the right to

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 25

 3. announce the resignation of the Government or to reject the decision of the
 State Duma. In the event that the State Duma expresses no confidence in the
 Government of the Russian Federation again within three months, the President
 of the Russian Federation shall announce the resignation of the Government or
 dissolve the State Duma.
 4. The Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation may raise before the
  Dismissal of the legislature State Duma the issue of confidence in the Government of the Russian
 Federation. If the State Duma returns a vote of no confidence, the President shall
 within seven days adopt a decision on the resignation of the Government of the
 Russian Federation or on the dissolution of the State Duma and the
 announcement of new elections.
 5. In the event of the resignation or cessation of the powers of the Government of
 the Russian Federation, it shall continue to work on the instructions of the
 President of the Russian Federation until a new Government of the Russian
 Federation is formed.

 CHAPTER 7. JUDICIAL AUTHORITY AND PUBLIC
 PROSECUTION

 Article 118
 1. Justice in the Russian Federation shall be administered only by court.
 2. Judicial authority shall be exercised by means of constitutional, civil,
 administrative and criminal proceedings.
 3. The judicial system in the Russian Federation shall be established by the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal constitutional law. The
 creation of extraordinary courts shall not be permitted.

  Eligibility for supreme court judges
  Min age of const court judges
 Article 119
  Eligibility for const court judges
  Minimum age of supreme court judges Judges shall be citizens of the Russian Federation over 25 years of age with a higher
 education in law who have served in the legal profession for not less than five years.
 Federal law may establish additional requirements for judges of the courts of the
 Russian Federation.

 Article 120
 1. Judges shall be independent and shall be subordinate only to the Constitution of
  Judicial independence the Russian Federation and federal law.
 2. Should a court establish when considering a case that a legal act of a State or
 other body conflicts with law, it shall take a decision in accordance with the law.

  Supreme court term length
  Constitutional court term length
 Article 121
 1. Judges shall be irremovable.
 2. The powers of a judge may be terminated or suspended only on the grounds and
  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal in accordance with the procedure established by federal law.

 Article 122
 1. Judges shall be inviolable.
 2. A judge cannot face criminal liability otherwise than in accordance with the
 procedure established by federal law.

 Article 123
 1. The examination of cases in all courts shall be open. Cases may be heard in
  Right to public trial closed sessions in those instances where this is permitted by federal law.
 2. The examination of criminal cases by default in courts shall not be permitted
 except in instances where this is permitted by federal law.
 3. Judicial proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of controversy and the
  Right to fair trial equality of the parties concerned.
 4. In cases provided for by federal law, judicial proceedings shall be conducted with
  Jury trials required the participation of a jury.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 26

 Article 124
 Courts shall be financed only from the federal budget and should ensure the possibility
 of the complete and independent administration of justice according to the requirements
 of federal law.

  Constitutional court powers
  Establishment of constitutional court
 Article 125
 1. The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation shall consist of 19 judges.
 2. The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, at the request of the
  Constitutionality of legislation President of the Russian Federation, the Council of Federation, the State Duma,
  Constitutional interpretation
 one fifth of the members of the Council of Federation or of the deputies of the
 State Duma, the Government of the Russian Federation, the Supreme Court of
 the Russian Federation, and bodies of legislative and executive power of
 constituent entities of the Russian Federation, shall decide cases on conformity
 to the Constitution of the Russian Federation of:
 a. federal laws, normative acts of the President of the Russian Federation,
 the Council of Federation, the State Duma, the Government of the
 Russian Federation;
 b. constitutions of republics, charters as well as laws and other normative
  Federal review of subnational legislation acts of constituent entities of the Russian Federation adopted on issues
 under the jurisdiction of bodies of State power of the Russian Federation
 and under the joint jurisdiction of bodies of State power of the Russian
 Federation and bodies State power of constituent entities of the Russian
 Federation;
 c. treaties between bodies of State power of the Russian Federation and
 bodies of State power of constituent entities of the Russian Federation,
 treaties between bodies of State power of constituent entities of the
 Russian Federation;
 d. international treaties of the Russian Federation pending their entry into
  International law force.
 3. The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation shall resolve disputes on
 authority:
 a. between federal State government bodies;
 b. between State government bodies of the Russian Federation and State
 government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation;
 c. between higher State government bodies of constituent entities of the
 Russian Federation.
 4. The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, on receiving complaints
  Constitutional interpretation about violations of the constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens and upon
 request of courts, shall check, in accordance with the procedure established by
 federal law, the constitutionality of a law which is used or is to be used in a
 particular case.
 5. The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, upon request of the
  Constitutional interpretation President of the Russian Federation, the Council of Federation, the State Duma,
  Constitutionality of legislation
 the Government of the Russian Federation, and legislative authorities of
 constituent entities of the Russian Federation, shall provide interpretation of the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation.
 6. Acts or certain provisions thereof, which are recognized as unconstitutional, shall
  Legal status of treaties lose force; international treaties of the Russian Federation, which do not
  Constitutionality of legislation
 correspond to the Constitution of the Russian Federation, shall not be
 implemented or used.
 7. The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, upon request of the Council
 of Federation, shall issue a resolution on the observation of the established
 procedure for bringing charges of treason or of other grave crimes against the
 President of the Russian Federation.

  Supreme court powers
  Structure of the courts
 Article 126
 The Supreme Court of the Russian Federation shall be the highest judicial body for civil
 cases, settlement of economic disputes, criminal, administrative and other cases under
 the jurisdiction of courts formed in accordance with federal constitutional law; it shall
 exercise judicial supervision over their activities in the procedural forms envisaged by
 federal law and shall provide interpretation on issues of court proceedings.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 27

 Article 127
 [excluded in accordance with the Law of the Russian Federation on amendment to the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation of 5th February, 2014 No. 2-ФЗ]

 Article 128
 1. Judges of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, the Supreme Court
  Constitutional court selection of the Russian Federation shall be appointed by the Council of Federation upon
  Supreme court selection
 nomination by the President of the Russian Federation.
 2. Judges of other federal courts shall be appointed by the President of the Russian
  Ordinary court selection Federation in accordance with the procedure established by federal law.
 3. The powers and the procedure for the formation and activity of the
  Constitutional court powers Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, the Supreme Court of the
  Supreme court powers
 Russian Federation and other federal courts shall be established by federal
 constitutional law.

  Attorney general Article 129
 1. Powers, organization and procedure for the activity of public prosecution of the
 Russian Federation shall be determined by federal law.
 2. The Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation and deputies of the
 Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation shall be appointed and dismissed
 by the Council of Federation upon a proposal of the President of the Russian
 Federation.
 3. Public prosecutors of constituent entities of the Russian Federation shall be
 appointed by the President of the Russian Federation upon nomination of the
 Prosecutor General coordinated with constituent entities of the Russian
 Federation. Public prosecutors of constituent entities of the Russian Federation
 shall be dismissed by the President of the Russian Federation.
 4. Other public prosecutors, except for public prosecutors of cities, districts and
 public prosecutors equated with them shall be appointed and dismissed by the
 President of the Russian Federation.
 5. Public prosecutors of cities, districts and public prosecutors equated with them
 shall be appointed and dismissed by the Prosecutor General of the Russian
 Federation.

  Subsidiary unit government
  Municipal government CHAPTER 8. LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT

 Article 130
 1. Local self-government in the Russian Federation shall provide for the
 independent resolution by the population of issues of local importance, and the
 possession, use and management of municipal property.
 2. Local self-government shall be exercised by citizens by means of referendum,
 elections and other forms of direct expression of their will, and through elected
 and other bodies of local self-government.

 Article 131
 1. Local self-government shall be administered in urban and rural settlements and
 on other territories with due consideration to historical and other local traditions.
 The structure of bodies of local self-government shall be determined by the
 population independently.
 2. Changes of borders of the territories in which local self-government is
 administered shall be permitted with due consideration to the opinion of the
 inhabitants of the relevant territories.

 Article 132
 1. Bodies of local self-government shall independently manage municipal property,
 form, approve and implement the local budget, introduce local taxes and levies,

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 28

 1. ensure the preservation of public order, and resolve other issues of local
 importance.
 2. Bodies of local self-government may be vested by law with certain State powers
 and accordingly receive material and financial resources which are necessary for
 their implementation. The implementation of the vested power shall be
 controlled by the State.

 Article 133
 Local self-government in the Russian Federation shall be guaranteed by the right to
 legal protection and compensation of additional expenses arising as a result of decisions
 adopted by State government bodies, and by a ban on restrictions of the rights of local
 self-government which are established by the Constitution of the Russian Federation
 and federal laws.

  Constitution amendment procedure
 CHAPTER 9. CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS AND
 REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION
 Article 134
 Proposals on amendments to and revision of the provisions of the Constitution of the
 Russian Federation may be submitted by the President of the Russian Federation, the
 Council of Federation, the State Duma, the Government of the Russian Federation,
 legislative (representative) bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation, and
 by groups consisting of not less than one fifth of the members of the Council of
 Federation or of the deputies of the State Duma.

 Article 135
 1. The provisions of Chapters 1, 2 and 9 of the Constitution of the Russian
 Federation may not be revised by the Federal Assembly.
 2. If a proposal on revising the provisions of Chapters 1, 2 and 9 of the Constitution
 of the Russian Federation is supported by three fifths of the total number of
 members of the Council of Federation and deputies of the State Duma, then in
 accordance with federal constitutional law, a Constitutional Assembly shall be
 convened.
 3. The Constitutional Assembly shall either confirm the invariability of the
  Referenda Constitution of the Russian Federation or draft a new Constitution of the Russian
 Federation, which shall be adopted by the Constitutional Assembly by two thirds
 of the total number of its members or shall be referred to a referendum. In the
 event that a referendum is held, the Constitution of the Russian Federation shall
 be considered to have been adopted if over one half of voters who participated in
 the vote voted in favour of it and provided that over a half of the electorate
 participated in the referendum.

 Article 136
 Amendments to the provisions of Chapters 3-8 of the Constitution of the Russian
 Federation shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure established for the
 adoption of federal constitutional law and shall come into force after they have been
 approved by legislative authorities of not less than two thirds of the constituent entities
 of the Russian Federation.

 Article 137
 1. Amendments to Article 65 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation which
 determines the composition of the Russian Federation shall be introduced on the
 basis of a federal constitutional law on the admission to the Russian Federation
 and the creation within it of new constituent entities of the Russian Federation,
 or on changes in the constitutional and legal status of a constituent entity of the
 Russian Federation.
 2. In the event of a change in the name of a republic, kray, oblast, city of federal
 significance, autonomous oblast or autonomous okrug the new name of the

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 29

 2. constituent entity of the Russian Federation shall be included in Article 65 of the
 Constitution of the Russian Federation.

 SECTION TWO. Concluding and interim
  Transitional provisions

 provisions

 1. The Constitution of the Russian Federation shall come into force from the
 moment of its official publication according to the results of the national
 referendum.

 The day of the national referendum, December 12, 1993, shall be considered the
 day of adopting the Constitution of the Russian Federation.

 At the same time the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Russian Federation
 - Russia adopted on April 12, 1978 with all amendments and additions shall
 cease to have effect.

 In the event of the non-conformity to the Constitution of the Russian Federation
 of the provisions of the Federation Treaty - Treaty on the division of authorities
 and powers between federal State government bodies of the Russian Federation
 and the State government bodies of constituent sovereign republics of the
 Russian Federation, the Treaty on the division of authorities and powers between
 federal State government bodies of the Russian Federation and the State
 government bodies of krays, oblasts, and the cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg
 of the Russian Federation, the Treaty on the division of authorities and powers
 between federal State government bodies of the Russian Federation and State
 government bodies of autonomous oblast and autonomous okrugs within the
 Russian Federation, and other treaties between federal State government bodies
 of the Russian Federation and State government bodies of constituent entities of
 the Russian Federation and treaties between State government bodies of
 constituent entities of the Russian Federation, the provisions of the Constitution
 of the Russian Federation shall apply.

 2. Laws and other legal acts which were in force on the territory of the Russian
 Federation before this Constitution comes into force shall apply to the extent
 that they do not conflict with the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
 3. The President of the Russian Federation, elected in accordance with the
 Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Russian Federation - Russia, shall from
 the day that this Constitution comes into force exercise the powers established
 by it until the term of office for which he (she) was elected expires.
 4. The Council of Ministers - Government of the Russian Federation - from the
 moment that this Constitution comes into force, shall acquire the rights,
 obligations and responsibilities of the Government of the Russian Federation,
 which are established by the Constitution of the Russian Federation and shall
 hereafter be called the Government of the Russian Federation.
 5. The courts of the Russian Federation shall administer justice in accordance with
 their powers as established by this Constitution.

 After the Constitution has come into force, judges of all courts of the Russian
 Federation shall retain their powers until the term for which they were elected
 expires. Vacant positions shall be filled in accordance with the procedure
 established by this Constitution.

 6. Until the adoption and implementation of the federal law, which establishes the
 procedure for the examination of cases by a court of jury, the existing procedure
 for the court examination of corresponding cases shall apply.

 Until criminal-procedural legislation of the Russian Federation has been brought
 into line with the provisions of this Constitution, the previous procedure for the
 arrest, detention and keeping in custody of persons suspected of committing a
 crime shall apply.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 30

 7. The Council of Federation of the first convocation and the State Duma of the first
 convocation shall be elected for a period of two years.
 8. The Council of Federation shall meet for its first session on the thirtieth day after
 the elections. The first session of the Council of Federation shall be opened by the
 President of the Russian Federation.
 9. A deputy of the State Duma of the first convocation may be simultaneously a
 member of the Government of the Russian Federation. Provisions of this
 Constitution on the immunity of deputies with respect to responsibility for
 actions (inaction) connected with the fulfilment of their official duties shall not
 extend to deputies of the State Duma who are members of the Government of
 the Russian Federation.

 Deputies of the Council of Federation of the first convocation shall exercise their
 powers on a non-permanent basis.

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 31

 Topic index

 A
 Accession of territory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Advisory bodies to the head of state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
 Approval or veto of general legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 Attorney general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 22, 28

 B
 Budget bills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 25

 C
 Cabinet removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 22, 25
 Cabinet selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 24
 Central bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 18, 22
 Claim of executive independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Claim of universal suffrage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Colonies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Compulsory education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Conditions for revoking citizenship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Constitution amendment procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
 Constitutional court powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27, 28
 Constitutional court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 22, 28
 Constitutional court term length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Constitutional interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Constitutionality of legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Customary international law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 6, 12, 14

 D
 Designation of commander in chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 22
 Dismissal of the legislature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 24, 25
 Division of labor between chambers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 Duty to obey the constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Duty to pay taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Duty to serve in the military . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

 E
 Eligibility for const court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Eligibility for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Eligibility for head of state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Eligibility for second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Eligibility for supreme court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Emergency provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 19, 22, 24
 Equality regardless of creed or belief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Equality regardless of financial status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Equality regardless of gender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Equality regardless of language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Equality regardless of nationality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Equality regardless of origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 32

 Equality regardless of race . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Equality regardless of religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Establishment of cabinet/ministers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Establishment of constitutional court . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Extradition procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Extraordinary legislative sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

 F
 Federal review of subnational legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Finance bills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 First chamber selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Foreign affairs representative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Free education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Freedom of assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Freedom of association . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Freedom of expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Freedom of movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Freedom of opinion/thought/conscience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Freedom of press . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Freedom of religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

 G
 General guarantee of equality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 H
 Head of government decree power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
 Head of government powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
 Head of government removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 25
 Head of government replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Head of government selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 22, 24
 Head of state decree power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Head of state immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Head of state powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 19
 Head of state removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Head of state replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Head of state selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Head of state term length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Head of state term limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Human dignity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 I
 Immunity of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Inalienable rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Initiation of general legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 International law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 12, 14, 19, 23, 27
 International organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10, 18

 J
 Joint meetings of legislative chambers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Judicial independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Jury trials required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 33

 L
 Leader of first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 Leader of second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 Legal status of treaties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 27
 Legislative committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 Legislative oversight of the executive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 22, 25
 Length of legislative sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

 M
 Min age of const court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Minimum age for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Minimum age of head of state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Minimum age of supreme court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Motives for writing constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Municipal government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 23, 28

 N
 Name/structure of executive(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17, 24
 National anthem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 National capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 National flag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 National vs subnational laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

 O
 Oaths to abide by constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Official or national languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Official religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Ombudsman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 Ordinary court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 28
 Outside professions of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Ownership of natural resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

 P
 Power to pardon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
 Powers of cabinet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
 Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Presumption of innocence in trials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Principle of no punishment without law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Prohibition of corporal punishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Prohibition of cruel treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Prohibition of double jeopardy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Prohibition of slavery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Prohibition of torture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Protection from ex post facto laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Protection from expropriation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Protection from self-incrimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Protection from unjustified restraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Protection of environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 15
 Protection of language use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Protection of stateless persons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 34

 Protection of victim's rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Provisions for intellectual property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9, 14
 Public or private sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

 R
 Reference to art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Reference to science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 9, 15, 25
 Referenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 18, 29
 Regulation of evidence collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Removal of individual legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 20
 Requirements for birthright citizenship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Restrictions on voting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 12
 Right of petition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to academic freedom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to appeal judicial decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Right to choose occupation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to competitive marketplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to conscientious objection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Right to counsel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Right to culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to establish a business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to fair trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Right to health care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Right to join trade unions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Right to just remuneration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Right to own property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 7
 Right to protect one's reputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Right to public trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Right to renounce citizenship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to rest and leisure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to safe work environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to self determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to shelter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to strike . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to transfer property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Rights of children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

 S
 Secession of territory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Second chamber selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 20, 21
 Secret ballot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Selection of active-duty commanders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
 Separation of church and state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Size of first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Size of second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 20
 Source of constitutional authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 State support for the disabled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 35

 State support for the elderly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 State support for the unemployed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Structure of legislative chamber(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Structure of the courts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Subsidiary unit government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 23, 28
 Supermajority required for legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Supreme court powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27, 28
 Supreme court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 22, 28
 Supreme court term length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
 Supreme/ordinary court judge removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

 T
 Tax bills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 Term length for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Term length of second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Transitional provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
 Treaty ratification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 23
 Type of government envisioned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

 U
 Ultra-vires administrative actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

 V
 Veto override procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

Russian Federation 1993 (rev. 2014) Page 36
