Argentina's Constitution of 1853,
 Reinstated in 1983, with
  Amendments through 1994

© Oxford University Press, Inc.

 Table of contents
 Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 PART 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 CHAPTER I. DECLARATIONS, RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 CHAPTER II. NEW RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 PART 2. AUTHORITIES OF THE NATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 TITLE I. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 TITLE II. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 2

Translated by Jonathan M. Miller and Fang-Lian Liao

 Preamble
  God or other deities
  Source of constitutional authority
  Preamble
  Motives for writing constitution

 We, the representatives of the people of the Argentine Nation, assembled in General
 Constituent Congress by the will and election of the provinces which compose it, in
 fulfillment of pre-existing pacts, with the object of constituting the national union,
 ensuring justice, preserving domestic peace, providing for the common defense,
 promoting the general welfare, and securing the blessings of liberty to ourselves, to our
 posterity, and to all men in the world who wish to dwell on Argentine soil: invoking the
 protection of God, source of all reason and justice, do ordain, decree and establish this
 Constitution for the Argentine Nation.

 PART 1

 CHAPTER I. DECLARATIONS, RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES
  Type of government envisioned Article 1
 The Argentine Nation adopts the federal, republican, representative form for its
 government, as established by the present Constitution.

  Official religion Article 2
 The Federal Government supports the Roman Catholic Apostolic Faith.

 Article 3
 The authorities that direct the Federal Government reside in the city which is to be
 declared the Capital of the Republic by a special law of Congress, after prior cession
 made by one or more Provincial legislatures of the territory to be federalized.

 Article 4
 The Federal Government provides for the Nation's expenditures with National Treasury
 funds made up of the proceeds of import and export duties, of the proceeds of the sale
 or lease of national lands, of Post Office revenues, of whatever other taxes the General
 Congress equitably and proportionally imposes upon the population, and of whatever
 loans and credit operations decreed by the same Congress for national exigencies or for
 undertakings of national utility.

  Subsidiary unit government Article 5
 Each Province shall adopt for itself a constitution under the republican, representative
 system, in accordance with the principles, declarations, and guarantees of the National
 Constitution, ensuring its administration of justice, municipal government, and
 elementary education. Under these conditions, the Federal Government guarantees to
 each Province the enjoyment and exercise of its institutions.

 Article 6
 The Federal Government may intervene in the territory of a Province in order to
 guarantee the republican form of government or to repel foreign invasions, and, at the
 request of the Province's appointed authorities, to support or reestablish them should
 they have been deposed by sedition or invasion from another Province.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 3

 Article 7
 The public acts and judicial proceedings of one Province enjoy full faith in the others; and
 Congress may, by general laws, determine what the evidentiary form of these acts and
 proceedings shall be, and the legal effects that they shall produce.

  Requirements for birthright citizenship Article 8
 The citizens of each Province enjoy all the rights, privileges, and immunities inherent to
 the status of citizen in the others. The extradition of criminals is a reciprocal obligation
 among all the Provinces.

 Article 9
 Throughout the territory of the Nation there shall be no other customhouses than the
 National ones, which shall enforce the tariffs sanctioned by Congress.

 Article 10
 The movement of goods of national production or manufacture is free from duties in the
 interior of the Republic, as is also that of goods and merchandise of all kinds once
 processed through the National customhouses.

 Article 11
 Articles of national or foreign production or manufacture, as well as livestock of all kinds,
 that may pass through the territory of one Province to another, shall be free from so-
 called transit duties, as shall the vehicles, ships or beasts on which they are transported,
 and no other duty, whatever its name may be, shall in the future be imposed on such
 movement for passage through the territory.

 Article 12
 Ships bound from one Province to another shall not be compelled to enter, anchor, or pay
 duties by reason of their transit; trading laws or regulations shall not allow in any case
 the grant of preferences to one port over another.

  Colonies
  Accession of territory
 Article 13
 New Provinces may be admitted into the Nation; but a Province cannot be established
 in the territory of another or several, nor several combine into one, without the consent
 of the legislatures of the interested Provinces and of Congress.

  Freedom of association
  Right to work
 Article 14
  Freedom of press
  Right to academic freedom All inhabitants of the Nation enjoy the following rights, in accordance with the laws that
  Freedom of movement
  Right of petition
 regulate their exercise, namely: of working in and practicing any lawful industry; of
  Freedom of expression navigating and trading; of petitioning the authorities; of entering, remaining in, traveling
  Right to choose occupation through and leaving the Argentine territory; of publishing their ideas through the press
  Right to establish a business
  Freedom of opinion/thought/conscience
 without prior censorship; of using and disposing of their property; of associating for
  Freedom of religion useful purposes; of freely practicing their religion; of teaching and learning.

 Article 14bis
  Right to safe work environment Labor in its diverse forms shall enjoy the protection of the law, which shall ensure to
  Right to rest and leisure
  Right to join trade unions
 workers: dignified and equitable working conditions; a limited working day; paid days of
  Right to just remuneration rest and vacation; fair remuneration; adjustable minimum living wages; equal pay for
 equal work; a share in the earnings of enterprises, with control over production and
 collaboration in management; protection against arbitrary discharge; permanence of
 public employment; free and democratic organization of labor unions, recognized simply
 by inscription in a special register.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 4

  Right to strike Trade unions are hereby guaranteed: [the right] to conclude collective bargaining
 agreements; [the right] to resort to conciliation and arbitration; the right to strike. Union
 representatives shall enjoy the guarantees necessary for the performance of their union
 tasks and those relating to the permanence of their employment.

  Right to reasonable standard of living The State shall grant the benefits of social security, which shall be comprehensive and
  Right to shelter
 unwaivable. In particular, the law shall establish: compulsory social security, which shall
 be under the charge of national or provincial entities having financial and economic
 autonomy, administered by the interested parties with State participation, but without
 the existence of overlapping contributions; adjustable retirement pay and pensions; full
 protection of the family; protection of the welfare of the family; economic compensation
 to families and access to decent housing.

  Prohibition of slavery Article 15
 In the Argentine Nation there are no slaves; the few that exist today are free from the
 promulgation of this Constitution; and a special law shall regulate the indemnification
 arising from this declaration. Any contract of purchase and sale of persons is a crime for
 which those performing it, and the notary or official approving it, shall be responsible.
 And slaves, by whatever manner they may be introduced, shall be free by the mere act
 of setting foot in the territory of the Republic.

  Mentions of social class
  General guarantee of equality
 Article 16
 The Argentine Nation does not allow prerogatives of blood or birth; in it there are no
 personal privileges [to special legal rules or courts] or titles of nobility. All its inhabitants
 are equal before the law, and admissible for [public] employment without any other
 requisite than fitness. Equality is the basis of taxation and of public charges.

  Provisions for intellectual property
  Inalienable rights
 Article 17
  Right to own property
  Protection from expropriation Property is inviolable, and no inhabitant of the Nation can be deprived thereof except by
 virtue of a judgment supported by law. Expropriation for reasons of public utility must be
 authorized by law and previously indemnified. Congress alone imposes the taxes
 mentioned in Article 4. No personal service can be required except by virtue of a law or
 a judgment supported by law. Every author or inventor is the exclusive owner of his
 work, invention or discovery for the term granted him by law. The confiscation of
 property is stricken out forever from the Argentine Penal Code. No armed body may
 make requisitions, or demand assistance of any kind.

 Article 18
  Protection from unjustified restraint No inhabitant of the Nation may be punished without prior trial based on a law in force
  Protection from self-incrimination
  Principle of no punishment without law
 prior to the offense, or tried by special commissions, or removed from the jurisdiction of
  Guarantee of due process the judges designated by the law in force prior to the offense. No one can be compelled
  Protection from ex post facto laws to testify against himself, or be arrested except by virtue of a written order from a
  Inalienable rights
 competent authority. The right to due process in the defense of the person and of rights
 is inviolable.

  Prohibition of capital punishment The residence is inviolable, as are letters and private papers; and a law shall determine
  Prohibition of torture
  Regulation of evidence collection
 in what cases and for what reasons their search and seizure shall be allowed. The
  Right to privacy penalty of death for political offenses, all kinds of torture and flogging are forever
  Prohibition of cruel treatment abolished. The prisons of the Nation shall be healthful and clean, for the custody and not
 for the punishment of prisoners confined therein; and any measure that under the
 pretext of precaution leads to mortifying them beyond what their custody demands,
 shall render liable the judge who authorizes it.

  Right to privacy
  God or other deities
 Article 19
 The private actions of men that in no way offend public order or morality, nor injure a
 third party, are reserved only to God, and are exempt from the authority of the
 magistrates. No inhabitant of the Nation shall be compelled to do what the law does not
 order, or be deprived of what it does not forbid.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 5

  Right to establish a business
  Regulation of marriage
 Article 20
  Requirements for birthright citizenship
  Requirements for naturalization Foreigners enjoy in the territory of the Nation all the civil rights of a citizen; they may
 engage in their industry, trade or profession, own, purchase or transfer real property,
 navigate the rivers and coasts, freely practice their religion, [and] make wills and marry
 in accordance with the laws. They are not obligated to assume citizenship, or to pay
 extraordinary compulsory taxes. They may obtain naturalization by residing two
 continuous years in the Nation, but the authorities may shorten this term in favor of
 anyone so requesting, upon their asserting and proving services to the Republic.

  Duty to serve in the military
  Requirements for birthright citizenship
 Article 21
 Every Argentine citizen is obliged to bear arms in defense of his country and of this
 Constitution, in accordance with such laws as the Congress may enact to that effect and
 with such decrees of the National Executive. Citizens by naturalization are free to
 render or not render this service for a period of ten years counted from the date on
 which they obtain their citizenship papers.

 Article 22
 The people do not deliberate or govern except through their representatives and
 authorities created by this Constitution. Any armed force or meeting of persons that
 attributes to itself the right to stand for the people and to petition in their name,
 commits the crime of sedition.

  Emergency provisions Article 23
 In the event of internal disorder or foreign attack that endangers the exercise of this
 Constitution and of the authorities created thereby, the Province or territory in which
 the disturbance of order exists shall be declared in a state of siege and the constitutional
 guarantees shall be suspended therein. But during such suspension the President of the
 Republic may not convict or apply punishment upon his own authority. His power shall
 be limited in such a case, with respect to persons, to arresting them or transferring them
 from one point of the Nation to another, should they prefer not to leave Argentine
 territory.

  Jury trials required Article 24
 Congress shall promote the amendment of all categories of existing legislation, and the
 establishment of trial by jury.

  Reference to art
  Reference to science
 Article 25
 The Federal Government shall encourage European immigration, and it may not restrict,
 limit, or burden with any tax whatsoever the entry into Argentine territory of foreigners
 whose purpose is tilling the soil, improving industries, and introducing and teaching the
 sciences and the arts.

 Article 26
 Navigation of the inland rivers of the Nation is free to all flags, subject only to
 regulations enacted by the National authority.

 Article 27
 The Federal Government is bound to strengthen its relations of peace and commerce
 with foreign powers by means of treaties that are in conformity with the principles of
 public law laid down by this Constitution.

 Article 28
 The principles, guarantees and rights recognized in the foregoing articles may not be
 altered by the laws that regulate their exercise.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 6

 Article 29
 Congress may not confer on the National Executive, nor Provincial Legislatures on the
 Provincial Governors, extraordinary powers, or the whole of the public authority, nor
 grant them acts of submission or supremacy whereby the lives, the honor or the
 property of Argentines will be at the mercy of governments or any person whatsoever.
 Acts of this nature shall be utterly void, and shall render those who formulate, consent
 to or sign them liable to be called to account and punished as infamous traitors to the
 country.

  Constitution amendment procedure Article 30
 The Constitution may be amended in its entirety or in any of its parts. The need for its
 amendment must be declared by the Congress by a vote of at least two-thirds of its
 members; but the amendment shall not be accomplished except by a Convention called
 for such purpose.

  Duty to obey the constitution Article 31
 This Constitution, the laws of the Nation that as a result thereof may be enacted by the
 Congress, and treaties with foreign powers, are the supreme law of the Nation, and the
 authorities of every Province are bound to conform to it, notwithstanding any provision
 to the contrary which the Provincial laws or constitutions may contain, except, in the
 case of the Province of Buenos Aires, [for those provisions established by] the treaties
 ratified following the Pact of November 11, 1859.

  Freedom of press Article 32
 The Federal Congress shall not enact laws that restrict the freedom of the press or that
 establish federal jurisdiction over it.

 Article 33
 The declarations, rights and guarantees that the Constitution enumerates shall not be
 construed as a denial of other rights and guarantees not enumerated therein, but which
 issue from the principle of the sovereignty of the people and from the republican form of
 government.

 Article 34
 The judges of the federal courts cannot serve at the same time as judges of the
 Provincial courts, nor does federal service, whether civil or military, confer domicile in
 the Province in which it is performed, and which is not the employee's habitual domicile,
 this provision being understood for the purpose of applying for public office in the
 Province in which the individuals happen to be.

 Article 35
 The designations successively adopted from 1810 up to the present, namely: United
 Provinces of the River Plate, Argentine Republic, [and] Argentine Confederation, shall
 henceforth be official names used indiscriminately for the designation of the
 Government and territory of the Provinces, the words "Argentine Nation" being used in
 the enactment and sanction of laws.

 CHAPTER II. NEW RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES
 Article 36
 This Constitution shall remain in force even if its observance is interrupted by acts of
 force against the institutional order and the democratic system. Such acts shall be
 irrevocably void.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 7

 Their authors shall be subject to the sanction provided in Article 29, forever disqualified
 from holding public office and excluded from the benefits of pardon and commutation of
 sentences.

 Also suffering the same sanctions shall be those who, as a consequence of these acts,
 usurp the functions reserved to the authorities of this Constitution or those of the
 Provinces, and shall answer civilly and criminally for their acts. The aforementioned
 actions are not subject to the statute of limitations.

 All citizens have the right of resistance against those who execute the forcible acts
 stated in this article.

 Likewise, he who commits a serious fraudulent crime against the State that leads to his
 enrichment shall have acted against the democratic system [and] is thereafter
 disqualified from holding public office or employment for the period of time that the laws
 specify.

 Congress shall pass a law concerning public ethics in the exercise of public functions.

  Compulsory voting Article 37
  Claim of universal suffrage This Constitution guarantees full enjoyment of political rights, in accordance with the
  Secret ballot
 principle of popular sovereignty and with the laws dictated pursuant thereto. Suffrage is
 universal, equal, secret and mandatory.

 True equality of opportunity between men and women in running for elected and party
 offices shall be guaranteed through affirmative actions in the regulation of political
 parties and in the electoral system.

  Campaign financing Article 38
  Right to form political parties Political parties are fundamental institutions of the democratic system.

  Restrictions on political parties Their creation and the exercise of their activities are free, so long as they respect this
 Constitution, which [hereby] guarantees their democratic organization and operation,
 the representation of minorities [within the party], the authority [of parties] to nominate
 candidates to elected public office, access to public information and the dissemination of
 their ideas.

 The State shall contribute to the financial support of their activities and educational
 improvement of their leaders.

 Political parties must make public the source and destination of their funds and their
 economic net worth.

  Legislative initiatives by citizens
  Initiation of general legislation
 Article 39
 Citizens have the right of initiative in presenting bills in the Chamber of Deputies.
 Congress must give them express treatment within the period of twelve months.

 By an absolute majority vote of the totality of the members of each Chamber, the
 Congress shall pass a regulatory law that may not require [the signatures of] more than
 three percent of the National electoral register [for an initiative to be valid], [with the
 regulatory law] requiring an adequate territorial distribution [of signatures] to endorse
 the initiative.

 Bills referring to constitutional reform, international treaties, taxes, the budget and
 penal matters shall not be the subject of popular initiatives.

  Referenda Article 40
 At the initiative of the Chamber of Deputies, Congress may submit a bill to a popular
 referendum. The law calling for the referendum may not be vetoed. The affirmative vote
 on the bill by the people of the Nation shall make it law and its enactment shall be
 automatic.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 8

 Congress or the President of the Nation, within their respective competence, may call
 for a non-binding popular referendum. In this case, voting is not obligatory.

 Congress, by an absolute majority vote of the totality of the members of each Chamber,
 shall regulate the topics, procedures, and occasion for popular referendum.

  Protection of environment Article 41
 All inhabitants enjoy the right to a healthful, balanced environment fit for human
 development, so that productive activities satisfy current needs without compromising
 those of future generations, and have the duty to preserve the environment.
 Environmental damage shall generate as a priority the obligation to repair it under the
 terms that the law shall establish.

 The authorities shall provide for the protection of this right, for the rational use of
 natural resources, for the preservation of the natural and cultural patrimony and of
 biological diversity, and for information and education on the environment.

 It falls to the Nation to dictate laws containing a minimum budget [necessary] for
 protecting the environment, and to the Provinces [to dictate] those laws necessary to
 complement the National laws, without such laws altering local jurisdictional [authority].

 The entry into the National territory of dangerous or potentially dangerous wastes and
 of radioactive materials is prohibited.

  Protection of consumers Article 42
 Consumers and users of goods and services have the right, in the consumer relationship,
 to the protection of their health, safety and economic interests, to adequate and truthful
 information, to freedom of choice, and to conditions of equitable and dignified treatment.

  Right to competitive marketplace The authorities shall provide for the protection of these rights, for consumer education,
 for the defense of competition against any type of market distortion, for the control of
 natural and legal monopolies, for the quality and efficiency of public services, and for the
 establishment of consumer and user associations.

 Legislation shall establish effective procedures for the prevention and resolution of
 conflicts, and a regulatory framework for public services within National jurisdiction,
 taking into consideration the necessary participation of consumer and user associations
 and of the interested Provinces in the directing bodies.

  Right to amparo Article 43
 Any person may file an expeditious and swift action of "amparo," whenever no other
 more appropriate judicial means exists, against any act or omission by public authorities
 or by private individuals, that presently or imminently harms, restricts, alters or
 threatens, in an arbitrary or manifestly illegal manner, the rights and guarantees
 recognized by this Constitution, by a treaty, or by a law. As appropriate, the judge may
 declare the norm upon which the harmful act or omission is founded unconstitutional.

  Right to information [When] this action complains of any form of discrimination, or regards the rights that
 protect the environment, competition, the user, the consumer, or rights of a collective
 nature in general, it may be brought by the affected party, the Defender of the People,
 and the associations that support these ends that are registered as required by a law
 that shall determine the requirements and forms of their organization.

 Any person may file an amparo action to find out and to learn the purpose of data about
 him which is on record in public registries or data banks, or in any private [registers or
 data banks] whose purpose is to provide information, and in case of falsity or
 discrimination, to demand the suppression, rectification, confidentiality, or updating of
 the same. The secrecy of journalistic information sources shall not be affected.

  Protection from unjustified restraint When the harmed, restricted, altered, or threatened right is that of physical liberty, or in
 case of illegal worsening in the manner or conditions of detention, or in case of the
 forced disappearance of persons, the writ of habeas corpus may be filed by the affected

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 9

 person or by anyone else on his behalf and the judge shall immediately resolve it, even
 while a state of siege is in effect.

 PART 2. AUTHORITIES OF THE NATION

 TITLE I. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

 SECTION I. THE LEGISLATIVE POWER
  Structure of legislative chamber(s) Article 44
 A Congress consisting of two Chambers, one of Deputies of the Nation and the other of
 Senators of the Provinces and of the City of Buenos Aires, will be vested with the
 Legislative Power of the Nation.

 CHAPTER I. THE CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES
  Structure of legislative chamber(s)
  National capital
 Article 45
  First chamber selection
 The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of representatives elected directly, by a
 simple majority of votes, by the people of the Provinces, the city of Buenos Aires, and
 the Capital in case of transfer [of the Capital], [with the City of Buenos Aires and any
 new Capital] being considered for this purpose as individual states making up their own
 electoral districts. The number of representatives shall be one for every 33,000
 inhabitants or fraction thereof that is not smaller than 16,500. After the completion of
 each census, the Congress shall fix the representation in accordance with the census,
 being able to increase but not to decrease the base indicated for each Deputy.

 Article 46
 The Deputies for the first Legislative Session shall be appointed in the following
 proportion: for the Province of Buenos Aires, twelve; for that of Cordoba, six; for that of
 Catamarca, three; for that of Corrientes, four; for that of Entre Rios, two; for that of
 Jujuy, two; for that of Mendoza, three; for that of La Rioja, two; for that of Salta, three;
 for that of Santiago, four; for that of San Juan, two; for that of Santa Fe, two; for that of
 San Luis, two; and for that of Tucuman, three.

  Census Article 47
 For the second Legislative Session, a general census shall be taken, and the number of
 Deputies shall be established accordingly; but this census can be renewed only every
 ten years.

  Eligibility for first chamber
  Minimum age for first chamber
 Article 48
 To be a Deputy one is required to have attained the age of twenty-five years, have four
 years of holding citizenship, and be a native of the Province that elects him or been in
 residence in the Province during the previous two years.

 Article 49
 For this [first] time, the legislatures of the Provinces shall regulate the means for
 effectuating the direct election of the Deputies of the Nation; for the future, the
 Congress shall enact a general law.

  Term length for first chamber Article 50
 Deputies shall serve in their representation for four years, and may be re-elected, but
 the Chamber shall be renewed by half every two years; to this end, those named for the

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 10

 first legislature, as soon as they meet, shall draw lots [to determine] who must leave
 after the first period.

  Replacement of legislators Article 51
 In case of vacancy, the Government of the Province, or of the Capital, shall proceed with
 the legal election of a new member.

  Tax bills
  First chamber reserved policy areas
 Article 52
 The Chamber of Deputies has the exclusive right to initiate proposed laws on taxes and
 recruitment of troops.

  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal
  Head of state removal
 Article 53
 Only the Chamber of Deputies has the right to bring charges before the Senate against
 the President, the Vice President, the Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers, the Ministers,
 and the members of the Supreme Court, in cases where they are allegedly responsible
 for poor performance or for committing an offense in carrying out their duties, or for
 common crimes, after being apprized of [the charges] and having declared by a two-
 thirds majority of the members present that there is cause for bringing an action.

 CHAPTER II. THE SENATE
  Size of second chamber
  Structure of legislative chamber(s)
 Article 54
  Second chamber selection
 The Senate shall be composed of three Senators from each Province and three from the
 City of Buenos Aires, elected directly and jointly, with two seats corresponding to the
 political party obtaining the greatest number of votes, and the remaining one to the
 political party receiving the next largest number of votes. Each Senator shall have one
 vote.

  Minimum age for second chamber
  Eligibility for second chamber
 Article 55
  Minimum age of supreme court judges
  Eligibility for head of state The requirements to be elected Senator are: to have attained the age of thirty years, to
  Eligibility for supreme court judges
  Minimum age of head of state
 have been a citizen of the Nation for six years, to enjoy an annual income of two
 thousand pesos or its equivalent, and to be a native of the Province that elects him or
 been in residence in the Province during the previous two years.

  Term length of second chamber Article 56
 Senators serve six years in the exercise of their office, and may be re-elected
 indefinitely; but the Senate shall renew itself by one-third of the electoral districts every
 two years.

  Deputy executive
  Leader of second chamber
 Article 57
 The Vice President of the Nation shall be President of the Senate, but shall have no vote
 except in the case of a tie in the voting.

 Article 58
 The Senate shall appoint a provisional president to preside over it in the event of the
 absence of the Vice President, or when the latter exercises the functions of President of
 the Nation.

  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal
  Head of state removal
 Article 59
 The Senate is charged with trying in public trial the persons impeached by the Chamber
 of Deputies, and its members shall take an oath when sitting for that purpose. When the
 person accused is the President of the Nation, the Senate shall be presided over by the
 President of the Supreme Court. No person shall be declared guilty except by a two-
 thirds majority of the members present.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 11

  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal
  Head of state removal
 Article 60
 The judgment shall go no further than to remove the accused person from office, and in
 addition declare him incapable of holding any employment of honor, trust, or pay of the
 Nation. But the party convicted shall, nevertheless, be subject to indictment, trial, and
 punishment according to law before the ordinary courts.

  Second chamber reserved policy areas
  Emergency provisions
 Article 61
 It is also within the power of the Senate whether to authorize the President of the
 Nation to declare a state of siege, in one or several districts of the Republic, in case of
 foreign invasion.

  Replacement of legislators Article 62
 When a vacancy occurs in the Senate through death, resignation or other cause, the
 Government unit affected by the vacancy shall proceed immediately to the election of a
 new member.

 CHAPTER III. PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH CHAMBERS
  Length of legislative sessions
  Extraordinary legislative sessions
 Article 63
 Both Chambers shall assemble by themselves in regular sessions every year from
 March 1 to November 30. They may also be convened in special sessions by the
 President of the Nation or have their sessions extended.

  Attendance by legislators
  Quorum for legislative sessions
 Article 64
 Each Chamber is the judge of the validity of the election, rights and titles of its
 members. Neither of them shall meet without an absolute majority of its members, but
 a lesser number may compel the absent members to attend the sessions, under such
 terms and penalties as each Chamber shall establish.

 Article 65
 Both Chambers begin and conclude their sessions simultaneously. Neither of them, while
 assembled, shall adjourn its sessions for more than three days, without the other's
 consent.

  Removal of individual legislators Article 66
 Each Chamber shall determine its rules and, by a two-thirds vote, may discipline any
 one of its members for disorderly conduct in the performance of his duties, or may
 remove a member for physical or moral incapacity occurring after his admission, and
 may even expel a member from the body; but a majority of one more than half of those
 present shall be sufficient to decide on voluntary resignations from office.

  Oaths to abide by constitution Article 67
 Senators and Deputies, on assuming office, shall take an oath to dutifully discharge their
 duties, and to proceed in everything in conformity with the requirements of this
 Constitution.

  Immunity of legislators Article 68
 No member of Congress may be indicted, judicially questioned, or harassed for the
 opinions expressed or speeches made by him in the performance of his duties as a
 legislator.

  Removal of individual legislators
  Immunity of legislators

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 12

 Article 69
 No Senator or Deputy, from the day of his election until he leaves office, may be
 arrested, except in case of his being caught in flagrante in the commission of a capital or
 other infamous or grave crime, in which case a summary report of the facts shall be
 made to the appropriate Chamber.

  Removal of individual legislators Article 70
 When a written charge is presented before the ordinary courts against any Senator or
 Deputy, each Chamber, after examining the merits of the indictment in public trial, may
 by a two thirds vote suspend the accused from his office and place him at the disposal of
 the proper court for trial.

  Legislative oversight of the executive Article 71
 Either of the Chambers may summon the Ministers of the Executive Power to its place
 of assembly to receive such explanations or reports as it may consider necessary.

  Outside professions of legislators Article 72
 No member of the Congress may receive employment or a commission from the
 Executive Power, without previous consent of the respective Chamber, except for
 permanent ranked positions.

 Article 73
 Regular clergymen cannot be members of the Congress, nor may Governors of the
 Province that they head.

  Compensation of legislators Article 74
 The services of the Senators and Deputies are paid for by the Treasury of the Nation,
 with an assignment of funds that the law shall fix.

 CHAPTER IV. THE POWERS OF CONGRESS

 Article 75
 The Congress shall have power:

 1. To legislate in customs matters. To establish import and export duties, which, like
 the appraisals of goods on which duties are imposed, shall be uniform throughout
 the Nation.

 2. To impose indirect taxes, as a power concurrent with the Provinces. To impose
  Subsidiary unit government
 direct taxes proportionately equal throughout the territory of the Nation, for a
 specified period of time, provided that the defense, common security and general
 welfare of the State require them. The taxes foreseen by this clause, with the
 exception of the part or whole of those that are predestined for specific purposes,
 are subject to co-participation [with the Provinces].

 A legal covenant, based on agreements between the Nation and the Provinces,
 shall institute regulations for co-participation in these taxes, guaranteeing the
 automatic remittal of the funds.
  Reference to fraternity/solidarity
 The distribution between and among the Nation, the Provinces and the City of
 Buenos Aires, shall be effectuated in direct relation to the competencies, services
 and functions of each one of them, observing objective criteria for distribution;
 said distribution shall be equitable, show solidarity, and shall give priority to
 achieving an equivalent level of development, quality of life and equality of
 opportunity throughout the entire National territory.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 13

 2. The legal covenant shall have the Senate as its Chamber of origin and must be
 passed by an absolute majority of the totality of the members of each Chamber;
 it may not be modified unilaterally or subjected to regulations, and it shall be
 approved by the Provinces.

 There shall not be a transfer of competency, services, or functions without the
 respective reallocation of revenues, as approved by a law of the Congress, if
 applicable, and by the interested Province or the City of Buenos Aires, as the
 case may be.

 A Federal fiscal body shall be in charge of controlling and administering the
 execution of what is established by this clause, as determined by law, which law
 shall ensure the representation of all the Provinces and the City of Buenos Aires
 in the body's composition.

 3. To establish and to modify specific reallocations of revenue [otherwise] subject to
 co-participation, for a specified period of time, through a special law approved by
 an absolute majority of the totality of the members of each Chamber.

 4. To borrow money on the credit of the Nation.

 5. To provide for the use and transfer of National lands.

 6. To establish and regulate a Federal bank with the power to issue money, as well
  Central bank
 as other National banks.

 7. To arrange payment of the domestic and foreign debt of the Nation.

 8. To fix annually, in conformity with the guidelines established in the third
 paragraph of clause 2 of this article, the general budget of expenditures and the
 calculation of resources of the National administration, based on the general
 program of government and on the public spending plan, and to approve or reject
 the spending account.

 9. To grant subsidies from the National Treasury to those Provinces whose
 revenues, according to their budgets, are insufficient to meet their ordinary
 expenses.

 10. To regulate the free navigation of internal rivers, to open the ports it shall
 consider necessary, and to create or close customhouses.

 11. To coin money, to regulate its value and that of foreign currency, and to adopt a
 uniform system of weights and measures for the whole Nation.

 12. To enact the Civil, Commercial, Penal, Mining, and Labor and Social Security
 Codes, in a unified body or separately, without such codes altering local
 jurisdictions; their application belonging to the federal or provincial courts,
 depending on which jurisdiction the things or persons [in litigation] come under;
 and, especially, [to enact] general laws for the whole Nation on naturalization and
 nationality, in accordance with the principle of nationality by birth and by choice
 for Argentine citizenship; as well as on bankruptcy, on counterfeiting of currency
 and public documents of the State; and those general laws that may require the
 establishment of trial by juries.

 13. To regulate commerce with foreign nations and of the Provinces among
 themselves.

 14. To regulate and establish the general post offices of the Nation.

 15. To settle permanently the boundaries of the National territory, to fix those of the
 Provinces, to create new Provinces, and to determine, by special legislation, the
 organization, administration and government that National territories remaining
 outside the boundaries assigned to the Provinces must have.

 16. To provide for the security of the frontiers.

 17. To recognize the ethnic and cultural pre-existence of indigenous Argentine
  Integration of ethnic communities
 peoples.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 14

  Protection of language use
 17. To guarantee respect for their identity and their right to bilingual and
 intercultural education; to recognize the legal standing of their communities, and
 the possession and community property over lands they have traditionally
 occupied, and to regulate the transfer of other lands fit and sufficient for human
 development - none of which may be alienable, conveyable or susceptible to
 encumbrances or attachments. To assure their participation in the related
 administration of their natural resources and of other interests affecting them.
 The Provinces may exercise these powers concurrently.

 18. To provide whatever is conducive to the prosperity of the country, to the
 improvement and welfare of all the Provinces, and to the advancement of
 learning, establishing general and university curricula, and promoting industry,
 immigration, the construction of railways and navigable canals, the settlement of
 government-owned lands, the introduction and establishment of new industries,
 the importation of foreign capital and the exploration of the interior rivers,
 through laws protective of these goals and by temporary concessions of
 privileges and incentive awards.

 19. To provide whatever is conducive to human development, to economic progress
  Reference to science
 with social justice, to the productivity of the National economy, to the generation
 of employment, to the professional development of workers, to the protection of
 the value of money, to research and scientific and technological development,
 including its dissemination and utilization.
  Second chamber reserved policy areas
 To provide for the harmonious growth of the Nation and for populating its
 territory; to promote differentiated policies that lead to balancing the irregular
 development of Provinces and regions. For these initiatives, the Senate shall be
 the initiating Chamber.
  Free education
 To pass laws on the organization of and basis for education which consolidate
 National unity, paying respect to Provincial and local particularities; which assure
 the undelegable responsibility of the State, the participation of the family and
 society, the promotion of democratic values and the equality of opportunities and
 means without any discrimination whatsoever, and which guarantee the
 principles of free and equitable public education by the State and the autonomy
 and self-sufficiency of the National universities.
  Reference to art
 To enact laws which protect cultural identity and pluralism, the unrestrained
  Right to culture creation and circulation of the works of authors, the artistic heritage, and cultural
 and audiovisual spaces.

 20. To establish tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court of Justice, to create and
 eliminate offices, to fix the duties thereof, to grant pensions, to decree honors,
 and to grant general amnesties.

 21. To accept or reject the reasons for the resignation of the President or Vice
 President of the Republic; and to declare the need to proceed to a new election.

 22. To approve or reject treaties entered with other nations and with international
  Legal status of treaties
 organizations, and concordats with the Holy See. Treaties and concordats have
  International organizations higher standing than laws.
  International  law
  Rights of children
 The following [international instruments], under the conditions under which they
  International human rights treaties are in force, stand on the same level as the Constitution, [but] do not repeal any
  Treaty ratification article in the First Part of this Constitution, and must be understood as
 complementary of the rights and guarantees recognized therein: The American
 Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man; the Universal Declaration of Human
 Rights; the American Convention on Human Rights; the International Covenant
 on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the International Covenant on Civil and
 Political Rights and its Optional Protocol; the [International] Convention on the
 Prevention and Punishment of Genocide; the International Convention on the
 Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination; the Convention on the
 Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; the Convention
 Against Torture and other Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment; and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. They may only be
 denounced, if such is to be the case, by the National Executive Power, after prior
 approval by two thirds of the totality of the members of each Chamber.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 15

 22. Other treaties and conventions on human rights, after being approved by
 Congress, shall require the vote of two-thirds of the totality of the members of
 each Chamber in order to enjoy standing on the same level as the Constitution.

 23. To legislate and promote proactive measures that guarantee true equality of
  State support for children
 opportunity and treatment, and the full enjoyment and exercise of the rights
  Rights of children recognized by this Constitution and by current international treaties on human
  State support for the disabled rights, in particular with respect to children, women, the elderly and people with
 disabilities.
  State support for the elderly

 To enact a special and integral social security system that protects needy
 children, from gestation through the end of elementary schooling, and that
 protects the mother during pregnancy and nursing.

 24. To approve treaties of integration which delegate competence and jurisdiction to
  International organizations
 international organizations under conditions of reciprocity and equality, and
 which respect the democratic order and human rights. Any rules enacted
 pursuant thereto have higher standing than laws.

 The approval of these treaties with Latin American States shall require the
 absolute majority of the totality of the members of each Chamber. In the case of
 treaties with other States, the National Congress, by an absolute majority of the
 members present in each Chamber, shall declare the desirability of approving the
 treaty, and it shall only be approved by an absolute majority vote of the totality
 of the members of each Chamber, one hundred and twenty days after the
 declaratory act.

 Denunciation of any of the treaties mentioned in this clause shall require the
 prior approval of an absolute majority of the totality of the members of each
 Chamber.

 25. To authorize the Executive Power to declare war or make peace.
  Power to declare/approve war

  Designation of commander in chief 26. To empower the Executive Power to order reprisals, and to establish regulations
 for prizes of war.

 27. To fix the size of the Armed Forces in time of peace and war, and to establish the
 regulations for their organization and administration.

 28. To permit the entry of foreign troops into the territory of the Nation, and the
 departure of national forces from it.

 29. To declare a state of siege in one or several parts of the Nation in case of internal
  Emergency provisions
 disturbance, and to approve or suspend a state of siege declared by the
 Executive during its recess.

 30. To exercise exclusive legislation in the territory of the Nation's Capital and to
 establish legislation necessary to achieve the specific goals of the establishments
 of National utility throughout the territory of the Republic. Provincial and
 Municipal authorities shall retain police and taxation powers over these
 establishments, as long as those powers do not interfere with the achievement of
 the establishments' goals.

 31. To order the Federal intervention of a Province or of the City of Buenos Aires.

 To approve or to revoke an intervention decreed by the Executive Power during
 [a congressional] recess.

 32. To enact all laws and regulations that may be necessary to carry out the
 foregoing powers, and all others granted by the present Constitution to the
 Government of the Argentine Nation.

 Article 76
 Any delegation of legislative power to the Executive Power is prohibited, except in
 specified matters concerning administration or public emergency, with a fixed period of

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 16

 time for exercise of the delegated authority, which may only be exercised within the
 terms established by Congress.

 The termination [of a legislative delegation] as a result of the passing of the time period
 provided in the preceding paragraph shall not entail the review of the legal relationships
 that arose under the rules dictated pursuant to legislative delegation.

 CHAPTER V. ON THE ENACTMENT AND APPROVAL OF LAWS
  Initiation of general legislation Article 77
  Tax bills Laws may originate in either Chamber of Congress, through bills proposed by their
  Budget bills
 members or by the Executive Power, except for the exceptions that this Constitution
 establishes.

 Bills that modify the electoral system and the system of political parties shall be
 approved by an absolute majority of the totality of the members of the Chambers.

  Division of labor between chambers
  Budget bills
 Article 78
  Tax bills
  Approval or veto of general legislation When a bill is passed by the Chamber in which it originated, it is forwarded for debate to
 the other Chamber. If approved by both, it is presented to the Executive of the Nation
 for his review, and if it also obtains his approval, he promulgates it as law.

  Legislative committees Article 79
 Each Chamber, after it approves a bill of law generally, may delegate to its committees
 the approval of specific parts of a bill, with the vote of an absolute majority of the
 totality of its members. The Chamber may also, with an equal number of votes, make
 the delegation inoperative and resume the regular procedures. The approval by the
 committee shall require the vote of the absolute majority of the totality of the members.
 Once the bill is approved by the committee, the regular procedures shall be followed.

  Approval or veto of general legislation Article 80
 Any bill that is not returned at the end of ten working days is considered approved by
 the Executive Power. Bills that are partially rejected may not be approved as to their
 remaining parts. Nevertheless, those parts that are not rejected may be promulgated if
 they have normative autonomy and their partial approval does not alter the spirit or the
 unity of the bill as passed by Congress. In such a case, the procedures established for
 decrees of necessity and urgency shall be applied.

 Article 81
 No bill of law that has been wholly rejected by one of the Chambers may be
 reintroduced during that year's sessions. Neither Chamber may entirely reject a bill
 which originated in it and which afterwards was added onto or amended by the
 reviewing Chamber. If a bill is the subject of additions or corrections by the reviewing
 Chamber, the result of the vote must be indicated so as to establish if additions or
 corrections were made by absolute majority of those present or by two-thirds of those
 present. The originating Chamber may, by absolute majority of those present, approve
 the bill with the introduced additions or corrections, or insist on the original language,
 unless the additions or corrections were made by the reviewing Chamber by two-thirds
 of those present. In this latter case, the bill shall be forwarded to the Executive Power
 with the additions or corrections made by the reviewing Chamber, except that the
 originating Chamber may insist in its original language by a vote of two-thirds of those
 present. The originating Chamber may not introduce new additions or corrections over
 those made by the reviewing Chamber.

 Article 82
 The will of each Chamber must be manifested expressly; tacit or implied approval is
 excluded in all cases.

  Veto override procedure
  Approval or veto of general legislation

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 17

 Article 83
 A bill wholly or partially rejected by the Executive Power shall be returned with its
 objections to the originating Chamber; the latter shall debate it anew, and if it ratifies it
 by a majority of two-thirds of the votes, the bill is sent again to the reviewing Chamber.
 If both Chambers pass it by a two-thirds majority, the bill becomes law and goes to the
 Executive Power for its promulgation. The voting in both Chambers shall be in this case
 by roll call, by yeas or by nays, and both the names and opinions of those voting as well
 as the objections of the Executive Power shall be immediately published in the press. If
 the Chambers disagree [with each other] regarding the [Executive's] objections, the bill
 may not be reintroduced in the sessions of that year.

 Article 84
 In the enactment of laws the following wording shall be used: "The Senate and Chamber
 of Deputies of the Argentine Nation, assembled in Congress, decree or sanction with the
 force of law."

 CHAPTER VI. OF THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL OF THE
 NATION

 Article 85
 External review of the wealth, economic aspects, finances and operations of the national
 public sector shall be an attribute of the Legislative Power.

 The review and the opinion of the Legislative Power on the performance and general
 state of public administration shall be supported by reports from the Office of the
 Auditor General of the Nation.

 This body of technical assistance of the Congress, with functional autonomy, shall be
 made up in the manner that the law that regulates its creation and operation
 establishes; such law shall be approved by an absolute majority of the members of each
 Chamber. The president of the body shall be appointed upon the proposal of the
 opposition political party having the greatest number of legislators in the Congress.

 The Office of the Auditor-General of the Nation shall have under its charge the review
 of the legality, management, and audit of all activities of centralized and decentralized
 public administration, whatever its manner of organization may be, and any other
 functions that the law may grant it. Its intervention is required in the procedures
 approving or rejecting the accounting of collection and investment of public funds.

 CHAPTER VII. OF THE DEFENDER OF THE PEOPLE
  Ombudsman Article 86
 The Defender of the People is an independent body created within the ambit of the
 National Congress, which shall operate with full functional autonomy, without taking
 orders from any authority. Its mission is the defense and protection of human rights and
 other rights, guarantees and interests protected by this Constitution and by the law,
 against deeds, acts, and omissions of the Administration, and the review of the exercise
 of public administrative functions.

 The Defender of the People has standing to litigate. He is appointed and removed by
 Congress by a vote of two-thirds of the members present in each one of the Chambers.
 He enjoys the immunities and privileges of legislators. He shall remain in office for five
 years, and may be reappointed only once.

 The organization and operation of this institution shall be regulated by a special law.

 SECTION II. THE EXECUTIVE POWER

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 18

 CHAPTER I. OF ITS NATURE AND DURATION
  Name/structure of executive(s) Article 87
 The Executive Power of the Nation shall be discharged by a citizen with the title of
 "President of the Argentine Nation."

  Deputy executive
  Head of state replacement
 Article 88
 In case of illness, absence from the Capital, death, resignation, or removal of the
 President, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the Vice President of the Nation.
 In event of the removal, death, resignation, or incapacity of the President and the Vice
 President of the Nation, the Congress shall determine which public official shall fill the
 Presidency until the cause for the disability ceases or a new President is elected.

  Eligibility for head of state
  Deputy executive
 Article 89
  Minimum age of head of state
 To be elected President or Vice President of the Nation requires one to have been born
 in Argentine territory or if one was born in a foreign country, to be the child of a native
 citizen and [to possess] the other qualifications required to be elected Senator.

  Head of state term length
  Head of state term limits
 Article 90
 The President and Vice President shall remain in office for a term of four years and may
 be reelected or succeed each other for only one consecutive term. If they have been
 reelected or succeeded each other, they may not be elected to either office, except after
 the interval of a term.

 Article 91
 The President of the Nation leaves office the day that his four-year term expires;
 without any event that may have interrupted his term being considered as a reason for
 completing it later.

 Article 92
 The President and Vice President enjoy a salary paid out from the Treasury of the
 Nation, which may not be altered during the term of their appointment. During that
 term, they may not hold other employment, or receive any other emolument from the
 Nation, or from any Province.

  Oaths to abide by constitution Article 93
 On assuming office, the President and Vice President shall take an oath, consistent with
 their religious beliefs, administered by the President of the Senate and before the
 assembled Congress, to: 'discharge with loyalty and patriotism the office of President (or
 Vice President) of the Nation and to observe and have faithfully observed the
 Constitution of the Argentine Nation.'

 CHAPTER II. OF THE MANNER AND TIME OF THE ELECTION OF THE
 PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT OF THE NATION
  Deputy executive
  Head of state selection
 Article 94
 The President and the Vice President of the Nation shall be elected directly by the
 People, in two rounds, as established by this Constitution. To this end, the national
 territory shall comprise a single district.

  Head of state selection Article 95
 The election shall be held within the two months prior to the conclusion of the mandate
 of the President in office.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 19

  Head of state selection Article 96
 The second electoral round, should it be required, shall be held between the two tickets
 of candidates receiving the most votes, within thirty days after the first electoral round.

  Head of state selection Article 97
 When the ticket that received the most votes in the first round has obtained more than
 forty-five percent of the validly cast affirmative votes, its candidates shall be proclaimed
 President and Vice President of the Nation.

  Head of state selection Article 98
 When the ticket that received the most votes in the first round obtains at least forty
 percent of the validly cast affirmative votes and, in addition, there also exists a
 difference greater than ten percentage points with respect to the total of the
 affirmative votes validly cast for that ticket over the ticket that follows it in number of
 votes, its candidates shall be proclaimed President and Vice President of the Nation.

 CHAPTER III. THE POWERS OF THE EXECUTIVE
  Head of state powers Article 99
 The President of the Nation has the following powers:

 1. He is the supreme chief of the Nation, chief of the government, and the politician
 responsible for the general administration of the country.

 2. He issues the instructions and regulations that may be necessary for the
 execution of the laws of the Nation, being careful not to alter their spirit through
 regulatory exceptions.

 3. He participates in the enactment of the laws according to the Constitution,
  Head of state decree power
 promulgates them, and has them published.

 The Executive Power may not issue dispositions of a legislative nature in any
 case whatsoever, under penalty of their absolute and incurable nullity.

 Only when exceptional circumstances make it impossible to follow the regular
 procedures provided by this Constitution for the passing of laws, and the
 situation does not involve rules that regulate criminal, tax, or electoral matters
 or the regime governing political parties, may [the President] dictate decrees by
 reason of necessity and urgency, which are to be decided at a general meeting of
 Ministers, who must endorse them, together with the Chief of the Cabinet of
 Ministers.
  Standing committees
 The Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers, personally and within ten days, shall
 submit the measure for the consideration of the Standing Bicameral Committee,
 whose membership must reflect the proportion of the political representation of
 each Chamber. This Committee shall forward its report within ten days to a
 plenary session of each Chamber for its express treatment, which the Chambers
 shall consider immediately. A special law approved by an absolute majority of the
 totality of the members of each Chamber shall regulate the procedure and the
 scope of the intervention of Congress.

 4. He appoints the judges of the Supreme Court, with the consent of the Senate by
  Supreme court selection
 two-thirds of its members present, in a public session convened for that purpose.
  Public or private sessions
  Ordinary court selection
 He appoints the judges of lower Federal tribunals, taking into account the
 qualifications of the candidates, based on a binding list of three candidates
 nominated by the Judicial Council, with the [subsequent] consent of the Senate,
 [convened] in public session.
  Mandatory retirement age for judges
 A new appointment, preceded by the same consent, shall be necessary in order
 to maintain in office any of these magistrates once they attain the age of

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 20

 4. seventy-five. All appointments of magistrates whose age is that indicated or
 greater shall be made for five years and may be repeated indefinitely following
 the same procedure.

 5. He may grant pardons or commute punishment for crimes subject to federal
  Power to pardon
 jurisdiction, after a report by the appropriate court, except in cases of
 impeachment by the Chamber of Deputies.

 6. He may grant retirement pensions, retirements, leaves of absence, and pensions
  Head of state powers
 in accordance with the laws of the Nation.

 7. He may appoint and remove ambassadors, Ministers plenipotentiary, and charge
  Cabinet selection
 d'affaires, with the consent of the Senate; on his own, he may appoint and
  Cabinet removal remove the Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers and the other Ministers of the
  Attorney general Cabinet, the officials of his office, consular agents, and employees whose
 appointment is not otherwise regulated by this Constitution.

 8. He shall open the sessions of Congress each year, with both Chambers meeting
 together for this purpose, and shall offer an account on that occasion of the state
 of the Nation, [and] of the reforms promised by the Constitution, and recommend
 for the consideration of Congress those measures he deems necessary and
 fitting.

 9. He extends the regular sessions of Congress, or convokes it for extraordinary
 sessions when an important interest in order or progress requires it.

 10. He supervises the exercise of authority by the Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers
 regarding the collection of the Nation's revenues and their investment, in
 accordance with the law or the budget of National expenditures.

 11. He concludes and signs treaties, concordats, and other negotiations required for
  Treaty ratification
 the maintenance of good relations with international organizations and foreign
  Foreign affairs representative nations, and receives their Ministers and admits their consuls.
  International organizations
 12. He is commander-in-chief of all Armed Forces of the Nation.
  Designation of commander in chief

 13. He fills the military posts of the Nation: with the consent of the Senate, in the
  Selection of active-duty commanders
 concession of posts or ranks of superior officers of the Armed Forces; and by
 himself on the battlefield.

 14. He has the Armed Forces at his disposal, and takes charge of their organization
  Power to declare/approve war
 and deployment, according to the needs of the Nation.

 15. He declares war and orders reprisals with the authorization and approval of
  Power to declare/approve war
 Congress.

 16. He declares in a state of siege one or various parts of the Nation, in case of
  Emergency provisions
 foreign invasion and for a limited time, with the consent of the Senate. In the
 event of internal disorder, he has this power only when Congress is in recess,
 because this is a power belonging to that body. The President exercises this
 power with the limitations prescribed in article 23.

 17. He may request any information he considers appropriate from the Chief of the
 Cabinet of Ministers and from the heads of all branches and departments of the
 administration, and, through them, from all other employees, and they are
 required to provide it.

 18. He may leave the territory of the Nation with the permission of Congress. During
 Congressional recess, he may only do so without permission for reasons justified
 by public service.

 19. He may fill vacancies in offices that require the consent of the Senate and that
 occur during its recess, by means of temporary appointments that shall expire at
 the end of the next Legislative session.

 20. He decrees the Federal intervention of a Province or of the City of Buenos Aires
 in the event of Congressional recess, and he must simultaneously convene
 Congress to consider it.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 21

 CHAPTER IV. CONCERNING THE CHIEF OF THE CABINET AND
 OTHER MINISTERS OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH
  Powers of cabinet
  Establishment of cabinet/ministers
 Article 100
  Eligibility for cabinet
 The Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers and other Secretary-Ministers, whose number and
 competence shall be established by a special law, shall have under their responsibility
 the handling of the Nation's business, and shall endorse and legalize the acts of the
 President through their signatures, without which the [President's] acts have no effect.

 The Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers, who has political responsibility to the National
 Congress, shall have the power:

 1. To exercise the general administration of the country.

 2. To issue the acts and regulations that may be necessary to exercise the powers
 that this article grants to him and those that the President of the Nation
 delegates to him, with the endorsement of the Secretary-Minister of the branch
 to which the act or regulation refers.

 3. To make the appointments of employees of the administration, except for those
 [appointments] which fall to the President.

 4. To exercise the functions and powers that the President of the Nation may
 delegate to him, and to resolve with the consent of the Cabinet matters that the
 Executive Power may assign to him, or upon his own initiative matters that he
 deems necessary within the scope of his competence.

 5. To coordinate, prepare for, and convene sessions of the Cabinet of Ministers,
 presiding over them in the event of the President's absence.

 6. To send to Congress the bills concerning the Ministries and the National Budget,
  Budget bills
 after previous [favorable] treatment at a Cabinet meeting and approval by the
 Executive Power.

 7. To see to the collection of the revenues of the Nation and to execute the
 National Budget law.

 8. To approve decrees establishing implementing regulations for laws, decrees that
 provide for the extension of ordinary sessions of Congress or the convening of
 extraordinary sessions, and the messages of the President promoting a
 legislative initiative.

 9. To attend sessions of Congress and participate in its debates, but without voting.

 10. Once ordinary sessions of Congress have begun, to present together with the
  Legislative oversight of the executive
 other Ministers a detailed account of the state of the Nation concerning the
 affairs of the respective departments.

 11. To produce the verbal or written reports and explanations that any of the
 Chambers may request from the Executive Power.

 12. To approve decrees that exercise powers delegated by Congress, which shall be
  Standing committees
 subject to the review of the Standing Bicameral Committee.

 13. To approve, jointly with the other Ministers, decrees of necessity and urgency
  Standing committees
 and decrees that partially promulgate laws. He shall personally submit these
  Head of state decree power decrees for consideration by the Standing Bicameral Committee within ten days
 of their enactment.

 The Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers may not simultaneously hold another ministry.

  Legislative oversight of the executive Article 101
 The Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers must attend Congress at least once a month,
 attending each Chamber alternately, to inform them of the government's progress,

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 22

 without prejudice to what is provided for in Article 71. He may be cross-examined for
 the purposes of considering a censure motion, by an absolute majority vote of the
 totality of the members of either of the Chambers, and he may be removed by an
 absolute majority vote of the members of each of the Chambers.

  Cabinet removal Article 102
 Each minister is responsible for the acts that he legalizes and is jointly responsible for
 those in which he concurs with his colleagues.

 Article 103
 Ministers may not, in any case, issue resolutions on their own, except for those
 concerning the economic and administrative system of their respective departments.

  Legislative oversight of the executive Article 104
 Once the Congress has opened its sessions, the Ministers of the Cabinet shall submit a
 detailed report on the state of the Nation as it relates to the affairs of their respective
 departments.

  Eligibility for cabinet Article 105
 Ministers may not be Senators or Deputies without first resigning their office as
 Minister.

 Article 106
 Ministers may attend the sessions of Congress and take part in their debates, but they
 may not vote.

 Article 107
 Ministers shall receive a salary established by law for their services, which may not be
 increased or decreased in favor of or to the detriment of those who are already in office.

 SECTION III. THE JUDICIAL POWER

 CHAPTER I. ITS NATURE AND DURATION
  Structure of the courts Article 108
 The Judicial Power of the Nation shall be vested in a Supreme Court of Justice, and in
 such lower courts as the Congress may establish in the territory of the Nation.

 Article 109
 In no case may the President of the Nation exercise judicial functions, assume
 jurisdiction over pending cases, or reopen those decided.

  Supreme court term length
  Protection of judges' salaries
 Article 110
 The judges, both of the Supreme Court and of the inferior courts of the Nation, shall hold
 their offices during their good behavior, and shall receive for their services a
 compensation that the law shall determine and that shall not be diminished in any way
 while they remain in office.

  Minimum age of supreme court judges
  Eligibility for supreme court judges
 Article 111
 No one shall be able to be a member of the Supreme Court of Justice without being a
 lawyer of the Nation, with eight years of practice, and possessing the qualifications
 required to be a Senator.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 23

  Oaths to abide by constitution Article 112
 Upon the first installation of the Supreme Court, the persons appointed shall take an
 oath before the President of the Nation, to discharge their duties in administering justice
 well and faithfully, and in conformity with what the Constitution prescribes. In the future,
 they shall take the oath before the President of the Court itself.

 Article 113
 The Supreme Court shall adopt its own internal regulations and shall appoint its
 employees.

  Establishment of judicial council Article 114
 The Judicial Council, regulated by a special law passed by an absolute majority of the
 totality of the members of each Chamber, shall be charged with selecting judges and
 with the administration of the Judiciary.

 The Council shall be reconstituted periodically so that an equilibrium is achieved among
 the representation of popularly elected political organs, judges of all instances, and
 federally licensed attorneys. It shall also include persons from the academic and
 scientific fields, of a number and manner of appointment the law shall indicate.

 Its powers shall be:

 1. To select candidates for inferior courts through public competitions.
  Ordinary court selection

 2. To issue binding lists of three candidates for appointment of judges of the lower
  Ordinary court selection
 courts.

 3. To administer revenues and to execute the budget that the law assigns for the
 administration of justice.

 4. To exercise disciplinary powers over judges.

 5. To determine the commencement of removal proceedings against judges, and in
  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal
 such case, to order their suspension and formulate the corresponding charges.

 6. To establish the regulations regarding judicial organization and all regulations
  Judicial independence
 necessary to assure the independence of judges and the effective rendering of
 judicial services.

  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal Article 115
 Judges of the lower courts of the Nation shall be removed on those grounds expressed
 in Article 53, by a trial jury composed of legislators, judges, and federally licensed
 attorneys.

 Its decision, which shall be unappealable, shall have no effect other than to remove the
 accused party from office. But the convicted party shall nevertheless remain subject to
 accusation, trial and punishment before the ordinary courts in conformity with the laws.

 It shall be necessary to terminate the proceedings and, in such case, to reinstate the
 suspended judge, if one hundred eighty days elapse without a judgment having been
 rendered, counted from the decision to open the removal proceedings.

 The composition of and the procedures of this jury shall be determined by the special
 law to which Article 114 refers.

 CHAPTER II. THE POWERS OF THE JUDICIARY
  Supreme court powers Article 116
 The Supreme Court of Justice and the lower courts of the Nation have jurisdiction over
 and decide all cases that deal with matters governed by the Constitution and the laws of

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 24

 the Nation, except as provided in clause 12 of article 75, and over treaties with foreign
 nations, in cases concerning ambassadors, public ministers and foreign consuls, in cases
 of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, in suits in which the Nation is a party, in cases
 arising between two or more Provinces, between one province and the citizens of
 another, between citizens of different Provinces, and between a Province or its citizens
 against a foreign State or citizen.

  Right to appeal judicial decisions Article 117
 In these cases the Supreme Court shall exercise appellate jurisdiction, according to the
 rules and exceptions that Congress may prescribe; but in all matters concerning
 ambassadors, foreign ministers and consuls, and those in which a Province shall be a
 party, the Court shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction.

  Jury trials required Article 118
 All ordinary criminal trials not resulting from the power of impeachment granted to the
 Chamber of Deputies shall be concluded by juries, once this institution is established in
 the Republic. The proceedings in these trials shall take place in the same Province where
 the crime was committed; but when the crime is committed outside the borders of the
 Nation, in violation of international norms, Congress shall determine by a special law the
 place where the trial is to be held.

 Article 119
 Treason against the Nation shall consist only in bearing arms against it, or in joining its
 enemies, giving them aid and comfort. Congress shall establish by a special law the
 punishment for this crime; but the punishment shall not go beyond the person of the
 offender nor shall the infamy of the criminal be transmitted to his relatives of any
 degree.

 SECTION IV. THE OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
  Attorney general Article 120
 The Office of the Public Prosecutor is an independent body with functional autonomy
 and financial self-sufficiency, whose function is to promote the intervention of the judicial
 [system] in defense of lawfulness and of the general interests of society, in coordination
 with the other authorities of the Republic.

 It is composed of a Chief Prosecutor of the Nation and a Chief Public Defender of the
 Nation and the other members that the law may establish.

 Its members enjoy functional immunities and noninterference with their remuneration.

 TITLE II. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS
  Subsidiary unit government Article 121
 The Provinces retain all powers not delegated by this Constitution to the Federal
 Government, and those they have expressly reserved by special covenants at the time
 of their incorporation [into the Argentine Republic].

  Subsidiary unit government Article 122
 The Provinces make their own local institutions and are governed by them. They elect
 their governors, legislators, and other Provincial officials, without intervention by the
 Federal Government.

  Subsidiary unit government Article 123
 Each Province dictates its own Constitution, in conformity with what is established in
 Article 5, assuring municipal autonomy and regulating its scope and content in the
 institutional, political, administrative, economic, and financial structure.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 25

  National vs subnational laws Article 124
 With the knowledge of the National Congress, the Provinces may create regions for
 economic and social development and establish bodies with power to achieve their
 goals, and they may enter international agreements as long as these are not
 incompatible with the foreign policy of the Nation and do not affect the powers
 delegated to the Federal Government or the public credit of the Nation. The City of
 Buenos Aires shall have a system that shall be established for such purpose.

 The original ownership over natural resources existing in their territory belongs to the
 Provinces.

 Article 125
 With the knowledge of the National Congress, the Provinces may enter into partial
 treaties for purposes of administration of justice, economic interests and works of
 common utility; and they may promote their industry, immigration, the construction of
 railroads and navigable canals, the settlement of lands owned by the Province, the
 introduction and establishment of new industries, the importation of foreign capital, and
 the exploration of their rivers, through laws protective of these purposes and with their
 own funds.

  Reference to science The Provinces and the City of Buenos Aires may maintain social security agencies for
 public employees and professionals, and may promote economic progress, human
 development, the creation of employment, education, science, knowledge, and culture.

  National vs subnational laws Article 126
 The Provinces do not exercise the power delegated to the Nation. They may not enter
 into partial treaties of a political nature; or enact laws dealing with commerce, or
 internal or foreign navigation; or establish Provincial customhouses; or coin money; or
 establish banks having note-issuing powers without the authorization of the Federal
 Congress; or enact Civil, Commercial, Penal, or Mining Codes after the Congress has
 enacted them; or enact special laws on citizenship and naturalization, bankruptcy, or
 counterfeiting of currency or State documents; or impose tonnage duties; or arm ships of
 war or raise armies, except in the event of foreign invasion or of such imminent danger
 as not to admit delay, giving immediate notice to the Federal Government; or appoint or
 receive foreign representatives.

 Article 127
 No Province may declare or wage war against another Province. Their complaints must
 be submitted to and settled by the Supreme Court of Justice. Their de facto hostilities
 are acts of civil war, characterized as sedition or rebellion, which the Federal
 Government must suppress and punish in accordance with the law.

  National vs subnational laws Article 128
 The governors of the Provinces are the natural representatives of the Federal
 Government for enforcing compliance with the Constitution and the laws of the Nation.

 Article 129
 The City of Buenos Aires shall have an autonomous system of government, with its own
 legislative and jurisdictional powers, and a head of government who shall be elected
 directly by the people of the City.

 A law shall guarantee the interests of the National Government while the City of
 Buenos Aires is the capital of the Nation.

 Within the framework established in this article, the National Congress shall convene
 the inhabitants of the City of Buenos Aires so that, through the representatives that
 they elect for this purpose, they enact the organizational statute of the City's
 institutions.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 26

 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
  Transitional provisions

 1. The Argentine Nation ratifies its legitimate and everlasting sovereignty over the
 Malvinas, South Georgia and Sandwich Islands and the corresponding maritime
 and insular areas, because they are an integral part of the National territory.

 The regaining of said territories and the full exercise of sovereignty, while
 respecting the lifestyle of their inhabitants, and in conformity with principles of
 international law, constitute a permanent and unwaivable objective of the
 Argentine people.

 2. The affirmative actions to which the last paragraph of Article 37 refers may not
 be weaker than those existing at the time this Constitution is sanctioned and
 they shall last for the time that the law determines. (This relates to Article 37.)
 3. The law that regulates the exercise of the popular initiative must be approved
 within eighteen months of the adoption of this Constitution. (This relates to
 Article 39.)
 4. The current members of the National Senate shall remain in office until the
 expiration of their individual terms.

 Upon the renewal of one-third of the Senate in 1995, as a result of the conclusion
 of the terms in office of all the Senators elected in 1986, a third Senator shall be
 appointed for each district by each Legislature. The group of Senators for each
 district shall be composed, insofar as possible, so that two seats belong to the
 political party or electoral alliance having the greatest number of members in the
 Legislature, and the remaining seat to the political party or electoral alliance that
 follows it in number of members. In case of a tie, the political party or electoral
 alliance that obtained the greatest number of votes in the immediately preceding
 Provincial legislative election shall prevail.

 The election of the Senators who will replace those whose terms expire in 1998,
 as well as the election of whomever might replace any of the current Senators in
 case of the application of Article 62, shall be conducted by these same rules for
 appointment. However, the political party or electoral alliance having the
 greatest number of members in the Legislature at the time of the election of the
 Senator shall have the right to have its candidate elected, with the sole limitation
 that the three Senators not turn out to be from the same political party or
 electoral alliance.

 These rules shall also apply to the election of Senators for the City of Buenos
 Aires, in 1995 by the voters, and in 1998 by the legislative body of the City.

 The election of all the Senators referred to in this clause shall be carried out no
 less than sixty nor more than ninety days before the time when the Senator must
 assume office.

 In all cases, candidates for Senator shall be nominated by the political parties or
 electoral alliances. The fulfillment of the legal and statutory requirements for
 nomination as a candidate shall be certified by the National Electoral Judiciary
 and reported to the Legislature.

 Every time a National Senator is elected, a substitute shall be designated who
 shall assume office in the cases specified by Article 62.

 The terms in office of Senators elected by the application of this transitional
 provision shall last until December 9, 2001. (This relates to Article 54.)

 5. All members of the Senate shall be elected in the manner indicated in Article 54
 within the two months prior to December 10, 2001; after they meet, they are to
 decide by lot who must leave office in the first biennium and who in the second
 biennium. (This relates to Article 56.)
 6. A system of co-participation shall be established before the end of the year 1996
 in conformity with the provisions of clause 2 of Article 75 and with the

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 27

 6. regulations organizing the Federal tax bureau; the distribution of jurisdictions,
 services, and functions existing at the time of the adoption of this reform may not
 be modified without the approval of the interested Province; neither may the
 distribution of revenues existing at the time of the adoption of this reform be
 modified to the detriment of the Provinces; and, in both [cases, the restriction on
 changes continues] until the establishment of the aforementioned system of co-
 participation.

 The present clause does not affect administrative or judicial claims currently in
 process that originate in disputes over the distribution of jurisdiction, services,
 functions, or revenues between the Nation and the Provinces. (This relates to
 Article 75, clause 2.)

 7. Congress shall exercise the legislative powers it retains in accordance with
 Article 129 in the City of Buenos Aires, so long as Buenos Aires is the Capital of
 the Nation. (This relates to Article 75, clause 30.)
 8. Pre-existing delegated legislation that does not contain an established length of
 time for its continuation in force shall expire at the end of five years from the
 effective date of this provision, except for that legislation which the National
 Congress expressly ratifies through a new law. (This relates to Article 76.)
 9. The term of the President currently in office at the time this reform is adopted
 must be considered as [his] first term. (This relates to Article 90.)
 10. The term of the President of the Nation who assumes office on July 8, 1995,
 shall end on December 10, 1999. (This relates to Article 90.)
 11. The expiration of appointments and the limited duration provided for in Article
 99, clause 4, shall take effect five years after the adoption of this constitutional
 reform. (This relates to Article 99, clause 4.)
 12. The mandates established in Articles 100 and 101 of Chapter IV of Section II of
 the Second Part of this Constitution, which pertain to the Chief of the Cabinet of
 Ministers, shall take effect on July 8, 1995.

 The Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers shall be designated for the first time on July
 8, 1995; until this date, his powers are to be exercised by the President of the
 Republic. (This relates to Article 99, clause 7, and to Articles 100 and 101.)

 13. Beginning three hundred sixty days from the effective date of this reform, lower
 court judges may only be designated through the procedure established by the
 present Constitution. Until then, the previously existing system shall be applied.
 (This relates to Article 114.)
 14. Cases in process before the Chamber of Deputies at the time that the Judicial
 Council is installed shall be referred to the latter for the purposes of clause 5 of
 Article 114. Those cases already in the Senate shall continue there until their
 conclusion. (This relates to Article 115.)
 15. Until the government authorities arising from the new system of autonomy for
 the City of Buenos Aires are constituted, the Congress shall exercise exclusive
 legislative authority over its territory, under those same terms as prior to the
 adoption of the present [reforms].

 The Chief of Government shall be chosen during 1995.

 The law provided for in the second and third paragraphs of Article 129 shall be
 passed within two hundred seventy days of the effective date of this
 Constitution.

 Until such time that the organizational statute is passed, the appointment and
 removal of judges for the City of Buenos Aires shall be regulated by the
 provisions of Articles 114 and 115 of this Constitution. (This relates to Article
 129.)

 16. This reform goes into effect the day following its publication. Members of the
 Constitutional Convention, the President of the Argentine Nation, the presidents
 of the Legislative Chambers, and the President of the Supreme Court of Justice
 will swear to it in a single act on August 24, 1994, in the San Jose Palace,
 Concepcion del Uruguay, Province of Entre Rios.

 Each branch of government and the Provincial and municipal authorities are to
 arrange whatever is necessary for their members and officials to swear
 allegiance to this Constitution.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 28

 17. The prescribed Constitutional text, sanctioned by this Constitutional Convention,
 replaces the one existing until now.

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 29

 Topic index

 A
 Accession of territory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Approval or veto of general legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Attendance by legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Attorney general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 25

 B
 Budget bills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17, 22

 C
 Cabinet removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 23
 Cabinet selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Campaign financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Census . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Central bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Claim of universal suffrage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Colonies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Compensation of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Compulsory voting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Constitution amendment procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

 D
 Deputy executive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 19
 Designation of commander in chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 20
 Division of labor between chambers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Duty to obey the constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Duty to serve in the military . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 E
 Eligibility for cabinet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 23
 Eligibility for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Eligibility for head of state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 19
 Eligibility for second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Eligibility for supreme court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 23
 Emergency provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 12, 13, 20
 Establishment of cabinet/ministers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 Establishment of judicial council . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Extraordinary legislative sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

 F
 First chamber reserved policy areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 First chamber selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Foreign affairs representative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Free education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
 Freedom of association . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Freedom of expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Freedom of movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 30

 Freedom of opinion/thought/conscience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Freedom of press . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 7
 Freedom of religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 G
 General guarantee of equality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 God or other deities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 5
 Guarantee of due process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 H
 Head of state decree power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 22
 Head of state powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Head of state removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 12
 Head of state replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
 Head of state selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 20
 Head of state term length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
 Head of state term limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

 I
 Immunity of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Inalienable rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Initiation of general legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 17
 Integration of ethnic communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 International human rights treaties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 International law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 International organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 20

 J
 Judicial independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Jury trials required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 25

 L
 Leader of second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Legal status of treaties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Legislative committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 Legislative initiatives by citizens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Legislative oversight of the executive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 22, 23
 Length of legislative sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

 M
 Mandatory retirement age for judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Mentions of social class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Minimum age for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Minimum age for second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Minimum age of head of state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 19
 Minimum age of supreme court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 23
 Motives for writing constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

 N
 Name/structure of executive(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
 National capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 31

 National vs subnational laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

 O
 Oaths to abide by constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 19, 24
 Official religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Ombudsman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
 Ordinary court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 24
 Outside professions of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

 P
 Power to declare/approve war . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 20
 Power to pardon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Powers of cabinet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Principle of no punishment without law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Prohibition of capital punishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Prohibition of cruel treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Prohibition of slavery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Prohibition of torture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Protection from ex post facto laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Protection from expropriation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Protection from self-incrimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Protection from unjustified restraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 9
 Protection of consumers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Protection of environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Protection of judges' salaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 Protection of language use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
 Provisions for intellectual property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Public or private sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

 Q
 Quorum for legislative sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

 R
 Reference to art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 15
 Reference to fraternity/solidarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Reference to science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 13, 26
 Referenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Regulation of evidence collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Regulation of marriage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Removal of individual legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 13
 Replacement of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 12
 Requirements for birthright citizenship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 6
 Requirements for naturalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Restrictions on political parties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right of petition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to academic freedom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to amparo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to appeal judicial decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
 Right to choose occupation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to competitive marketplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 32

 Right to culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
 Right to establish a business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 6
 Right to form political parties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to join trade unions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to just remuneration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to own property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Right to privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Right to reasonable standard of living . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Right to rest and leisure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to safe work environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Right to shelter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Right to strike . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Right to work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Rights of children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 13

 S
 Second chamber reserved policy areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 15
 Second chamber selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Secret ballot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Selection of active-duty commanders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Size of second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Source of constitutional authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Standing committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 22
 State support for children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 State support for the disabled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 State support for the elderly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Structure of legislative chamber(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10, 11
 Structure of the courts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 Subsidiary unit government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 13, 25
 Supreme court powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Supreme court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Supreme court term length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 Supreme/ordinary court judge removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 12, 24

 T
 Tax bills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 17
 Term length for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Term length of second chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Transitional provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Treaty ratification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 20
 Type of government envisioned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

 V
 Veto override procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

Argentina 1853 (reinst. 1983, rev. 1994) Page 33
