The Oration of the Emperor Constantine to the Assembly of the Saints (Constantine the Great)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 The Oration

 of

 the emperor constantine,

 which he addressed

 "to the assembly of the saints."

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.--Preliminary Remarks on the Feast of Easter: and how the
 Word of God, having conferred Manifold Benefits on Mankind, was
 betrayed by his Beneficiaries.

 That light which far outshines the day and sun, first pledge of
 resurrection, and renovation of bodies long since dissolved, [3366] the
 divine token [3367] of promise, the path which leads to everlasting
 life--in a word, the day of the Passion--is arrived, best beloved
 doctors, and ye, my friends who are assembled here, ye blessed
 multitudes, who worship him who is the author of all worship, and
 praise him continually with heart and voice, according to the precepts
 of his holy word. But thou, Nature, [3368] parent of all things, what
 blessing like to this hast thou ever accomplished for mankind? Nay
 rather, what is in any sense thy workmanship, since he who formed the
 universe is himself the author of thy being? For it is he who has
 arrayed thee in thy beauty; and the beauty of Nature is life according
 to Nature's laws. But principles quite opposed to Nature have mightily
 prevailed; in that men have agreed in withholding his rightful worship
 from the Lord of all, believing that the order of the universe
 depended, not on his providence, but, on the blind uncertainty of
 chance: and this notwithstanding the clearest announcement of the truth
 by his inspired prophets, whose words should have claimed belief, but
 were in every way resisted by that impious wickedness which hates the
 light of truth, and loves the obscure mazes of darkness. Nor was this
 error unaccompanied by violence and cruelty, especially in that the
 will of princes encouraged the blind impetuosity of the multitude, or
 rather itself led the way in the career of reckless folly. Such
 principles as these, confirmed by the practice of many generations,
 became the source of terrible evils in those early times: but no sooner
 had the radiance of the Saviour's presence appeared, than justice took
 the place of wrong, a calm succeeded the confusion of the storm, and
 the predictions of the prophets were all fulfilled. For after he had
 enlightened the world by the glorious discretion and purity of his
 character, and had ascended to the mansions of his father's house, he
 founded his Church on earth, as a holy temple of virtue, an immortal,
 imperishable temple, wherein the worship due to the Supreme Father and
 to himself should be piously performed. But what did the insane malice
 of the nations hereupon devise? Their effort was to reject the grace of
 Christ, and to ruin that Church which was ordained for the salvation of
 all, though they thus ensured the overthrow of their own superstition.
 [3369] Once more then unholy sedition, once more war and strife
 prevailed, with stiff-neckedness, luxurious riot, and that craving for
 wealth which now soothes its victims with specious hope, now strikes
 them with groundless fear; a craving which is contrary to nature, and
 the very characteristic of Vice herself. Let her, however, lie
 prostrate in the dust, and own the victorious power of Virtue; and let
 her rend and tear herself, as well she may, in the bitterness of
 repentance. But let us now proceed to speak of topics which pertain to
 the Divine doctrine.

 [3366] Or "once suffering."

 [3367] hermaiou, "gift of Hermes"; i.e. providential good-fortune.
 Valesius wrongly conjectures herma, "foundation" of promise.

 [3368] Valesius, followed by various translators, substitutes "God" for
 "Nature." But all ms. authority, and the context as well, is against.

 [3369] 1709, Molz., Vales., Cous., render "substitute in place thereof
 their own superstition."

 Chapter II.--An Appeal to the Church and to his Hearers to pardon and
 correct the Errors of His Speech.

 Hear then, thou master [3370] of the ship, possessor of virgin purity,
 and thou Church, the cherisher of tender and inexperienced age,
 guardian of truth and gentleness, through whose perennial fountain the
 stream [3371] of salvation flows! Be ye also indulgent, my hearers, who
 worship God sincerely, and are, therefore, the objects of his care:
 attending, not to the language, but to the truth of what is said; not
 to him who speaks, but rather to the pious zeal which hallows his
 discourse! For what will be the use of words when the real purpose of
 the speaker remains unknown? It may be, indeed, that I essay great
 things; the love of God which animates my soul, a love which overpowers
 natural reserve, is my plea for the bold attempt. On you, then, I call,
 who are best instructed in the mysteries of God, to aid me with your
 counsel, to follow me with your thoughts, and correct whatever shall
 savor of error in my words, expecting no display of perfect knowledge,
 but graciously accepting the sincerity of my endeavor. And may the
 Spirit of the Father and the Son accord his mighty aid, while I utter
 the words which he shall suggest to speech or thought. [3372] For if
 any one, whether in the practice of eloquence, or any other art,
 expects to produce a finished work without the help of God, both the
 author and his efforts will be found alike imperfect; while he has no
 cause to fear, no room for discouragement, [3373] who has once been
 blessed with the inspiration of Heaven. Wherefore asking your
 indulgence for the length of this preface, let us attempt the theme in
 its utmost scope. [3374]

 [3370] [The bishop who is thus metaphorically addressed as the guide
 and controller of the Church.--Bag.]

 [3371] Some mss. read poma, "draught."

 [3372] "I read aute phr?sei...but regarding phr?sei as derived not from
 the verb phr?zein, but from the noun phr?sis."--Hein.

 [3373] "Ought not to shrink or to be neglectful."

 [3374] Valesius, followed by 1709 and substantially by Bag., omitting
 pros, renders "enter upon the head and principal matter of our design."
 Hein. retains pros, and like Molz. renders "proceed, as well as I may,
 to my theme." He means rather that having God's help he will not fear
 to "essay great things."

 Chapter III.--That God is the Father of the Word, and the Creator of
 all Things; and that Material Objects could not continue to exist, were
 their Causes Various.

 God, who is ever above all existence, and the good which all things
 desire, has no origin, and therefore no beginning, being himself the
 originator [3375] of all things which receive existence. But he who
 proceeds from him is again united to him; and this separation from and
 union with him is not local, but intellectual in its character. For
 this generation was accompanied by no diminution of the Father's
 substance (as in the case of generation by seed); but by the
 determining act of foreknowledge God manifested a Saviour presiding
 over [3376] this sensible world, and all created things therein. [3377]
 From hence, then, is the source of existence and life to all things
 which are within the compass of this world; hence proceed the soul, and
 every sense; [3378] hence those organs through which the
 sense-perceptions are perfected. What, then, is the object of this
 argument? To prove that there is One director of all things that exist,
 and that all things, whether in heaven or on earth, both natural and
 organized bodies, [3379] are subject to his single sovereignty. For if
 the dominion of these things, numberless as they are, were in the
 hands, not of one but of many, there must be a partition and
 distribution of the elements, and the old fables would be true; [3380]
 jealousy, too, and ambition, striving for superior power, would destroy
 the harmonious concord of the whole, while each of the many masters
 would regulate in a manner different from the rest the portion subject
 to his control. The fact, however, that this universal order is ever
 one and the same, is the proof that it is under the care of a superior
 power, and that its origin cannot be ascribed to chance. Else how could
 the author of universal nature ever be known? To whom first, or last,
 could prayers and supplications be addressed? Whom could I choose
 [3381] as the object of my worship, without being guilty of impiety
 towards the rest? Again, if haply I desired to obtain some temporal
 blessing, should I not, while expressing my gratitude to the Power who
 favored my request, convey a reproach to him who opposed it? Or to whom
 should I pray, when desiring to know the cause of my calamity, and to
 obtain deliverance? Or let us suppose that the answer is given by
 oracles and prophecies, but that the case is not within the scope of
 their authority, being the province of some other deity. [3382] Where,
 then, is mercy? where is the provident care of God for the human race?
 Unless, indeed, some more benevolent Power, assuming a hostile attitude
 against another who has no such feeling, be disposed to accord me his
 protection. Hence anger, discords, mutual censure, and finally
 universal confusion, would ensue, while each departed from his proper
 sphere of action, dissatisfied, through ambitious love of power, with
 his allotted portion. What, then, would be the result of these things?
 Surely this discord among the heavenly powers would prove destructive
 to the interests of earth: the orderly alternation of times and seasons
 would disappear; the successive productions of the earth would be
 enjoyed no more: the day itself, and the repose of night which follows
 it, would cease to be. But enough on this subject: let us once more
 resume that species of reasoning which admits of no reply.

 [3375] "Beginning."

 [3376] Presiding "overseer," "president," or "ruler." It is the one who
 has charge of games or ships or public works, &c.

 [3377] Cf. John i. 3, 13, 14, and Eph. i. 10. There is the greatest
 variety in the rendering of this passage, of which Bag.'s is the worst.
 The writer draws here on a philosophy of the Logos, which recognizes
 the second person of the Trinity as the creator and head of created
 things. The free version of Cousin gives the best flavor of the idea.
 "He was produced by the inexhaustible fecundity of his eternal mind to
 preside over the creation and government of this visible world." A
 better translation waits on a better exposition of the doctrine of the
 Logos and its history.

 [3378] Molz.renders "und die Organe, mit Hilfe derer das Wahrgenommene
 innerlich zur Idee erhoben wird."

 [3379] Chr.substantially "natural and artificial"; Molz. "lifeless and
 live"; perhaps "inorganic and organic" is meant.

 [3380] [Alluding to the fabulous division of the world between the
 brothers Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto. Valesius in loc.--Bag.] Or rather
 Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades. Zeus had the heavens, Poseidon the sea, and
 Hades the underworld, while the earth remained "with high Olympus,
 common to us all"--a fruitful source of dissension. Cf. Homer, Il. XV.
 184-195, ed. Doederlein, 2 (1864), p. 64-65; tr. Bryant, XV. ll.
 227-245.

 [3381] A possible reading here is exairetos, i.e. take as the chief
 object, &c.--Vales. and Hein.

 [3382] Valesius remarks that many instances are recorded where the
 oracle of Apollo replied to those who consulted him that Bacchus or
 Saturn must be placated in order to their liberation.

 Chapter IV.--On the Error of Idolatrous Worship.

 Whatever has had a beginning, has also an end. Now that which is a
 beginning in respect of time, is called a generation: and whatever is
 by generation is subject to corruption, and its beauty [3383] is
 impaired by the lapse of time. How, then, can they whose origin is from
 corruptible generation, be immortal? Again, this supposition has gained
 credit with the ignorant multitude, that marriages, and the birth of
 children, are usual among the gods. Granting, then, such offspring to
 be immortal, and continually produced, the race must of necessity
 multiply to excess: and if this were so, where is the heaven, or the
 earth, which could contain so vast and still increasing a multitude of
 gods? But what shall we say of those men who represent these celestial
 beings as joined in incestuous union with their sister goddesses, and
 charge them with adultery and impurity? [3384] We declare, further,
 with all confidence, that the very honors and worship which these
 deities receive from men are accompanied by acts of wantonness and
 profligacy. Once more; the experienced and skillful sculptor, having
 formed the conception of his design, perfects his work according to the
 rules of art; and in a little while, as if forgetful of himself,
 idolizes his own creation, and adores it as an immortal god, while yet
 he admits that himself, the author and maker of the image, is a mortal
 man. Nay, they even show the graves and monuments of those whom they
 deem immortal, and bestow divine honors on the dead: not knowing that
 that which is truly blessed and incorruptible needs no distinction
 which perishable men can give: for that Being, who is seen by the
 mental eye, and conceived by the intellect alone, requires to be
 distinguished by no external form, and admits no figure to represent
 its character and likeness. But the honors of which we speak are given
 to those who have yielded to the power of death: they once were men,
 and tenants, while they lived, of a mortal body.

 [3383] "Form."

 [3384] A favorite theme of the Christian apologists. Cf. long list
 given in the Clementine Recognitions, X. 22.

 Chapter V.--That Christ, the Son of God, created All Things, and has
 appointed to Every Thing the Term of its Existence.

 But why do I defile my tongue with unhallowed words, when my object is
 to sound the praises of the true God? Rather let me cleanse myself, as
 it were, from this bitter draught by the pure stream which flows from
 the everlasting fountain of the virtue [3385] of that God who is the
 object of my praise. Be it my special province to glorify Christ, as
 well by the actions of my life, as by that thanksgiving which is due to
 him for the manifold and signal blessings which he has bestowed. I
 affirm, therefore, that he [3386] has laid the foundations of this
 universe; and conceived the race of men, ordaining these things by his
 word. And immediately he transferred our newly created parents
 (ignorant at first, according to his will, of good and evil) to a happy
 region, abounding in flowers and fruits of every kind. [3387] At
 length, however, he appointed them a seat on earth befitting creatures
 endued with reason; and then unfolded to their faculties, as
 intelligent beings, the knowledge of good and evil. Then, too, he bade
 the race increase; and each healthy region of the world, as far as the
 bounds of the circumambient ocean, became the dwelling-place of men;
 while with this increase of numbers the invention of the useful arts
 went hand in hand. Meantime the various species of inferior [3388]
 animals increased in due proportion, each kind discovering some
 characteristic quality, the special gift of nature: the tame
 distinguished by gentleness and obedience to man; the wild by strength
 and swiftness, and an instinctive foresight which warned them to escape
 from peril. The gentler animals he placed entirely beneath man's
 protecting care, but entailed on him the necessity of strife with those
 of fiercer nature. He next created the feathered race, manifold in
 number, diverse in character and habits; brilliant with every variety
 of color, and endued with native powers of melody. Finally, having
 arranged with wise discrimination whatever else the compass of this
 world contains, and having assigned to every creature the stated term
 of its existence, he thus completed the beautiful order of the perfect
 whole.

 [3385] Or "perfections."

 [3386] "To be referred not to the preceding Christ' but...the supreme
 God."--Hein. (?).

 [3387] [Constantine seems to have supposed the Paradise of our first
 parents to be somewhere apart from this earth. In this fanciful idea,
 which is obviously indefensible from Scripture he is countenanced by
 the opinions of Tertullian, Tatian, Clement of Alexandria, Origen,
 Valentinian, and Jerome, some of whom placed it in or above the third
 heaven, others in the fourth, others again in a world superior to the
 present, &c. See the note of Valesius, who quotes from some of these
 Fathers. In reference to what follows, we may ask, Was Constantine
 acquainted with, or does he avoid noticing, the circumstances of the
 fall?--Bag.] Ans. Constantine like many another to our own day seems to
 regard the "fall" as a fall upwards--that complacent optimism which
 ignores Scripture and Schopenhauer alike.

 [3388] Without the logos, i.e. inarticulate or (as here) irrational.

 Chapter VI.--The Falsity of the General Opinion respecting Fate [3389]
 is proved by the Consideration of Human Laws, and by the Works of
 Creation, the Course of which is not Fortuitous, but according to an
 Orderly Arrangement which evinces the Design of the Creator.

 The great majority, however, in their folly, ascribe the regulation of
 the universe to nature, while some imagine fate, or accident, [3390] to
 be the cause. With regard to those who attribute the control of all
 things to fate, they know not that in using this term they utter a mere
 word, but designate no active power, nor anything which has real and
 substantial existence. For what can this fate be, considered in itself,
 if nature be the first cause of all things? Or what shall we suppose
 nature itself to be, if the law of fate be inviolable? Indeed, the very
 assertion that there is a law of fate implies that such law is the work
 of a legislator: if, therefore, fate itself be a law, it must be a law
 devised by God. All things, therefore, are subject to God, and nothing
 is beyond the sphere of his power. If it be said that fate is the will
 [3391] of God, and is so considered, we admit the fact. But in what
 respect do justice, [3392] or self-control, [3393] or the other
 virtues, depend on fate? From whence, if so, do their contraries, as
 injustice and intemperance, proceed? For vice has its origin from
 nature, not from fate; and virtue is the due regulation of natural
 character and disposition. But, granting that the varied results of
 actions, whether right or erroneous in themselves, depend on fortune or
 fate: in what sense can the general principle of justice, [3394] the
 principle of rendering to every one his due, be ascribed to fate?
 [3395] Or how can it be said that laws, encouragements to virtue and
 dissuasives from what is evil, praise, blame, punishment, in short
 whatever operates as a motive to virtue, and deters from the practice
 of vice, derive their origin from fortune or accident, and not rather
 from that of justice, [3396] which is a characteristic attribute of the
 God of providence? For the events which befall men are consequent upon
 the tenor of their lives. Hence pestilence or sedition, famine and
 plenty, succeed in turn, declaring plainly and emphatically that all
 these things are regulated with reference to our course of life. For
 the Divine Being delights in goodness, but turns with aversion from all
 impiety; looks with acceptance on the humble spirit, but abhors
 presumption, and that pride which exalts itself above what becomes a
 creature. And though the proofs of these truths are clear and manifest
 to our sight, they appear in a still stronger light, when we collect,
 and as it were concentrate our thoughts within ourselves, and ponder
 their causes with deep attention. I say, then, that it becomes us to
 lead a life of modesty and gentleness, not suffering our thoughts to
 rise proudly above our natural condition, and ever mindful that God is
 near us, and is the observer of all our actions. But let us still
 farther test the truth of the proposition, that the order of the
 universe depends on chance [3397] or accident. [3398] Are we then to
 suppose that the stars and other heavenly bodies, the earth and sea,
 fire and wind, water and air, the succession of the seasons, the
 recurrence of summer and winter, that all these have an undesigned and
 fortuitous existence, and not rather that they proceed from the
 creative hand of God? Some, indeed, are so senseless as to say that
 most of these things have been devised by mankind because of their need
 of them. Let it be admitted that this opinion has a semblance of reason
 in regard to earthly and corruptible things (though Nature herself
 supplies every good with a lavish hand); yet can we believe that things
 which are immortal and unchangeable are the inventions of men? These,
 indeed, and all things else which are beyond the reach of our senses,
 and comprehended by the intellect [3399] alone, receive their being,
 not from the material life of man, but from the intellectual and
 eternal essence of God. Again, the orderly arrangement of these things
 is the work of his providence: for instance, that the day, deriving
 radiance from the sun, is bright; that night succeeds his setting, and
 the starry host [3400] by which night itself is redeemed from total
 darkness. And what shall we say of the moon, which when most distant
 from, and opposite to the sun, is filled with light, but wanes in
 proportion to the nearness of her approach to him? Do not these things
 manifestly evince the intelligence [3401] and sagacious wisdom of God?
 Add to this that needful warmth of the solar rays which ripens the
 fruits of the earth; the currents of wind, so conducive to the
 fertility of the seasons; the cool and refreshing showers; and the
 harmony of all these things in accordance with which all are reasonably
 and systematically conducted: lastly, the everlasting order of the
 planets, which return to the self-same place at their appointed times:
 are not all these, as well as the perfect ministry of the stars,
 obedient to a divine law, evident proofs of the ordinance [3402] of
 God? Again, do the mountain heights, the deep and hollow valleys, the
 level and extensive plains, useful as they are, as well as pleasing to
 the eye, appear to exist independently of the will of God? Or do not
 the proportion and alternate succession of land and water, serviceable,
 the one for husbandry, the other for the transport of such foreign
 products as we need, afford a clear demonstration of his exact and
 proportionate providential care? For instance, the mountains contain a
 store of water, which the level ground receives, and after imbibing
 sufficient for the renovation of the soil, sends forth the residue into
 the sea, and the sea in turn passes it onward to the ocean. And still
 we dare to say that all these things happen by chance [3403] and
 accident; unable though we be to show by what shape or form this chance
 is characterized; a thing which has no foundation either in intellect
 or sense existence; which rings in our ears as the mere sound of an
 unsubstantial name!

 [3389] For a full discussion of various definitions and usage of the
 word Fate (he eiriarmene) in Greek philosophy, compare Zeller, Stoics,
 Epicureans, and Sceptics (Lond. 1880), p. 170-171, notes.

 [3390] automaton. The usual word for chance or accident is tuche. These
 may be here, as is often the case, simple synonyms, but both words are
 used in the same phrase later in such way as to suggest that tuche is
 parallel with "fate" rather than "chance" in the author's mind.
 automaton seems to be used of "self-originating," tuche of originating
 from some unknown cause or without any cause. The former is the modern,
 self-energized, "lift-yourselves-by-your-own-boot-straps" evolution.
 The latter is a form of agnosticism. Aristotle (Metaph. 10. 8) defines
 chance (tuche) as a "cause by accident" (sumbebekos), or more literally
 "coincidence," which is substantially what Janet (Final Causes, 1878,
 p. 19) means by defining chance as the coincidence of causes. At the
 end of the same chapter Aristotle uses automaton in contrast with
 tuche--"tuche or even automaton," which has been rendered (M'Mahon)
 "chance or even spontaneity." In modern phrase those who hold these
 three various views of the universe might be characterized as "material
 evolutionists," "transcendental idealists," and "philosophical (or
 perhaps agnostic') evolutionists."

 [3391] i.e. "plan."

 [3392] dikaiosune, better "righteousness," "correctness of thinking,
 feeling, and acting" (Thayer, Lex. p. 149). So its opposite mentioned
 below (adikia) is better "unrighteousness," as generally in the revised
 English version of the N.T., "mammon of unrighteousness" (Luke xvi. 9,
 e.g.). The word means more than our "just," "more," as Socrates said
 (Plat. Rep. 1. 331), "than to speak the truth and pay your debts."
 Righteousness is the better translation, but we are met with the
 difficulty that it has generally been rendered justice in translations
 of the philosophers.

 [3393] sophrosune, temperance, vs. akolasia, intemperance, below;
 soundness of mind vs. insanity (cf. use in Acts xxvi. 25, and of verb
 in Mark v. 15; Luke viii. 35; also use in Plato, Rep. 332, &c.);
 self-control vs. unbridled desire. This same contrast of sophrosune and
 akolasia is found in Aristotle, Eth. 2, vii. 3; 7, vii. I; and
 especially 7, ix. 5.

 [3394] ti dikaion, not dikaiosune

 [3395] This is very free, and follows translation of Valesius and 1709
 text. 1709 marg. translates more literally, "But either crimes, or, on
 the other hand, brave performances, which are [the property] of a good
 and right purpose of mind, if they happen sometimes one way, at others
 another," and Molz. somewhat similarly. It is possible that it should
 read: "Granted that either evil actions proceeding from a good and
 upright will, or contrariwise, good actions [from an evil will] which
 issue directly contrary [to their own nature or to just expectation]
 may be ascribed to chance or fate, how can the right," &c.

 [3396] dikaiosune

 [3397] tuche.

 [3398] automaton

 [3399] noos was not narrowed to the mere intellectual functions.
 "Intellectual" is not to be taken of brain function only, but of brain
 and heart,--real knowing, as against the "intellectuation" which men
 nowadays try to force the word "know" to mean.

 [3400] "Quire of the stars," 1709.

 [3401] The "logos endi?thetos" of Philo, frequent in Alexandrian
 theologians. It is the unuttered thought vs. the expressed word.

 [3402] Fore-ordination, or plan.

 [3403] automaton

 Chapter VII.--In regard to Things above our Comprehension, we should
 glorify the Creator's Wisdom, and attribute their Causes to him alone,
 and not to Chance.

 In fact, this word "chance" is the expression of men who think in
 haphazard and illogical fashion; who are unable to understand the
 causes of these things, and who, owing to the feebleness of their own
 apprehensions, conceive that those things for which they cannot assign
 a reason, are ordered without reason. There are, unquestionably, some
 things which possess wonderful natural properties, and the full
 apprehension of which is very difficult: for example, the nature of hot
 springs. For no one can easily explain the cause of so powerful a fire;
 and it is indeed surprising that though surrounded on all sides by a
 body of cold water, it loses none of its native heat. These phenomena
 appear to be of rare occurrence throughout the world, being intended, I
 am persuaded, to afford to mankind convincing evidence of the power of
 that Providence which ordains that two directly opposite natures, heat
 and cold, should thus proceed from the self-same source. Many indeed,
 yea, numberless, are the gifts which God has bestowed for the comfort
 and enjoyment of man; and of these the fruit of the olive-tree and the
 vine deserve especial notice; the one for its power of renovating and
 cheering the soul, [3404] the other because it ministers to our
 enjoyment, and is likewise adapted for the cure of bodily disease.
 Marvelous, too, is the course of rivers, flowing night and day with
 unceasing motion, and presenting a type of ever-flowing, never-ceasing
 life: and equally wonderful is the alternate succession of day and
 night.

 [3404] psuches = "soul." In the absence of a proper Biblical psychology
 the word has been most sadly abused in translations. The only way back
 to a proper conception of the words "spirit" and "soul" and "life,"
 &c., is to re-establish a uniform rendering for them. It is as bad as
 the rendering of our English version, where nephesk (= psuche) is
 rendered "life."

 Chapter VIII.--That God bestows an Abundant Supply of whatever is
 suited to the Wants of Man, and ministers but sparingly to his
 Pleasures; in Both Cases with a View to his Advantage.

 Let what has been said suffice to prove that nothing exists without
 reason and intelligence, and that reason itself and providence are of
 God. It is he who has also distributed the metals, as gold, silver,
 copper, and the rest, in due proportion; ordaining an abundant supply
 of those which would be most needed and generally employed, while he
 dispensed those which serve the purposes merely of pleasure in
 adornment of luxury with a liberal and yet a sparing hand, holding a
 mean between parsimony and profusion. For the searchers for metals,
 were those which are employed for ornament procured in equal abundance
 with the rest, would be impelled by avarice to despise and neglect to
 gather those which, like iron or copper, are serviceable for husbandry,
 or house-building, or the equipment of ships; and would care for those
 only which conduce to luxury and a superfluous excess of wealth. Hence
 it is, as they say, that the search for gold and silver is far more
 difficult and laborious than that for any other metals, the violence of
 the toil thus acting as a counterpoise to the violence of the desire.
 And how many instances might still further be enumerated of the
 workings of that Divine Providence which, in all the gifts which it has
 so unsparingly conferred upon us, plainly urges us to the practice of
 self-control and all other virtues, and leads us away from unbefitting
 covetousness! To trace the secret reasons of all these things is indeed
 a task which exceeds the power of human faculties. For how can the
 intellect of a frail and perishable being arrive at the knowledge of
 perfect truth, or apprehend in its purity the counsel of God from the
 beginning?

 Chapter IX.--Of the Philosophers, who fell into Mistaken Notions, and
 Some of them into Danger, by their Desire of Universal Knowledge.--Also
 of the Doctrines of Plato.

 We ought, therefore, to aim at objects which are within our power, and
 exceed not the capacities of our nature. For the persuasive influence
 of argument has a tendency to draw most of us away from the truth of
 things, which has happened to many philosophers, who have employed
 themselves in reasoning, and the study of natural science, and who, as
 often as the magnitude of the subject surpasses their powers of
 investigation, adopt various devices for obscuring the truth. Hence
 their diversities of judgment, and contentious opposition to each
 others' doctrines, and this notwithstanding their pretensions to
 wisdom. Hence, too, popular commotions have arisen, and severe
 sentences, passed by those in power, apprehensive of the overthrow of
 hereditary institutions, have proved destructive to many of the
 disputants themselves. Socrates, for example, elated by his skill in
 argumentation, indulging his power of making the worse appear the
 better reason, [3405] and playing continually with the subtleties of
 controversy, fell a victim to the slander of his own countrymen and
 fellow-citizens. Pythagoras, too, who laid special claim to the virtues
 of silence and self-control, was convicted of falsehood. For he
 declared to the Italians that the doctrines which he had received
 during his travels in Egypt, and which had long before been divulged by
 the priests of that nation, were a personal revelation to himself from
 God. Lastly, Plato himself, the gentlest and most refined of all, who
 first essayed to draw men's thoughts from sensible to intellectual and
 eternal objects, and taught them to aspire to sublimer speculations, in
 the first place declared, with truth, a God exalted above every
 essence, but to him he added also a second, distinguishing them
 numerically as two, though both possessing one perfection, and the
 being of the second Deity proceeding from [3406] the first. For he is
 the creator and controller of the universe, and evidently supreme:
 while the second, as the obedient agent of his commands, refers the
 origin of all creation to him as the cause. In accordance, therefore,
 with the soundest reason, we may say that there is one Being whose care
 and providence are over all things, even God the Word, who has ordered
 all things; but the Word being God himself is also the Son of God. For
 by what name can we designate him except by this title of the Son,
 without falling into the most grievous error? For the Father of all
 things is properly considered the Father of his own Word. Thus far,
 then, Plato's sentiments were sound; but in what follows he appears to
 have wandered from the truth, in that he introduces a plurality of
 gods, to each of whom he assigns specific forms. And this has given
 occasion to still greater error among the unthinking portion of
 mankind, who pay no regard to the providence of the Supreme God, but
 worship images of their own devising, made in the likeness of men or
 other living beings. Hence it appears that the transcendent nature and
 admirable learning of this philosopher, tinged as they were with such
 errors as these, were by no means free from impurity and alloy. And yet
 he seems to me to retract, and correct his own words, when he plainly
 declares that a rational soul is the breath [3407] of God, and divides
 all things into two classes, intellectual and sensible: [the one
 simple, the other] [3408] consisting of bodily structure; the one
 comprehended by the intellect alone, the other estimated by the
 judgment and the senses. The former class, therefore, which partakes of
 the divine spirit, and is uncompounded and immaterial, is eternal, and
 inherits everlasting life; but the latter, being entirely resolved into
 the elements of which it is composed, has no share in everlasting life.
 He farther teaches the admirable doctrine, that those who have passed a
 life of virtue, that is, the spirits of good and holy men, are
 enshrined, after their separation from the body, in the fairest
 mansions of heaven. A doctrine not merely to be admired, but profitable
 too. [3409] For who can believe in such a statement, and aspire to such
 a happy lot, without desiring to practice righteousness and temperance,
 and to turn aside from vice? Consistently with this doctrine he
 represents the spirits of the wicked as tossed like wreckage on the
 streams of Acheron and Pyriphlegethon.

 [3405] This is almost identically the form of what Socrates (Apol. c.
 2) declared to be the falsehood circulated by his enemies to his
 prejudice. "But far more dangerous are those who began when you were
 children and took possession of your minds with their falsehoods,
 telling of one Socrates, a wise man who...made the worse appear the
 better cause" (logon, "reason"), Tr. Jowett, 1 (1874), 316. This
 example does peculiar discredit either to the learning or the mental
 honesty of the author.

 [3406] Rather "deriving existence from," "proceeding from," gives
 strict idea, but may be confounded with the technical "proceeding from"
 of the "filioque" controversy, which is quite another phrase.

 [3407] "Spirit."

 [3408] "The one simple" is not in the text, but is a conjectural
 addition of Valesius, followed by most translators. "Consisting of
 bodily structure" seems possibly to be an epexegetical phrase relating
 to the "all things" which he divides into intellectual and sensible,
 making the intellectual as well as the sensible to have bodily
 (somatic) structure. "All things," or "the universe," a plural
 technical term, is regarded as his mind passes to the explanation as
 "the all." This psychological probability appears a simpler solution
 than the various textual conjectures.

 [3409] Heinichen suspects that there has been an inversion of words
 here, and that it should have been, "He further teaches the admirable
 and profitable doctrine," and "a doctrine not merely to be admired"
 omitted.

 Chapter X.--Of those who reject the Doctrines of Philosophers, as well
 as those of Scripture: and that we ought to believe the Poets in All
 Things, or disbelieve them in All.

 There are, however, some persons so infatuated, that when they meet
 with such sentiments as these, they are neither converted or alarmed:
 nay, they even treat them with contempt and scorn, as if they listened
 to the inventions of fable; applauding, perhaps, the beauty of the
 eloquence, but abhorring the severity of the precepts. And yet they
 give credence to the fictions of the poets, and make both civilized and
 barbarous [3410] countries ring with exploded and false tales. For the
 poets assert that the judgment of souls after death is committed to men
 whose parentage they ascribe to the gods, [3411] extolling their
 righteousness and impartiality and represent them as guardians of the
 dead. The same poets describe the battles of the gods and certain
 usages of war among them, and speak of them as subject to the power of
 fate. Some of these deities they picture to us as cruel, others as
 strangers to all care for the human race, and others again as hateful
 in their character. They introduce them also as mourning the slaughter
 of their own children, thus implying their inability to succor, not
 strangers merely, but those most dear to them. They describe them, too,
 as subject to human passions, and sing of their battles and wounds,
 their joys and sorrows. And in all this they appear worthy of belief.
 [3412] For if we suppose them to be moved by a divine impulse to
 attempt the poetic art, we are bound to believe them and to be
 persuaded of what they utter under this inspiration. They speak, then,
 of the calamities to which their divinities are subject; calamities
 which of course are altogether true! But it will be objected that it is
 the privilege of poets to lie, since the peculiar province of poetry is
 to charm [3413] the spirits of the hearers, while the very essence of
 truth is that things told be in reality exactly what they are said to
 be. [3414] Let us grant that it is a characteristic of poetry
 occasionally to conceal the truth. But they who speak falsehood do it
 not without an object; being influenced either by a desire of personal
 gain or advantage, or possibly, being conscious of some evil conduct,
 they are induced to disguise the truth by dread of the threatening
 vengeance of the laws. But surely it were possible for them (in my
 judgment), by adhering faithfully to truth at least while treating of
 the nature of the Supreme Being, to avoid the guilt at once of
 falsehood and impiety.

 [3410] "All the Greek-speaking world, and foreign lands as well."

 [3411] Rhadamanthus was a son of Jove (or Vulcan) and Europa. Cf. Hom.
 Il. 14. 322; Od. 4. 564, 7. 323.

 [3412] [There can be no doubt (though the fact is not immediately
 apparent from the wording of the text), that the spirit of this passage
 is ironical.--Bag.]

 [3413] Rather "cheat," or "delude." Mr. Charles Dudley Warner, essayist
 and novelist, says in an interesting essay on the relation of fiction
 to life, that the object of fiction is to produce illusions, and the
 test of its art is its power to produce such illusion.

 [3414] There is a temptation here to adopt the translation of Molz.
 "Truth lies in the fiction, however, when what is told corresponds to
 reality." Mr. Warner, in his lecture, goes on to say that the object of
 fiction is to reveal what is,--not the base and sordid things only or
 peculiarly, but the best possibilities, and gives an exquisite
 exposition of the fact that the idealism of true fiction is simply the
 realism of the nobler characteristics and truths. The truth is, that
 the object of fiction or poetry as art is to produce the image,--fill
 the whole personality with a picture. This is only gained in its
 highest form when every detail exactly corresponds to truth or reality.
 The function of fiction is not illusion, but realization. Its object is
 the reproduction of truth. Molz. makes Constantine say that fiction is
 true when it corresponds to reality, though the forms be not historical
 or actual. This is a true observation, but not what Constantine says.
 He says in substance, with Mr. Warner, that the object is to produce
 illusion or deceive, while the idea of truth is just the reverse.

 Chapter XI.--On the Coming of our Lord in the Flesh; its Nature and
 Cause. [3415]

 Whoever, then, has pursued a course unworthy of a life of virtue, and
 is conscious of having lived an irregular and disorderly life, let him
 repent, and turn with enlightened spiritual vision to God; and let him
 abandon his past career of wickedness, content if he attain to wisdom
 even in his declining years. We, however, have received no aid from
 human instruction; nay, whatever graces of character are esteemed of
 good report by those who have understanding, are entirely the gift of
 God. And I am able to oppose no feeble buckler against the deadly
 weapons of Satan's armory; I mean the knowledge I possess of those
 things which are pleasing to him: and of these I will select such as
 are appropriate to my present design, while I proceed to sing the
 praises of the Father of all. But do thou, O Christ, Saviour of
 mankind, be present to aid me in my hallowed task! Direct the words
 which celebrate thy virtues, [3416] and instruct me worthily to sound
 thy praises. And now, let no one expect to listen to the graces of
 elegant language: for well I know that the nerveless eloquence of those
 who speak to charm the ear, and whose aim is rather applause than sound
 argument, is distasteful to hearers of sound judgment. It is asserted,
 then, by some profane and senseless persons, that Christ, whom we
 worship, was justly condemned to death, and that he who is the author
 of life to all, was himself deprived of life. That such an assertion
 should be made by those who have once dared to enter the paths of
 impiety, who have cast aside all fear, and all thought of concealing
 their own depravity, is not surprising. But it is beyond the bounds of
 folly itself that they should be able, as it seems, really to persuade
 themselves that the incorruptible God yielded to the violence of men,
 and not rather to that love alone which he bore to the human race: that
 they should fail to perceive that divine magnanimity and forbearance is
 changed by no insult, is moved from its intrinsic steadfastness by no
 revilings; but is ever the same, breaking down and repelling, by the
 spirit of wisdom and greatness of soul, the savage fierceness of those
 who assail it. The gracious kindness of God had determined to abolish
 iniquity, and to exalt order and justice. Accordingly, he gathered a
 company of the wisest among men, [3417] and ordained that most noble
 and useful doctrine, which is calculated to lead the good and blessed
 of mankind to an imitation of his own providential care. And what
 higher blessing can we speak of than this, that God should prescribe
 the way of righteousness, and make those who are counted worthy of his
 instruction like himself; that goodness might be communicated to all
 classes of mankind, and eternal felicity be the result? This is the
 glorious victory: this the true power: this the mighty work, worthy of
 its author, the restoration of all people to soundness of mind: and the
 glory of this triumph we joyfully ascribe to thee, thou Saviour of all!
 But thou, vile and wretched blasphemy, whose glory is in lies and
 rumors and calumny; thy power is to deceive and prevail with the
 inexperience of youth, and with men who still retain the folly of
 youth. These thou seducest from the service of the true God, and
 settest up false idols as the objects of their worship and their
 prayers; and thus the reward of their folly awaits thy deluded victims:
 for they calumniate Christ, the author of every blessing, who is God,
 and the Son of God. Is not the worship of the best and wisest of the
 nations of this world worthily directed to that God, who, while
 possessing boundless power, remains immovably true to his own purpose,
 and retains undiminished his characteristic kindness and love to man?
 Away, then, ye impious, for still ye may while vengeance on your
 transgressions is yet withheld; begone to your sacrifices, your feasts,
 your scenes of revelry and drunkenness, wherein, under the semblance of
 religion, your hearts are devoted to profligate enjoyment, and
 pretending to perform sacrifices, yourselves are the willing slaves of
 your own pleasures. No knowledge have ye of any good, nor even of the
 first commandment of the mighty God, who both declares his will to man,
 and gives commission to his Son to direct the course of human life,
 that they who have passed a career of virtue and self-control may
 obtain, according to the judgment of that Son, a second, yea, a blessed
 and happy existence. [3418] I have now declared the decree of God
 respecting the life which he prescribes to man, neither ignorantly, as
 many have done, nor resting on the ground of opinion or conjecture. But
 it may be that some will ask, Whence this title of Son? Whence this
 generation of which we speak, if God be indeed only One, and incapable
 of union with another? We are, however, to consider generation as of
 two kinds; one in the way of natural birth, which is known to all; the
 other, that which is the effect of an eternal cause, the mode of which
 is seen by the prescience of God, and by those among men whom he loves.
 For he who is wise will recognize the cause which regulates the harmony
 of creation. Since, then, nothing exists without a cause, of necessity
 the cause of existing substances preceded their existence. But since
 the world and all things that it contains exist, and are preserved,
 [3419] their preserver must have had a prior existence; so that Christ
 is the cause of preservation, and the preservation of things is an
 effect: [3420] even as the Father is the cause of the Son, and the Son
 the effect of that cause. Enough, then, has been said to prove his
 priority of existence. But how do we explain his descent to this earth,
 and to men? His motive in this, [3421] as the prophets had foretold,
 originated in his watchful care for the interests of all: for it needs
 must be that the Creator should care for his own works. But when the
 time came for him to assume a terrestrial body, and to sojourn on this
 earth, the need requiring, he devised for himself a new mode [3422] of
 birth. Conception was there, yet apart from marriage: childbirth, yet
 pure virginity: and a maiden became the mother of God! An eternal
 nature received a beginning of temporal existence: a sensible form of a
 spiritual essence, a material manifestation of incorporeal brightness,
 [3423] appeared. Alike wondrous were the circumstances which attended
 this great event. A radiant dove, like that which flew from the ark of
 Noah, [3424] alighted on the Virgin's bosom: and accordant with this
 impalpable union, purer than chastity, more guileless than innocence
 itself, were the results which followed. From infancy possessing the
 wisdom of God, received with reverential awe by the Jordan, in whose
 waters he was baptized, gifted with that royal unction, the spirit of
 universal intelligence; with knowledge and power to perform miracles,
 and to heal diseases beyond the reach of human art; he yielded a swift
 and unhindered assent to the prayers of men, to whose welfare, indeed,
 his whole life was devoted without reserve. His doctrines instilled,
 not prudence only, [3425] but real wisdom: his hearers were instructed,
 not in the mere social virtues, [3426] but in the ways which conduct to
 the spiritual world; and devoted themselves to the contemplation of
 immutable and eternal things, and the knowledge of the Supreme Father.
 The benefits which he bestowed were no common blessings: for blindness,
 the gift of sight; for helpless weakness, the vigor of health; in the
 place of death, restoration to life again. I dwell not on that abundant
 provision in the wilderness, whereby a scanty measure of food became a
 complete and enduring supply [3427] for the wants of a mighty
 multitude. [3428] Thus do we render thanks to thee, our God and
 Saviour, according to our feeble power; unto thee, O Christ, supreme
 Providence of the mighty Father, who both savest us from evil, and
 impartest to us thy most blessed doctrine: for I say these things, not
 to praise, but to give thanks. For what mortal is he who shall worthily
 declare thy praise, of whom we learn that thou didst from nothing call
 creation into being, and illumine it with thy light; that thou didst
 regulate the confusion of the elements by the laws of harmony and
 order? But chiefly we mark thy loving-kindness, [3429] in that thou
 hast caused those whose hearts inclined to thee to desire earnestly a
 divine and blessed life, and hast provided that, like merchants of true
 blessings, they might impart to many others the wisdom and good fortune
 they had received; themselves, meanwhile, reaping the everlasting fruit
 of virtue. Freed from the trammels of vice, and imbued with the love of
 their fellow-men, they keep mercy ever before their eyes, and hoping
 for the promises of faith; [3430] devoted to modesty, and all those
 virtues which the past career of human life had thrown aside [but which
 were now restored by him whose providence is over all]. [3431] No other
 power could be found to devise a remedy for such evils, and for that
 spirit of injustice which had heretofore asserted its dominion over the
 race of men. Providence, however, could reach the circumstances even
 here, and with ease restored whatever had been disordered by violence
 and the licentiousness of human passion. And this restoring power he
 exercised without concealment. For he knew that, though there were some
 whose thoughts were able to recognize and understand his power, others
 there were whose brutish and senseless nature led them to rely
 exclusively on the testimony of their own senses. In open day,
 therefore, that no one, whether good or evil, might find room for
 doubt, he manifested his blessed and wondrous healing power; restoring
 the dead to life again, and renewing with a word the powers of those
 who had been bereft of bodily sense. [3432] Can we, in short, suppose,
 that to render the sea firm as the solid ground, to still the raging of
 the storm, and finally to ascend to heaven, after turning the unbelief
 of men to steadfast faith by the performance of these wondrous acts,
 demanded less than almighty power, was less than the work of God? Nor
 was the time of his passion unaccompanied by like wonders: when the sun
 was darkened, and the shades of night obscured the light of day. Then
 terror everywhere laid hold upon the people, and the thought that the
 end of all things was already come, and that chaos, such as had been
 ere the order of creation began, would once more prevail. Then, too,
 the cause was sought of so terrible an evil, and in what respect the
 trespasses of men had provoked the wrath of Heaven; until God himself,
 who surveyed with calm dignity the arrogance of the ungodly, renewed
 the face of heaven, and adorned it with the host of stars. Thus the
 beclouded face of Nature was again restored to her pristine beauty.

 [3415] One ms. adds, "and concerning those who did not know this
 mystery." In another the chapter is divided, and this is the heading of
 the second part.

 [3416] Or "this discourse concerning virtue."

 [3417] [Alluding to the apostles, who are called in the beginning of
 ch. 15, "the best men of their age." Were it our province to criticise,
 we might notice the contrariety of such expressions as these to the
 account which Scripture gives us of those "unlearned and ignorant men,"
 the feeble, and, in themselves, fallible instruments, whom God selected
 to further his wondrous designs of mercy to a ruined world.--Bag.] Were
 it in our province to criticise the critic, we might notice that the
 fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and refer to the whole
 Book of Proverbs. Any just conception of wisdom or true learning says
 the same thing. The man who knows that God and not phusis or tuche
 manages the universe, is more learned than the wisest of those learned
 in things which are not so.

 [3418] Christophorson extends ch. 10 to this point, and here introduces
 ch. 11, with the heading "On the coming of Our Lord in the flesh; its
 nature and cause."

 [3419] Preserved, preserver, and preservation = saved, saviour, and
 salvation. This represents the N.T. idea better than the popular
 conception which confuses Christ our Saviour with Christ our Redeemer.
 Redemption was a necessary part of his effort for our salvation, but
 the salvation itself was a saving, in literal English preserving. We
 have been redeemed; we are being saved.

 [3420] Bag.follows here Valesius' translation and note where he makes
 the word "preservation" a conjectural emendation of Scaliger,
 inconsistent with the meaning of the passage, and omits translating
 "the cause of all things that exist." But Hein. does not even hint such
 reading, and his text (followed also by Molz.), so far from tending to
 disturb the whole meaning, gives much the more intelligent conception.
 Christ is the preserver (saviour) of things. Preservation of things is
 the effect of that cause, just as the Father is the cause of the Son,
 and the Son the effect of that cause. Therefore the preserver precedes
 created things as a cause precedes its effect.

 [3421] Valesius expresses a preference for the reading kathodou
 (advent) here instead of katholou (universal), but the latter is the
 reading of Heinichen, and undoubtedly correct. Bag. has followed
 Valesius.

 [3422] "New mode" is a paraphrase supported by only one ms. The real
 meaning of nothen is well expressed by Chr., "alienam quandam a communi
 hominum natura nascendi rationem sibi excogitavit." Its usual meaning
 is "illegitimate."

 [3423] This is supposed to refer to Heb. i. 3, although a different
 Greek word is used.

 [3424] Various suggestions have been made regarding the dove which
 according to the literal rendering "flew from the ark of Noah."
 Christophorson (according to Valesius) supposes it to be that dove
 which Noah formerly sent out of the ark, this dove being a figure of
 the Holy Spirit which was afterward to come in the Virgin. Jerome, Ep.
 ad Oc., also regards the Noachic dove as a symbol of the Holy Spirit.
 Vales., followed by 1711 and Bag., prefer to translate as if it were
 "like that," &c. This form of the story, according to which the Holy
 Spirit descends in the form of a dove, is according to Valesius from
 the Apocrypha; perhaps, he suggests, from the "Gospel to the Hebrews."
 In later art the dove is the constant symbol of the Holy Spirit, and is
 often found in pictures of the annunciation, e.g. in pictures by
 Simeone Memmi, Dürer, Andrea del Sarto, and many others. It is found in
 six of the pictures of the annunciation given by Mrs. Jameson (Legends
 of the Madonna, p. 165 sq.).

 [3425] The author seems to have here a reference to the Aristotelian
 distinction between prudence and wisdom (cf. Ethics, 6. 3; 7. 8, &c.).
 It reminds of that passage (vi. 7, ed. Grant ad. ii. 165-166), where
 the two are distinguished and defined, wisdom being "concerned with the
 immutable, and prudence with the variable"; and a little farther along
 wisdom is distinguished from "statesmanship," i.e. the "social" of
 Bag., which is a form of "prudence" (tr. Williams, p. 160), and indeed
 (vi. 8. 1) generically identical with prudence. So again (1, 2)
 "political art" is identified with ethics.

 [3426] Social virtues or "political" virtues. Cf. the "political art"
 or "statesmanship" of Aristotle.

 [3427] [Pollou chronou, "for a considerable time." This seems to be a
 rhetorical addition to the circumstances of the miracle, scarcely to be
 justified by the terms of the inspired narrative.--Bag.]

 [3428] At this point Christophorson begins his chapter xii., "of those
 who did not know the mystery," &c.

 [3429] The translator takes most extraordinary liberties with the word
 "philanthropy"; now it is "loving-kindness," now "love of their
 fellow-men," and so on in picturesque variety, and yet as appropriate
 as it is lacking in uniformity.

 [3430] Cf. Rom. viii. 25; Gal. v. 5.

 [3431] [The text, in the last clause of this passage, is undoubtedly
 corrupt. The above is an attempt to supply a probable sense.--Bag.]
 This is omitted by Hein. from his text.

 [3432] i.e. healing the paralytics. This paraphrased passage reads more
 literally, "bidding those bereft of sense [i.e. sensation, feeling] to
 feel again." Still it may be that Molz. is right in thinking it refers
 to the senses--seeing, hearing, &c.--as well as feeling, though his
 translation will hardly stand; "and to such as lacked any of the senses
 he granted the full use of all their senses again."

 Chapter XII.--Of those who are Ignorant of this Mystery; and that their
 Ignorance is Voluntary. The Blessings which await those who know it,
 especially such as die in the Confession of the Faith. [3433]

 But it will be said by some, who love to blaspheme, that it was in the
 power of God to ameliorate and soften the natural will of man. What
 better way, I ask, what better method could be devised, what more
 effectual effort put forth for reclaiming evil man, than converse with
 God himself? Was not he visibly present to teach them the principles of
 virtuous conduct? And if the personal instructions of God were without
 effect, how much more, had he continued absent and unheard? What, then,
 had power to hinder this most blessed doctrine? The perverse folly of
 man. For the clearness of our perceptions is at once obscured, as often
 as we receive with angry impatience those precepts which are given for
 our blessing and advantage. In truth, it was the very choice of men to
 disregard these precepts, and to turn a deaf ear to the commandments so
 distasteful to them; though had they listened, they would have gained a
 reward well worthy such attention, and that not for the present only,
 but the future life, which is indeed the only true life. For the reward
 of obedience to God is imperishable and everlasting life, to which they
 may aspire who know him, [3434] and frame their course of life so as to
 afford a pattern to others, and as it were a perpetual standard for the
 imitation of those who desire to excel in virtue. Therefore was the
 doctrine committed to men of understanding, that the truths which they
 communicated might be kept with care and a pure conscience by the
 members of their households, and that thus a truthful and steadfast
 observance of God's commands might be secured, the fruit of which is
 that boldness in the prospect of death which springs from pure faith
 and genuine holiness before God. He who is thus armed can withstand the
 tempest of the world, and is sustained even to martyrdom by the
 invincible power of God, whereby he boldly overcomes the greatest
 terrors, and is accounted worthy of a crown of glory by him to whom he
 has thus nobly testified. [3435] Nor does he himself assume the praise,
 knowing full well that it is God who gives the power both to endure,
 and to fulfill with ready zeal the Divine commands. And well may such a
 course as this receive the meed of never-failing remembrance and
 everlasting honor. For as the martyr's life is one of sobriety and
 obedience to the will of God, so is his death an example of true
 greatness and generous fortitude of soul. Hence it is followed by hymns
 and psalms, words and songs of praise to the all-seeing God: and a
 sacrifice of thanksgiving is offered in memory of such men, a
 bloodless, a harmless sacrifice, wherein is no need of the fragrant
 frankincense, no need of fire; but only enough of pure light [3436] to
 suffice the assembled worshipers. Many, too, there are whose charitable
 spirit leads them to prepare a temperate banquet for the comfort of the
 needy, and the relief of those who had been driven from their homes: a
 custom which can only be deemed burdensome [3437] by those whose
 thoughts are not accordant with the divine and sacred doctrine.

 [3433] Literally and better, "through the confession." It refers to
 those who are technically known as confessors. Although in general the
 distinction prevails by which those who have suffered, but not unto
 death, are called "confessors," while those who lost their lives are
 called "martyrs" (cf. Pseud-Cypr. de dupl. Mart. c. 31), yet its use
 for martyrs is not uncommon (cf. Ambrose, ad Gratian, c. 2). Later the
 term was used of all, especially faithful professors of Christ.

 [3434] Cf. John xvii. 3; 1 John v. 19-20.

 [3435] This translation "to whom" accords with the reading of Valesius,
 followed by 1611, Molz., "Zimmermann," Cous. ("whose cause he has
 sustained"), but Hein. adopts the reading "who," preceded by Chr., who
 translates "who himself bravely endured martyrdom."

 [3436] [Alluding to the tapers, &c., lighted at the tombs of martyrs on
 the anniversary of their death.--Bag.] Compare Scudamore, Lights, The
 Ceremonial Use of, in Smith and Cheetham, Dict. 1 (1880), 993 sq.

 [3437] "Vulgar."

 Chapter XIII.--That there is a Necessary Difference between Created
 Things. That the Propensity to Good and Evil depends on the Will of
 Man; and that, consequently, Judgment is a Necessary and Reasonable
 Thing.

 There are, indeed, some who venture with childish presumption to find
 fault with God in respect of this also, and ask why it is that he has
 not created one and the same natural disposition for all, but rather
 has ordained the existence of many things different, nay, contrary in
 their nature, whence arises the dissimilarity of our moral conduct and
 character. Would it not (say they) have been better, both as regards
 obedience to the commands of God, and a just apprehension of himself,
 and for the confirmation of individual faith, that all mankind should
 be of the same moral character? It is indeed ridiculous to expect that
 this could be the case, and to forget that the constitution of the
 world is different from that of the things that are in the world; that
 physical and moral objects are not identical in their nature, nor the
 affections of the body the same as those of the soul. [For the immortal
 soul far exceeds the material world in dignity, and is more blessed
 than the perishable and terrestrial creation, in proportion as it is
 noble and more allied to God. [3438] ] Nor is the human race excluded
 from participation in the divine goodness; though this is not the lot
 of all indiscriminately, but of those only who search deeply into the
 Divine nature, and propose the knowledge of sacred things as the
 leading object of their lives.

 [3438] [The text of this passage is defective. The conjectural
 restoration of Valesius, which seems probable, is chiefly
 followed.--Bag.] Heinichen, like Christophorson and Savil before him,
 "does not hesitate," with one of the mss., to omit this passage.

 Chapter XIV.--That Created Nature differs infinitely from Uncreated
 Being; to which Man makes the Nearest Approach by a Life of Virtue.

 Surely it must be the very height of folly to compare created with
 eternal things, which latter have neither beginning nor end, while the
 former, having been originated and called into being, and having
 received a commencement of their existence at some definite time, must
 consequently, of necessity have an end. How then can things which have
 thus been made, bear comparison with him who has ordained their being?
 Were this the case, [3439] the power to command their existence could
 not rightly be attributed to him. Nor can celestial things be compared
 to him, any more than the material [3440] with the intellectual [3441]
 world, or copies with the models from which they are formed. Nay, is it
 not absurd thus to confound all things, and to obscure the honor of God
 by comparing him with men, or even with beasts? And is it not
 characteristic of madmen, utterly estranged from a life of sobriety and
 virtue, to affect a power equivalent to that of God? If indeed we in
 any sense aspire to blessedness like that of God, our duty is to lead a
 life according to his commandments: so shall we, having finished a
 course consistent with the laws which he has prescribed, dwell for ever
 superior to the power of fate, in eternal and undecaying mansions. For
 the only power in man which can be elevated to a comparison with that
 of God, is sincere and guileless service and devotion of heart to
 himself, with the contemplation and study of whatever pleases him, the
 raising our affections above the things of earth, and directing our
 thoughts, as far as we may, to high and heavenly objects: for from such
 endeavors, it is said, a victory accrues to us more valuable than many
 blessings. [3442] The cause, then, of that difference which subsists,
 as regards the inequality both of dignity and power in created beings,
 is such as I have described. In this the wise acquiesce with abundant
 thankfulness and joy: while those who are dissatisfied, display their
 own folly, and their arrogance will reap its due reward.

 [3439] This is following with Heinichen, and meets the conjecture of
 Valesius as over against the mss. and other conjectures, which,
 substituting mania for homoia, read "for if it be madness to liken
 these things to him," &c.

 [3440] Or "sensible"; i.e. world of sense or perception.

 [3441] This is the word often rendered by Bag. as "spiritual."

 [3442] This is supposed to refer to Rev. ii. 7-10; iii. 11, &c. It
 might well have in mind Col. iii. 2-4, or best of all Rev. xxi. 7, as
 containing the thought of victory (nik?o = "overcome").

 Chapter XV.--Of the Saviour's Doctrines and Miracles; and the Benefits
 he confers on those who own Subjection to him.

 The Son of God invites all men to the practice of virtue, and presents
 himself to all who have understanding hearts, as the teacher of his
 saving precepts. [3443] Unless, indeed, we will deceive ourselves; and
 remain in wretched ignorance of the fact, that for our advantage, that
 is, to secure the blessing of the human race, he went about upon earth;
 and, having called around him the best men of their age, committed to
 them instructions full of profit, and of power to preserve them in the
 path of a virtuous life; teaching them the faith and righteousness
 which are the true remedy against the adverse power of that malignant
 spirit whose delight it is to ensnare and delude the inexperienced.
 Accordingly he visited the sick, relieved the infirm from the ills
 which afflicted them, and consoled those who felt the extremity of
 penury and want. He commended also sound and rational sobriety of
 character, enjoining his followers to endure, with dignity and
 patience, every kind of injury and contempt: teaching them to regard
 such as visitations permitted by their Father, and the victory is ever
 theirs who nobly bear the evils which befall them. For he assured them
 that the highest strength of all consisted in this steadfastness of
 soul, combined with that philosophy which is nothing else than the
 knowledge of truth and goodness, producing in men the generous habit of
 sharing with their poorer brethren those riches which they have
 themselves acquired by honorable means. At the same time he utterly
 forbade all proud oppression, declaring that, as he had come to
 associate with the lowly, so those who despised the lowly would be
 excluded from his favor. Such and so great was the test whereby he
 proved the faith of those who owned allegiance to his authority, and
 thus he not only prepared them for the contempt of danger and terror,
 but taught them at the same time the most genuine confidence in
 himself. Once, too, his rebuke was uttered to restrain the zeal of one
 of his companions, who yielded too easily to the impulse of passion,
 when he assaulted with the sword, and, eager to protect his Saviour's
 life, exposed his own. Then it was that he bade him desist, and
 returned his sword to its sheath, reproving him for his distrust of
 refuge and safety in himself, and declaring solemnly that all who
 should essay to retaliate an injury by like aggression, or use the
 sword, should perish by a violent death. [3444] This is indeed heavenly
 wisdom, to choose rather to endure than to inflict injury, and to be
 ready, should necessity so require, to suffer, but not to do, wrong.
 For since injurious conduct is in itself a most serious evil, it is not
 the injured party, but the injuring, on whom the heaviest punishment
 must fall. It is indeed possible for one who is subject to the will of
 God to avoid the evil both of committing and of suffering injury,
 provided his confidence be firm in the protection of that God whose aid
 is ever present to shield his servants from harm. For how should that
 man who trusts in God attempt to seek for resources in himself? In such
 a case he must abide the conflict with uncertainty of victory: and no
 man of understanding could prefer a doubtful to a certain issue. Again,
 how can that man doubt the presence and aid of God, who has had
 experience of manifold dangers, and has at all times been easily
 delivered, at his simple nod, from all terrors: who has passed, as it
 were, through the sea which was leveled by the Saviour's word, and
 afforded a solid road for the passage of the people? This is, I
 believe, the sure basis of faith, the true foundation of confidence,
 that we find such miracles as these performed and perfected at the
 command of the God of Providence. Hence it is that even in the midst of
 trial we find no cause to repent of our faith, but retain an unshaken
 hope in God; and when this habit of confidence is established in the
 soul, God himself dwells in the inmost thoughts. But he is of
 invincible power: the soul, therefore, which has within it him who is
 thus invincible, will not be overcome by the perils which may surround
 it. Likewise, [3445] we learn this truth from the victory of God
 himself, who, while intent on providing for the blessing of mankind,
 though grievously insulted by the malice of the ungodly, yet passed
 unharmed through the sufferings of his passion, and gained a mighty
 conquest, an everlasting crown of triumph, over all iniquity; thus
 accomplishing the purpose of his own providence and love as regards the
 just, and destroying the cruelty of the impious and unjust.

 [3443] This accords with the "margin of the Geneva Edition," and
 mentioned by Valesius, who gives also "in the Saviour's commands" and
 "in the Father's commands," which latter is adopted by Heinichen.

 [3444] Matt. xxvi. 52; for "all they that take the sword shall perish
 by the sword." Note the characteristic inflation of style. Matthew
 takes eight words, the English translators twelve, Constantine sixteen,
 and his translator twenty-two ponderous words.

 [3445] Val. prefers pros ("besides") to para ("likewise, at the same
 time"), and is followed by Bag.

 Chapter XVI.--The Coming of Christ was predicted by the Prophets; and
 was ordained to be the Overthrow of Idols and Idolatrous Cities.

 Long since had his passion, as well as his advent in the flesh, been
 predicted by the prophets. The time, too, of his incarnation had been
 foretold, and the manner in which the fruits of iniquity and
 profligacy, so ruinous to the works and ways of righteousness, should
 be destroyed, and the whole world partake of the virtues of wisdom and
 sound discretion, through the almost universal prevalence of those
 principles of conduct which the Saviour should promulgate, over the
 minds of men; whereby the worship of God should be confirmed, and the
 rites of superstition utterly abolished. By these not the slaughter of
 animals alone, but the sacrifice of human victims, and the pollutions
 of an accursed worship, had been devised: as, for example, by the laws
 of Assyria and Egypt, the lives of innocent men were offered up in
 images of brass or earth. Therefore have these nations received a
 recompense worthy so foul a worship. Memphis and Babylon [it was
 declared] [3446] shall be wasted, and left desolate with their fathers'
 gods. Now these things I speak not from the report of others, but
 having myself been present, and actually seen the most wretched of
 these cities, the unfortunate Memphis. [3447] Moses desolated, at the
 Divine command, the land of the once mighty Pharaoh, whose arrogance
 was his destruction, [3448] and destroyed his army (which had proved
 victorious over numerous and mighty nations, an army strong in defenses
 and in arms), not by the flight of arrows or the hurling of hostile
 weapons, but by holy prayer alone, and quiet supplication.

 [3446] Not in text. This parenthesis is the least obnoxious of various
 proposed paraphrases.

 [3447] Probably refers to its destruction by Diocletian, whom
 Constantine accompanied. See Prolegomena, Life, Early Years.

 [3448] The text of this passage is most dubious. Bag., following
 Valesius, translates: "And an actual witness of the wretched fate which
 has befallen these cities. Memphis lies desolate; that city which was
 the pride of the once mighty Pharaoh whose power Moses crushed at the
 Divine command." This has been changed to accord with the text and
 punctuation of Heinichen. The change makes Constantine declare himself
 an eye-witness of the fate of Memphis alone, which is thought to accord
 with the facts; for while he was in fact in Egypt with Diocletian there
 is no evidence that he ever saw Babylon. And yet it is possible he did.

 Chapter XVII.--Of the Wisdom of Moses, which was an Object of Imitation
 to the Wise among Heathen Nations. Also concerning Daniel, and the
 Three Children.

 No nation has ever been more highly blessed than that which Moses led:
 none would have continued to enjoy higher blessings, had they not
 willingly withdrawn themselves from the guidance of the Holy Spirit.
 But who can worthily describe the praises of Moses himself; who, after
 reducing to order an unruly nation, and disciplining their minds [3449]
 to habits of obedience and respect, out of captivity restored them to a
 state of freedom, turned their mourning into gladness, and so far
 elevated their minds, [3450] that, through the excess of contrast with
 their former circumstances, and the abundance of their prosperity, the
 spirit of the people was elated with haughtiness and pride? So far did
 he surpass in wisdom those who had lived before him, that even the wise
 men and philosophers [3451] who are extolled by heathen nations aspired
 to imitate his wisdom. For Pythagoras, following his wisdom, attained
 to such a pitch of self-control, that he became to Plato, himself a
 model of discretion, the standard of his own self-mastery. Again, how
 great and terrible the cruelty of that ancient Syrian king, over whom
 Daniel triumphed, the prophet who unfolded the secrets of futurity,
 whose actions evinced transcendent greatness of soul, and the luster of
 whose character and life shone conspicuous above all? The name of this
 tyrant was Nebuchadnezzar, whose race afterward became extinct, and his
 vast and mighty power was transferred to Persian hands. The wealth of
 this tyrant was then, and is even now, celebrated far and wide, as well
 as his ill-timed devotion to unlawful worship, his idol statues,
 lifting their heads to heaven, and formed of various metals, and the
 terrible and savage laws ordained to uphold this worship. These terrors
 Daniel, sustained by genuine piety towards the true God, utterly
 despised, and predicted that the tyrant's unseasonable zeal would be
 productive of fearful evil to himself. He failed, however, to convince
 the tyrant (for excessive wealth is an effectual barrier to true
 soundness of judgment), and at length the monarch displayed the savage
 cruelty of his character, by commanding that the righteous prophet
 should be exposed to the fury of wild beasts. Noble, too, indeed was
 the united spirit exhibited by those brethren [3452] (whose example
 others have since followed, and have won surpassing glory by their
 faith in the Saviour's name), [3453] those, I mean, who stood unharmed
 in the fiery furnace, and the terrors appointed to devour them,
 repelling by the holy touch of their bodies the flame by which they
 were surrounded. On the overthrow of the Assyrian Empire, which was
 destroyed by thunderbolts from Heaven, [3454] the providence of God
 conducted Daniel to the court of Cambyses the Persian king. Yet envy
 followed him even here; nor envy only, but the deadly plots of the
 magians against his life, with a succession of many and urgent dangers,
 from all which he was easily delivered by the providential care of
 Christ, [3455] and shone conspicuous in the practice of every virtue.
 Three times in the day did he present his prayers to God, and memorable
 were the proofs of supernatural power which he displayed: and hence the
 magians, filled with envy at the very efficacy of his petitions,
 represented the possession of such power to the king as fraught with
 danger, and prevailed on him to adjudge this distinguished benefactor
 of the Persian people to be devoured by savage lions. Daniel,
 therefore, thus condemned, was consigned to the lions' den (not indeed
 to suffer death, but to win unfading glory); and though surrounded by
 these ferocious beasts of prey, he found them more gentle than the men
 who had enclosed him there. Supported by the power of calm and
 steadfast prayer, he was enabled to subdue all these animals, ferocious
 as, by nature, they were. Cambyses, on learning the event (for so
 mighty a proof of Divine power could not possibly be concealed), amazed
 at the marvelous story, and repenting the too easy credence he had
 given to the slanderous charges of the magians, resolved,
 notwithstanding, to be himself a witness of the spectacle. But when he
 saw the prophet with uplifted hands rendering praises to Christ, and
 the lions crouching, and as it were worshiping, at his feet,
 immediately he adjudged the magians, to whose persuasions he had
 listened, to perish by the self-same sentence, and shut them up in the
 lions' den. [3456] The beasts, erewhile so gentle, rushed at once upon
 their victims, and with all the fierceness of their nature tore and
 destroyed them all. [3457]

 [3449] "Souls."

 [3450] "Souls."

 [3451] The sage commentators on this passage have thought it incumbent
 to explain and, as it were, apologize for the apparent tautology, "wise
 men or philosophers,--whichever you choose to call them" (Val. and
 Hein.). Colloquially speaking, there is a vast difference between being
 a philosopher and being a wise man. Probably this is no slip of style
 nor gracious option of language such as the editors impute, but some
 more or less clear distinction of technical terms.

 [3452] "Spirit exhibited by these brethren in suffering martyrdom."

 [3453] Molz.remarks that to get any intelligent meaning out of this
 mass of sounding words, the translator often has to guess and translate
 very freely.

 [3454] ['Anairetheises keraunon bolais. This must be regarded as a
 rhetorical rather than historical allusion to the extinction of the
 Assyrian Empire. The critical reader will not fail to mark occasional
 instances of inaccuracy and looseness of statement in this chapter, and
 generally in the course of the oration.--Bag.] Valesius objects to this
 passage as follows in the language of 1711: "Neither do I well
 understand that. For Men, Towns, and Cities may be destroyed by
 Thunder-bolts,...But, truly I can't see how a kingdom could be ruined
 by Thunder."

 [3455] Constantine evidently believed in an eternal Christ.

 [3456] "He adjudged to perish by the self-same sentence, and shut them
 up in the lions' den," is bracketed by Valesius and the second clause
 omitted by Bag.

 [3457] "Eliminated them all." Valesius calls attention to the
 characteristic slight inaccuracies of our author! e.g. in the Biblical
 account (1) it was not the magi; (2) it was not Cambyses.

 Chapter XVIII.--Of the Erythræan Sibyl, who pointed in a Prophetic
 Acrostic at our Lord and his Passion. The Acrostic is "Jesus Christ,
 Son of God, Saviour, Cross."

 My desire, however, is to derive even from foreign sources a testimony
 to the Divine nature of Christ. For on such testimony it is evident
 that even those who blaspheme his name must acknowledge that he is God,
 and the Son of God if indeed they will accredit the words of those
 whose sentiments coincided with their own. [3458] The Erythræan Sibyl,
 then, who herself assures us that she lived in the sixth generation
 after the flood, was a priestess of Apollo, who wore the sacred fillet
 in imitation of the God she served, who guarded also the tripod
 encompassed with the serpent's folds, and returned prophetic answers to
 those who approached her shrine; having been devoted by the folly of
 her parents to this service, a service productive of nothing good or
 noble, but only of indecent fury, such as we find recorded in the case
 of Daphne. [3459] On one occasion, however, having rushed into the
 sanctuary of her vain superstition, she became really filled with
 inspiration from above, and declared in prophetic verses the future
 purposes of God; plainly indicating the advent of Jesus by the initial
 letters of these verses, forming an acrostic in these words: Jesus
 Christ, Son of God, Saviour, Cross. The verses themselves are as
 follows:

 Judgment! Earth's oozing pores [3460] shall mark the day;

 Earth's heavenly king his glories shall display:

 Sovereign of all, exalted on his throne,

 Unnumbered multitudes their God shall own;

 Shall see their Judge, with mingled joy and fear,

 Crowned with his saints, in human form appear.

 How vain, while desolate earth's glories lie,

 Riches, and pomp, and man's idolatry!

 In that dread hour, when Nature's fiery doom

 Startles the slumb'ring tenants of the tomb,

 Trembling all flesh shall stand; each secret wile,

 Sins long forgotten, thoughts of guilt and guile,

 Open beneath God's searching light shall lie:

 No refuge then, but hopeless agony.

 O'er heaven's expanse shall gathering shades of night

 From earth, sun, stars, and moon, withdraw their light;

 God's arm shall crush each mountain's towering pride;

 On ocean's plain no more shall navies ride.

 Dried at the source, no river's rushing sound

 Shall soothe, no fountain slake the parched ground.

 Around, afar, shall roll the trumpet's blast,

 Voice of wrath long delayed, revealed at last.

 In speechless awe, while earth's foundations groan,

 On judgment's seat earth's kings their God shall own.

 Uplifted then, in majesty divine,

 Radiant with light, behold Salvation's Sign!

 Cross of that Lord, who, once for sinners given,

 Reviled by man, now owned by earth and heaven,

 O'er every land extends his iron sway.

 Such is the name these mystic lines display;

 Saviour, eternal king, who bears our sins away. [3461]

 It is evident that the virgin uttered these verses under the influence
 of Divine inspiration. And I cannot but esteem her blessed, whom the
 Saviour thus selected to unfold his gracious purpose towards us.

 [3458] "Of their own selves."

 [3459] [Daughter of Tiresias, and priestess at Delphi. She was called
 Sibyl, on account of the wildness of her looks and expressions when she
 delivered oracles (Lempriere in voc.).--Bag.]

 [3460] [ Idrosei gar chthon, k.t.l.--Bag.]

 [3461] [It can scarcely be necessary to observe that the acrostic, the
 general sense of which has been aimed at in the above translation, must
 be regarded as the pious fiction of some writer, whose object was to
 recommend the truth of Christianity to heathens by an appeal to the
 authority of an (alleged) ancient heathen prophecy.--Bag.] The
 quotation is found in the edition of Alexandre, Bk. VIII. ch. 219-250.
 (Cf. translation in Augustin, De civ. Dei.) The translation of Bag.,
 giving the "general sense" and reproducing the acrostic, stands
 unchanged. The translation of 1709, much more vigorous and suggestive
 of the "Dies Iræ," is as follows: "When the Great Day of Judgment shall
 appear, The melting Earth shall then dissolve with fear; A King
 Immortal shall from Heav'n descend, At whose Tribunal the whole world
 attend. Both Just and Wicked shall, when Time grows old, Their mighty
 God in flesh array'd behold; Armies of Saints on His Right hand shall
 come, Whilst Humane Souls expect their final doom. Th' Universe shall
 be a dry, Barren Strand, And Thorns shall flourish on the scorched
 land; Men shall with indignation cast away Their Wealth and Idols in
 that dreadful day. The parching Earth, and Heaven in flames shall fry,
 And searching fire drain the Ocean dry: All flesh which in the Grave
 imprison'd lay, Shake off their Fetters, and return to Day. Fire 'twixt
 Good and Bad shall diff'rence make, And filthy Dross from purer Metal
 take. Man's secret Deeds shall all be open lay'd, And th' obscure Mazes
 of their Hearts displayed; Gnashing their Teeth, they shall their Fate
 bewail: The stars harmonious dance, and th' Sun shall fail. The Orbs
 roll'd up, shrink into darkest night, The Labouring Moon shall lose her
 borrowed light. Mountains with Plains on the same Level lye; Vallies
 shall gape no more, nor Hills be high. On the proud Billows Ships shall
 ride no more: And Lightning the Earth's Face shall shrivel sore. The
 crackling Rivers with fierce Fire shall burn, Which shall their streams
 to solid Crystal turn. The Heav'nly Trump shall blow a doleful sound,
 And th' world's destruction, and its sin resound. The yawning Earth
 Hell's vast Abyss shall shew; All Kings before God's just Tribunal go.
 Then Liquid Sulphur from the Sky shall stream, God shall pour down
 Rivers of vengeful flame; All men shall then the Glorious Cross descry,
 That wished-for sign unto a faithful eye: The Life of pious Souls,
 their chief delight; To Sinners an Offence, a dismal sight!
 Enlightening the called with its beams, When cleansed from sin in twice
 six limpid streams. His Empire shall be boundless, and that God Shall
 Rule the Wicked with an Iron Rod; This God, Immortal King, describ'd in
 Verse, Our Saviour, dying, shall man's doom Reverse."

 Chapter XIX.--That this Prophecy respecting our Saviour was not the
 Fiction of any Member of the Christian Church, but the Testimony of the
 Erythræan Sibyl, whose Books were translated into Latin by Cicero
 before the coming of Christ. Also that Virgil makes mention of the
 same, and of the Birth of the Virgin's Child: though he spoke obscurely
 of this Mystery from Fear of the Ruling Powers.

 Many, however, who admit that the Erythræan Sibyl was really a
 prophetess, yet refuse to credit this prediction, and imagine that some
 one professing our faith, and not unacquainted with the poetic art, was
 the composer of these verses. They hold, in short, that they are a
 forgery, and alleged to be the prophecies of the Sibyl on the ground of
 their containing useful moral sentiments, tending to restrain
 licentiousness, and to lead man to a life of sobriety and decorum.
 Truth, however, in this case is evident, since the diligence of our
 countrymen [3462] has made a careful computation of the times; so that
 there is no room to suspect that this poem was composed after the
 advent and condemnation of Christ, or that the general report is false,
 that the verses were a prediction of the Sibyl in an early age. For it
 is allowed that Cicero was acquainted with this poem, which he
 translated into the Latin tongue, and incorporated with his own works.
 [3463] This writer was put to death during the ascendancy of Antony,
 who in his turn was conquered by Augustus, whose reign lasted fifty-six
 years. Tiberius succeeded, in whose age it was that the Saviour's
 advent enlightened the world, the mystery of our most holy religion
 began to prevail, and as it were a new race of men commenced: of which,
 I suppose, the prince of Latin poets thus speaks:

 Behold, a new, a heaven-born race appears. [3464]

 And again, in another passage of the Bucolics:

 Sicilian Muses, sound a loftier strain.

 What can be clearer than this? For he adds,

 The voice of Cuma's oracle is heard again. [3465]

 Evidently referring to the Cumæan Sibyl. Nor was even this enough: the
 poet goes further, as if irresistibly impelled to bear his testimony.
 What then does he say?

 Behold! the circling years new blessings bring:

 The virgin comes, with her the long-desired king. [3466]

 Who, then, is the virgin who was to come? Is it not she who was filled
 with, and with child of the Holy Spirit? And why is it impossible that
 she who was with child of the Holy Spirit should be, and ever continue
 to be a virgin? This king, too, will return, and by his coming lighten
 the sorrows of the world. The poet adds,

 Thou, chaste Lucina, greet the new-born child,

 Beneath whose reign the iron offspring ends,

 A golden progeny from heaven descends;

 His kingdom banished virtue shall restore,

 And crime shall threat the guilty world no more.

 We perceive that these words are spoken plainly and at the same time
 darkly, by way of allegory. Those who search deeply for the import of
 the words, are able to discern the Divinity of Christ. But lest any of
 the powerful in the imperial city might be able to accuse the poet of
 writing anything contrary to the laws of the country, and subverting
 the religious sentiments which had prevailed from ancient times, he
 intentionally obscures the truth. For he was acquainted, as I believe,
 with that blessed mystery which gave to our Lord the name of Saviour:
 [3467] but, that he might avoid the severity of cruel men, he drew the
 thoughts of his hearers to objects with which they were familiar,
 saying that altars must be erected, temples raised, and sacrifices
 offered to the new-born child. His concluding words also are adapted to
 the sentiments of those who were accustomed to such a creed; for he
 says:

 [3462] "Our men," i.e. Christians rather than "countrymen."

 [3463] [The passage in Cicero (De Divinatione, Bk. II. ch. 54) clearly
 does not refer to this acrostic, and contains in itself a plain denial
 of prophetic truth in the Sibylline prediction (whatever it was) which
 the writer had in view. "Non esse autem illud carmen furentis, cum
 ipsum poema declaret (est enim magis artis et diligentiæ, quam
 incitationis et motus), tum verò ea, quæ akrostichis dicitur, cum
 deinceps ex primis versuum litteris aliquid connectitur, ut in
 quibusdam Cumanis, id certe magis est attenti animi, quam furentis,"
 &c.--Bag.]

 [3464] This and following quotations are found in the fourth eclogue of
 Virgil--the Pollio. The version of Bag. is allowed to stand. If farther
 variety of rendering and interpretation is desired, it can be found in
 charming profusion in the various English translations of Virgil of
 which the few at hand give ample promise. Those at hand are Ogilby,
 Lond., 1675, p. 41-49; Warton, Lond., 1763, p. 76-82; Trapp, Lond.,
 1755, p. 37-46; Kennedy, Lond., 1849, p. 25-29; Wilstach, Bost., 1884,
 p. 154-161; Bowen, Lond., 1887, p. 24-28. Compare Henley, Observations
 on the Subject of the Fourth Eclogue, etc., Lond., 1788. 8vo.

 [3465] Here is variety indeed. 1711 renders, "Last times are come
 Cumæa's prophecy,"--whatever that may mean. Molz. has "Now the voice of
 the famed oracle of Cumæ is dumb."

 [3466] Constantine takes large liberty with the poet here in order to
 make him say what he would like to have had him say. The latest
 translation at hand (Bowen) renders: "Now is the world's grand cycle
 begun once more from of old; Justice the Virgin comes, and the Saturn
 Kingdom again."

 [3467] "The blessed and salutary mystery of our Saviour."--1709.
 "Mystery of salvation."--Molz.

 Chapter XX.--A Farther Quotation from Virgilius Maro respecting Christ,
 with its Interpretation, showing that the Mystery was indicated therein
 darkly, as might be expected from a Poet.

 A life immortal he shall lead, and be

 By heroes seen, himself shall heroes see;

 evidently meaning the righteous.

 The jarring nations he in peace shall bind,

 And with paternal virtues rule mankind.

 Unbidden earth her earliest fruits shall bring,

 And fragrant herbs, to greet her infant king.

 Well indeed was this admirably wise and accomplished man acquainted
 with the cruel character of the times. He proceeds:

 The goats, uncall'd, full udders home shall bear;

 The lowing herds no more fierce lions fear.

 Truly said: for faith will not stand in awe of the mighty in the
 imperial palace.

 His cradle shall with rising flowers be crown'd:

 The serpent's brood shall die; the sacred ground

 Shall weeds and poisonous plants refuse to bear;

 Each common bush th' Assyrian rose [3468] shall wear.

 Nothing could be said more true or more consistent with the Saviour's
 excellency than this. For the power of the Divine Spirit presents the
 very cradle of God, like fragrant flowers, to the new-born race. [3469]
 The serpent, too, and the venom of that serpent, perishes, who
 originally beguiled our first parents, and drew their thoughts from
 their native innocence [3470] to the enjoyment of pleasures, that they
 might experience [3471] that threatened death. For before the Saviour's
 advent, the serpent's power was shown in subverting the souls of those
 who were sustained by no well-grounded hope, and ignorant of that
 immortality which awaits the righteous. But after that he had suffered,
 and was separated for a season from the body which he had assumed, the
 power of the resurrection was revealed to man through the communication
 of the Holy Spirit: and whatever stain of human guilt might yet remain
 was removed by the washing of sacred lustrations.

 Then indeed could the Saviour bid his followers be of good cheer, and,
 remembering his adorable and glorious resurrection, expect the like for
 themselves. Truly, then, the poisonous race may be said to be extinct.
 Death himself is extinct, and the truth of the resurrection sealed.
 Again, the Assyrian race is gone, which first led the way to faith in
 God. [3472] But when he speaks of the growth of amomum every where, he
 alludes to the multitude of the true worshipers of God. [3473] For it
 is as though a multitude of branches, crowned with fragrant flowers,
 and fitly watered, sprung from the self-same root. Most justly said,
 Maro, thou wisest of poets! and with this all that follows is
 consistent.

 But when heroic worth his youth shall hear,

 And learn his father's virtues to revere.

 By the praises of heroes, he indicates the works of righteous men: by
 the virtues of his Father he speaks of the creation and everlasting
 structure of the world: and, it may be, of those laws by which God's
 beloved Church is guided, and ordered in a course of righteousness and
 virtue. Admirable, again, is the advance to higher things of that state
 of life which is intermediate, as it were, between good and evil, and
 which seldom admits a sudden change:

 Unlabored harvests shall the fields adorn, [3474]

 that is, the fruit of the Divine law springs up for the service of men.

 And clustered gropes shall blush on every thorn.

 Far otherwise has it been during the corrupt and lawless period of
 human life.

 The knotted oaks shall showers of honey weep. [3475]

 He here describes the folly and obduracy of the men of that age; and
 perhaps he also intimates that they who suffer hardships in the cause
 of God, shall reap sweet fruits of their own endurance.

 Yet, of old fraud some footsteps shall remain;

 The merchant still shall plough the deep for gain:

 Great cities shall with walls be compassed round,

 And sharpened shares shall vex the fruitful ground:

 Another Tiphys shall new seas explore;

 Another Argo land the chiefs upon the Iberian shore;

 Another Helen other wars create,

 And great Achilles urge the Trojan fate.

 Well said, wisest of bards! Thou hast carried the license of a poet
 precisely to the proper point. For it was not thy purpose to assume the
 functions of a prophet, to which thou hadst no claim. I suppose also he
 was restrained by a sense of the danger which threatened one who should
 assail the credit of ancient religious practice. Cautiously, therefore,
 and securely, as far as possible, he presents the truth to those who
 have faculties to understand it; and while he denounces the munitions
 and conflicts of war [3476] (which indeed are still to be found in the
 course of human life), he describes our Saviour as proceeding to the
 war against Troy, understanding by Troy the world itself. [3477] And
 surely he did maintain the struggle against the opposing powers of
 evil, sent on that mission both by the designs of his own providence
 and the commandment of his Almighty Father. How, then, does the poet
 proceed?

 But when to ripen'd manhood he shall grow,

 that is, when, having arrived at the age of manhood, he shall utterly
 remove the evils which encompass the path of human life, and
 tranquilize the world by the blessings of peace:

 The greedy sailor shall the seas forego;

 No keel shall cut the waves for foreign ware,

 For every soil shall every product bear.

 The laboring hind his oxen shall disjoin;

 No plough shall hurt the glebe, no pruning-hook the vine;

 Nor wool shall in dissembled colors shine:

 But the luxurious father of the fold,

 With native purple, and unborrow'd gold,

 Beneath his pompous fleece shall proudly sweat;

 And under Tyrian robes the lamb shall bleat.

 Mature in years, to ready honors move,

 O of celestial seed, O foster son of Jove!

 See, laboring nature calls thee to sustain

 The nodding flame of heaven, and earth, and main!

 See to their base restored, earth, seas, and air;

 And joyful ages, from behind, in crowing ranks appear.

 To sing thy praise, would heaven my breath prolong.

 Infusing spirits worthy such a song,

 Not Thracian Orpheus should transcend my lays,

 Nor Linus, crown'd with never-fading bays;

 Though each his heavenly parent should inspire;

 The Muse instruct the voice, and Phoebus tune the lyre.

 Should Pan contend in verse, and thou my theme,

 Arcadian judges should their God condemn. [3478]

 Behold (says he) how the mighty world and the elements together
 manifest their joy.

 [3468] [Amomum.--Bag.] "Assyrian cinnamon," Kennedy, p. 28; "the
 cardamon's spice shall grow, That from Assyria's gardens," Wilstach, 1,
 p. 157; "Syrian spices," Trapp, 1, p. 92; "Assyria's rich perfume,"
 Warton, 1, p. 78; "Assyrian roses," Ogilby, p. 42.

 [3469] [i.e. the Christians.--Bag.]

 [3470] Self-control.

 [3471] "Might not experience," according to some, including Heinichen,
 who rejects in first, but accepts in text of his second edition.

 [3472] [Referring, apparently, to Abraham. This passage is founded on a
 misconstruction of Virgil's line by Constantine. which is followed by
 the Greek verse itself according to one edition.--Bag.]

 [3473] [By a kind of play on the word amomum, he alludes to the
 Christians as amomoi, or blameless persons.--Bag.]

 [3474] "The fields shall mellow wax with golden grain."

 [3475] Bag.adds: "And through the matted grass the liquid gold shall
 creep." 1709translates: "And th' hardened oaks with dewy honey sweat."
 While Molz. has "Forth from the hard oak stems the lovely honey flows."
 These all approach Virgil closer than they do Constantine. With all
 allowance for poetic license, "pine" should hardly be translated "oak."

 [3476] Literally, "times and wars."--1709.

 [3477] This, bad as it is, is hardly worse than the subjective
 interpretation of scripture by modern allegorizers, and certainly no
 worse than some of the Scripture interpretations of Eusebius.

 [3478] [The reader will perceive that the foregoing verses, with but
 little exception, and very slight alteration, are taken from Dryden's
 translation of the fourth eclogue of Virgil.--Bag.]

 Chapter XXI.--That these Things cannot have been spoken of a Mere Man:
 and that Unbelievers, owing to their Ignorance of Religion, know not
 even the Origin of their own Existence.

 It may be some will foolishly suppose that these words were spoken of
 the birth of a mere ordinary mortal. But if this were all, what reason
 could there be that the earth should need neither seed nor plough, that
 the vine should require no pruning-hook, or other means of culture? How
 can we suppose these things to be spoken of a mere mortal's birth? For
 nature is the minister of the Divine will, not an instrument obedient
 to the command of man. Indeed, the very joy of the elements indicates
 the advent of God, not the conception of a human being. The prayer,
 too, of the poet that his life might be prolonged is a proof of the
 Divinity of him whom he invoked; for we desire life and preservation
 from God, and not from man. Indeed, the Erythræan Sibyl thus appeals to
 God: "Why, O Lord, dost thou compel me still to foretell the future,
 and not rather remove me from this earth to await the blessed day of
 thy coming?" And Maro adds to what he had said before:

 Begin, sweet boy! with smiles thy mother know,

 Who ten long months did with thy burden go.

 No mortal parents smiled upon thy birth:

 No nuptial joy thou know'st, no feast of earth.

 How could his parents have smiled on him? For his Father [3479] is God,
 who is a Power without sensible quality, [3480] existing, not in any
 definite shape, but as comprehending other beings, [3481] and not,
 therefore, in a human body. And who knows not that the Holy Spirit has
 no participation in the nuptial union? For what desire can exist in the
 disposition of that good which all things else desire? What fellowship,
 in short, can wisdom hold with pleasure? But let these arguments be
 left to those who ascribe to him a human origin, and who care not to
 purify themselves from all evil in word as well as deed. On thee,
 Piety, I call to aid my words, on thee who art the very law of purity,
 most desirable of all blessings, teacher of holiest hope, assured
 promise of immortality! Thee, Piety, and thee, Clemency, I adore. We
 who have obtained thine aid [3482] owe thee everlasting gratitude for
 thy healing power. But the multitudes whom their innate hatred of
 thyself deprives of thy succor, are equally estranged from God himself,
 and know not that the very cause of their life and being, and that of
 all the ungodly, is connected with the rightful worship of him who is
 Lord of all: for the world itself is his, and all that it contains.

 [3479] "Father" is emendation of Valesius embodied in his translation
 (1659), but not his text (1659). It is bracketed by Molz. "His God [and
 Father]."

 [3480] "Pure force."

 [3481] In this form it sounds much like Pantheism, but in translation
 of Molz. this reads, "but determinable through the bounds of other
 [existences]."

 [3482] So Valesius conjectures it should read, but the text of Val. and
 Hein. read, "We needy ones owe," &c.

 Chapter XXII.--The Emperor thankfully ascribes his Victories and all
 other Blessings to Christ; and condemns the Conduct of the Tyrant
 Maximin, the Violence of whose Persecution had enhanced the Glory of
 Religion.

 To thee, Piety, I ascribe the cause of my own prosperity, and of all
 that I now possess. To this truth the happy issue of all my endeavors
 bears testimony: brave deeds, victories in war, and triumphs over
 conquered foes. This truth the great city itself allows with joy and
 praise. The people, too, of that much-loved city accord in the same
 sentiment, though once, deceived by ill-grounded hopes, they chose a
 ruler unworthy of themselves, [3483] a ruler who speedily received the
 chastisement which his audacious deeds deserved. But be it far from me
 now to recall the memory of these events, while holding converse with
 thee, Piety, and essaying with earnest endeavor to address thee with
 holy and gentle words. Yet will I say one thing, which haply shall not
 be unbefitting or unseemly. A furious, a cruel, and implacable war was
 maintained by the tyrants against thee, Piety, and thy holy churches:
 nor were there wanting some in Rome itself who exulted at a calamity so
 grievous to the public weal. Nay, the battlefield was prepared; when
 thou didst stand forth, [3484] and present thyself a voluntary victim,
 supported by faith in God. Then indeed it was that the cruelty of
 ungodly men, which raged incessantly like a devouring fire, wrought for
 thee a wondrous and ever memorable glory. Astonishment seized the
 spectators themselves, when they beheld the very executioners who
 tortured the bodies of their holy victims wearied out, and disgusted at
 the cruelties; [3485] the bonds loosened, the engines of torture
 powerless, the flames extinguished, while the sufferers preserved their
 constancy unshaken even for a moment. What, then, hast thou gained by
 these atrocious deeds, most impious of men? [3486] And what was the
 cause of thy insane fury? Thou wilt say, doubtless, these acts of thine
 were done in honor of the gods. What gods are these? or what worthy
 conception hast thou of the Divine nature? Thinkest thou the gods are
 subject to angry passions as thou art? Were it so indeed, it had been
 better for thee to wonder at their strange determination than obey
 their harsh command, when they urged thee to the unrighteous slaughter
 of innocent men. Thou wilt allege, perhaps, the customs of thy
 ancestors and the opinion of mankind in general, as the cause of this
 conduct. I grant the fact: for those customs are very like the acts
 themselves, and proceed from the self-same source of folly. Thou
 thoughtest, it may be, that some special power resided in images formed
 and fashioned by human art; and hence thy reverence, and diligent care
 lest they should be defiled: those mighty and highly exalted gods, thus
 dependent on the care of men!

 [3483] [Maxentius (W. Lowth in loc.).--Bag.]

 [3484] This passage clearly refers to the voluntary sufferings of the
 martyrs. See the note of Valesius.

 [3485] "At a loss to invent fresh cruelties," Bag.; "And perplexed at
 the labor and trouble they met with," 1709; "And reluctantly pursuing
 their terrible work," Molz.

 [3486] Alluding to Maximin, the most bitter persecutor of the
 Christians, as appears from the title of this chapter.

 Chapter XXIII.--Of Christian Conduct. That God is pleased with those
 who lead a Life of Virtue: and that we must expect a Judgment and
 Future Retribution.

 Compare our religion with your own. Is there not with us genuine
 concord, and unwearied love of others? If we reprove a fault, is not
 our object to admonish, not to destroy; our correction for safety, not
 for cruelty? Do we not exercise, not only sincere faith towards God,
 but fidelity in the relations of social life? Do we not pity the
 unfortunate? Is not ours a life of simplicity which disdains to cover
 evil beneath the mask of fraud and hypocrisy? Do we not acknowledge the
 true God, and his undivided sovereignty? This is real godliness: this
 is religion sincere and truly undefiled: this is the life of wisdom;
 and they who have it are travelers, as it were, on a noble road which
 leads to eternal life. For he who has entered on such a course, and
 keeps his soul pure from the pollutions of the body, does not wholly
 die: rather may he be said to complete the service appointed him by
 God, than to die. Again, he who confesses allegiance to God is not
 easily overborne by insolence or rage, but nobly stands under the
 pressure of necessity and the trial of his constancy is as it were, a
 passport to the favor of God. For we cannot doubt that the Deity is
 pleased with excellence in human conduct. For it would be absurd indeed
 if the powerful and the humble alike acknowledge gratitude to those
 from whose services they receive benefit, and repay them by services in
 return, and yet that he who is supreme and sovereign of all, nay, who
 is Good itself, should be negligent in this respect. Rather does he
 follow us throughout the course of our lives, is near us in every act
 of goodness, accepts, and at once rewards our virtue and obedience;
 though he defers the full recompense to that future period, when the
 actions of our lives shall pass under his review and when those who are
 clear in that account shall receive the reward of everlasting life,
 while the wicked shall be visited with the penalties due to their
 crimes.

 Chapter XXIV.--Of Decius, Valerian, and Aurelian, who experienced a
 Miserable End in consequence of their Persecution of the Church.

 To thee, Decius, [3487] I now appeal, who has trampled with insult on
 the labors of the righteous: to thee, the hater of the Church, the
 punisher of those who lived a holy life: what is now thy condition
 after death? How hard and wretched thy present circumstances! Nay, the
 interval before thy death gave proof enough of thy miserable fate, when
 overthrown with all thine army on the plains of Scythia, thou didst
 expose the vaunted power of Rome to the contempt of the Goths. Thou,
 too, Valerian, who didst manifest the same spirit of cruelty towards
 the servants of God, hast afforded an example of righteous judgment. A
 captive in the enemies' hands, led in chains while yet arrayed in the
 purple and imperial attire, and at last thy skin stripped from thee,
 and preserved by command of Sapor the Persian king, thou hast left a
 perpetual trophy of thy calamity. And thou, Aurelian, fierce
 perpetrator of every wrong, how signal was thy fall, when, in the midst
 of thy wild career in Thrace, thou wast slain on the public highway,
 and didst fill the furrows of the road with thine impious blood!

 [3487] [Vide Euseb. Hist. Eccles. Bk. VI. ch. 39. Gibbon (ch. 16)
 notices very leniently the persecution of Decius.--Bag.]

 Chapter XXV.--Of Diocletian, who ignobly abdicated [3488] the Imperial
 Throne, and was terrified by the Dread of Lightning for his Persecution
 of the Church.

 Diocletian, however, after the display of relentless cruelty as a
 persecutor, evinced a consciousness of his own guilt and owing to the
 affliction of a disordered mind, endured the confinement of a mean and
 separate dwelling. [3489] What then, did he gain by his active
 hostility against our God? Simply this I believe, that he passed the
 residue of his life in continual dread of the lightning's stroke.
 Nicomedia attests the fact; eyewitnesses, of whom I myself am one,
 declare it. The palace, and the emperor's private chamber were
 destroyed, consumed by lightning, devoured by the fire of heaven. Men
 of understanding hearts had indeed predicted the issue of such conduct;
 for they could not keep silence, nor conceal their grief at such
 unworthy deeds; but boldly and openly expressed their feeling, saying
 one to another: "What madness is this? and what an insolent abuse of
 power, that man should dare to fight against God; should deliberately
 insult the most holy and just of all religions; and plan, without the
 slightest provocation, the destruction of so great a multitude of
 righteous persons? O rare example of moderation to his subjects! Worthy
 instructor of his army in the care and protection due to their
 fellow-citizens! Men who had never seen the backs of a retreating army
 plunged their swords into the breasts of their own countrymen!" So
 great was the effusion of blood shed, that if shed in battle with
 barbarian enemies, it had been sufficient to purchase a perpetual
 peace. [3490] At length, indeed, the providence of God took vengeance
 on these unhallowed deeds; but not without severe damage to the state.
 For the entire army of the emperor of whom I have just spoken, becoming
 subject to the authority of a worthless person, [3491] who had
 violently usurped the supreme authority at Rome (when the providence of
 God restored freedom to that great city), was destroyed in several
 successive battles. And when we remember the cries with which those who
 were oppressed, and who ardently longed for their native liberty
 implored the help of God; and their praise and thanksgiving to him on
 the removal of the evils under which they had groaned, when that
 liberty was regained, and free and equitable intercourse restored: do
 not these things every way afford convincing proofs of the providence
 of God, and his affectionate regard for the interests of mankind?

 [3488] Cf. Prolegomena, Life.

 [3489] [The derangement of Diocletian appears to have been temporary
 only. The causes of his abdication are not very clearly ascertained;
 but he seems to have meditated the step a considerable time previously.
 See Gibbon, ch. 13, and the note of Valesius.--Bag.]

 [3490] Valesius and Hein., in his first edition, and Bag. read this
 transposed thus, "...severe damage to the state, and an effusion of
 blood; which, if shed," etc. But Val. suggests, and Heinichen adopts in
 his second edition, that the whole sentence should be transposed as
 above.

 [3491] ["He means Maxentius, as appears from what follows. How
 Diocletian's army came under the command of Maxentius, it is not
 difficult to understand. After Diocletian's abdication, Galerius
 Maximian took the command of his forces, giving part to Severus Cæsar
 for the defence of Italy. Shortly afterwards, Maxentius having usurped
 the Imperial power at Rome, Galerius sent Severus against him with his
 forces. Maxentius, however, fraudulently and by promises corrupted and
 drew to his own side Severus's army. After this, Galerius, having
 marched against Maxentius with a more numerous force, was himself in
 like manner deserted by his troops. Thus the army of Diocletian came
 under the power of Maxentius" (Valesius ad loc.).--Bag.]

 Chapter XXVI.--The Emperor ascribes his Personal Piety to God; and
 shows that we are bound to seek Success from God, and attribute it to
 him; but to consider Mistakes as the Result of our own Negligence.

 When men commend my services, which owe their origin to the inspiration
 of Heaven, do they not clearly establish the truth that God is the
 cause of the exploits I have performed? Assuredly they do: for it
 belongs to God to do whatever is best, and to man, to perform the
 commands of God. I believe, indeed, the best and noblest course of
 action is, when, before an attempt is made, we provide as far as
 possible for a secure result: and surely all men know that the holy
 service in which these hands have been employed has originated in pure
 and genuine faith towards God; that whatever has been done for the
 common welfare has been effected by active exertion combined with
 supplication and prayer; the consequence of which has been as great an
 amount of individual and public benefit as each could venture to hope
 for himself and those he holds most dear. They have witnessed battles,
 and have been spectators of a war in which the providence of God has
 granted victory to this people: [3492] they have seen how he has
 favored and seconded our prayers. For righteous prayer is a thing
 invincible; and no one fails to attain his object who addresses holy
 supplication to God: nor is a refusal possible, except in the case of
 wavering faith; [3493] for God is ever favorable, ever ready to approve
 of human virtue. While, therefore, it is natural for man occasionally
 to err, yet God is not the cause of human error. Hence it becomes all
 pious persons to render thanks to the Saviour of all, first for our own
 individual security, and then for the happy posture of public affairs:
 at the same time intreating the favor of Christ with holy prayers and
 constant supplications, that he would continue to us our present
 blessings. For he is the invincible ally and protector of the
 righteous: he is the supreme judge of all things, the prince of
 immorality, the Giver of everlasting life.

 [3492] i.e. the Roman. So Val. and Hein., but Val. thinks it may
 perhaps rather be "to my army."

 [3493] Better, literally, "slackening faith." There is somewhat of loss
 from the primitive and real conception of faith in the fixing of the
 word "wavering" as the conventional expression for weak. Faith is the
 steadfast current of personality towards an object, and poverty of
 faith is more often the abatement or slackening of that steady,
 insistent activity than the wavering of doubt. There is more unbelief
 than disbelief.
