 Azerbaijan's Constitution of
 1995 with Amendments through
 2016

 Table of contents
 Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 First part. General provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Chapter I. The Power of the People . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Chapter II. Foundations of the State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Second part. Major rights, freedoms and responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Chapter III. Principal Human Rights and Civil Liberties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Chapter IV. Principal Obligations of Citizens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 Third part. State power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Chapter V. Legislative Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Chapter VI. Executive Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Chapter VII. Judicial Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Chapter VIII. The Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
 Fourth part. Local self-government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
 Chapter IX. Municipalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
 Fifth Part. Law and statute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
 Chapter X. Legal System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
 Chapter XI. Revision of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
 Chapter XII. Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
 Transitional provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 2

  Source of constitutional authority
  Preamble
  Motives for writing constitution
 Preamble

 The Azerbaijan people, continuing the traditions of many centuries of their Statehood,
 guided by the principles which are reflected in the Constitutional Act on the State
 Independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan, wishing to provide welfare for all and
 everyone, and to establish justice, freedom, security, and being aware of their
 responsibility before past, present, and future generations, exercise their sovereign
 right by solemnly declaring the following goals:

 to protect the independence, sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan;

 to guarantee the democratic system within the framework of the Constitution;

 to achieve the realization of a civil society;

 to establish a law-governed, secular state which assures the supremacy of the
 law as an expression of the will of the people;

 to assure to all a decent level of life in accordance with a just economic and social
 order;

 to live under conditions of friendship, peace and safety with other peoples,
 maintaining a commitment to general human values and to implement a mutually
 beneficial cooperation for these purposes.

  Referenda For the sake of the above stated high intentions, this Constitution shall be adopted
 through a nationwide referendum.

 First part. General provisions

 Chapter I. The Power of the People

 Article 1. Source of Power
 I. The Azerbaijan people are the sole source of State power in the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 II. The Azerbaijan people include citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan that live in
  International law the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan or outside the country and that obey
  Customary international law
 the Azerbaijan State and its Laws. This does not exclude norms defined by the
 international law.

 Article 2. The Sovereignty of the People
 I. The Azerbaijan people have the sovereign right to freely and independently
 decide their fate and to establish the form of its own governance.
 II. The Azerbaijan people implement their sovereign right by universal elections-
  Referenda referendum and by their representatives elected on the basis of universal, direct
  Claim of universal suffrage
  Secret ballot
 and equal elections by secret and individual ballot.

  Referenda Article 3. Matters to be determined by Referendum
 I. The Azerbaijan people can settle every matter connected with their rights and
 interests by referendum.
 II. The below-mentioned matters can only be determined by referendum:
 1. The adoption of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the
  Constitution amendment procedure introduction of changes to it.
 2. The change of State borders of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
  Accession of territory

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 3

 III. A referendum cannot be held concerning the following matters:
 1. Taxes and the state budget;
 2. Amnesty and pardon;
 3. The election, appointment or confirmation of officials, whose election,
 appointment or confirmation are within the competence of the legislative
 organs and (or) the executive power.

 Article 4. The Right to Represent the People
 No one except authoritative representatives elected by the people have the right to
 represent, speak for and address on behalf of the people.

 Article 5. The Unity of the People
 I. The Azerbaijan people are united.
 II. The unity of the Azerbaijan people constitutes the foundation of the Azerbaijan
 State. The Republic of Azerbaijan is wholly and indivisibly the Homeland for all
 the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Article 6. Banning of Power Usurpation
 I. No part of the Azerbaijan people, either an individual, or a social group or an
 organization has the right to usurp the authority of the Azerbaijan people to
 exercise the power.
 II. Power usurpation is the most serious crime directed against the people.

 Chapter II. Foundations of the State

 Article 7. The Azerbaijan State
 I. The Azerbaijan State is a democratic, law-governed, secular, unitary republic.
  Type of government envisioned II. The Republic of Azerbaijan sovereign power in internal matters is confined to
  Separation oflaw
 church and state
  International legal rules, while in international matters it is restricted to solely international
 agreements.
 III. State power in the Republic of Azerbaijan is based on the principle of separation
 of powers:
 Legislative power is exercised by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.

  Name/structure of executive(s) Executive power is vested in a President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Judicial power is administered by courts.

 IV. According to the constitutional provisions, executive, legislative and judicial
  Judicial independence powers cooperate and are independent within the framework of their authority.
  Claim of executive independence

  Name/structure of executive(s) Article 8. The Head of the Azerbaijan State
 I. The President is the Head of the Republic of Azerbaijan. He represents the
  Foreign affairs representative Azerbaijan State in home and foreign policies.
 II. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan embodies the unity of the Azerbaijan
 people and ensures the continuity of the Azerbaijan State.
 III. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan guarantees independence, territorial
  International law integrity and fulfillment of international agreements to which the Republic of
 Azerbaijan is a party.
 IV. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan ensures the independence of the
 judicial power.

 Article 9. The Armed Forces
 I. The Republic of Azerbaijan establishes the Armed Forces to ensure its security
 and protection. The Armed Forces are composed of the Azerbaijan army and
 other armed formations.
 II. The Republic of Azerbaijan rejects war as a means of encroaching on the
 independence of other States and of settling international conflicts.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 4

 III. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the Commander in Chief of the
  Designation of commander in chief Armed Forces.

  International law
  Customary international law
 Article 10. Principles of Foreign Policy
 The Republic of Azerbaijan conducts its relations with other States on the basis of the
 principles recognized by the universally acknowledged rules of international law.

 Article 11. Territory
 I. The territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan is unitary, inviolable and indivisible.
 II. The Republic of Azerbaijan territory includes the Republic of Azerbaijan inner
 waters, the Caspian Sea (Lake) sector relating to the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 [and] the air space over the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. The territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan may not be torn away. The Republic of
 Azerbaijan shall not yield its territory, or part of it, in any form, to anyone;
 borders can be specified only by the Decree of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan on the basis of the will of the people of Azerbaijan.

 Article 12. The Supreme Objective of the State
 I. The supreme objective of the State shall be to ensure human rights and civil
  Right to reasonable standard of living liberties and an adequate standard of living for the citizens of Azerbaijan.
 II. The human rights and civil liberties enumerated in this Constitution shall be
  International law implemented in accordance with the international agreements to which the
 Republic of Azerbaijan is a party.

  Right to own property Article 13. Property
 I. The property in the Republic of Azerbaijan is inviolable and protected by the
 State.
 II. The property can have the form of State property, private property and municipal
 property.
 III. The property cannot be used against human rights and civil liberties, against
  Human dignity interests of the society and State, against human dignity.

  Ownership of natural resources Article 14. Natural Resources
 Natural resources belong to the Republic of Azerbaijan, without damage to the rights
 and interests of any physical or juridical person.

 Article 15. Economic Development and the State
 I. The development of the economy in the Republic of Azerbaijan, based on various
 forms of property, aims to ensure the prosperity of the people.
 II. The Azerbaijan State creates conditions for the development of a socially
  Right to competitive marketplace oriented economy, guarantees free enterprise and prevents monopolies and
  Right to establish a business
 unfair competition in economic relations.

 Article 16. Social Development and the State
 I. The Republic of Azerbaijan ensures the improvement of the well-being of the
  Right to reasonable standard of living people and every citizen, their social protection and normal living standard.
 II. The Republic of Azerbaijan promotes the development of culture, education,
  Reference to art medical care, science, art, protects the nature of the country, historical, material
  Protection of environment
  Right to culture
 and spiritual values of the people.
  Reference to science
  Rights of children Article 17. Family, Children and the State
 I. The family as the foundation of society is under special protection of the State.
  Right to found a family II. Taking care of children and their upbringing is the obligation of the parents. The
 State sees to it that this obligation is fulfilled.
 III. Children who do not have parents or guardians and are deprived of parental care
 are under the protection of the State.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 5

 IV. It is prohibited to involve children in activities that may threaten their lives,
 health, or morality.
 V. Children under the age of 15 may not be employed for work.
  Limits on employment of children VI. The State supervises the implementation of children's rights.

  Separation of church and state Article 18. Religion and the State
 I. In the Republic of Azerbaijan religion is separated from the State. All religions are
 equal before the law.
 II. The spread and propaganda of religions (religious movements) which humiliate
  Human dignity human dignity and contradict the principles of humanity are banned.
 III. The State education system is of secular character.

 Article 19. National Currency
 I. The currency of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the manat.
 II. The Central Bank of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the exclusive property of the
  Central bank State. The Central Bank has the sole legal right to issue notes or to take them
 out of circulation.
 III. Usage of any other currency besides the manat as a means of payment in the
 territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan is prohibited.

 Article 20. Restriction of State Loans
 The Republic of Azerbaijan does not support or provide loans for activities aimed at a
 mutiny or coup d'etat.

 Article 21. State Language
 I. The State language of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the Azerbaijan language. The
  Official or national languages Republic of Azerbaijan shall ensure the development of the Azerbaijan language.
 II. The Republic of Azerbaijan guarantees the free use and development of other
  Protection of language use languages spoken by the population.

  National capital Article 22. The Capital
 Baku is the capital of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

  National flag Article 23. Azerbaijan State Symbols
 I. The State symbols of the Republic of Azerbaijan are the Republic of Azerbaijan
  National anthem Flag, the Republic of Azerbaijan Emblem and the Republic of Azerbaijan National
 Anthem.
 II. The State Flag of the Republic of Azerbaijan consists of three wide stripes. The
 upper stripe is of blue color, the middle stripe is red and the lower one is green.
 There is a white crescent and eight pointed star in the middle of the red stripe on
 both sides of the Flag. The proportion of the width to the length is 1 by 2.
 III. The design of the Republic of Azerbaijan Flag and the Republic of Azerbaijan
  National anthem State Emblem, the music and the text of the Republic of Azerbaijan National
 Anthem shall be defined by a Constitutional Law.

 Second part. Major rights, freedoms and
 responsibilities

 Chapter III. Principal Human Rights and Civil Liberties

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 6

 Article 24. Main Principles Concerning Human Rights and Civil
 Liberties
 I. Human dignity is protected and respected.
  Human dignity II. Every citizen from birth enjoys inviolable, undeniable and inalienable rights and
  Inalienable rights freedoms.
 III. Rights and freedoms also include commitments to society and other individuals.
 Abuse of rights is not allowed.

 Article 25. Right to Equality
 I. Everyone is equal before the law and the court.
  General guarantee of equality II. Men and women have equal rights and freedoms.
  Equality regardless of gender III. Everyone has equal rights and freedoms irrespective of race, ethnicity, religion,
  Equality regardless of race sex, origin, property status, social position, convictions, political party, trade
  Equality regardless of religion
  Equality regardless of origin
 union organization and social unity affiliation. Limitations or recognition of rights
  Equality regardless of social status and freedoms because of race, ethnicity, social status, language, origin,
  Equality regardless of financial status convictions and religion are prohibited.
  Equality regardless of political party
  Equality regardless of gender
 IV. No one may be harmed, granted advantages or privileges, or deprived from
  Equality regardless of creed or belief granting advantages and privileges on the basis of the abovementioned grounds.
 V. Everyone shall be guaranteed equal rights in any proceeding before state
 authorities and bearers of public authority that decide on his or her rights and
 duties.
 VI. Persons with impaired health are entitled to all rights and carry all duties vested
 by this Constitution, except in cases when enjoyment of rights and performance
 of duties is impeded on their limited abilities.

 Article 26. Protection of Human rights and civil liberties
 I. Everyone is authorized to defend his or her human rights and freedoms by
 accepted means.
 II. The State ensures the protection of human rights and freedoms.

 Article 27. Right to Life
 I. Everyone has the right to life.
  Right to life II. Every citizen's right to life is inviolable with the exception of cases when as a
  Inalienable rights result of the armed attack, an enemy soldier is killed, capital punishment is
 executed according to the court's decision and other cases specified by law.
 III. Capital punishment as an extreme measure of punishment is still in force and can
 be applied to an individual for committing a grave crime against the State and
 different persons.
 IV. Except in case of necessary defense, dire necessity, apprehension and detention
 of a criminal, prevention of an escape by a prisoner, prevention of a revolt or coup
 against the State, an armed attack against the country, the use of a weapon
 against a human is not permitted.

 Article 28. Right to Freedom
 I. Everybody has the right to freedom.
 II. The right to freedom is only limited by detention, arrest or imprisonment by
  Protection from unjustified restraint procedures specified by law.
 III. Anyone who is legally in the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan can freely
  Freedom of movement move and choose a place of domicile for himself and to travel from the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 IV. A citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan has the right to come back to his or her
 country unhampered.

  Right to own property Article 29. Right to Property
 I. Everyone has the right to property.
 II. No form or kind of property shall have any advantage. The property right,
 including the private property right, is protected by law.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 7

 III. Every individual may possess moveable and immoveable property. The property
 right consists of the owner's right to possess, use and dispose of the property,
 individually or jointly.
 IV. No one is dispossessed without a decision of the court. Complete confiscation is
  Protection from expropriation inadmissible. The alienation of property for state needs is allowed only after a fair
 reimbursement of its value has been granted.
 V. Private property shall entail social responsibility.
 VI. Land ownership may be restricted by law due to social justice and for efficient
 use of the land.
 VII. The State secures the right of succession.
  Right to transfer property
  Provisions for intellectual property Article 30. Right to Intellectual Property
 I. Everyone has the right to intellectual property.
 II. Copyright, the right of invention and other forms of intellectual property shall be
 guaranteed by the State.

 Article 31. The Right to a Secure Life
 I. Everyone has the right to a secure life.
 II. With the exception of cases specified by law, infringement upon a person's life,
 his or her physical and mental health, property, residence, the use of force
 against him or her is prohibited.

  Right to privacy Article 32. Personal Inviolability
 I. Everyone has the right to personal inviolability.
 II. Everybody has the right to keep their family life secret or private. Except in
 cases specified by law, interference with a person's private or family life is
 prohibited. Everyone has a right to protection against unlawful interference with
 his or her private or family life.
 III. It is prohibited to gather, store, use or disseminate information about a person's
 private life without his or her consent. No one shall be followed, filmed,
 photographed, recorded, or subjected to any other similar actions without his or
 her knowledge or despite his or her disapproval, except when such actions are
 prescribed by law.
 IV. The State guarantees everybody's right to keep secret their correspondence,
  Telecommunications telephone conversations and information transmitted by mail, telegraph or other
 means of communication. This right might be restricted, as specified by
 legislation, to prevent crime or to find out true facts when investigating criminal
 case.
 V. Everyone may become familiar with the materials collected in regards to him or
  Right to information her save in cases prescribed by law. Everyone has a right to demand correction
 or elimination of the information collected in regards to him or her, which does
 not correspond to the truth or is incomplete or collected through violation of the
 provisions of law.
 VI. It is prohibited to enter information resources carried on the paper or in
 electronic form in order to obtain information on third party, except in the cases
 provided by law.
 VII. Information technologies cannot be used for disclosing information about private
 life, including convictions, religion and ethnic identity except in the cases when
 the concerned person has openly expressed his consent or when the statistic
 data of anonymous nature are being processed without discrimination and other
 cases provided by law.
 VIII. Scope of the personal information, as well as the condition of their processing,
 collection, passing, use and protection is defined by law.

  Right to privacy Article 33. Inviolability of Residence
 I. Everyone has the right to inviolability of the residence.
 II. With the exception of cases specified by law or court no one is authorized to
 enter a residence against the will of the resident.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 8

 Article 34. Right to Marriage
 I. Everybody has the right to marriage upon reaching the age specified by law.
  Regulation of marriage II. Marriage is contracted on the basis of voluntary consent. No one shall be forced
 to marry.
 III. Family and marriage are under the protection of the State. Mothers, fathers and
 children shall be protected by law. The State renders assistance to large families.
 IV. The rights of husband and wife are equal. The care and raising of children is the
  Provision for matrimonial equality right and obligation of both parents.
 V. Children have the obligation to take care of their parents. Able-bodied children
 upon reaching the age of 18 have the duty to support their invalid parents.

  Right to work Article 35. Right to Work
 I. Work is the basis of individual and social well-being.
 II. Everyone, depending on working skills, has the right to freely choose the activity,
  Right to choose occupation profession, position and area of employment.
 III. No one can be forced to work.
  Prohibition of slavery IV. Labor contracts are freely signed. No one can be forced to sign contracts.
 V. On the basis of [a] court decision, it is permissible under conditions specified by
  Emergency provisions law to impose hard labor, forcing them to work under orders issued by authorized
  Prohibition of slavery
 officials to perform required work during a state of emergency or martial law.
 VI. Everyone has the right to work under safe and healthy conditions, to receive
  Right to reasonable standard of living without distinction no less than the minimum salary fixed by the State for fulfilled
  Right to safe work environment
 labor.
 VII. The unemployed have the right to receive social benefits from the State.
  State support for the unemployed VIII. The State shall do everything in its power to eradicate unemployment.

  Right to strike Article 36. Right to Strike
 I. Everyone has the right to strike either on his own or collectively with others.
 II. The right to strike of people working on a contract basis can be limited only in
  Restrictions on the armed forces cases specified by law. Military and civil persons serving in the Armed Forces of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan shall not go on strike.
 III. Individual and collective labor disputes are settled in the procedure established
 by law.
 IV. Except as provided by law, a lockout is prohibited.

  Right to rest and leisure Article 37. Right to Rest
 I. Everyone has the right to rest.
 II. To people working on contract with [a] maximum 8-hour working day, rest and
 holiday days, at least 21-day paid annual leave is guaranteed.

 Article 38. Right to Social Security
 I. Everyone has the right to social security.
 II. It is the obligation of the family members initially to render assistance to those in
 their family who need it.
 III. Everyone has the right to social security in old age, sickness specified by law,
  State support for the unemployed disability, when losing work ability or the breadwinner of the family, when
  State support for the disabled
  State support for the elderly
 unemployed and in other cases specified by law.
 IV. Minimal pensions and social benefits are established by law.
 V. The State creates possibilities for developing charity work, voluntary social
 insurance and other forms of social security and shall promote their
 development.

  Protection of environment Article 39. Right to Live in a Healthy Environment
 I. Everyone has the right to live in a healthy environment.
 II. Everyone has the right to collect information on the environmental situation and
 to get compensation for damage rendered to the health and property due to the
 violation of ecological rights.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 9

 III. No one may cause threat or damage to the environment and natural resources
 beyond the limits set by law.
 IV. The state guarantees the preservation of ecological balance and protection of
 the species of wild plants and animals determined by law.

  Right to culture Article 40. Right to Culture
 I. Everyone has the right to participate in cultural life, make use of cultural
 institutions and cultural wealth.
 II. Everyone must treat with respect historical, cultural and spiritual values,
 preserve them and protect cultural monuments.

  Right to health care Article 41. Right to Health Protection
 I. Everyone has the right to health protection and medical aid.
 II. The State, acting on the basis of various forms of property, implements
 necessary measures to promote the development of all aspects of health
 services, ensures the sanitary-epidemiological well-being and creates various
 forms of medical insurance.
 III. Officials are held to account if they withhold information on facts or situations
 which threaten the life or health of people.

 Article 42. Right to Education
 I. Everyone has the right to an education.
 II. The State guarantees the right to free compulsory secondary education.
  Compulsory education III. The system of education is controlled by the State.
  Free education
 IV. Regardless of material conditions, the State guarantees [that] talented and
  Access to higher education merited persons continue their education.
 V. The State establishes minimum educational standards.

  Right to shelter Article 43. Right to Residence
 I. No one can be deprived of his or her residence.
 II. The State provides loans for the construction of houses and blocks of
 apartments, takes measures in order to implement [the] right to residence.

 Article 44. National and Ethnic Identity
 I. Everyone has the right to preserve one's national identity.
 II. No one can be deprived of the right to change one's national identity.

  Protection of language use Article 45. Right to Use the Mother Tongue
 I. Everyone has the right to use the mother tongue. Everyone has the right to be
 raised and get an education, be engaged in creative activities in one's mother
 tongue.
 II. No one can be deprived of the right to use the mother tongue.

  Human dignity Article 46. Protection of Honor and Dignity
 I. Everyone has the right to protect his or her honor and dignity.
 II. The State shall protect personal dignity. Nothing can justify humiliation of
 personal dignity.
 III. Nobody can be tortured or tormented, nobody shall suffer a treatment or
  Reference to science punishment humiliating to human dignity. Nobody can be experimented upon-
  Prohibition of cruel treatment
  Prohibition of torture
 medically, scientifically or in any other way-without his or her consent.

  Freedom of expression
  Freedom of opinion/thought/conscience
 Article 47. Freedom of Thought and Speech
 I. Everyone has the freedom of thought and speech.
 II. Nobody may be forced to identify or refuse his or her ideas and principles.
 III. Propaganda inciting racial, ethnic, religious, social animosity or hostility or relying
 on any other criteria is inadmissible.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 10

  Freedom of religion Article 48. Freedom of Conscience
 I. Everyone has the right to freedom of conscience and religion.
 II. Everyone has the right to independently define his or her attitude towards
 religion, to profess religion alone or together with others, or to profess no religion
 at all, to express and spread religious convictions.
 III. The free conduct of religious rites if it does not violate public order or public
 morality is authorized.
 IV. The violation of the freedom of religion and self-expression is not allowed.
 V. No one shall be forced to express (or demonstrate) his or her religious faith and
 belief, to execute religious rituals or participate in religious ceremonies.

  Freedom of assembly Article 49. Freedom of Assembly
 I. Everyone has the right to freely gather with others.
 II. Everyone has the right, upon notification in advance of responsible government
 organs, to peaceful, unarmed gatherings, meetings, demonstrations, rallies,
 street processions, pickets together with others, provided that public order and
 public morals are not violated.

 Article 50. Freedom of Information
 I. Everyone has the right to legally seek, receive, pass, prepare and disseminate
 information.
 II. The freedom of mass media is guaranteed. State censorship of mass media,
  Freedom of press including print media, is forbidden.
 III. Everyone's right to refute or reply to the information published in the media and
  Right to protect one's reputation violating his or her rights or damaging his or her interests shall be guaranteed.

 Article 51. Freedom of Creative Work
 I. Everyone has the freedom of creative work.
 II. The State ensures the realization of belles-lettres, scientific-technical and other
  Reference to science forms of creative work.

  Requirements for birthright citizenship Article 52. Right to Citizenship
 A person having political and legal relationship to the Republic of Azerbaijan as well as
 mutual rights and obligations is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. A person born on
 the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. A
 person whose one parent is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a citizen of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Article 53. Guarantee of the Citizenship Right
 I. A citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan cannot be deprived of his or her citizenship
  Conditions for revoking citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan (except for statutory cases of its loss).
 II. A citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan can under no circumstances be expelled
  Extradition procedure from the Republic of Azerbaijan or extradited to a foreign state.
 III. The Republic of Azerbaijan guarantees the legal defense and protection of
 citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan who reside temporarily or permanently
 abroad.

 Article 54. Right to Participate in the Political Life of Society and the
 State
 I. Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan have the right to participate without
 hindrance in the political life of the society and the State.
 II. Every citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan has the right to independently show
 resistance to the attempt of a mutiny against the State or against forced change
 of the constitutional order.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 11

 Article 55. Right to Participate in the Government of the State
 I. Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan have the right to participate in the
 Government. They can implement this right directly or by their representatives.
 II. Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan have the right to serve in government
 organs. Officials to government organs are appointed from the citizens of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan. Foreign citizens and persons without citizenship can be
 admitted to government service by the procedures specified by law.

  Restrictions on voting Article 56. Election Right
 I. Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan have the right to elect and be elected to
  Referenda the government organs and also to participate in referenda.
 II. The right to participate in the elections as well as in the referenda does not
  Referenda belong to persons whose incapacity has been determined by court.
 III. Professional military persons, judges, government officials, persons sentenced to
  Restrictions on the armed forces imprisonment according to a court decision brought into effect, religious officials
 and other people mentioned in the present Constitution and laws are limited in
 their right to be elected.

  Right of petition Article 57. Right to Petition
 I. Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan have the right to address themselves to
 their government organs as well as to send them individual and collective
 petitions. Military servants can use this right only on an individual basis.
 Response to each petition must be given in the procedure and the terms
 established by law.
 II. Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan have the right to criticize the activity of
 government organs, their officials, political parties, professional unions, other
 public unions and individuals. They may not be persecuted for exercising this
 right. Insult and slander cannot be considered criticism.

  Freedom of association Article 58. Right to Association
 I. Everyone has the right to associate freely with others.
 II. Everyone has the right to set up any organization, including a political party,
  Right to join trade unions professional union and any other public association or to enter an already
  Right to form political parties
 existing association. The independent activity of all associations is guaranteed.
 III. No one can be forced to enter an association or to remain its member.
 IV. Activity of unions which intend forcible overthrow of legal state power on the
 whole territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan or in any part thereof and other
 objectives which are considered a crime, or use criminal methods are prohibited.
 The activities of unions which violate the Constitution and laws can be curtailed
 solely by a court order.

  Right to establish a business Article 59. Right to Freedom of Enterprise
 I. Everyone has the right to use his or her opportunities, abilities and property, to
 be independently or jointly with others engaged in business activity or in any
 other kind of economic activity.
 II. The state only regulates the protection of state interests, human life and health
 in business activity.

 Article 60. Administrative and judicial guarantee of rights and
 freedoms
 I. Everyone is guaranteed the protection of his rights and freedoms in the
 administrative manner and in court.
 II. Everyone has the right to an unbiased approach to their work and consideration
 of the case within a reasonable time in the administrative proceedings and
 litigation.
 III. Everyone has the right to being heard in administrative proceedings and
 litigation.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 12

 IV. Everyone may appeal to court in the administrative manner against the actions
 and inaction of public authorities, political parties, legal entities, municipalities
 and their officials.

  Right to counsel Article 61. Right to Receive Legal Help
 I. Everyone has the right to receive qualified legal assistance.
 II. In cases specified by law, legal help shall be rendered free at the expense of the
 State.
 III. Everyone from the moment of being detained, arrested, charged with a crime on
 the part of authorized State organs has the right to seek the help of the
 Defender.

 Article 62. Prohibition of Changes of Court Jurisdiction
 Everyone has the right to have his or her case considered in a court specified by law. It is
 prohibited to have the case considered in another court without his or her consent.

  Presumption of innocence in trials Article 63. Presumption of Innocence
 I. Everyone has the right to the presumption of innocence. Everyone who is
 charged with a crime shall be considered innocent until his or her guilt has been
 proven in the procedure specified by law, and a verdict, passed by the court, has
 come into effect.
 II. In case there are grounded suspicions concerning a person's guilt, it is not
 permitted to bring in a verdict of guilty with respect to the person.
 III. A person who is charged with a crime is not obliged to prove his or her innocence.
 IV. Evidence obtained by violating the law cannot be used when administering
  Regulation of evidence collection justice. Without a verdict passed by the court, no one can be found guilty of
 committing a crime.

  Prohibition of double jeopardy Article 64. Inadmissibility of Repeated Conviction for the Same Crime
 No one shall be convicted repeatedly for the same crime.

  Right to appeal judicial decisions Article 65. Right of Repeated Appeal to Court
 Everyone has the right to appeal to a higher court for reconsideration of the verdict
 passed with respect to him in the procedure specified by law as well as appeal for
 pardon and for mitigating the punishment.

  Protection from self-incrimination Article 66. Inadmissibility of Forced Testifying Against Relatives
 No one can be forced to testify against himself, wife (husband), children, parents,
 brother, sister. A complete list of relatives against whom testifying is not obligatory is
 determined by law.

 Article 67. Rights of the Detained, Arrested, and Accused of a Crime
 I. Everyone who has been detained, arrested, accused of a crime on the part of
 competent State organs must be given immediate explanation of his or her rights
 and the reason for being arrested and brought to justice.
 II. Every person accused of a criminal offence shall be heard before being
 sentenced.

 Article 68. The right to protection against arbitrariness and being
 treated with dignity
 I. Everyone has the right to being treated by public bodies with dignity that rules
  Human dignity out arbitrariness.
 II. The rights of a person who has been a victim of a crime and abuse of power shall
  Protection of victim's rights be protected by the law. A victim has the right to participate in court
 examination and to demand compensation for damage caused to him.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 13

 III. Everyone has the right to receive compensation from the State for the damage
  Ultra-vires administrative actions caused to him as a result of illegal actions or inaction of government organs or
 their officials.
 IV. The government, together with civil servants, shall bear civil liability for damage
 caused to human rights and freedoms as a result of unlawful actions and inaction
 of public servants, and the violation of their guarantees.

  International law Article 69. Rights of Foreign Citizens and Persons without Citizenship
 I. Foreign citizens and persons without citizenship when in the Republic of
 Azerbaijan can enjoy all rights and freedoms and shall fulfill all the obligations
 together with citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan, if they do not contradict the
 law or an international agreement to which the Republic of Azerbaijan is a party.
 II. Rights and freedoms of foreign citizens and people without citizenship residing
  Customary international law permanently or temporarily in the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be
 restricted only in accordance with the international legal norms and laws of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Protection of stateless persons Article 70. Right to Political Asylum
 I. According to the universal international legal norms the Republic of Azerbaijan
  Customary international law grants political asylum to foreign citizens and persons without citizenship.
  International law
 II. Extradition to another State of persons persecuted for their political convictions
  Extradition procedure and deeds which are not considered crimes in the Republic of Azerbaijan shall not
 be authorized.

 Article 71. Protection of Human rights and civil liberties
 I. The legislative, executive and judicial powers shall observe and protect human
 rights and freedoms fixed in the Constitution.
 II. No one can curtail the implementation of the rights and freedoms of man and
 citizen. Everyone's rights and freedoms are subject to the restrictions provided
 for in the Constitution and the laws as well as to the limits resulting from the
 rights and freedoms of others. Restriction rights and freedoms should be
 proportional to the result expected by the state.
 III. Upon declaration of war, martial law and exceptional situation, as well as
  International law mobilization that the implementation of human rights and freedoms can be
  Emergency provisions
 partially and temporarily curtailed taking into consideration international
 obligations of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The population shall be notified in
 advance of the temporary suspension of human rights and freedoms.
 IV. No one shall be compelled to make public religious and other convictions and
 thoughts and be persecuted for them.
 V. None of the provisions of the Constitution may be used to abolish human rights
 and civil liberties.
 VI. In the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan, human rights and freedoms are
 immediately in force.
 VII. Disputes in relation to human rights and freedoms shall be resolved in court.
 VIII. No one can be responsible for a deed which at the time of being committed was
  Principle of no punishment without law not considered a violation of law. If after violating the law a new law removed or
  Protection from ex post facto laws
 mitigated the responsibility for such actions the new law is applied in that case.
 IX. Everyone is free to do anything which is not prohibited by law and no one may be
  Principle of no punishment without law forced to do anything which is not prescribed by law.
 X. The state institutions may act only on the basis of this Constitution, in the
  Duty to obey the constitution manner and within the boundaries prescribed by law.

 Chapter IV. Principal Obligations of Citizens

 Article 72. Principal Obligations of Citizens
 I. Everyone has responsibilities towards the State and society which result directly
 from his or her rights and freedoms. Duties may be established for anyone only
 by this Constitution or by law.
 II. Everyone must abide by the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of
  Duty to obey the constitution Azerbaijan, respect the rights and freedoms of other people, and fulfill other
 obligations specified by law.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 14

 III. Ignorance of the law shall not relieve a person of his or her responsibility.

  Duty to pay taxes Article 73. Taxes and Other State Duties
 I. Everyone has the responsibility to pay taxes and other State dues imposed by
 the law in full and without delay.
 II. No one can be forced to pay taxes and other State dues over and above the
 amount determined by the law and if there are no reasons specified by the law.

 Article 74. Loyalty to the Homeland
 I. Loyalty to the Homeland is sacred.
 II. Persons employed by election or appointment in the legislative, executive and
 judicial organs bear responsibility for proper and accurate implementation of
 their obligations and in cases specified by the law take an oath.
 III. A person holding a position by election or appointment in the legislative,
  Head of government removal executive and judicial organs, who has taken the oath of allegiance to the
  Oaths to abide by constitution
  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal
 Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan, shall be considered to have resigned
  Removal of individual legislators from holding the position and cannot hold this position any more, if he is charged
  Head of state removal with a crime against the independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan, its
  Cabinet removal
 constitutional order, mutiny against the State or overthrow of the government
 and if the person is convicted on the basis of this charge.

  National flag
  National anthem
 Article 75. Respect for State Symbols
 I. Every citizen must respect the State Symbols of the Republic of Azerbaijan-its
 Flag, Emblem and National Anthem.
 II. Expression of disrespect to the state symbols shall entail liability as determined
 by law.

  Duty to serve in the military Article 76. Defense of the Homeland
 I. The Defense of the Homeland is the duty of every citizen. Citizens shall serve in
 the Armed Forces in accordance with the conditions specified by law.
 II. If serving in the Armed Forces runs counter to a person's convictions then active
  Right to conscientious objection military service can be replaced by an alternative one in the cases specified by
 the law.

  Right to culture Article 77. Protection of Historical and Cultural Monuments
 To protect historical and cultural monuments is the duty of everyone.

  Protection of environment Article 78. Environmental Protection
 Protection of the environment is the duty of everyone.

 Article 79. Prohibition to Execute Responsibilities Contradicting the
 Law
 No one can be compelled to execute responsibilities contradicting the Constitution and
 the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Article 80. Responsibility
 Violation of the present Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan as well
 as abuse of rights and freedoms and failure to fulfill responsibilities specified by the
 present Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan entails liability in the
 forms determined by law.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 15

 Third part. State power

 Chapter V. Legislative Power
  Structure of legislative chamber(s) Article 81. Authority Competent to Exercise Legislative Power
 The legislative power is exercised by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Size of first chamber Article 82. Composition of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan consists of 125 Deputies.

  Secret ballot
  First chamber selection
 Article 83. Principles for the Elections to the Milli Majlis of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan
 The Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan are elected on the basis of
 majority voting in general, equal and direct elections by way of free, individual and
 secret voting.

 Article 84. Term of Office for Members of the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The term of the office of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is five years.
  Constitutional court powers In case the conduct of elections to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
  Emergency provisions
  Term length for first chamber
 cannot be held due to military operations under a state of war, the term of office
 of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be extended until the end of
 military operations. The decision of this matter shall be taken by the
 Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan upon application of the state
 body organizing elections (referendum).
 II. Elections of the Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan are held
  Scheduling of elections every five years on the first Sunday of November.
 III. The term of office for the Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan are limited by the term of office of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 IV. If the new elections are held to replace the Deputies that have ended the
  Replacement of legislators membership with new ones, the term of office of the newly elected Deputy is
 limited to the term of office of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Article 85. Requirements of Candidates for Deputy of the Milli Majlis
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. Every citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan with the right to participation in
  Eligibility for first chamber election can be elected a Deputy of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 in the procedure determined by law.
 II. Persons cannot be elected Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
  Outside professions of legislators Azerbaijan who have dual citizenship, are in State service in other countries,
  Reference to science
  Eligibility for first chamber
 work in the executive or juridical organs, persons engaged in a different paid
 activity with the exception of scientific, creative and teaching work, ministers of
 religion, persons whose incapacity has been confirmed by a court, persons who
 serve their sentence in places of confinement based on a court verdict.

  Constitutional court powers Article 86. Certification and Confirmation of Election Results
 The election results shall be verified and confirmed by the Constitutional Court of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 16

 Article 87. Expiration of Term of Office of the Deputies
 I. The term of office of the Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 expires on the day of the first sitting of the newly elected Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.
 II. The elections to replace the Deputies who have left the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan shall not be held if less than 120 days remain until the
 expiration of the term of office.
 III. The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall have power when the authority
  Quorum for legislative sessions of 83 members is confirmed.

 Article 88. Sessions of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. Every year, Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan holds two regular, spring and
 autumn, sessions.

 The first session of Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is called no later than
 one week from the day of confirmation of the authority of 83 deputies of Milli
 Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 If after the confirmation of the authority of 83 deputies of Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan is not confirmed by the 10th of March, then the
 Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan determines the time of the
 first session of Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 II. Special sessions of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be
  Extraordinary legislative sessions summoned by the Speaker of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan at the
 request of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, or 42 Members of the Milli
 Majlis.
 III. The agenda of the special session is worked out by those members who required
 its convocation. After consideration of the agenda items the work of the special
 session shall be completed.
 IV. The assemblies of the sessions of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
  Public or private sessions shall be open to the public. An assembly of the session of the Milli Majlis may be
 closed to the public upon the claim of 83 members of parliament or the proposal
 by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Removal of individual legislators Article 89. Termination of the Mandate of a Deputy of the Milli Majlis
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan and Loss of Powers
 I. The powers of a Deputy of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan are
 terminated in the following cases:
 1. the wrong counting of votes during the elections has been established;
 2. the citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan has been lost or citizenship of
 another country has been acquired;
 3. a crime has been committed and a court decision has come into effect;
 4. a position held in government organs, being a minister of religion, being
  Reference to science engaged in the business, commercial or other paid activity (excepting
  Outside professions of legislators
 scientific, teaching and creative activity);
 5. resignation of his or her own accord;
 6. in case this violates the requirement of Part III of Article 93 of this
 Constitution;
 7. in flagrant violation of statutory rules of ethical conduct for deputies.

 The rules of termination of the membership to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan are established by law.

 II. The functions of the Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 shall be considered to have been terminated when they are unable to fulfill their
 official duties and in other cases specified by law. The procedure in which such a
 decision is taken shall be established by law.

  Immunity of legislators

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 17

 Article 90. The Immunity of the Deputy of the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Deputy of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan during the term of
 office has personal immunity. With the exception of cases when he has been
 caught in flagrante delicto, the Deputy during the term of office cannot be
 brought to court, detained, administrative measures of punishment cannot be
 applied to him. He cannot be arrested or punished in some other way and he
 cannot be searched or examined. The Deputy of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan can be detained if caught in flagrante delicto. In this case the organ
 which has detained the Deputy of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 must inform the General Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 II. The immunity of the Deputy of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan can
 be terminated only by the decision of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 on the basis of proposals of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan by the
 General Procurator.

  Immunity of legislators Article 91. Immunity from Prosecution of Members of the Milli Majlis
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan Answerable
 The Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan may not be prosecuted for
 their activity in the Milli Majlis, voting in the Milli Majlis and ideas expressed in the Milli
 Majlis. Concerning these cases clarifications and evidence can be required only with
 their consent.

  Legislative committees
  Leader of first chamber
 Article 92. Organization of the Work of the Milli Majlis of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan
 The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall determine its rules of procedure and
 establish its bodies, including the election of its Speaker and the Deputy Speakers, the
 organization of committees and commissions, and the establishment of a counting
 chamber.

 Article 93. Acts of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall adopt constitutional laws, laws
 and resolutions on matters within its competence.
 II. Constitutional laws, laws and resolutions shall be adopted by the Milli Majlis in
 the procedure specified by the present Constitution.
 III. Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall exercise the right
 to vote in person.
 IV. In the laws and resolutions the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan cannot
 assign specific tasks to executive organs and courts.

 Article 94. General Rules to be Determined by the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan determines the general rules on the
 following matters:
 1. the use of human and civil constitutional rights and freedoms, State
 guarantee of these rights and freedoms;
 2. Presidential elections of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 3. elections to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the status of
 Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 4. referendum;
  Referenda 5. the court system and the status of judges, procuracy; attorneyship; and
 notary business;
 6. legal procedures, implementation of court's decisions;
 7. municipal elections and the status of municipalities;
  Municipal government 8. the regime in exceptional situations; martial law regime;
 9. State awards;
 10. the status of physical and juridical persons;
 11. matters of civil law;
 12. transactions; civil law agreements, representations and inheritance;
  Right to transfer property

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 18

 I. 13. right of ownership, including the legal regime of the State, private and
  Provisions for intellectual property municipal property, right of intellectual property; other property rights;
 obligation right;
 14. family relations including trusteeship and guardianship;
 15. foundations of finance activity, taxes, duties and customs;
 16. labor relations and social security;
 17. determination of crimes and law violations; imposing responsibility for
 their commitment;
 18. defense and military service;
 19. State service;
 20. foundations of security;
 21. territorial organization; regime of State borders;
 22. ratification and denunciation of international agreements;
  International law 23. communications and transport;
 24. statistics, metrology and standards;
 25. customs;
 26. commerce and transaction;
 27. banking, accounting, insurance.
 II. On the matters mentioned in items 2, 3, 4 of the present Article the laws are
  Supermajority required for legislation passed by a majority of 83 votes; on the remaining matters-a majority of 63
 votes are required to pass a law.
 III. The first part of the present Article may be supplemented by a constitutional law.

 Article 95. Matters to be Determined by the Milli Majlis of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan
 I. The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is competent to determine the
 following matters:
 1. the arrangement of the work of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan;
 2. the establishment of diplomatic representation upon the proposal of the
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 3. the administrative-territorial division;
 4. the ratification and denunciation of international treaties and
  International law intergovernmental agreements containing rules contrary to the laws of
  Treaty ratification
 the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 5. the ratification of the State fiscal budget on the proposal of the President
  Budget bills of the Republic of Azerbaijan and exercising control over its use;
 6. the election of a commissioner for human rights of the Republic of
  Human rights commission Azerbaijan upon presentation by the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan;
 7. upon the proposal of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 ratification of the military doctrine of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 8. ratification in cases specified by the present Constitution of the decrees of
  Head of state decree power the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 9. upon the proposal of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, giving
  Head of government selection consent to the candidate being appointed to the post of the Prime
 Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 10. on the proposal of the President of the President of the Republic of
  Supreme court selection Azerbaijan appointment of the members of the Constitutional Court and
  Ordinary court selection
  Constitutional court selection
 Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Courts of the Appeal
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 11. appointment of the General Procurator on the proposal of the President of
  Attorney general the Republic of Azerbaijan, giving consent to release the General
 Procurator from holding position on the proposal of the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan;
 12. removal of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan from office by way
  Head of state removal of impeachment upon proposal of the Constitutional Court;
  Constitutional court powers
 13. removal of judges from holding positions on the proposal of the President
  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 14. taking the decision on a vote of confidence in the Cabinet of Ministers of
  Cabinet removal the Republic of Azerbaijan;
  Head of government removal
 15. appointment and dismissal of the Chairperson and the members of the
  Central bank Board of Directors of the Central Bank of the Republic of Azerbaijan upon
 recommendation of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 19

 I. 16. giving consent to the use of the Armed Forces to the fulfillment of
  Designation of commander in chief obligations not connected with their main purpose on the basis of the
 proposal of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 17. on the basis of the proposal of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
  Power to declare/approve war give consent to declare a war and conclude peace;
 18. schedule a referendum;
  Referenda 19. amnesty; and
 20. hearing of the municipality reports.
 II. Matters specified in items 1-5 of the present Article laws shall be passed by a
 majority of 63 votes; as for the remaining matters, resolutions shall be adopted
 in the same procedure if the present Constitution does not stipulate another
 procedure.
 III. Resolutions shall also be adopted with respect to other issues, which, according
 to the present Constitution, fall within the competence of the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan, the issues connected with the organization of the activity
 of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan, as well as the issues on which the
 opinion of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is required.
 IV. The first part of the present Article may be supplemented by a constitutional law.

  Legislative initiatives by citizens Article 96. The Right to Initiate Legislation in the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The right to initiate legislation (the right to submit draft laws and other issues to
  Subsidiary unit government the discussion of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan) in the Milli Majlis of
  Initiation of general legislation
  Attorney general
 the Republic of Azerbaijan belongs to the Members of the Milli Majlis of the
  Supreme court powers Republic of Azerbaijan, the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Supreme
 Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan, forty thousand citizens of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan enjoying suffrage, the Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan and the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic.
 II. Draft laws or decisions submitted to the discussion of the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan by way of legislative initiative by the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan, forty
 thousand citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan enjoying suffrage, the
 Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Ali Majlis of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic are submitted to the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan for discussion and put to the vote in the form in which they
 have been presented.
 III. Changes to such laws or decisions may be made with the consent of the subjects
 exercising the right of legislative initiative.
 IV. Draft laws or decisions presented by way of legislative initiative by the President
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 forty thousand citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan enjoying suffrage, the
 Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Azerbaijan or the Ali Majlis of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic shall be put to the vote in the Milli Majlis of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan within a period of two months.
 V. If the adoption of a draft law or decision has been declared a matter of urgency
 by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Supreme Court of the
 Republic, the Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Azerbaijan or the Ali Majlis of
 the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic this period shall be 20 days.
 VI. The manner in which 40 thousand citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan enjoying
 suffrage exercise their right to initiate legislation shall be defined by law.
 VII. Draft laws and resolutions shall be substantiated and the purposes for their
 adoption shall be indicated.

 Article 97. Time limit for the Submission of Laws to the President for
 Signing
 I. The laws are submitted to the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan for signing
 within 14 days from the day of adoption.
 II. A draft law which has been declared urgent is submitted to the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan for signing within 24 hours from its adoption.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 20

 Article 98. Coming into Force of Laws of the Milli Majlis of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan
 The law and the resolutions shall come into effect from the day of publication if the law
 or the resolution itself does not specify a different procedure.

  Dismissal of the legislature Article 98-1. The dissolution of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan is empowered to dissolve the Milli
 Majlis if the same convocation of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 expresses twice during the year no-confidence to the Cabinet of Ministers of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan or if the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan fails to
 appoint during the statutory period the candidates nominated for the
 membership of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court and the Board of the
 Central Bank of Azerbaijan upon a double submission of the President of
 Azerbaijan, as well as if the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan fails to fulfill
 its obligations specified in Articles 94, 95 and 97, as well as in Parts II, III, IV and
 V of Article 96 due to unavoidable reasons.
 II. The term of office of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan elected via
  Scheduling of elections extraordinary elections of Milli Majlis's convocation may be less than five years.
 In such case the regular elections to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 shall be held on the first Sunday of November of the fifth year of a term of office
 of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan elected on extraordinary elections
 of Milli Majlis's convocation.

 Chapter VI. Executive Power
  Name/structure of executive(s) Article 99. Authority Competent to Exercise Executive Power
 The executive power in the Republic of Azerbaijan belongs to the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Eligibility for head of state Article 100. Requirements of Candidates for the Presidency of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be any citizen of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan, has been residing in the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan without
 interruption for more than 10 years, enjoys the right to vote, has never been tried for a
 major crime, has no commitments towards other States, has benefited from higher
 education and does not have dual citizenship.

  Head of state selection Article 101. Foundations for the Election of the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan is elected for a term of seven years
  Secret ballot by universal, direct and equal elections by free, individual and secret ballot. The
  Head of state term length
  Claim of universal suffrage
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan is empowered to declare extraordinary
 presidential elections.
 II. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan is elected by a majority of half of the
 votes cast in the election.
 III. If this majority is not achieved on the first ballot, a second ballot shall be held on
 the second Sunday following the first round of voting. Only the two candidates
 who have polled the highest numbers of votes in the first round shall participate
 in the second round, or, in case those candidates who have polled most votes
 have withdrawn their candidacies, the two candidates placed immediately behind
 them.
 IV. The candidate who has obtained a majority vote in the second round is
 considered the elected President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 V. In case the conduct of the Presidential Election of the Republic of Azerbaijan is
  Constitutional court powers not held due to military operations under a state of war, the term of office of the
  Emergency provisions
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be extended until the end of military
 operations. The decision on this matter shall be adopted by the Constitutional

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 21

 V. Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the basis of the application of the state
 body organizing elections (referendum).
 VI. The rules for the implementation of this Article shall be defined by law.

  Constitutional court powers Article 102. Results of the Elections of the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 The results of the elections shall be officially announced by the Constitutional Court of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan within 14 days after the elections.

 Article 103. Oath of Allegiance of the Person Elected President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The person who has been elected President of the Republic of Azerbaijan within
  Oaths to abide by constitution three days starting from the announcement day of the Presidential election
 results with the participation of judges of the Constitutional Court takes the
 following oath: "While executing the power of the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan I swear to observe the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State, to serve the people
 in a dignified manner."
 II. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan is considered to have assumed his or
 her duties from the day of swearing in.

  Deputy executive Article 103-1. Vice-presidents of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The First Vice-President and Vice-Presidents of the Republic of Azerbaijan are
 appointed and dismissed by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 II. A citizen of the Azerbaijani Republic, having voting right and university decree
 and having no obligations in other states can be appointed to the post of Vice-
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Article 104. Permanent Incapacity of the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. The powers of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be considered to
  Head of state removal have expired before the official end of his or her term when he or she retires,
 loses the ability to fulfill the duties of his or her office for health reasons, or is
 removed from office in the conditions and in the procedure specified by the
 present Constitution.
 II. When the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan retires, his or her request for
 retirement is submitted to the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan, having ascertained that
 the President has personally sent in his or her resignation makes a decision on
 approving the resignation of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan. From
 that moment the President shall be considered to have resigned from his or her
 position in connection with his or her retirement.
 III. Upon the presentation of information concerning the complete loss of ability of
  Constitutional court powers the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan to fulfill the duties of his or her office
 for health reasons, the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall request the
 Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan to verify and confirm the
 relevant facts. The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan makes a
 decision on this matter by a majority of six votes. If the Constitutional Court of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan does not confirm the relevant facts, the issue shall be
 deemed to have been settled.

  Head of state replacement Article 105. Execution of Obligations of the President and Retirement
 I. When the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan retires from the position before
 the official end of his or her term, a new Presidential election shall be held within
 60 days. In this case the First Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall
 perform the duties of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan before the
 election of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 II. If during this term the First Vice-President acting as President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan resigns or completely loses the ability to fulfill his or her official duties
 due to poor health, the Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan receives the

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 22

 II. status of First Vice-President in a specified sequence and shall carry out the
 powers of the President.
 III. Due to the reasons specified in Part II of this article, in case that First Vice-
 President is unable to carry out the powers of the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan, the powers of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be
 carried out by Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 IV. Due to the reasons specified in Part II of this article, in case that Prime Minister
 is not able to carry out the powers of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 the powers of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be carried out by
 Speaker of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan. If the Speaker of the Milli
 Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is unable to fulfill the powers of the President
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan due to aforementioned reasons, the Milli Majlis of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan passed a decision about the fulfillment of the powers
 of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan by other official.

  Head of state immunity Article 106. Immunity of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan has the right of immunity.

 The honor and dignity of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be protected
 by law.

 Article 106-1. Immunity of the Vice-President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. The Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan enjoys immunity during the
 whole term of his powers.
 II. The Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan may not be arrested, brought to
 criminal responsibility except cases when he has been caught red-handed,
 disciplinary measures may not be applied to him by court, he may not be
 searched.
 III. The Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan may be arrested if he has been
 caught red-handed. In such case body detained the Vice-President must
 immediately notify Prosecutor-General of the Azerbaijan Republic about the fact.
 IV. Immunity of the Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan might be stopped
 only by the President of the Azerbaijan Republic, based on application of
 Prosecutor-General of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Constitutional court powers
  Head of state removal
 Article 107. Removal of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 from Office
 I. The matter of the removal of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan from his
  Supreme court powers or her office when a serious crime has been committed by the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan may be presented before the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan on the initiative of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan on the basis of a decision reached by the Supreme Court of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan within 30 days.
 II. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be removed from office on the
 basis of a resolution passed by the majority of 95 votes of the Deputies. This
 resolution shall be signed by the Constitutional Court of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan. If within one week the Constitutional Court of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan does not support the signing this resolution, the resolution shall not
 come into effect.
 III. The resolution on the removal of the President from office shall be passed within
 two months from the day of the Constitutional Court addressing the Milli Majlis
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan. If within this term the mentioned resolution is not
 passed the accusation shall be rejected.

 Article 108. Financial support of the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. The President of the Azerbaijan Republic and his family are provided for by the
 state. Security of the President of the Azerbaijan Republic and his family is
 ensured by special guard services.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 23

 II. Regulations for the material security of the person who was elected President of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan in the past shall be defined by a Constitutional law.

 Article 108-1. Provisions of the First Vice-President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 The Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and his family are provided for by the
 state. Security of the Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and his family is
 ensured by special guard services.

  Head of state powers Article 109. Powers of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan:

 1. sets the date for the elections to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

 2. presents the State budget of the Republic of Azerbaijan to the Milli Majlis for
  Budget bills
 ratification;

 3. approves State economic and social programs;
  Economic plans

 4. with the consent of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan appoints the
  Head of government removal
 Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan and removes from position the
  Head of government selection Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

 5. appoints to and removes from position members of the Cabinet of Ministers of
  Cabinet removal
 the Republic of Azerbaijan; in special cases presides at the meetings of the
  Cabinet selection Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

 6. makes a decision on the resignation of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan;

 7. establishes central and local executive organs for exercising executive power
 within the expenses planned by the State budget of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

 8. annuls the resolutions and orders of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
  Federal review of subnational legislation
 Azerbaijan, the Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic,
 acts of central and local executive organs;

 9. presents a proposal to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the
  Supreme court selection
 appointment and removal from the position of judges of the Constitutional Court
  Ordinary court selection of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan
  Constitutional court selection and the Courts of Appeal of the Republic of Azerbaijan; in agreement with the
 Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan appoints and removes the General
  Constitutional court removal
 Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan from his or her position; appoints to the
  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal position judges of other courts of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
  Attorney general
 10. presents proposals to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan concerning the
  Central bank
 appointment and dismissal of the members of the Board of Directors of the
 Central Bank of the Republic of Azerbaijan and appoints the Chairman of the
 Central Bank of the Republic of Azerbaijan from the members of the Governing
 Board of the Central Bank of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 11. presents the military doctrine of the Republic of Azerbaijan to the Milli Majlis of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan for ratification;

 12. appoints and removes from position higher commanders of the Armed Forces of
  Selection of active-duty commanders
 the Republic of Azerbaijan;

 13. organizes the administration of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and
 appoints its Head;

 14. makes recommendation to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan for the
  Human rights commission
 election of the commissioner for human rights.

 15. presents to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan a proposal on
  International organizations
 establishing diplomatic representations of the Republic of Azerbaijan in foreign
 countries and international organizations, appoints and recalls diplomatic

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 24

 15. representatives of the Republic of Azerbaijan in foreign States and international
 organizations;

 16. accepts credentials and letters of recall of the diplomatic representatives of
 foreign States;

 17. concludes international treaties and intergovernmental agreements, submits
  International law
 international and intergovernmental agreements containing rules contrary to the
  Treaty ratification laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 for ratification or denunciation, and signs decrees on the ratification of
 international treaties and agreements;

 18. decides on the holding of a referendum;
  Referenda

 19. signs and issues laws;

 20. settles matters of citizenship;

 21. decides matters on granting political asylum;

 22. passes acts on granting mercy;
  Power to pardon

 23. grants State awards;

 24. confers higher military and higher special ranks;

 25. announces total or partial mobilization and demobilization;

 26. makes a decision on calling up citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan for urgent
 military service and on transferring soldiers to the reserve;

 27. establishes the Security Council of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
  Advisory bodies to the head of state

 28. introduces a proposal to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan on giving
 consent to enlist Armed Forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan for the fulfillment of
 obligations not connected with their main obligation;

 29. declares an emergency situation and martial law;
  Emergency provisions

 30. with the consent of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan declares war and
  Power to declare/approve war
 concludes peace;

 31. establishes special protective services, provided for in the budget of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan;

 32. settles other matters not assigned by the present Constitution to the Milli Majlis
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan by executive order.

  Approval or veto of general legislation
  Veto override procedure
 Article 110. Signing Laws
 I. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan signs laws within 56 days from the
 day of presentation. If law engenders objection on the part of the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan, he, without signing the law, shall at the appointed time,
 attaching his or her objections, send it back to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 II. If the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan adopts in a second vote a law
 previously passed by a majority of 83 votes by a majority of 95 or a law
 previously passed by a majority of 63 votes by a majority of 83 votes, the law
 shall come into effect.

  Treaty ratification
  International law
 Article 110-1. Delegation of authority to sign international interstate
 and intergovernmental agreements
 The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan can delegate the authority to the Vice-
 President, Members of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan and other
 officials, appointed by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan to sign international
 interstate and intergovernmental agreements.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 25

  Emergency provisions Article 111. Declaration of Martial Law
 When a certain part of the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan has been occupied,
 when a foreign State has declared a war against the Republic of Azerbaijan, a real
 danger of an armed attack against the Republic of Azerbaijan has been brought into
 being, a territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan has been blockaded, and if there exists
 real danger of such a blockade, the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan declares
 martial law on the entire territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan or in some of its parts
 and within 24 hours presents the decree to the Milli Majlis to the Republic of Azerbaijan
 for ratification.

  Emergency provisions Article 112. Declaration of a State of Emergency
 The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan declares a state of emergency in separate
 areas of the Republic of Azerbaijan when there are natural calamities, epidemics,
 epizootics, great ecological and other catastrophes, as well as when there are actions
 directed at the violation of the territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan, forced
 change of its Constitutional system, mass disturbances, accompanied by violence, rise of
 national conflicts creating threat for life and security of citizens, or for normal activity of
 State organs.

 The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan within 24 hours presents the decree to the
 Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan for ratification.

  Head of state decree power Article 113. Acts of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan establishes general rules by way of decree
 and issues orders to determine other matters.

 If a different procedure is not envisaged in decrees and orders, they come into effect
 from the day of publication.

  Establishment of cabinet/ministers Article 114. Status of the Cabinet of the Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. With the aim of the implementation of executive competence the President of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan forms the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 II. The Cabinet of Ministers is the supreme executive organ of the executive power
 of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan is subordinate and
 accountable to the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 IV. The agenda of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan is
 determined by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Deputy executive
  Name/structure of executive(s)
 Article 115. Composition of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
  Establishment of cabinet/ministers Azerbaijan
 The Cabinet of Ministers consists of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan, his
 or her Deputy, Ministers and the heads of other central organs of executive power.

  Establishment of cabinet/ministers Article 116. Resignation of the Cabinet of Ministers
 On the day when the newly elected President of the Republic of Azerbaijan takes office
 and assumes the duties of his or her office the Cabinet of Ministers shall resign.

  Establishment of cabinet/ministers Article 117. Meetings of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 The Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan presides at meetings of the Cabinet of
 Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 26

  Head of government selection Article 118. Appointment Procedure of the Prime Minister of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan is appointed by the President of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan with the consent of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 II. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan presents for discussion to the Milli
 Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan a proposal on the candidacy to the post of the
 Prime Minister no later than one month from the day of assuming his or her
 duties or no later than two weeks from the day of resignation of the Cabinet of
 Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall approve the candidate for the
 post of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan no later than one week
 after the candidacy has been presented. If this procedure is not respected, or if
 the candidate proposed by the President of the Azerbaijan Republic for the post
 of Prime Minister of the Azerbaijan Republic is rejected three times, the
 President of the Azerbaijan Republic may appoint Prime Minister of the
 Azerbaijan Republic without consent of Milli Majlis of the Azerbaijan Republic.

  Establishment of cabinet/ministers
  Powers of cabinet
 Article 119. Powers of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan:

  Budget bills prepares a draft of the State budget of the Republic of Azerbaijan and submits it
 to the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

 ensures the implementation of the State budget of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

 ensures realization of the financial credit and monetary policy;

 ensures the execution of the State social program;

 guides the Ministries and other central organs of the executive organs, annuls
 their acts;

 settles other matters which are assigned by the President to the competence of
 the Cabinet.

  Head of government decree power Article 120. Acts of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan establishes general rules
 by issuing decrees and issues orders to determine other matters.
 II. If a different procedure is not specified in decrees and orders of the Cabinet of
 Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan they come into effect after the day of
 publication.

  Eligibility for head of government
  Eligibility for cabinet
 Article 121. Requirements for Candidates for the Cabinet of Ministers
 The appointment to be Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Deputy Prime
 Minister, Minister, head of other central body of executive power can be a citizen of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan, having voting right, with university degree, having no liabilities in
 other states.

  Eligibility for cabinet
  Reference to science
 Article 122. Requirements for Members of the Cabinet of Ministers of
  Head of government's role in the legislature the Republic of Azerbaijan
 The Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan, his or her Deputies, Ministers, Heads
 of other central organs of the executive power cannot hold any other elected or
 appointed position, they cannot be engaged in business, commercial and other paid
 activity with the exception of scientific, teaching and creative activity, they cannot
 receive remuneration other than the position salary and means received for scientific,
 teaching and creative work.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 27

  Head of government immunity Article 123. Immunity of the Prime Minister of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. During the term of office the Prime Minister enjoys personal immunity.
 II. The Prime Minister cannot be brought to court, detained, except in cases when
 he is caught flagrante delicto, no court measures, administrative penalty, arrest,
 and other suppression measures can be applied to him, he cannot be searched or
 inspected.
 III. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be detained if he is caught
 flagrante delicto. In that case the organ which has detained him shall
 immediately inform the General Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 IV. The immunity of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be
 interrupted only by the President on the basis of the presentation of the General
 Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Municipal government Article 124. Local Executive Power
 I. Local executive power is exercised by the Heads of executive power.
 II. Heads of executive power are appointed and removed from holding positions by
 the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. The competence of the local executive power is determined by the President of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Chapter VII. Judicial Power
 Article 125. The Exercise of Judicial Power
 I. Judicial power is exercised solely by judicial organs.
 II. Judicial power is exercised by the Constitutional Court of the Republic of
  Structure of the courts Azerbaijan, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Courts of
  Establishment of constitutional court
 Appeal of the Republic of Azerbaijan, general and specialized courts of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. Judicial power is exercised in constitutional, civil, administrative and criminal
 legal proceedings and in other forms specified by law.
 IV. In the criminal legal proceedings, Prosecutor's Office of the Azerbaijan Republic
  Attorney general and defense take part.
 V. Judicial structure and legal procedure are determined by law.
 VI. The use of legal means not specified by law in order to change the competence of
 judges and create extraordinary courts is prohibited.
 VII. Court proceedings shall provide for the discovery of the truth.

  Eligibility for ordinary court judges
  Eligibility for const court judges
 Article 126. Requirements of Candidates for the Post of Judges
  Eligibility for supreme court judges
 I. Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan, enjoying the right to vote, having a
 university degree in law and a five-year working experience in the field of law can
 be judges.
 II. Judges cannot hold other elected or appointed position, they cannot be engaged
  Reference to science in business, commercial and any other paid activity, excepting scientific, teaching
 and creative work, nor can they affiliate with political parties and be engaged in
 political activity, nor can they get any remuneration except salary and means for
 scientific, teaching and creative work.

 Article 127. Principles of Justice
 I. Judges are autonomous, they are subordinate only to the Constitution and the
  Judicial independence laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan and are irremovable during their term of office.
 II. Judges decide the cases in an unbiased, fair way, following the legal equality of
  Right to fair trial the sides, on the basis of facts and in accordance with the law.
 III. Direct or indirect restriction of legal procedure on someone's part and for some
 reason, illegal influence, pressure, threat, and interference is not permitted.
 IV. Justice is administered on the basis of legal equality of citizens before the law
 and the court.
 V. Trial in all the courts is public.
  Right to public trial

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 28

 V. Hearing of the case behind closed doors can be authorized in case the court
 assumes that open trial can lead to revealing a State, professional or commercial
 secret, or when the court deems it necessary to keep a secret of personal or
 family life.

 VI. Legal proceedings of criminal cases by default are not authorized in the court of
 first instance.
 VII. Legal proceedings are conducted based on the principle of controversy.
 VIII. Everyone has the right to receive qualified legal help at any stage of the legal
  Right to counsel proceedings.
 IX. Justice is based on the presumption of innocence.
  Presumption of innocence in trials X. Legal proceedings in the Republic of Azerbaijan are conducted in the official
  Trial in native language of accused language of the Republic of Azerbaijan or in the language of the population which
 constitute the majority in the area concerned. Persons-participants in court
 examination who do not know the language in which legal proceedings are held
 are guaranteed the right to familiarize themselves with the matter, to participate
 in the Court with the help of an interpreter, to speak in their native language.

 Article 128. Immunity of Judges
 I. Judges shall enjoy immunity.
 II. A judge can be brought to court only in the procedure specified by law.
 III. The competence of judges can be terminated only in the legal procedure specified
 by law.
 IV. If a crime is committed by a judge, the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan
  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal shall on the basis of the conclusions of the Supreme Court of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan request the removal of the judge from office before the Milli Majlis of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan. The relevant conclusions of the Supreme Court of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan must be presented to the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan within 30 days from the request.
 V. Decisions on the removal of members of the Constitutional Court of the Republic
  Supreme/ordinary court judge removal of Azerbaijan, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Courts of
  Constitutional court removal
 Appeal of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be taken by a majority of 83 votes,
 decisions on the removal of other judges by a majority of 63 votes in the Milli
 Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Article 129. Court Decisions and their Implementation
 I. Court decisions shall be made on behalf of the State and their implementation
 shall be mandatory.
 II. Failure to execute a court decision shall entail liability prescribed by law.
 III. A court decision shall be grounded in law and evidence.

  Establishment of constitutional court Article 130. The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan consists of nine (9) judges.
 II. The members of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan are
  Constitutional court selection appointed by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan upon proposal of the
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. Upon request by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Milli Majlis of
  Constitutional interpretation the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
  Constitutional court powers
  Constitutionality of legislation
 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the General Procurator's Office
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan or the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall examine the
 following matters:
 1. the conformity with the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan of laws
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan, decrees and orders of the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan, resolutions of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan, resolutions and orders of the Cabinet of Ministers of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan, normative and legal acts of central executive
 organs of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 2. the conformity with the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan of decrees of
 the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, resolutions of the Cabinet of
 Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan, normative and legal acts of central
 executive organs of the Republic of Azerbaijan;

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 29

 III. 3. the conformity with the decrees and orders of the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan of resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan and normative and legal acts of central executive
 organs of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 4. in cases specified by law the conformity of acts of the Supreme Court of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan with the Constitution and the laws of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan;
 5. the conformity of the acts of the municipalities with the Constitution of
  National vs subnational laws the Republic of Azerbaijan, decrees of the President of the Republic of
  Federal review of subnational legislation
 Azerbaijan, resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan (in the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic-also with the
 Constitution and the laws of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic and
 with the resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan
 Autonomous Republic);
 6. the conformity of non-ratified inter-state treaties of the Republic of
  Legal status of treaties Azerbaijan with the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the
  International law
 conformity of intergovernmental treaties with the Constitution and the
 laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 7. the conformity of the Constitution and the laws of the Nakhichevan
  National vs subnational laws Autonomous Republic, the resolutions of the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan
  Federal review of subnational legislation
 Autonomous Republic, the resolutions and orders of the Cabinet of
 Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic with the Constitution
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the conformity of the laws of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, the resolutions of the Cabinet of
 Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic with the laws of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan, and the conformity of the resolutions of the
 Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic with the
 decrees and orders of the President and the resolutions of the Cabinet of
 Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 8. disputes related to the separation of powers between the legislative and
 executive branches.
 IV. The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall interpret the
  Constitutional interpretation Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan upon application by the
  Constitutionality of legislation
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan, the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Office of
 the General Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan or the Ali Majlis of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic.
 V. Everyone who claims to be the victim of a violation of his or her rights or
 freedoms by a decision of the legislative, executive and judiciary or by one of the
 municipal acts set forth in the items 1-7 of section III of this Article may appeal,
 in accordance with the procedure provided for by law, to the Constitutional Court
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan with the view of the restoration of his or her
 violated human rights and freedoms.
 VI. In accordance with the procedure provided by the laws of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan, courts may apply to the Constitutional Court of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan for an interpretation of the Constitution and the laws of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan with regard to issues arising out of the implementation of human
 rights and civil liberties.
 VII. The Ombudsman of the Azerbaijan Republic shall apply to the Constitutional
  Ombudsman Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan in cases where the rights and freedoms of a
 person have allegedly been violated by legislative acts in force, normative acts of
 the executive or of municipalities, or court decisions in accordance with the
 procedure provided for by the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the
 adjudication of the cases and applications listed as items 1 to 7 in section III of
 the present Article.
 VIII. The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall also perform the
 other duties specified in the present Constitution.
 IX. The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall determine issues of
 jurisdiction. Decisions of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 are binding on the whole territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The decisions of
 the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be published.
 X. Laws and other normative acts or individual provisions of such acts or
  Constitutionality of legislation intergovernmental treaties of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall cease to apply at
  International law
  Legal status of treaties
 the time which is indicated in the decision of the Constitutional Court that
 declares them to be inconsistent with the Constitution of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan; inter­state treaties of the Republic of Azerbaijan which are declared
 unconstitutional shall not come into effect.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 30

  Structure of the courts Article 131. The Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the highest judicial organ on
 civil, criminal and other cases belonging to general and specialized courts; it
 administers justice by cassation procedure; it provides explanations concerning
 the practice of courts by cassation.
 II. Judges of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan are appointed by the
  Supreme court selection Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the proposal of the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. The decisions of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be
 published.

  Structure of the courts Article 132. The Courts of Appeal of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Courts of Appeal of the Republic of Azerbaijan are the courts of last instance
 in matters assigned to them by law.
 II. Judges of the Courts of Appeal are appointed by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
  Ordinary court selection Azerbaijan on the recommendation of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Attorney general Article 133. The General Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 I. The Office of the Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan, in the procedure and
 cases, specified by law, exercises control over the accurate and uniform
 execution and application of laws; supports in court State prosecution; brings in
 an action; institutes and proceedings and holds investigations; brings objections
 to the court's decisions. There appears to be no attempt to curb the power of the
 Prosecutor, which has remained one of the several authoritarian features of the
 former Soviet regime.
 II. The Office of the Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a united centralized
 organ consisting of territorial and specialized Procurator Offices based on their
 subordination to the Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. The Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan is appointed to and removed from
 holding the position by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan with the
 consent of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 IV. Deputies of the Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan, heads of the specialized
 republican offices of the Procurator are appointed to and removed from the
 position by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the proposal of the
 Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 V. Territorial and specialized procurators are appointed to the positions by the
 Procurator of the Republic of Azerbaijan in agreement with the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Subsidiary unit government
 Chapter VIII. The Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic

 Article 134. The Status of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic
 I. The Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is an autonomous State which forms
 part of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 II. The status of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is determined by the
 present Constitution.
 III. The Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is an inalienable part of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 IV. The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan, laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
  National vs subnational laws decrees of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and resolutions of the
 Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan are binding in the territory of
 the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic.
 V. The Constitution and laws of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic must not
  National vs subnational laws contradict the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic
 must not contradict the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 the decrees of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the resolutions of
 the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 VI. The Constitution of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic shall be presented to
  Federal review of subnational legislation the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan by the President of the Republic of

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 31

 VI. Azerbaijan and is confirmed by a Constitutional Law.

 Article 135. Separation of Powers in the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic
 I. The legislative power in the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is exercised by
  Structure of the courts the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, the executive power is
 exercised by the Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic,
 the judicial power is exercised by the courts of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic.
 II. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic deals independently
 with matters referred to its power by the Constitution and the laws of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan; the Cabinet of Ministers of Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic deals independently with matters referred to its power by the
 Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan, decrees of the President
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan; the courts of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic deal independently with matters referred to its power by the
 Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 Article 136. The Highest Official of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic
 The Speaker of the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is the highest
 official of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic.

 Article 137. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic
 I. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic consists of 45 members.
 II. The term of office for the Ali Majlis members of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic is five years.
 III. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic elects the Speaker of
 the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic and its Deputies form
 permanent and other commissions.

 Article 138. General Rules Established by the Ali Majlis of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic
 I. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic establishes general rules
 on the following matters:
 1. elections to the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic;
 2. taxes;
 3. directions of the economic development of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic;
 4. social security;
 5. protection of the environment;
  Protection of environment 6. tourism;
 7. health care, science, culture.
  Reference to science II. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic adopts laws on matters
 specified in this Article.

  Right to culture Article 139. Matters Dealt with by the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan
 Autonomous Republic
 I. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic deals with the following
 matters:
 1. work organization of the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic;
 2. the budget of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic;
 3. approval of economic and social programs of the Nakhichevan
 Autonomous Republic;
 4. the appointment to the position and removal from the position of the
 Prime Minister of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic;
 5. the approval of the composition of the Cabinet of Ministers of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic;

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 32

 I. 6. confidence in the Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic.
 II. The Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic passes resolutions on
 the matters mentioned in this Article.

 Article 140. The Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic
 I. The composition of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic shall be determined by the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic on the proposal of the Prime Minister of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic.
 II. The Prime Minister of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is appointed by the
 Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic based on the proposal of the
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 III. The Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic:
 makes budget estimates of the Republic and submits them to the Ali
 Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic;

 realizes the budget of the Autonomous Republic;

 ensures the implementation of economic programs;

 ensures social security programs;

 deals with other matters attributed to its competence by the President of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan.

 IV. The Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic adopts
 resolutions and orders.

  Municipal government Article 141. Local Executive Power in Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic
 Heads of local executive power in the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic are appointed
 by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the basis of joint presentations by the
 Speaker of the Ali Majlis and the Prime Minister of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic.

 Fourth part. Local self-government
  Municipal government

 Chapter IX. Municipalities

 Article 142. The Organization of Local Government
 I. Local government in rural areas and towns, villages and settlements is exercised
 by municipalities.
 II. Municipalities are formed on the basis of elections.
 III. The foundation of the status of municipalities is established by the Constitution
 and the rules of elections to municipalities by law.

 Article 143. Organization of the Work of Municipalities
 I. The municipalities implement their activity by meetings, permanent and other
 commissions.
 II. Meetings of the municipalities are convened by the Chairperson of the
 Municipality.

 Article 144. The Competence of Municipalities
 I. The following matters are settled at the meetings of the municipalities:

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 33

 I. 1. the recognition of the authority of municipality members, termination of
 their authority in cases specified by law;
 2. the approval of regulations;
 3. the election of the Chairman of the Municipality and his or her deputies,
 permanent and other commissions;
 4. the determination of local taxes and fees;
 5. the approval of the local budget and accounts for their use;
 6. the ownership of the municipal property, charging and using it;
 7. the approval and implementation of local programs of social security and
 social development;
 8. the approval and implementation of local programs of economic
 development;
 9. the approval and implementation of local ecological programs.
 II. Municipalities can be delegated additional authority by the legislative and the
 executive power. Municipalities must be allotted necessary financial means for
 executing this authority. The realization of this authority shall be controlled by
 the legislative and the executive power.

 Article 145. Decisions of Municipalities
 I. Decisions on matters are taken at the meetings of municipalities.
 II. Decisions of municipalities are made by a simple majority vote of municipality
 members.
 III. Decisions connected with local taxes and payments are made by a majority of
 two-thirds of votes of the municipality members.

 Article 146. Guarantee of the Independence of Municipalities
 I. Municipalities are independent to exercise their power; this does not exclude
 their responsibility before the citizens residing in the territory of the municipality.
 The regulations and procedure for the selection of the municipality members, the
 termination of their powers, as well as the regulation for early dissolution of
 municipalities shall be laid down by law.
 II. The independent exercise of their powers by the municipalities may not infringe
 the sovereignty of the Azerbaijani state.
 III. The state oversees the activities of municipalities.
 IV. Municipalities shall submit reports to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 in the conditions and in the manner prescribed by law.
 V. Municipalities shall enjoy protection in the courts court and receive
 compensation for additional expenses caused by decisions of State bodies.

 Article 146-1. Responsibility of municipalities
 The municipalities and municipal servants are responsible for damage caused to human
 rights and freedoms in the result of the offences or inactivity by municipal servants and
 their non-provision.

 Fifth Part. Law and statute

 Chapter X. Legal System
 Article 147. Legal Status of the Constitution of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the supreme law in the Republic
 of Azerbaijan.
 II. The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan has direct binding effect.
 III. The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the foundation of the legal
 system in the Republic of Azerbaijan.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 34

 Article 148. Acts composing the Legal System of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
 I. The legal system of the Republic of Azerbaijan consists of the following
 normative-legal Acts:
 1. the Constitution;
 2. Acts adopted by referendum;
  Referenda 3. Laws;
 4. Decrees;
 5. Resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
 6. Normative acts of central organs of the executive power.
 II. International treaties, to which the Republic of Azerbaijan is a party, are an
  International law inalienable substantive part of the legal system of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
  Legal status of treaties
 III. In the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic the Constitution and the laws of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the
 Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic also have binding force.
 IV. The legal system in the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic must correspond to
 the legal system in the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 V. Within their competence, the local organs of the executive power can take
 decisions and instructions of a normative character and other acts, provided that
 they do not conflict with acts forming part of the legal system.

 Article 149. Normative Legal Acts
 I. Acts that have been passed by referendum must be based on law and justice (on
 equal relationship to equal interests).
 II. Only in case of publication of acts, passed by referendum, are their use and
 implementation obligatory for citizens, legislative, executive and judicial power,
 juridical persons and the municipalities.
 III. Laws must not contradict the Constitution. The application and fulfillment is
 obligatory only for published laws for all citizens, legislative, executive and
 judicial powers, juridical persons and municipalities.
 IV. Decrees must not contradict the Constitution or laws of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan. Only published decrees are used and implemented for citizens,
 executive organs, and juridical persons.
 V. Resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers must not contradict the Constitution,
 Laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan, and decrees of the Republic of Azerbaijan. It is
 only when the resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan are made public that their application and realization are obligatory
 for citizens, central and local organs of the executive power, juridical persons.
 VI. Acts of central and local organs of the executive power must not contradict the
  National vs subnational laws Constitution, the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan, decrees of the President of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan, resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan.
 VII. Normative legal acts, altering the legal status of physical and juridical persons,
  Protection from ex post facto laws removing or mitigating their legal responsibility can have retroactive force. Other
 normative-legal acts do not have retroactive force.
 VIII. Normative legal acts shall be published. No one may be forced to execute (to
 adhere to) a regulation that was not published and held liable for failing to
 execute (to adhere to) such regulation. An order for publication of regulations
 shall be set forth by a Constitutional law.

  Municipal government Article 150. Acts of Municipalities
 I. Acts passed by municipalities must not contradict the Constitution and the laws
  National vs subnational laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan, decrees or resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan (and in the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic-also
 the Constitution and the laws of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic,
 resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Nakhichevan Autonomous
 Republic).
 II. The implementation of acts passed by the municipality is binding for citizens
 living in its territory, and for juridical persons settled in this territory.

  International law
  Legal status of treaties

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 35

 Article 151. Legal Status of International Acts
 When conflicts arise between normative-legal acts which form part of the legal system
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan (with the exception of the Constitution of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan and the acts passed by way of referendum) and international treaties to
 which the Republic of Azerbaijan is a party, the international treaties shall apply.

  Constitution amendment procedure
 Chapter XI. Revision of the Constitution of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan
  Referenda Article 152. Procedure for the Revision of the Constitution of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 Changes to the text of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan are adopted only
 by referendum.

 Article 153. Procedure for the Initiation of a Constitutional Revision
 If changes in the text of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan are proposed by
 the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan or the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan, the opinion of the Constitutional Court on the proposed changes must be
 obtained in advance.

  Referenda Article 154. Limits on Powers of the Constitutional Court in
 constitutional referendums
 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan cannot give an opinion on the
 changes to the text of the Constitution approved by referendum.

  Referenda
  Unamendable provisions
 Article 155. Limits to Constitutional Revision
  International law
 Proposals for a referendum cannot be introduced concerning Articles 1, 2, 6, 7, 8 and 21
 of this Constitution, regarding restrictions or the abolition of the rights and freedoms of
 man and citizen, provided for in Chapter III of the present Constitution, to a higher
 degree than is provided for by international agreements to which the Republic of
 Azerbaijan is a party.

  Constitution amendment procedure
 Chapter XII. Amendments to the Constitution of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan

 Article 156. Procedure for the Adoption of Constitutional
 Amendments
 I. Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be adopted
 as Constitutional Laws in the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan by a
 majority of 95 votes.
 II. Constitutional Laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan on amendments to the
 Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan are put to a vote in the Milli Majlis of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan twice. The second voting is held six months after the
 first voting.
 III. Constitutional Laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan on amendments to the
 Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan are submitted to the President of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan both after the first voting and after the second voting.
 IV. Constitutional Laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan on amendments to the
 Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan come into force upon the signing, after
 the second voting by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 V. Constitutional Laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan are an integral part of the
 Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan and they must not contradict the main
 text of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 36

 Article 157. Introduction of Amendments to the Constitution of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan
 Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be put forward by the
 President of the Republic of Azerbaijan or at least 63 Members of the Milli Majlis of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan.

  Unamendable provisions Article 158. Limitation on Initiative on Introduction of Amendments to
 the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 There cannot be proposed any amendment to the Constitution of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan regarding the provisions in Chapter I of the present Constitution.

 Transitional provisions
  Transitional provisions

 1. The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall come into force after the
  Referenda acceptance by (referendum) on the day of official publication. The Constitution
 (Fundamental Law) of the Republic of Azerbaijan which was adopted on the 21st
 of April, 1978 loses its force on the same day.
 2. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan from the day of adopting the present
 Constitution and up to completing the term of office exercises the powers
 specified by the present Constitution for the President of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.
 3. Paragraph V of Article 101 of the present Constitution affects the President of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan elected after the adoption of the present Constitution.
 4. The power of the Milli Majlis composed of the People's Deputies of the Republic
 of Azerbaijan by the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Azerbaijan expires on the
 day of the first meeting of the newly elected Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan.

 The first meeting of the newly elected Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan
 shall be held a week after election of no less than 83 Members of the Milli Majlis
 of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The first session of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan shall last until May 31, 1996.

 Article 85' of the Republic of Azerbaijan law "On Elections to the Milli Majlis of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan" which was adopted on August 15, 1995 shall be in
 force until the expiration of the power of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan of the first convocation elected on the basis of the pertinent law.

 5. The Cabinet of Ministers from the day of the adoption of the present
 Constitution has the powers specified by the present Constitution.
 6. From the day of the entering into force of the present Constitution, the power of
 the local Soviets of the People's Deputies of the Republic of Azerbaijan expires.
 Powers assigned by the legislature of the Republic of Azerbaijan to the local
 Soviets of People's Deputies of the Republic of Azerbaijan are implemented by
 local organs of the executive power.
 7. Within two years after the present Constitution has entered into force a law on
 local self-government must be passed and elections to municipalities must be
 held.
 8. Laws and other normative-legal acts operating on the territory of the Republic of
 Azerbaijan from the day of the adoption of the present Constitution remain in
 force in the parts that do not contradict the present Constitution.
 9. The courts of the Republic of Azerbaijan administer justice according to the
 authority and principles of the present Constitution until the present [new]
 Constitution enters into force.
 10. Within one year from the day of the adoption of the present Constitution
 corresponding legislation on the status of judges, on the structure of court and
 court reform must be passed and judges of the Republic of Azerbaijan must be
 newly appointed. Until the pertinent legislation is adopted the appointment of

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 37

 10. judges to the position and their removal are realized on the basis of legislation
 which is operative until the present [new] Constitution enters into force.
 11. After the present Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan has become
 operative, within one year a law of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the
 Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan must be passed and the
 Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan established. Before the
 Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan has been created the authority
 of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan specified by the present
 Constitution shall not be implemented. The matter specified in item 7 paragraph
 III of Article 130 of the present Constitution is settled by the Supreme Court of
 the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 12. The highest court of arbitration of the Republic of Azerbaijan until the day the
 present Constitution comes into force, shall be titled the Economic Court of the
 Republic of Azerbaijan and exercises the competence specified by legislation.

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 38

 Topic index

 A
 Access to higher education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Accession of territory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Advisory bodies to the head of state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Approval or veto of general legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
 Attorney general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 20, 24, 28, 31

 B
 Budget bills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24, 27

 C
 Cabinet removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 19, 24
 Cabinet selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Central bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 19, 24
 Claim of executive independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Claim of universal suffrage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 21
 Compulsory education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Conditions for revoking citizenship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Constitution amendment procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 36
 Constitutional court powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 19, 21, 22, 23, 29
 Constitutional court removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 29
 Constitutional court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24, 29
 Constitutional interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
 Constitutionality of legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
 Customary international law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 5, 14

 D
 Deputy executive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 26
 Designation of commander in chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 19
 Dismissal of the legislature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Duty to obey the constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 Duty to pay taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
 Duty to serve in the military . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

 E
 Economic plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Eligibility for cabinet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Eligibility for const court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Eligibility for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Eligibility for head of government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Eligibility for head of state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Eligibility for ordinary court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Eligibility for supreme court judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Emergency provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9, 14, 16, 21, 24, 26
 Equality regardless of creed or belief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Equality regardless of financial status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Equality regardless of gender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 39

 Equality regardless of origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Equality regardless of political party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Equality regardless of race . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Equality regardless of religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Equality regardless of social status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Establishment of cabinet/ministers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26, 27
 Establishment of constitutional court . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 29
 Extradition procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 14
 Extraordinary legislative sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

 F
 Federal review of subnational legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 29, 31
 First chamber selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Foreign affairs representative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
 Free education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Freedom of assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Freedom of association . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Freedom of expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Freedom of movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Freedom of opinion/thought/conscience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Freedom of press . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Freedom of religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

 G
 General guarantee of equality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

 H
 Head of government decree power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Head of government immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Head of government removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 19, 24
 Head of government selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24, 27
 Head of government's role in the legislature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Head of state decree power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 26
 Head of state immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
 Head of state powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Head of state removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 19, 22, 23
 Head of state replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 Head of state selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Head of state term length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
 Human dignity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 6, 10, 13
 Human rights commission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24

 I
 Immunity of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17, 18
 Inalienable rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 7
 Initiation of general legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 International law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 4, 5, 14, 18, 19, 24, 25, 29, 35, 36
 International organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

 J
 Judicial independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 28

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 40

 L
 Leader of first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
 Legal status of treaties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29, 35
 Legislative committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
 Legislative initiatives by citizens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 Limits on employment of children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 M
 Motives for writing constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Municipal government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 28, 33, 35

 N
 Name/structure of executive(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 21, 26
 National anthem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 15
 National capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 National flag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 15
 National vs subnational laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29, 31, 35

 O
 Oaths to abide by constitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 22
 Official or national languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Ombudsman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
 Ordinary court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24, 31
 Outside professions of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 17
 Ownership of natural resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 P
 Power to declare/approve war . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24
 Power to pardon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Powers of cabinet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 Presumption of innocence in trials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 28
 Principle of no punishment without law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 Prohibition of cruel treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Prohibition of double jeopardy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Prohibition of slavery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Prohibition of torture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Protection from ex post facto laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14, 35
 Protection from expropriation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Protection from self-incrimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Protection from unjustified restraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Protection of environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 9, 15, 32
 Protection of language use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 10
 Protection of stateless persons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 Protection of victim's rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Provision for matrimonial equality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Provisions for intellectual property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 18
 Public or private sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

 Q

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 41

 Quorum for legislative sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

 R
 Reference to art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Reference to science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 10, 11, 16, 17, 27, 28, 32
 Referenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 12, 18, 19, 24, 35, 36, 37
 Regulation of evidence collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Regulation of marriage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Removal of individual legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 17
 Replacement of legislators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Requirements for birthright citizenship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Restrictions on the armed forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9, 12
 Restrictions on voting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Right of petition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Right to appeal judicial decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Right to choose occupation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to competitive marketplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Right to conscientious objection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
 Right to counsel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 28
 Right to culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 10, 15, 32
 Right to establish a business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 12
 Right to fair trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Right to form political parties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Right to found a family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
 Right to health care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Right to information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to join trade unions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
 Right to life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
 Right to own property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 7
 Right to privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Right to protect one's reputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 Right to public trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Right to reasonable standard of living . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 9
 Right to rest and leisure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to safe work environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to shelter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 Right to strike . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Right to transfer property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 18
 Right to work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Rights of children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 S
 Scheduling of elections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 21
 Secret ballot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 16, 21
 Selection of active-duty commanders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
 Separation of church and state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 6
 Size of first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Source of constitutional authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
 State support for the disabled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 State support for the elderly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 42

 State support for the unemployed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 Structure of legislative chamber(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Structure of the courts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 31, 32
 Subsidiary unit government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 31
 Supermajority required for legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
 Supreme court powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 23
 Supreme court selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24, 31
 Supreme/ordinary court judge removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 19, 24, 29

 T
 Telecommunications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
 Term length for first chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
 Transitional provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
 Treaty ratification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 24, 25
 Trial in native language of accused . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
 Type of government envisioned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 U
 Ultra-vires administrative actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 Unamendable provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36, 37

 V
 Veto override procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

Azerbaijan 1995 (rev. 2016) Page 43
