A Story of Beyond the Sea (The Count of Ponthieu)
by Anonymous (12th-13th century)
Translated by Eugene Mason (1911)
Source: Project Gutenberg ebook #11417, "French Mediaeval Romances from the Lays of Marie de France" (1911)
Rights: Public Domain

XVI


A STORY OF BEYOND THE SEA

In times gone by there lived a Count of Ponthieu, who loved chivalry
and the pleasures of the world beyond measure, and moreover was a
stout knight and a gallant gentleman. In the self-same day there lived
a Count of St. Pol, who was lord of much land, and a right worthy man.
One grief he had, that there was no heir of his body; but a sister was
his, a prudent woman and a passing good gentlewoman, who was dame of
Dommare in Ponthieu. This lady had a son, Thibault by name, who was
heir to this County of St. Pol, but he was a poor man so long as his
uncle lived. He was a prudent knight, valiant and skilled with the
spear, noble and fair. Greatly was he loved and honoured of all honest
people, for he was of high race and gentle birth.

The Count of Ponthieu, of whom the tale hath spoken, had to wife a
very worthy lady. He and his dame had but one child, a daughter,
very good and gracious, who increased with her days in favour and in
virtues; and the maid was of some sixteen years. The third year after
her birth her mother died, whereof she was sorely troubled and right
heavy. The Count, her father, took to himself another wife with no
long tarrying, a dame of gentle race and breeding. Of this lady he got
him quickly a son; very near was the boy to his father's heart. The
lad grew with his years in stature and in valour, and gave promise to
increase in all good qualities.

The Count of Ponthieu marked my lord Thibault of Dommare. He summoned
the knight to his castle, and made him of his house for guerdon. When
Sir Thibault was of his fellowship he rejoiced greatly, for the Count
prospered in goods and in praise by reason of his servant's deeds. As
they came from a tournament on a day, the Count and my lord Thibault
together, the Count required of his companion and said,

"Thibault, by the aid of God tell me truly which jewel of my crown
shines the fairest in your eyes!"

"Sir," replied Messire Thibault, "I am only a beggar, but so help me
God, of all the jewels in your crown I love and covet none, save only
my demoiselle, your daughter."

When he heard this thing the Count had great content. He laughed in
his heart and said,

"Thibault, I will grant her to the beggar, if it be to her mind."

"Sir," answered he, "thanks and gramercy. May God make it up to you."

Then went the Count to his daughter, and said,

"Fair daughter, I have promised you in marriage, so it go not against
your heart."

"Sir," inquired the maid, "to whom?"

"In the name of God, to a loyal man, and a true man, of whom much is
hoped; to a knight of my own household, Thibault of Dommare."

"Dear sir," answered the maiden sweetly, "if your county were a
kingdom, and I were the king's only child, I would choose him as my
husband, and gladly give him all that I had."

"Daughter," said the Count, "blessed be your pretty person, and the
hour that you were born."

Thus was this marriage made. The Count of Ponthieu and the Count of
St. Pol were at the feast, and many another honourable man besides.
Great was the joy in which they met, fair was the worship, and
marvellous the delight. The bride and groom lived together in all
happiness for five years. This was their only sorrow, that it pleased
not our Lord Jesus Christ that they should have an heir to their
flesh.

On a night Sir Thibault lay in his bed. He considered within himself
and said,

"Lord, whence cometh it that I love this dame so fondly, and she me,
yet we may have no heir of our bodies to serve God and to do a little
good in the world?"

Then he remembered my lord St. James, the Apostle of Spain, who gives
to the fervent supplicant that which rightly he desires. Earnestly, to
his own heart, he promised that he would walk a pilgrim in his way.
His wife lay sleeping at his side, but when she came from out her
sleep, he took her softly in his arms, and required of her that she
would bestow on him a gift.

"Sir," said the lady, "what gift would you have?"

"Wife," he made answer, "that you shall know when it is mine."

"Husband," said she, "if it be mine to grant, I will give it you,
whatever the price."

"Wife," he said, "I pray you to grant me leave to seek my lord St.
James the Apostle, that he may intercede with our Lord Jesus Christ to
bestow on us an heir of our flesh, whereby God may be served in this
world and Holy Church glorified."

"Sir," cried the lady, "sweet and dear it is that you should crave
such bounty, and I grant the permission you desire right willingly."

Deep and long was the tenderness that fell betwixt these twain. Thus
passed a day, and another day, and yet a third. On this third day it
chanced that they lay together in their bed, and it was night. Then
said the dame,

"Husband, I pray and require of you a gift."

"Wife," he replied, "ask, and I will give it you, if by any means I
can."

"Husband," she said, "I require leave to come with you on this errand
and journey."

When Messire Thibault heard this thing he was right sorrowful, and
said,

"Wife, grievous would be the journey to your body, for the way is very
long, and the land right strange and perilous."

Said she,

"Husband, be not in doubt because of me. You shall be more hindered of
your squire than of your wife."

"Dame," said he, "as God wills and as you wish."

The days went, and these tidings were so noised abroad that the Count
of Ponthieu heard thereof. He commanded my lord Sir Thibault to his
house, and said,

"Thibault, you are a vowed pilgrim, as I hear, and my daughter too!"

"Sir," answered he, "that is verily and truly so."

"Thibault," replied the Count, "as to yourself what pleases you is to
my mind also, but concerning my daughter that is another matter."

"Sir," made answer Sir Thibault, "go she must, and I cannot deny her."

"Since this is so," said the Count, "part when you will. Make ready
for the road your steeds, your palfreys, and the pack horses, and I
will give you riches and gear enough for the journey."

"Sir," said Messire Thibault, "thanks and gramercy."

Thus these pilgrims arrayed them, and sought that shrine with
marvellous joy. They fared so speedily upon the way, that at length
they came near to my lord St. James, by less than two days faring.
That night they drew to a goodly town. After they had eaten in the
hostel, Sir Thibault called for the host and inquired of him the road
for the morrow, how it ran, and whether it were smooth.

"Fair sir," replied the innkeeper to the knight, "at the gate of this
town you will find a little wood. Beyond the wood a strong smooth road
runs for the whole day's journey."

Hearing this they asked no more questions, but the beds being laid
down, they went to their rest. The morrow broke full sweetly. The
pilgrims rose lightly from their beds as soon as it was day, and made
much stir and merriment. Sir Thibault rose also, since he might not
sleep, but his head was heavy. He therefore called his chamberlain,
and said,

"Rise quickly, and bid the company to pack the horses and go their
way. Thou shalt remain with me, and make ready our harness, for I am a
little heavy and disquieted."

The chamberlain made known to the sergeants the pleasure of their
lord, so that presently they took the road. In no great while Messire
Thibault and his dame got them from the bed, and arraying their
persons, followed after their household. The chamberlain folded the
bed linen, and it was yet but dawn, though warm and fair. The three
went forth through the gate of the city, those three together, with no
other companion save God alone, and drew near to the forest. When they
came close they found two roads, the one good, the other ill; so that
Sir Thibault said to his chamberlain,

"Put spurs to your horse, and ride swiftly after our people. Bid them
await our coming, for foul it is for lady and knight to pass through
this wood with so little company."

The servitor went speedily, and Messire Thibault entered the forest.
He drew rein beside the two roads, for he knew not which to follow.

"Wife," he said, "which way is ours?"

"Please God, the good," she answered.

Now in this wood were robbers, who spoiled the fair way, and made wide
and smooth the false, so that pilgrims should mistake and wander from
the path. Messire Thibault lighted from his horse. He looked from one
to the other, and finding the wrong way broader and more smooth than
the true, he cried,

"Wife, come now; in the name of God, this."

They had proceeded along this road for some quarter of a mile when the
path grew strict and narrow, and boughs made dark the way.

"Wife," said the knight, "I fear that we fare but ill."

When he had thus spoken he looked before him, and marked four armed
thieves, seated on four strong horses, and each bore lance in hand.
Thereupon he glanced behind him, and, lo, four other robbers, armed
and set in ambush, so he said,

"Dame, be not affrighted of aught that you may see from now."

Right courteously Sir Thibault saluted the robbers in his path, but
they gave no answer to his greeting. Afterwards he sought of them
what was in their mind, and one replied that he should know anon.
The thief, who had thus spoken, drew towards my lord Thibault, with
outstretched sword, thinking to smite him in the middle. Messire
Thibault saw the blow about to fall, and it was no marvel if he feared
greatly. He sprang forward nimbly, as best he might, so that the
glaive smote the air. Then as the robber staggered by, Sir Thibault
seized him fiercely, and wrested the sword from his hand. The knight
advanced stoutly against those three from whom the thief had come. He
struck the foremost amidst the bowels, so that he perished miserably.
Then he turned and went again to that one who had first come against
him with the sword, and slew him also. Now it was decreed of God that
after the knight had slain three of this company of robbers, that
the five who were left, encompassed him round about, and killed his
palfrey. Sir Thibault tumbled flat upon his back, although he was not
wounded to his hurt. Since he had neither sword nor other harness
he could do no more. The thieves therefore stripped him to his very
shirt, his boots and hosen, and binding him hand and foot with a
baldrick, cast him into a thorn bush, right thick and sharp. When
they had done this they hastened to the lady. From her they took her
palfrey and her vesture, even to the shift. Passing fair was the lady;
she wept full piteously, and never was dame more sorrowful than she.
Now one of these bold robbers stared upon the lady, and saw that she
was very fair. He spoke to his companions in this fashion,

"Comrades, I have lost my brother in this broil. I will take this
woman for his blood money."

But the others made answer,

"I, too, have lost my kin. I claim as much as you, and my right is
good as yours."

So said a third, and a fourth, and a fifth. Then spake yet another.

"In keeping of the lady will be found neither peace nor profit. Rather
let us lead her from here within the forest, there do our pleasure
upon her, and then put her again upon the path, so that she may go her
way."

Thus they did as they had devised together, and left her on the road.

Right sick at heart was Messire Thibault when he saw her so entreated,
but nothing could he do. He bore no malice against his wife by reason
of that which had befallen, for well he knew that it, was by force,
and not according to her will. When he saw her again, weeping bitterly
and altogether shamed, he called to her, and said,

"Wife, for God's love unloose me from these bonds, and deliver me from
the torment that I suffer, for these thorns are sharper than I can
endure."

The lady hastened to the place where Sir Thibault lay, and marked a
sword flung behind the bush, belonging to one of those felons that
were slain. She took the glaive, and went towards her lord, filled
full of wrath and evil thoughts because of what had chanced to her.
She feared greatly lest her husband should bear malice for that which
he had seen, reproaching her upon a day, and taunting her for what was
past. She said,

"Sir, you are out of your pain already."

She raised the sword, and came towards her husband, thinking to strike
him midmost the body. When he marked the falling glaive he deemed that
his day had come, for he was a naked man, clad in nought but his shirt
and hosen. He trembled so sorely that his bonds were loosed, and the
lady struck so feebly that she wounded him but little, severing that
baldrick with which his hands were made fast. Thereat the knight brake
the cords about his legs, and leaping upon his feet, cried, "Dame,
by the grace of God it is not to-day that you shall slay me with the
sword."

Then she made answer, "Truly, sir, the sorer grief is mine."

Sir Thibault took the sword, and set it again in the sheath,
afterwards he put his hand upon the lady's shoulder, and brought her
back by the path they had fared. At the fringe of the woodland he
found a large part of his fellowship, who were come to meet him. When
these saw their lord and lady so spoiled and disarrayed they inquired
of them, "Sir, who hath put you in this case?"

He set them by, saying that they had fallen amongst felons who had
done them much mischief.

Mightily the sergeants lamented; but presently they fetched raiment
from the packs, and arrayed them, for enough they had and to spare. So
they climbed into the saddle, and continued their journey.

They rode that day, nor for aught that had chanced did Messire
Thibault show sourer countenance to the lady. At nightfall they came
to a goodly town, and there took shelter in an inn. Messire Thibault
sought of his host if there was any convent of nuns in those parts
where a lady might repose her. The host made answer to him,

"Sir, you are served to your wish. Just beyond the walls is a right
fair religious house, with many holy women."

On the morrow Messire Thibault went to this house, and heard Mass.
Afterwards he spoke to the Abbess and her chapter, praying that he
might leave his lady in their charge, until his return; and this they
accorded very willingly. Messire Thibault bestowed the lady in this
convent, with certain of his house to do her service, and went his way
to bring his pilgrimage to a fair end. When he had knelt before the
shrine, and honoured the Saint, he came again to the convent and the
lady. He gave freely of his wealth to the house, and taking to himself
his wife, returned with her to their own land, in the same joy and
honour as he had brought her forth, save only that they lay not
together.

Great was the gladness of the folk of that realm when Sir Thibault
returned to his home. The Count of Ponthieu, the father of his wife
was there, and there, too, was his uncle the Count of St. Pol. Many
worthy and valiant gentlemen came for his welcome, and a fair company
of dames and maidens likewise honoured the lady. That day the Count
of Ponthieu sat at meat with my lord Thibault, and ate from the same
dish, the two together. Then it happed that the Count spake to him,

"Thibault, fair son, he who journeys far hears many a strange matter
and sees many strange sights, which are hidden from those who sit over
the fire. Tell me therefore, of your favour, something of all you have
seen and heard since you went from amongst us."

Messire Thibault answered shortly that he knew no tale worth the
telling. The Count would take no denial, but plagued him so sorely,
begging him of his courtesy to tell over some adventure, that at the
last he was overborne.

"Sir, I will narrate a story, since talk I must; but at least let it
be in your private ear, if you please, and not for the mirth of all."

The Count replied that his pleasure was the same. After meat, when men
had eaten their fill, the Count rose in his chair, and taking my lord
Thibault by the hand, entreated,

"Tell me now, I pray, that which it pleases you to tell, for there are
few of the household left in hall."

Then Messire Thibault began to relate that which chanced to a knight
and a dame, even as it has been rehearsed before you in this tale;
only he named not the persons to whom this lot was appointed. The
Count, who was wise and sober of counsel, inquired what the knight had
done with the lady. Thibault made answer that the knight had brought
the lady back by the way she went, with the same joy and worship as he
led her forth, save only that they slept not together.

"Thibault," said the Count, "your knight walked another road than I
had trod. By my faith in God and my love for you, I had hanged this
dame by her tresses to a tree. The laces of her gown would suffice if
I could find no other cord."

"Sir," said Messire Thibault, "you have but my word. The truth can
only be assured if the lady might bear witness and testify with her
own mouth."

"Thibault," said the Count, "know you the name of this knight?"

"Sir," cried Messire Thibault, "I beg you again to exempt me from
naming the knight to whom this sorrow befell. Know of a truth that his
name will bring no profit."

"Thibault," said the Count, "it is my pleasure that his name should
not be hid."

"Sir," answered Thibault, "tell I must, as you will not acquit me; but
I take you to witness that I speak only under compulsion, since gladly
I would have kept silence, had this been your pleasure, for in the
telling there is neither worship nor honour."

"Thibault," replied the Count, "without more words I would know
forthwith who was the knight to whom this adventure chanced. By the
faith that you owe to your God and to me, I conjure you to tell me his
name, since it is in your mind."

"Sir," replied Messire Thibault, "I will answer by the faith I owe
my God and you, since you lay this charge upon me. Know well, and be
persuaded, that I am the knight on whom this sorrow lighted. Hold it
for truth that I was sorely troubled and sick of heart. Be assured
that never before have I spoken to any living man about the business,
and moreover that gladly would I have held my peace, had such been
your will."

When the Count heard this adventure he was sore astonied, and
altogether cast down. He kept silence for a great space, speaking
never a word. At the last he said, "Thibault, was it indeed my child
who did this thing?"

"Sir, it is verily and truly so."

"Thibault," said the Count, "sweet shall be your vengeance, since you
have given her again to my hand."

Because of his exceeding wrath the Count sent straightway for his
daughter, and demanded of her if those things were true of which
Messire Thibault had spoken. She inquired of the accusation, and her
father answered, "That you would have slain him with the sword, even
as he has told me?"

"Sir, of a surety."

"And wherefore would you slay your husband?"

"Sir, for reason that I am yet heavy that he is not dead."

When the Count heard the lady speak in this fashion, he answered her
nothing, but suffered in silence until the guests had departed. After
these were gone, the Count came on a day to Rue-sur-Mer, and Messire
Thibault with him, and the Count's son. With them also went the lady.
Then the Count caused a ship to be got ready, very stout and speedy,
and he made the dame to enter in the boat. He set also on the ship an
untouched barrel, very high and strong. These three lords climbed into
the nave, with no other company, save those sailors who should labour
at the oar. The Count commanded the mariners to put the ship to sea,
and all marvelled greatly as to what he purposed, but there was none
so bold as to ask him any questions. When they had rowed a great way
from the land, the Count bade them to strike the head from out the
barrel. He took that dame, his own child, who was so dainty and so
fair, and thrust her in the tun, whether she would or whether she
would not. This being done he caused the cask to be made fast again
with staves and wood, so that the water might in no manner enter
therein. Afterwards he dragged the barrel to the edge of the deck, and
with his own hand cast it into the sea, saying,

"I commend thee to the wind and waves."

Passing heavy was Messire Thibault at this, and the lady's brother
also, and all who saw. They fell at the Count's feet, praying him of
his grace that she might be delivered from the barrel. So hot was his
wrath that he would not grant their prayer, for aught that they might
do or say. They therefore left him to his rage, and turning to the
Heavenly Father, besought our Lord Jesus Christ that of His most sweet
pity He would have mercy on her soul, and give her pardon for her
sins.

The ship came again to land, leaving the lady in sore peril and
trouble, even as the tale has told you. But our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is Lord and Father of all, and desireth not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live--as each day
He showeth us openly by deed, by example and by miracle--sent succour
to this lady, even as you shall hear. For a ship from Flanders, laden
with merchandise, marked this barrel drifting at the mercy of winds
and waters, before ever the Count and his companions were come ashore.
One of the merchants said to his comrades,

"Friends, behold a barrel drifting in our course. If we may reach it,
perchance we may find it to our gain."

This ship was wont to traffic with the Saracens in their country, so
the sailors rowed towards the barrel, and partly by cunning and partly
by strength, at the last got it safely upon the deck. The merchants
looked long at the cask. They wondered greatly what it could be, and
wondering, they saw that the head of the barrel was newly closed. They
opened the cask, and found therein a woman at the point of death, for
air had failed her. Her body was gross, her visage swollen, and the
eyes started horribly from her head. When she breathed the fresh air
and felt the wind blow upon her, she sighed a little, so that the
merchants standing by, spoke comfortably to her, but she might not
answer them a word. In the end, heart and speech came again to her.
She spoke to the chapmen and the sailors who pressed about her, and
much she marvelled how she found herself amongst them. When she
perceived that she was with merchants and Christian men she was the
more easy, and fervently she praised Jesus Christ in her heart,
thanking Him for the loving kindness which had kept her from death.
For this lady was altogether contrite in heart, and earnestly desired
to amend her life towards God, repenting the trespass she had done
to others, and fearing the judgment that was rightly her due. The
merchants inquired of the lady whence she came, and she told them the
truth, saying that she was a miserable wretch and a poor sinner, as
they could see for themselves. She related the cruel adventure which
had chanced to her, and prayed them to take pity on a most unhappy
lady, and they answered that mercy they would show. So with meat and
drink her former beauty came to her again.

Now this merchant ship fared so far that she came to the land of the
Paynims, and cast anchor in the port of Aumarie. Galleys of these
Saracens came to know their business, and they answered that they were
traffickers in divers merchandise in many a realm. They showed them
also the safe conduct they carried of princes and mighty lords that
they might pass in safety through their countries to buy and sell
their goods. The merchants got them to land in this port, taking the
lady with them. They sought counsel one of the other to know what it
were best to do with her. One was for selling her as a slave, but his
companion proposed to give her as a sop to the rich Soudan of Aumarie,
that their business should be the less hindered. To this they all
agreed. They arrayed the lady freshly in broidered raiment, and
carried her before the Soudan, who was a lusty young man. He accepted
their gift, receiving the lady with a right glad heart, for she was
passing fair. The Soudan inquired of them as to who she was.

"Sire," answered the merchants, "we know no more than you, but
marvellous was the fashion in which she came to our hands."

The gift was so greatly to the Soudan's mind that he served the
chapmen to the utmost of his power. He loved the lady very tenderly,
and entreated her in all honour. He held and tended her so well, that
her sweet colour came again to her, and her beauty increased beyond
measure. The Soudan sought to know by those who had the gift of
tongues as to the lady's home and race, but these she would not reveal
to any. He was the more thoughtful therefore, because he might see
that she was a dame of birth and lineage. He inquired of her as to
whether she were a Christian woman, promising that if she would deny
her faith, he would take her as his wife, since he was yet unwed. The
lady saw clearly that it were better to be converted by love than
perforce; so she answered that her religion was to do her master's
pleasure. When she had renounced her faith, and rejected the Christian
law, the Soudan made her his dame according to the use and wont of
this country of the Paynim. He held her very dear, cherishing her in
all honour, for his love waxed deeper as the days wore on.

In due time it was with this lady after the manner of women, and she
came to bed of a son. The Soudan rejoiced greatly, being altogether
merry and content. The lady, for her part, lived in fair fellowship
with the folk of her husband's realm. Very courteous was she, and
very serviceable, so that presently she was instructed in the Saracen
tongue. In no long while after the birth of her son she conceived of
a maid, who in the years that befell grew passing sweet and fair, and
richly was she nurtured as became the daughter of so high a prince.
Thus for two years and a half the lady dwelt with the Paynim in much
softness and delight.

Now the story keeps silence as to the lady and the Soudan, her
husband, till later, as you may hear, and returns to the Count of
Ponthieu, the son of the Count, and to my lord Thibault of Dommare,
who were left grieving for the dame who was flung into the sea, as you
have heard, nor knew aught of her tidings, but deemed that she were
rather dead than alive. Now tells the story--and the truth bears
witness to itself and is its own confirmation--that the Count was in
Ponthieu, together with his son, and Messire Thibault. Very heavy was
the Count, for in no wise could he get his daughter from his mind,
and grievously he lamented the wrong that he had done her. Messire
Thibault dared not take to himself another wife, because of the
anguish of his friend. The son of the Count might not wed also;
neither durst he to become knight, though he was come to an age when
such things are greatly to a young man's mind.

On a day the Count considered deeply the sin that he had committed
against his own flesh. He sought the Archbishop of Rheims in
confession, and opened out his grief, telling in his ear the crime
that he had wrought. He determined to seek those holy fields beyond
the sea, and sewed the Cross upon his mantle. When Messire Thibault
knew that his lord, the Count, had taken the Cross, he confessed him,
and did likewise. And when the Count's son was assured of the purpose
of his sire and of Messire Thibault, whom he loved dearly, he took the
Cross with them. Passing heavy was the Count to mark the Sign upon his
son's raiment.

"Fair son, what is this you have done; for now the land remains
without a lord!"

The son answered, and said, "Father, I wear the Sign first and
foremost for the love of God; afterwards for the saving of my soul,
and by reason that I would serve and honour Him to the utmost of my
power, so long as I have life in my body."

The Count put his realm in ward full wisely. He used diligence in
making all things ready, and bade farewell to his friends. Messire
Thibault and the son of the Count ordered their business, and the
three set forth together, with a fair company. They came to that holy
land beyond the sea, safe of person and of gear. There they made
devout pilgrimage to every place where they were persuaded it was meet
to go, and God might be served. When the Count had done all that
he was able, he deemed that there was yet one thing to do. He gave
himself and his fellowship to the service of the Temple for one year;
and at the end of this term he purposed to seek his country and his
home. He sent to Acre, and made ready a ship against his voyage. He
took his leave of the Knights Templar, and other lords of that land,
and greatly they praised him for the worship that he had brought them.
When the Count and his company were come to Acre they entered in the
ship, and departed from the haven with a fair wind. But little was
their solace. For when they drew to the open sea a strong and horrible
tempest sprang suddenly upon them, so that the sailors knew not where
they went, and feared each hour that all would be drowned. So piteous
was their plight that, with ropes, they bound themselves one to
another, the son to the father, the uncle to the nephew, according as
they stood. The Count, his son, and Messire Thibault for their part,
fastened themselves together, so that the same end should chance to
all. In no long time after this was done they saw land, and inquired
of the shipmen whither they were come. The mariners answered that this
realm belonged to the Paynim, and was called the Land of Aumarie. They
asked of the Count,

"Sire, what is your will that we do? If we seek the shore, doubtless
we shall be made captives, and fall into the hands of the Saracen."

The Count made answer, "Not my will, but the will of Jesus Christ be
done. Let the ship go as He thinks best. We will commit our bodies and
our lives to His good keeping, for a fouler and an uglier death we
cannot die, than to perish in this sea."

They drove with the wind along the coast of Aumarie, and the galleys
and warships of the Saracens put out to meet them. Be assured that
this was no fair meeting, for the Paynims took them and led them
before the Soudan, who was lord of that realm. There they gave him
the goods and the bodies of these Christians as a gift. The Soudan
sundered this fair fellowship, setting them in many places and in
divers prisons; but since the Count, his son, and Messire Thibault
were so securely bound together, he commanded that they should be cast
into a dungeon by themselves, and fed upon the bread of affliction and
the water of affliction. So it was done, even as he commanded. In this
prison they lay for a space, till such time as the Count's son fell
sick. His sickness was so grievous that the Count and Messire Thibault
feared greatly that this sorrow was to death.

Now it came to pass that the Soudan held high Court because of the day
of his birth, for such was the custom of the Saracens. After they had
well eaten, the Saracens stood before the Soudan, and said,

"Sire, we require of you our right."

He inquired of what right they were speaking, and they answered,

"Sire, a Christian captive to set as a mark for our arrows."

When the Soudan heard this he gave no thought to such a trifle, but
made reply,

"Get you to the prison, and take out that captive who has the least of
life in him."

The Paynim hastened to the dungeon, and brought forth the Count,
bearded, unkempt and foredone. The Soudan marked his melancholy case,
so he said to them, "This man has not long to live; take him hence,
and do your will on him."

The wife of the Soudan, of whom you have heard, the daughter of this
very Count, was in the hall, when they brought forth her father to
slay him. Immediately that her eyes fell upon him the blood in her
veins turned to water; not so much that she knew him as her sire, but
rather that Nature tugged at her heart strings. Then spake the dame to
the Soudan, "Husband, I, too, am French, and would gladly speak with
this poor wretch ere he die, if so I may."

"Wife," answered the Soudan, "truly, yes; it pleases me well."

The lady came to the Count. She took him apart, and bidding the
Saracens fall back, she inquired of him whence he was.

"Lady, I am from the kingdom of France, of a county that men call
Ponthieu."

When the lady heard this her bowels were moved. Earnestly she demanded
his name and race.

"Of a truth, lady, I have long forgotten my father's house, for I have
suffered such pain and anguish since I departed, that I would rather
die than live. But this you may know, that I--even the man who speaks
to you--was once the Count of Ponthieu."

The lady hearkened to this, but yet she made no sign. She went from
the Count, and coming to the Soudan, said,

"Husband, give me this captive as a gift, if such be your pleasure. He
knows chess and draughts and many fair tales to bring solace to the
hearer. He shall play before you, and we will make our pastime of his
skill."

"Wife," answered the Soudan, "I grant him to you very willingly; do
with him as you wish."

The lady took the captive, and bestowed him in her chamber. The
gaolers sought another in his stead, and brought forth my lord
Thibault, the husband to the dame. He came out in tatters, for he was
clothed rather in his long hair and great beard, than in raiment. His
body was lean and bony, and he seemed as one who had endured pain and
sorrow enough, and to spare. When the lady saw him she said to the
Soudan,

"Husband, with this one also would I gladly speak, if so I may."

"Wife," answered the Soudan, "it pleases me well."

The lady came to my lord Thibault, and inquired of him whence he was.

"Lady, I am of the realm of that ancient gentleman who was taken from
prison before me. I had his daughter to wife, and am his knight."

The lady knew well her lord, so she returned to the Soudan, and said
to him, "Husband, great kindness will you show me, if you give me this
captive also."

"Wife," said the Soudan, "I grant him to you very willingly."

She thanked him sweetly, and bestowed the gift in her chamber, with
the other.

The archers hastened together, and drawing before the Soudan said,
"Sire, you do us wrong, for the day is far spent."

They went straight to the prison, and brought forth the son of the
Count, shagged and filthy, as one who had not known of water for many
a day. He was a young man, so young that his beard had not come on
him, but for all his youth he was so thin and sick and weak, that
he scarce could stand upon his feet. When the lady saw him she had
compassion upon him. She came to him asking whose son he was and of
his home, and he replied that he was son to that gentleman, who was
first brought out of the dungeon. She knew well that this was her
brother, but she made herself strange unto him.

"Husband," said she to the Soudan, "verily you will shew kindness to
your wife beyond measure if you grant me this captive. He knows chess
and draughts and other delights passing fair to see and hear."

And the Soudan made answer, "Wife, by our holy law if they were a
hundred I would give them all to you gladly."

The lady thanked him tenderly, and bestowed the captive swiftly in
her chamber. The Saracens went again to the prison and fetched out
another, but the lady left him to his fate, when she looked upon his
face. So he won a martyr's crown, and our Lord Jesus Christ received
his soul. As for the dame, she hid herself from the sight, for it gave
her little joy, this slaying of the Christian by the Paynims.

The lady came to her chamber, and at her coming the captives would
have got them to their feet, but she made signs that they should
remain seated. Drawing close she made gestures of friendship. The
Count, who was very shrewd, asked at this, "Lady, when will they slay
us?"

She answered that their time had not yet come.

"Lady," said he, "the sorer grief is ours, for we are so anhungered,
that for a little our souls would leave our bodies."

The lady went out, and bade meat to be made ready. This she carried
in, giving to each a little, and to each a little drink. When they had
eaten, they had yet greater hunger than before. In this manner she fed
them, little by little, ten times a day, for she deemed that should
they eat to their desire, they would die of repletion. For this reason
she caused them to break their fast temperately. Thus the good lady
dealt with them for the first seven days, and at nights, by her grace,
they lay softly at their ease. She did away with their rags, and clad
them in seemly apparel. When the week was done she set before them
meat and drink to their heart's desire, so that their strength
returned to them again. They had chess and draughts, and played these
games to their great content. The Soudan was often with them. He
watched the play, and took pleasure in their gladness. But the lady
refrained, so that none might conceive, either by speech or fashion,
that he had known her before.

Now a short while after this matter of the captives, the story tells
that the Soudan had business enough of his own, for a mighty Sultan
laid waste his realm, and sought to do him much mischief. To avenge
his wrong the Soudan commanded his vassals from every place, and
assembled a great host. When the lady knew this, she entered the
chamber where the captives lay, and sitting amidst them lifted her
hand, and said, "Sirs, you have told me somewhat of your business; now
will I be assured whether you are true men or not. You told me that in
your own land you were once the Count of Ponthieu, that this man was
wedded to your daughter, and that this other was your son. Know that I
am a Saracen, having the science of astrology; so I tell you plainly
that you were never so near to a shameful death, as you are now, if
you hide from me the truth. What chanced to your daughter, the wife of
this knight?"

"Lady," replied the Count, "I deem her to be dead."

"How came she to her death?"

"Certes, lady," said the Count, "because for once she received her
deserts."

"Tell me of these deservings," said the dame.

Then the Count began to tell, with tears, of how she was wedded, but
was yet a barren wife; how the good knight vowed pilgrimage to my lord
St. James in Galicia, and how the lady prayed that she might go with
him, which prayer he granted willingly. He told how they went their
way with joy, till alone, in the deep wood, they met with sturdy
felons who set upon them. The good knight might do nothing against so
many, for he was a naked man; but despite of all, he slew three, and
five were left, who killed his palfrey, and spoiling him to the very
shirt, bound him hands and feet, and flung him into a thorn bush. They
spoiled the lady also and stole her palfrey from her. When they looked
upon her, and saw that she was fair, each would have taken her.
Afterwards they accorded that she should be to all, and having
had their will in her despite, they departed and left her weeping
bitterly. This the good knight saw, so he besought her courteously to
unloose his hands, that they might get them from the wood. But the
lady marked a sword belonging to one of these felons that were slain.
She handselled it, and hastening where he lay, cried in furious
fashion, "You are unbound already." Then she raised the naked sword,
and struck at his body. But by the loving kindness of God, and the
vigour of the knight, she but sundered the bonds that bound him, so
that he sprang forth, and wounded as he was, cried, "Dame, by the
grace of God it is not to-day that you shall kill me with the sword."

At this word that fair lady, the wife of the Soudan, spoke suddenly,
and said,

"Ah, sir, you have told the tale honestly, and very clear it is why
she would have slain him."

"For what reason, lady?"

"Certes," answered she, "for reason of the great shame which had
befallen her."

When Messire Thibault heard this he wept right tenderly, and said,
"Alas, what part had she in this wickedness! May God keep shut the
doors of my prison if I had shown her the sourer face therefore,
seeing that her will was not in the deed."

"Sir," said the lady, "she feared your reproach. But tell me which is
the more likely, that she be alive or dead?"

"Lady," said Thibault, "we know not what to think."

"Well I know," cried the Count, "of the great anguish we have
suffered, by reason of the sin I sinned against her."

"If it pleased God that she were yet living," inquired the lady, "and
tidings were brought which you could not doubt, what would you have to
say?"

"Lady," said the Count, "I should be happier than if I were taken from
this prison, or were granted more wealth than ever I have had in my
life."

"Lady," said Messire Thibault, "so God give me no joy of my heart's
dearest wish, if I had not more solace than if men crowned me King of
France."

"Certes, lady," said the dansellon, who was her brother, "none could
give or promise me aught so sweet, as the life of that sister, who was
so fair and good."

When the lady hearkened to these words her heart yearned with
tenderness. She praised God, rendering Him thanks, and said to them,
"Be sure that you speak with unfeigned lips."

And they answered and said that they spoke with unfeigned lips. Then
the lady began to weep with happy tears, and said to them, "Sir, now
may you truly say that you are my father, for I am that daughter on
whom you wrought such bitter justice. And you, Messire Thibault, are
my lord and husband; and you, sir dansellon, are my brother."

Then she rehearsed to them in what manner she was found of the
chapmen, and how they bestowed her as a gift on the Soudan. They were
very glad, and rejoiced mightily, humbling themselves before her, but
she forbade them to show their mirth, saying, "I am a Saracen, and
have renounced the faith; otherwise I should not be here, but were
dead already. Therefore I pray and beseech you as you love your lives
and would prolong your days, whatever you may see or hear, not to show
me any affection, but keep yourselves strange to me, and leave me to
unravel the coil. Now I will tell why I have revealed myself to you.
My husband, the Soudan, rides presently to battle. I know well,
Messire Thibault, that you are a hardy knight, and I will pray the
Soudan to take you with him. If ever you were brave, now is the time
to make it plain. See to it that you do him such service that he have
no grievance against you."

The lady departed forthwith, and coming before the Soudan, said,
"Husband, one of my captives desires greatly to go with you, if such
be your pleasure."

"Wife," answered he, "I dare not put myself in his hand, for fear that
he may do me a mischief."

"Husband, he will not dare to be false, since I hold his companions as
hostages."

"Wife," said he, "I will take him with me, because of your counsel,
and I will deliver him a good horse and harness, and all that warrior
may require."

The lady returned straightway to the chamber. She said to Messire
Thibault, "I have persuaded the Soudan to bring you to the battle. Act
therefore manfully."

At this her brother knelt at her knee, praying her to plead with the
Soudan that he might go also.

"That I may not do," said she, "or the thing will be too clear."

The Soudan ordered his business, and went forth, Messire Thibault
being with him, and came upon the enemy. According to his word, the
Soudan had given to the knight both horse and harness. By the will of
Jesus Christ, who faileth never such as have faith and affiance in
Him, Messire Thibault did such things in arms that in a short space
the enemies of the Soudan were put under his feet. The Soudan rejoiced
greatly at his knight's deeds and his victory, and returned bringing
many captives with him. He went straight to the dame, and said, "Wife,
by my law I have naught but good to tell of your prisoner, for he has
done me faithful service. So he deny his faith, and receive our holy
religion, I will grant him broad lands, and find him a rich heiress in
marriage."

"Husband, I know not, but I doubt if he will do this thing."

No more was spoken of the matter; but the lady set her house in order,
as best she was able, and coming to her captives said, "Sirs, go
warily, so that the Saracens see nothing of what is in our mind; for,
please God, we shall yet win to France and the county of Ponthieu."

On a day the lady came before the Soudan. She went in torment, and
lamented very grievously.

"Husband, it is with me as it was before. Well I know it, for I have
fallen into sore sickness, and my food has no relish in my mouth, no,
not since you went to the battle."

"Wife, I am right glad to hear that you are with child, although your
infirmity is very grievous unto me. Consider and tell me those things
that you deem will be to your healing, and I will seek and procure
them whatever the cost."

When the lady heard this, her heart beat lightly in her breast. She
showed no semblance of joy, save this only, that she said, "Husband,
my old captive tells me that unless I breathe for awhile such air as
that of my native land, and that quickly, I am but dead, for in nowise
have I long to live."

"Wife," said the Soudan, "your death shall not be on my conscience.
Consider and show me where you would go, and there I will cause you to
be taken."

"Husband, it is all one to me, so I be out of this city."

Then the Soudan made ready a ship, both fair and strong, and garnished
her plenteously with wines and meats.

"Husband," said the lady to the Soudan, "I will take of my captives
the aged and the young, that they may play chess and draughts at my
bidding, and I will carry with me my son for my delight."

"Wife," answered he, "your will is my pleasure. But what shall be done
with the third captive?"

"Husband, deal with him after your desire."

"Wife, I desire that you take him on the ship; for he is a brave man,
and will keep you well, both on land and sea, if you have need of his
sword."

The lady took leave of the Soudan, bidding him farewell, and urgently
he prayed her to return so soon as she was healed of her sickness. The
stores being put upon the ship and all things made ready, they entered
therein and set sail from the haven. With a fair wind they went very
swiftly, so that the shipmen sought the lady, saying, "Madam, this
wind is driving the boat to Brindisi. Is it your pleasure to take
refuge there, or to go elsewhere?"

"Let the ship keep boldly on her course," answered the lady to them,
"for I speak French featly and other tongues also, so I will bring you
to a good end."

They made such swift passage by day and by night, that according to
the will of Our Lord they came quickly to Brindisi. The ship cast
anchor safely in the harbour, and they lighted on the shore, being
welcomed gladly by the folk of that country. The lady, who was very
shrewd, drew her captives apart, and said, "Sirs, I desire you to
call to mind the pledge and the covenant you have made. I must now be
certain that you are true men, remembering your oaths and plighted
words. I pray you to let me know, by all that you deem of God, whether
you will abide or not by our covenant together; for it is yet not too
late to return to my home."

They answered, "Lady, know beyond question that the bargain we have
made we will carry out loyally. By our faith in God and as christened
men we will abide by this covenant; so be in no doubt of our
assurance."

"I trust you wholly," replied the lady; "but, sirs, see here my son,
whom I had of the Soudan, what shall we do with him?"

"Lady, the boy is right welcome, and to great honour shall he come in
our own land."

"Sirs," said the dame, "I have dealt mischievously with the Soudan,
for I have stolen my person from him, and the son who was so dear to
his heart."

The lady went again to the shipmen, and lifting her hand, said to
them, "Sirs, return to the Soudan whence you came, and greet him with
this message. Tell him that I have taken from him my body and the son
he loved so well, that I might deliver my father, my lord, and my
brother from the prison where they were captive."

When the sailors heard this they were very dolent, but there was
naught that they might do. They set sail for their own country, sad
and very heavy by reason of the lady, of the young lad, whom they
loved greatly, and of the captives who were escaped altogether from
their hand.

For his part the Count arrayed himself meetly by grace of merchants
and Templars, who lent him gladly of their wealth. He abode in the
town, together with his fellowship, for their solace, till they made
them ready for the journey, and took the road to Rome. The Count
sought the Pontiff, and his company with him. Each confessed him
of the secrets of his heart, and when the Bishop heard thereof,
he accepted their devotion, and comforted them right tenderly. He
baptised the child, who was named William. He reconciled the lady with
Holy Church, and confirmed the lady and Messire Thibault her lord, in
their marriage bond, reknitting them together, giving penance to each,
and absolution for their sins. After this they made no long sojourn
in Rome, but took their leave of the Apostle who had honoured them so
greatly. He granted them his benison, and commended them to God. So
they went their way in great solace and delight, praising God and His
Mother, and all the calendar of saints, and rendering thanks for the
mercies which had been vouchsafed to them. Journeying thus they
came at last to the country of their birth, and were met by a fair
procession of bishops and abbots, monks and priests, who had desired
them fervently. But of all these welcomes they welcomed most gladly
her who was recovered from death, and had delivered her sire, her
lord, and her brother from the hands of the Paynim, even as you have
heard. There we leave them for awhile, and will tell you of the
shipmen and Saracens who had fared with them across the sea.

The sailors and Saracens who had carried them to Brindisi, returned
as quickly as they were able, and with a fair wind cast anchor before
Aumarie. They got them to land, very sad and heavy, and told their
tidings to the Soudan. Right sorrowful was the Soudan, and neither for
time nor reason could he forget his grief. Because of this mischief he
loved that daughter the less who tarried with him, and showed her the
less courtesy. Nevertheless the maiden increased in virtue and in
wisdom, so that the Paynim held her in love and honour, praising her
for the good that was known of her. But now the story is silent as to
that Soudan who was so tormented by reason of the flight of his dame
and captives; and comes again to the Count of Ponthieu, who was
welcomed to his realm with such pomp and worship, as became a lord of
his degree.

In no long while after his return the son of the Count was dubbed
knight, and rich was the feast. He became a knight both chivalrous and
brave. Greatly he loved all honourable men, and gladly he bestowed
fair gifts on the poor knights and poor gentlewomen of the country.
Much was he esteemed of lord and hind, for he was a worthy knight,
generous, valiant and debonair, proud only to his foes. Yet his days
on earth were but a span, which was the sorer pity, for he died
lamented of all.

Now it befell that the Count held high Court, and many a knight and
lord sat with him at the feast. Amongst these came a very noble man
and knight, of great place, in Normandy, named my lord Raoul des
Preaux. This Raoul had a daughter, passing sweet and fair. The Count
spoke so urgently to Raoul and to the maiden's kin that a marriage
was accorded between William, his grandson, the son of the Soudan of
Aumarie, and the daughter of my lord Raoul, the heiress to all his
wealth. William wedded the damsel with every rich observance, and in
right of his wife this William became Lord of Preaux.

For a long while the realm had peace from its foes.

Messire Thibault dwelt with the lady, and had of her two sons, who
in later days were worthy gentlemen of great worship. The son of the
Count of Ponthieu, of whom we have spoken much and naught but good,
died shortly after, to the grief of all the land. The Count of St. Pol
was yet alive; therefore the two sons of my lord Thibault were heirs
to both these realms, and attained thereto in the end. That devout
lady, their mother, because of her contrite heart, gave largely to
the poor; and Messire Thibault, like the honourable gentleman he was,
abounded in good works so long as he was quick.

Now it chanced that the daughter of the lady, who abode with the
Soudan her father, increased greatly in favour and in virtue. She was
called The Fair Captive, by reason that her mother had left her in
the Soudan's keeping, as you have heard. A certain brave Turk in the
service of the Soudan--Malakin of Baudas by name--saw this damsel, so
fair and gracious, and desired her dearly in his heart, because of the
good men told of her. He came before his master, and said to him,

"Sire, in return for his labour your servant craves a gift."

"Malakin," returned the Soudan, "what gift would you have?"

"Sire, I would dare to tell it to your face, if only she were not so
high above my reach."

The Sultan who was both shrewd and quick witted made reply,

"Say out boldly what is in your mind, for I hold you dear, and
remember what you have done. If there is aught it beseems me to
grant--saving only my honour--be assured that it is yours."

"Sire, well I know that your honour is without spot, nor would I seek
anything against it. I pray you to bestow on your servant--if so it be
your pleasure--my lady your daughter, for she is the gift I covet most
in all the world."

The Soudan kept silence, and considered for a space. He knew well that
Malakin was both valiant and wise, and might easily come to great
honour and degree. Since the servant was worthy of his high desire,
the Soudan said, "By my law you have required of me a great thing, for
I love my daughter dearly, and have no other heir. You know well, and
it is the simple truth, that she comes of the best and bravest blood
in France, for her mother is the child of the Count of Ponthieu. But
since you too are valiant, and have done me loyal service, for my part
I will give her to you willingly, save only that it be to the maiden's
mind."

"Sire," said Malakin, "I would not take her against her wish."

The Soudan bade the girl be summoned. When she came, he said, "Fair
daughter, I have granted you in marriage, if it pleases you."

"Sir," answered the maiden, "my pleasure is in your will."

The Soudan took her by the hand, saying, "Take her, Malakin, the maid
is yours."

Malakin received her with a glad heart, and wedded her according to
the Paynim rite, bringing her to his house right joyously, with the
countenance of all his friends. Afterwards he returned with her to his
own land. The Soudan escorted them upon their way, with such a fair
company of his household as seemed good to him. Then he bade farewell
to his child and her lord, and returned to his home. But a great part
of his fellowship he commanded to go with her for their service,
Malakin came back to his own land, where he was welcomed right gladly
of his friends, and served and honoured by all the folk of his realm.
He lived long and tenderly with his wife, neither were they childless,
as this story testifies. For of this lady, who was called the Fair
Captive, was born the mother of that courteous Turk, the Sultan
Saladin, an honourable, a wise, and a conquering lord.
