A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, Vol. I (James Cook, 1785)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1785 first edition, official account of the third voyage (https://archive.org/details/b28777438_0001). The official account of Cook's third voyage (1776–79) — the search for the Northwest Passage and the discovery of Hawaii.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Wellcome  Library 


https://archive.org/details/b28777438_0001 


I 


9 . 


(X 

J^k'^  19}^ 


I 


» 


■J 


■; 

•'  'T'n 


T/U12. 


A 

VOYAGE 

TO  THE 

PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

UNDERTAKEN, 

'BY  THE  COMMAND  OF  HIS  MAJESTY, 

FOR  MAKING 

Difcoveries  in  the  Northern  Hemiiphere. 

Performed  under  the  Direftion  of  Captains  COOK,  CLERK E,  and  GORE, 

In  His  Majefly’s  Ships  the  Refolution  and  Difcovery  ; in  the  Years  1776,  1777,  1778,  I779j  and  1780. 

IN  THREE  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  1.  and  II.  written  by  Captain  JAMES  COOK,  F. R. S. 

VOL.  HI.  by  Captain  JAMES  KING,  LL.D.  and  F.R.  S. 

Publifhed  by  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  of  the  Admiralty. 
THE  SECOND  EDITION. 


VOL.  I. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  H.  HUGHS, 

FOR  G.  NICOL,  BOOKSELLER  TO  HIS  MAJESTY,  IN  THE  STRAND; 
AND  T.  CADELL,  IN  THE  STRAND. 


M.pCC.LX^tX  V. 


J 


\ 


VD 


I HI8TORIOAU. 
' MEDICAL 


CONTENTS 


OF  THE 

FIRST  VOLUME. 


Introduction.  Page  i 

Infer ipt ion  to  the  Memory  of  Captain  James  Cook.  Ixxxvii 
Liji  of  the  Plates.  xci 

BOOK  I. 

TRANSACTIONS  FROM  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  VOYAGE  TILL 
OUR  DEPARTURE  FROM  NEW  ZEALAND. 

CHAP.  I. 

T/’ARIOUS  Preparations  for  the  Voyage, — Omai^s  Behavi- 
^ our  on  embarking,  — Obfervations  for  determining  the 
Longitude  of  Sheernefs^  and  the  North  Foreland, — Paffage 
of  the  Refolution  from  Deptford  to  Plymouth, — Employments 
there, — Complements  of  the  Crews  of  both  Jhips,  and  Names 
of  the  Officers, — Obfervations  to  fix  the  Longitude  of  Ply- 
mouth,— Departure  of  the  Refolution,  Page  i 


VoL.  I. 


CHAP. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  II. 

Pajfage  of  the  Refolution  to  Teneriffe,  — Reception  there. — 
Defcription  of  Santa  Cruz  Road.  — Refrejhments  to  be 
met  with. — Obfervations  for  fixing  the  Longitude  of  'Lene- 
riffe. — Some  Account  of  the  Ifiand.  — Botanical  Obferva- 
tions. — Cities  of  Santa  Cruz  and  Laguna. — Agriculture. — 
Air  and  Climate. — Commerce. — Inhabitants.  14. 

CHAP.  III. 

departure  from  L’eneriffe. — Danger  of  the  Ship  near  Bona- 
vifia.  — Ifie  of  Mayo. — Port  Praya. — Precautions  againjl 
the  Rain  and  fultry  Weather  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Equator. — Pofition  of  the  Coaft  of  Brazil. — Arrival  at  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope. — Tranfadlions  there. — JunBion  of  the 
Difcovery.  — Mr.  Anderfon’s  Journey  up  the  Country. — 
Afironomical  Obfervations. — Nautical  Remarks  on  the  Paf- 
fage  from  England  to  the  Cape,  with  regard  to  the  Cur- 
rents and  the  Variation.  suy 

CHAP.  IV. 

Ihe  two  Ships  leave  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. — Lwo  Ifiands^ 
named  Prince  Edwardls,  feen,  and  their  Appearance  de- 
fer i bed. — Kerguelen's  Land  vifited.- — Arrival  in  Chrifimas 
Harbour. — Occurrences  there. — Defcription  of  it.  51 

C H A P.  V. 

Departure  from  Chrifimas  Harbour. — Range  along  the  Coafi, 
to  difeover  its  Pofition  and  Extent  .-^Several  Promontories 

and 


CONTENTS. 


and  Bays,  and  a Beninfula,  defcribed  and  named. — T>an~ 
ger  from  Shoals. — Another  Harbour  and  a Sound. — Mr. 
Anderjon's  Obfervations  on  the  natural  ProduBions,  Ani- 
mals, Soil,  &c.  of  Kerguelen^ s Land.  70 

C H A P.  VI. 

Paffage  from  Kerguelen's  to  Van  Diemen's  Land. — Arrival 
in  Adventure  Bay. — Incidents  there. — Interviews  with  the 
Natives. — L’heir  Perfons  and  Drefs  defcribed. — Account  of 
their  Behaviour. — Table  of  the  Longitude,  Latitude,  and 
Variation. — Mr.  Anderfon's  Obfervations  on  the  natural 
ProduBions  of  the  Country,  on  the  Inhabitants,  and  their 
Language.  91 

CHAP.  VII. 

The  Paffage  from  Van  Diemen's  Land  to  New  Zealand. 
— Employments  in  Slueen  Charlotte's  Sound. — TranfaBions 
with  the  Natives  there. — Intelligence  about  the  Majfacre 
of  the  Adventure's  Boat's  Crew.  — Account  of  the  Chief 
who  headed  the  Party  on  that  Occajion.  — Of  the  two 
young  Men  who  embark  to  attend  Omai.  — Various  Re- 
marks on  the  Inhabitants. — Aflrono^nical  and  Nautical  Ob- 
fervations. 1 18 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Mr.  Anderfon's  Remarks  on  the  Country  near  ^een  Char- 
lotte's Sound. — The  Soil. — Climate. — Weather. — Winds. — 
Trees. — Plants. — Birds. — Fijh. — Other  Animals. — Of  the 
Inhabitants. — Defcription  of  their  Per  [fins. — Their  Drefs. — 
Ornaments. — Habitations. — Boats. — Food  and  Cookery. — 
Arts. — Weapons. — Cruelty  to  Prifoners. — Various  Cujioms. 
— Specimen  of  their  Language.  145 

A 2 


BOOK 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK  II. 

FROM  LEAVING  NEW  ZEALAND,  TO  OUR  ARRIVAL  AT  OTA- 
HEITE,  OR  THE  SOCIETY  ISLANDS. 


CHAP.  I. 

Profecution  of  the  Voyage. — Behaviour  of  the  two  New  Zea- 
landers on  board. — Unfavourable  winds. — An  IJland  called 
Mangeea  dif covered. — T^he  Coajl  of  it  examined. — I’ranf ac- 
tions with  the  Natives. — An  Account  of  their  Perfonsy 
Drefs^  and  Canoe. — Defcription  of  the  IJland. — A Specimen 
of  the  Language. — Difpojition  of  the  Inhabitants.  167 


CHAP.  II. 

'The  Lifcovery  of  an  IJland  called  Wateeoo. — Its  Coajls  exa- 
mined.— Vijits  from  the  Natives  on  board  the  Ships. — Mejf. 

^ Gorey  Burney,  and  Anderfon,  with  Omai,  fent  on  Shore. — 
Mr.  Anderfon's  Narrative  of  their  Reception. — Omai’s  Ex- 
pedient to  prevent  their  being  detained. — His  meeting  with 
fame  of  his  Countrymen,  and  their  dijlrefsful  Voyage. — Far- 
ther Account  of  Wateeoo,  and  of  its  Inhabitants.  180 

CHAP.  III. 

Wenooa-ette,  or  Otakootaia,  vijited. — Account  of  that  IJland, 
and  of  its  Produce.  — Hervefs  IJland,  or  Terougge  mou 
Attooa,  found  to  be  inhabited. — TranfaBions  with  the  Na- 
tives.-^I’heir  Perfons,  Drejs,  Language,  Canoes. — Fruit- 

Ms 


CO  NTENTS. 


lefs  Attempt  to  land  there. — Reafons  for  bearing  away  for 
the  Friendly  IJlands. — Palmerjion's  IJland  touched  at. — De^ 
fcription  of  the  two  Places  where  the  Boats  landed. — Re- 
frejhments  obtained  there. — ConjeBures  on  the  Formation 
of  fuch  low  IJlands. — Arrival  at  the  Friendly  IJlands.  205 

' CHAP.  IV. 

Intercourfe  with  the  Natives  of  Komango,  and  other  IJlands, 
— Arrival  at  Annamooka. — Franfadlions  there. — Feenou, 
a principal  Chief  from  'Tongataboo,  comes  on  a Vijit. — Jhe 
Manner  of  bis  Reception  in  the  IJland^  and  on  board. — In- 
fiances  of  the  pilfering  Difpojition  of  the  Natives. — Some  Ac- 
count of  Annamooka. — fhe  Pajfage  from  it  to  Hapaee.  225, 

CHAP.  V. 

Arrival  of  the  Ships  at  Hapaee^  and  friendly  Reception  there, 
— Prefents  and  Solemnities  on  the  Occajion. — Single  Com- 
bats with  Clubs. — Wrejiling  and  Boxing  Matches. — Female 
Combatants. — Marines  exercifed. — A Dance  performed  by 
Men. — Fireworks  exhibited. — Jhe  Night-entertainments  of 
Singing  and  Dancing  particularly  defer ibed.  242 

CHAP.  VI. 

Defeription  of  Lefooga. — Its  cultivated  State. — Its  Extent. — 
T’ranfadiions  there. — A Female  Oculift. — Singular  Expedi- 
ents for Jhaving  off  the  Hair. — I’he  Ships  change  their  Sta- 
tion.— A remarkable  Mount  and  Stone. — Defeription  of 
Hoolaiva. — Account  of  Poulabo^  King  of  the  Friendly  IJlands. 
— Refpediful  Manner  in  which  he  is  treated  by  his  People, — ■ 

Departure 


CONTENTS. 


Departure  from  the  Hapaee  IJlands. — Some  Account  of  Ko^ 
too, — Return  of  the  Ships  to  Annamooka, — Poulaho  and 
Feenou  meet. — Arrival  at  Tongataboo.  256 

CHAP.  VII. 

Friendly  Reception  at  Fongatahoo. — Manner  of  difir ibuting  a 
baked  Hog  and  Kava  to  Poulaho' s Attendants. — The  Obfer- 
vatorjy  ^c.  ereSled. — The  Village  where  the  Chiefs  refide^. 
and  the  adjoining  Country.^  defcribed.  — Interviews  with 
Mareewagee,  and  Toobou^  and  the  King's  Son. — A grand 
Haiva^  or  Entertainment  of  Songs  and  Dances^  given  by 
Mareezvagee. — Exhibition  of  Fireworks  .—r Manner  of  Wrejl- 
ling  and  Boxing. — Dijiribution  of  the  Cattle. — Thefts  com- 
mitted by  the  Natives. — Poulaho^  and  the  other  Chiefs.^  con- 
fined on  that  Account. — Poulahd’s  Prefent^  and  Haiva.  278 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Some  of  the  Officers  plundered  by  the  Natives.  — A fijhing 
Party. — A Vifit  to  Poulaho. — A Fiatooka  defcribed. — Ob- 
fervations  on  the  Country  Entertainment  at  Poulaho' s Houfe. 
— His  Mourning  Ceremony. — Of  the  Kava  Plants  and  the 
Manner  of  preparing  the  Liquor.  — Account  of  Onevy^  a 
little  IJland. — One  of  the  Natives  zvounded  by  a Sentinel. — 
Meffirs.  King  and  Anderfon  vifit  the  King's  Brother. — Their 
Entertainment. — Another  Mourning  Ceremony. — Manner 
of  paffiuig  the  Night. — Remarks  on  the  Country  they  paffied 
through. — Preparatiotis  made  for  failing. — An  Eclipfe  of 
the  Sun^  imperfeSlly  obferved. — Mr.  Anderfon's  Account  of 
the  Ifiandy  and  its  Productions.  309 

CHAP. 

L „ 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  IX. 

A grand  Solemnity called  Natche,  in  Honour  of  the  King's 
Son,  performed.  — ^he  ProceJJions  and  other  Ceremonies, 
during  the  JirJi  Day,  defcribed. — P’he  Manner  of  pajjing  the 
Night  at  the  King's  Houfe. — Continuation  of  the  Solemnity, 
the  next  Day. — ConjeBures  about  the  Nature  of  it. — Depar- 
ture from  Tongataboo,  and  Arrival  at  Eooa. — Account  of 
that  IJland,  and  ‘TranfaSiions  there.  336 

CHAP.  X. 

Advantages  derived  from  vifiting  the  Friendly  IJlands. — Bejl 
Articles  for  Traffic. — Refrejhments  that  may  be  procured. — 
The  Number  of  the  IJlands,  and  their  Names. — Keppel's 
and  Bofcawen's  IJlands  belong  to  them. — Account  of  Vavaoo 
— of  Hamoa — of  Feejee. — Voyages  of  the  Natives  in  their 
Canoes. — Difficulty  of  procuring  exaB  Information. — Per- 
fons  of  the  Inhabitants  of  both  Sexes. — Their  Colour. — Dif- 
eafes. — Their  general  CharaSier. — Manner  of  wearing  their 
Hair — of  punBuring  their  Bodies. — Their  Clothing  and  Or- 
naments.— Perfonal  Cleanlinefs.  364 

CHAP.  XE 

Employments  of  the  Women  at  the  Friendly  IJlands. — Of  the 
Men. — Agriculture.— ConJlruBion  of  their  Houfes. — Their 
working  Tools. — Cordage,  and JJhing  Implements . — Mujical 
Injlruments.  — Weapons.  — Food,  and  Cookery.  — Amufe- 
ments. — Marriage. — Mourning  Ceremonies  for  the  Dead. — 
Their  Divinities. — Notions  about  the  Soul,  and  a future 

State. 


CONTENTS, 


State, — 'Their  Places  of  Worjhip. — Government. — Manner 
of  paying  Obeijance  to  the  King. — Account  of  the  Royal  Fa^ 
mily. — Remarks  on  their  Language^  and  a Specimen  of 
it. — Nautical  and  other  Obfervations.  390 


INTRO- 


INTRODUCTION. 


H E fpirit  of  difcovery,  which  had  long  animated  the 


X European  nations,  having,  after  its  arduous  and  fuc- 
cefsful  exertions,  during  the  fifteenth  and  fixteenth  cen- 
turies, gradually  fubfided,  and  for  a confiderable  time  lain 
dormant,  began  to  revive  in  Great  Britain  in  the  late 
reign  ; and  recovered  all  its  former  activity,  under  the 
cherifhing  influence,  and  munificent  encouragement,  of  his 
prefent  Majefty. 

Soon  after  his  acceffion  to  the  throne,  having  happily 
clofed  the  deftrudlive  operations  of  war,  he  turned  his 
thoughts  to  enterprizes  more  humane,  but  not  lefs  bril- 
liant, adapted  to  the  feafon  of  returning  peace.  While 
every  liberal  art,  and  ufeful  ftudy,  flouriflied  under  his 
patronage  at  home,  his  fuperintending  care  was  extended 
to  fuch  branches  of  knowledge,  as  required  diftant  exami- 

* Two  voyages  for  difcovering  a North  Weft  paflage,  through  Hudfon’s  Bay,  were 
then  performed ; one  under  the  command  of  Captain  Middleton,  in  his  Majefty’s  ftiips  the 
Furnace,  and  the  Difcovery  Pink,  in  1741,  and  1742.  The  other  under  the  direftion  of 
Captains  Smith  and  Moore,  in  the  ftiips  Dobbs  and  California,  fitted  out  by  fubfcription, 
in  1746,  and  1747. 

VoL.  I.  a nation 


n 


INTRODUCTION. 


nation  and  inquiry  ; and  his  fliips,  after  bringing  back  vic- 
tory and  conqueft  from  every  quarter  of  the  known  world, 
were  now  employed  in  opening  friendly  communications 
with  its  hitherto  unexplored  recefles. 

In  the  profecution  of  an  object  fo  worthy  of  the  Monarch 
of  a great  commercial  people,  one  voyage  followed  another 
in  clofe  fuccellion  ; and,  we  may  add,  in  regular  gradation. 
What  Byron  ''i-'  had  begun,  Wallis  t and  Carteret  J foon  im- 
proved. Their  fuccefs  gave  birth  to  a far  more  extenfive 
plan  of  difcovery,  carried  into  execution,  in  two  fubfequent 
voyages,  condudted  by  Cook  §.  And  that  nothing  might 
be  left  un attempted,  though  much  had  been  already  done, 
the  fame  Commander,  whofe  profeffional  fkill  could  only 
be  equalled  by  the  perfevering  diligence  with  which  he 
had  exerted  it,  in  the  courfe  of  his  former  refearches,  was 
called  upon,  once  more,  to  refume,  or  rather  to  complete, 
the  furvey  of  the  globe.  Accordingly,  another  voyage  was 
undertaken  in  1776 ; which,  though  laft  in  the  order  of 
time,  was  far  from  being  the  leaft  confiderable,  with  refpedt 
to  the  extent  and  importance  of  its  obje6ls ; yet,  ftill,  far 

* Captain,  now  Admiral,  Byron,  had,  under  his  command,  the  Dolphin  and  Tamer. 
He  failed  in  June  1764,  and  returned  in  May  1766- 

f Captain  Wallis  had,  under  his  command,  the  Dolphin  and  Swallow.  He  failed  in 
Auguft  1766,  and  returned,  with  the  Dolphin,  in  May  1768. 

% The  Swallow,  commanded  by  Captain  Carteret,  having  been  fcparated  from 
Wallis,  and,  by  keeping  a different  route,  having  made  different  difcoveries,  this  may 
be  confidered  as  a diftinft  voyage.  The  Swallow  returned  to  England  in  March 
1769. 

§ Captain  Cook,  in  the  Endeavour,  failed  in  Auguft  1768,  and  returned  in  July 
1771. 

In  his  fecond  voyage,  he  had  the  Refolution  and  Adventure  under  his  command. 
They  failed  from  England  in  July  1772,  and  returned  on  the  30th  of  July  1775. 


lefs 


INTRODUCTION. 

lefs  fortunate  than  any  of  the  former,  as  thofe  objedls  were 
not  accomplifhed,  but  at  the  expence  of  the  valuable  life  of 
its  Condudtor, 

When  plans,  calculated  to  be  of  general  utility,  are  car- 
ried into  execution  with  partial  views,  and  upon  interefted 
motives,  it  is  natural  to  attempt  to  confine,  within  fome 
narrow  circle,  the  advantages  which  might  have  been  de- 
rived to  the  world  at  large,  by  an  unreferved  difclofure  of 
all  that  had  been  efFe6ted.  And,  upon  this  principle,  it  has 
too  frequently  been  conlidered  as  found  policy,  perhaps,  in 
this  country,  as  well  as  amongft  fome  of  our  neighbours, 
to  affe(5l  to  draw  a veil  of  fecrecy  over  the  refult  of  enter- 
prizes  to  difcover  and  explore  unknown  quarters  of  the 
globe.  It  is  to  the  honour  of  the  prefent  reign,  that  more 
liberal  views  have  been  now  adopted.  Our  late  voyages, 
from  the  very  extenlive  objects  propofed  by  them,  could  not 
but  convey  ufeful  information  to  every  European  nation ; 
and,  indeed,  to  every  nation,  however  remote,  which  cul- 
tivates commerce,  and  is  acquainted  with  navigation  : and 
that  information  has  mold  laudably  been  afforded.  The 
fame  enlarged  and  benevolent  fpirit,  which  ordered  thefe 
feveral  expeditions  to  be  undertaken,  has  alfo  taken  care 
that  the  refult  of  their  various  difcoveries  fliould  be  au- 
thentically recorded.  And  the  tranfa6tions  of  the  five  firfl 
voyages  round  the  world  having,  in  due  time,  been  com- 
municated under  the  authority  of  his  Majefty’s  naval 
Minifter ; thofe  of  the  fixth,  which,  belides  revifiting  many 
of  the  former  difcoveries  in  the  Southern,  carried  its  opera- 

* The  account  of  the  four  firft  of  thefe  voyages,  compiled  by  Dr.  Hawkefworth,  from 
the  Journals  of  the  feveral  Commanders,  was  publiftied  in  1772,  in  Three  Volumes 
quarto  and  Captain  Cook’s  own  account  of  the  fifth,  in  1777,  in  Two  Volumes 
quarto, 


hi 


a 2 


tions 


IV 


INTRODUCTION, 


tions  into  untrodden  paths  in  the  Northern  hemifphere, 
are,  under  the  fame  fan6tion,  now  fubmitted  to  the  Public 
in  thefe  Volumes. 

One  great  plan  of  nautical  inveftigation  having  been 
purfued  throughout,  it  is  obvious,  that  the  feveral  voy- 
ages have  a clofe  connection,  and  that  an  exaCt  recollec- 
tion of  what  had  been  aimed  at,  and  effected,  in  thofe 
that  preceded,  will  throw  confiderable  light  on  our  pe- 
riod. With  a view,  therefore,  to  affifl  the  Reader  in  form- 
ing a juft  eftimate  of  the  additional  information  conveyed 
by  this  Publication,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  lay  before 
him  a fhort,  though  comprehenfive,  abftraCt  of  the  prin- 
cipal objects  that  had  been  previoufly  accomplifhed,  ar- 
ranged in  fuch  a manner,  as  may  ferve  to  unite,  into  one 
point  of  view,  the  various  articles  which  lie  fcattered 
through  the  voluminous  Journals  already  in  the  hands 
of  the  Public ; thofe  compiled  by  Dr.  Hawkefworth ; and 
that  which  was  written  by  Captain  Cook  himfelf.  By 
thus  fhewing  what  had  been  formerly  done,  how  much 
ftill  remained  for  fubfequent  examination,  will  be  more  ap- 
parent ; and  it  will  be  better  underftood  on  what  grounds, 
though  the  fhips  of  his  Majefty  had  already  circumnavi- 
gated the  world  five  different  times,  in  the  courfe  of 
about  ten  years,  another  voyage  fhould  ftill  be  thought 
expedient. 

There  will  be  a farther  ufe  in  giving  fuch  an  abftraCt  a 
place  in  this  Introduction.  The  plan  of  difcovery,  carried 
on  in  fo  many  fucceffive  expeditions,  being  now,  we  may 
take  upon  us  to  fay,  in  a great  meafure  completed ; by 
fumming  up  the  final  refult,  we  lliall  be  better  able  to  do 
juftice  to  the  benevolent  purpofes  it  was  defigned  to  anfwer ; 
and  a folid  foundation  will  be  laid,  on  which  we  may  build 

a fa- 


INTRODUCTION. 


V 


a fatisfacSlory  anfwer  to  a queftion,  fometimes  afked  by 
peevifli  refinement,  and  ignorant  malevolence,  What  bene- 
ficial confequences,  if  any,  have  followed,  or  are  likely  to 
follow,  to  the  difcoverers,  or  to  the  difcovered,  to  the  com- 
mon interefts  of  humanity,  or  to  the  increafe  of  ufeful 
knowledge,^  from  all  our  boafted  attempts  to  explore  the 
diftant  recefles  of  the  globe  ? 

The  general  objedf  of  the  feveral  voyages  round  the  world, 
undertaken  by  the  command  of  his  Majefty,  prior  to  that 
related  in  this  work,  was  to  fearch  for  unknown  trails  of 
land  that  might  exifl;  within  the  bofom  of  the  immenfe 
expanfe  of  ocean  that  occupies  the  whole  Southern  hemi- 
fphere. 

Within  that  fpace,  fo  few  refearches  had  been  made, 
before  our  time,  and  thofe  few  refearches  had  been  made 
fo  imperfectly,  that  the  refult  of  them,  as  communicated 
to  the  world  in  any  narration,  had  rather  ferved  to  create 
uncertainty,  than  to  convey  information;  to  deceive  the 
credulous,  rather  than  to  fatisfy  the  judicious  inquirer ; by 
blending  the  true  geography  of  above  half  the  fuperficies 
of  the  earth  with  an  endlefs  variety  of  plaufible  conjectures, 
fuggefted  by  ingenious  fpeculation ; of  idle  tales,  handed 
down  by  obfcure  tradition ; or  of  bold  fictions,  invented  by 
deliberate  falfehood. 

. It  would  have  been  very  unfortunate,  indeed,  if  five  dif- 
ferent circumnavigators  of  the  globe,  fome  of  them,  at 
leaft,  if  not  all,  in  tracks  little  known,  and  lefs  frequented,, 
had  produced  no  difcoveries,  to  reward  the  difficulties  and 
perils  unavoidably  encountered.  But  the  following  review 
will  furnifh  the  molt  fatisfaCtory  proofs,  that  his  Majefty’s 
inftruCtions  have  been  executed  with  ability  ; and  that  the 
repeated  vifits  of  his  fhips  to  the  Southern  hemifphere, 

have 


Vi 


INTRODUCTION. 


have  very  confiderably  added  to  our  Rock  of  geographical 
knowledge. 

I. 

The  South  Atlantic  Ocean  was  the  fir  ft  fcene  of  our  ope- 
rations. Falkland’s  Iflands  had  been  hitherto  barely  known 
to  exift ; but  their  true  pofition  and  extent,  and  every  cir- 
cumftance  which  could  render  their  exiftence  of  any  con- 
fequence,  remained  abfolutely  undecided,  till  Byron  vifited 
them  in  1764.  And  Captain  Macbride,  who  followed  him 
thither  two  years  after,  having  circumnavigated  their  coafts, 
and  taken  a complete  furvey,  a chart  of  Falkland’s  Iflands 
has  been  conftrudled,  with  fo  much  accuracy,  that  the  coafts 
of  Great  Britain,  itfelf,  are  not  more  authentically  laid  down, 
upon  our  maps. 

How  little  was  really  known  of  the  iflands  in  the  South 
Atlantic,  even  fo  late  as  the  time  of  Lord  Anfon,  we  have 
the  moft  remarkable  proofs,  in  the  Hiftory  of  his  voyage. 
Unavoidably  led  into  miftake,  by  the  imperfecft  materials 
then  in  the  poflelfion  of  the  world,  he  had  confidered  Pe- 
pys’s  Ifland,  and  Falkland  Ifles,  as  diftincft  places,  diftant 
from  each  other  about  five  degrees  of  latitude  Byron’s 
refearches  have  rectified  this  capital  error;  and  it  is  now 
decided,  beyond  all  contradidtion,  that  future  navigators 
will  mifpend  their  time^  if  they  look  for  Pepys^s  Ifland  in  lati- 
tude 47° ; it  being  now  certain^  that  Pepys^s  Ifland  is  no  other 
than  thefe  iflands  of  Falkland 

Befides  the  determination  of  this  confiderable  point,  other 


* See  Lord  Anfon’s  V oyage,  quarto  edition,  p*  9 1 . 

t Thefe  are  Captain  Cook’s  words,  Preface  to  his  Voyage^  p.  14. ; and  the  evidence, 
on  which  he  forms  this  judgment,  may  be  met  with  in  Hawkefworth’s  Journal  of  Byron’s 
Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  23,  24—51,  52,  53,  54. 


lands, 


INTRODUCTION. 


vii 


lands,  Iituated  in  the  South  Atlantic,  have  been  brought 
forward  into  view.  If  the  ille  of  Georgia  had  been  for- 
merly feen  by  La  Roche,  in  1675,  and  by  Mr.  Guyot,  in  the 
fliip  Lion,  in  1756,  which  feems  to  be  probable.  Captain 
Cook,  in  1775,  has  made  us  fully  acquainted  with  its  extent 
and  true  polition ; and,  in  the  fame  year,  he  added  to  the 
map  of  the  world  Sandwich  Land,  hitherto  not  known  to 
exift,  and  the  moft  Southern  difcovery  that  has  been  ever 
accompliflied  '‘b 

II. 

Though  the  Strait  of  Magalhaens  had  been  frequently 
vilited,  and  failed  through  by  fhips  of  different  nations, 
before  our  time ; a careful  examination  of  its  bays,  and 
harbours,  and  head-lands,  of  the  numerous  iflands  it  con- 
tains, and  of  the  coafts,  on  both  fides,  that  inclofe  it ; and 
an  exadt  account  of  the  tides,  and  currents,  and  foundings, 
throughout  its  whole  extent,  was  a talk,  which,  if  Sir 
John  Narborough,  and  others,  had  not  totally  omitted, 
they  cannot  be  faid  to  have  recorded  fo  fully,  as  to  pre- 
clude the  utility  of  future  inveftigation.  This  talk  has 
been  ably  and  effedfually  performed  by  Byron,  Wallis,  and 
Carteret ; whofe  tranfadtions  in  this  Strait,  and  the  chart  of 
it,  founded  on  their  obfervations  and  difcoveries,  are  a moll 
valuable  acceflion  to  geography. 

IIL 

If  the  correct  information,  thus  obtained,  about  every 
part  of  this  celebrated  Strait,  Ihould  deter  future  adven- 
turers from  involving  themfelves  in  the  difficulties  and 

* See  the  Chart  of  Difcoveries  in  the  South  Atlantic,  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii. 
p.  210. 


embarralfments 


INTRODUCTION. 


viii 


embarralTments  of  a labyrinth,  now  known  to  be  fo  intri- 
cate, and  the  unavoidable  fource  of  danger  and  delay,  we 
have  the  fatisfadfion  to  have  difcovered,  that  a fafer  and 
more  expeditious  entrance  into  the  Pacific  Ocean,  may  be 
reafonably  depended  upon.  The  paflage  round  Cape  Horn, 
has  been  repeatedly  tried,  both  from  the  Eaft  and  from  the 
Well,  and  ftript  of  its  terrors.  We  fhall,  for  the  future,  be 
lefs  difcouraged  by  the  labours  and  diftrelTes  experienced 
by  the  fquadrons  of  Lord  Anfon  and  Pizarro,  when  we  re- 
colle(Sl:,  that  they  were  obliged  to  attempt  the  navigation  of 
thofe  feas  at  an  unfavourable  feafon  of  the  year ; and  that 
there  was  nothing  very  formidable  met  with  there,  when 
they  were  traverfed  by  Captain  Cook. 

To  this  diftinguifhed  navigator  was  referved  the  honour 
of  being  the  firft,  who,  from  a feries  of  the  mofi:  fatisfadfory 
obfervations,  beginning  at  the  Weft  entrance  of  the  Strait 
of  Magalhaens,  and  carried  on,  with  unwearied  diligence, 
round  Tierra  del  Fuego,  through  the  Strait  of  Le  Maire,  has 
conftru6ted  a chart  of  the  Southern  extremity  of  America, 
from  which  it  will  appear,  how  much  former  navigators 
muft  have  been  at  a lofs  to  guide  themfelves,  and  what 
advantages  will  now  be  enjoyed  by  thofe  who  fliall  here- 
after fail  round  Cape  Horn. 


IV. 

As  the  voyages  of  difcovery,  undertaken  by  his  Majefty’s 
command,  have  facilitated  the  accefs  of  fliips  into  the  Pa- 
cific Ocean,  they  have  alfo  greatly  enlarged  our  knowledge 
of  its  contents. 

Though  the  immenfe  expanfe  ufually  diftinguiflied  by 
this  appellation,  had  been  navigated  by  Europeans  for  near 
two  centuries  and  a half  *■,  by  far  the  greater  part  of  it, 
* Magalhaens’s  Voyage  was  undertaken  in  1519. 


particularly 


INTRODUCTION. 


IX 


particularly  to  the  South  of  the  equator,  had  remained, 
during  all  this  time,  unexplored. 

The  great  aim  of  Magalhaens,  and  of  the  Spaniards  in 
general,  its  firft  navigators,  being  merely  to  arrive,  by  this 
paflage,  at  the  Moluccas,  and  the  other  Aliatic  Spice  Iflands, 
every  intermediate  part  of  the  ocean  that  did  not  lie  conti- 
guous to  their  Weftern  track,  which  was  on  the  North  fide 
of  the  equator,  of  courfe  efcaped  due  examination.  And  if 
Mendana  and  Quiros,  and  fome  namelefs  condudfors  of 
voyages  before  them  by  deviating  from  this  track,  and 
Ileering  Weftward  from  Callao,  within  the  Southern  tropic, 
were  fo  fortunate  as  to  meet  with  various  illands  there,  and 
fo  fanguine  as  to  conlider  thofe  iflands  as  marks  of  the  ex- 
iftence  of  a neighbouring  Southern  continent ; in  the  ex- 
ploring of  which  they  flattered  themfelves  they  fliould  rival 
the  fame  of  De  Gama  and  Columbus ; thefe  feeble  efforts 
never  led  to  any  effedtual  difclofure  of  the  fuppofed  hidden 
mine  of  a New  World.  On  the  contrary,  their  voyages  being 
condudted  without  a judicious  plan,  and  their  difcoveries 
being  left  imperfedl  without  immediate  fettlement,  or  fub- 
fequent  examination,  and  fcarcely  recorded  in  any  well- 
authenticated  or  accurate  narrations,  had  been  almoft  for- 
got ; or  were  fo  obfcurely  remembered,  as  only  to  ferve 
the  purpofe  of  producing  perplexing  debates  about  their 
fituation  and  extent;  if  not  to  fuggefl  doubts  about  their 
very  exiftence. 

It  feems,  indeed,  to  have  become  a very  early  object  of 
policy  in  the  Spanifh  councils,  to  difcontinue  and  to  dif- 
courage  any  farther  refearches  in  that  quarter.  Already 
matters  of  a larger  empire  on  the  continent  of  America 

* See  the  particulars  of  their  difcoveries  in  Mr.  Dalrymple’s  valuable  Colledtion  of 
Voyages  in  the  South  Pacific  Ocean. 

VOL.  I. 


b 


than 


X 


INTRODUCTION. 


than  they  could  conveniently  govern,  and  of  richer  mines 
of  the  precious  metals  on  that  continent  than  they  could 
convert  into  ufe,  neither  avarice  nor  ambition  furniflied 
reafons  for  aiming  at  a frefli  acceflion  of  dominions.  And 
thus,  though  fettled  all  along  the  fhores  of  this  Ocean,  in  a 
iituation  fo  commodious  for  profecutingdifcoveries  through- 
out its  wide  extent,  the  Spaniards  remained  fatisfied  with  a 
coafting  intercourfe  between  their  own  ports ; never  ftretch- 
ing  acrofs  the  vaft  gulph  that  feparates  that  part  of  America 
from  Alia,  but  in  an  unvarying  line  of  navigation ; per- 
haps in  a lingle  annual  fliip,  between  Acapulco  and  Ma- 
nilla. 

The  tracks  of  other  European  navigators  of  the  South 
Pacific  Ocean,  were,  in  a great  meafure,  regulated  by  thofe 
of  the  Spaniards  ; and  confequently  limited  within  the  fame 
narrow  bounds.  With  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  two  in- 
ftances  only,  thofe  of  Le  Maire  and  Roggewein,  no  fhips  of 
another  nation  had  entered  this  fea,  through  the  Strait  of 
Magalhaens,  or  round  Cape  Horn,  but  for  the  purpofes  of 
trade  with  the  Spaniards,  or  of  hoftility  againfl:  them : pur- 
pofes which  could  not  be  anfwered,  without  precluding 
any  probable  chance  of  adding  much  to  our  ftock  of  dif- 
covery.  For  it  was  obviOully  incumbent  on  all  fuch  ad- 
venturers, to  confine  their  cruifes  within  a moderate  diftance 
of  the  Spanilh  fettlements ; in  the  vicinity  of  which  alone 
they  could  hope  to  exercife  their  commerce,  or  to  exe- 
cute their  predatory  and  military  operations.  Accordingly, 
foon  after  emerging  from  the  Strait,  or  completing  the 
circuit  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  they  began  to  hold  a Northerly 
courfe,  to  the  uninhabited  ifiand  of  Juan  Fernandez,  their 
ufual  fpot  of  rendezvous  and  refrefhment.  And  after 
ranging  along  the  continent  of  America,  from  Chili  to 

California, 


INTRODUCTION. 

California,  they  either  reverfed  their  courfe  back  to  the 
Atlantic ; or,  if  they  ventured  to  extend  their  voyage,  by 
ftretching  over  to  Alia,  they  never  thought  of  trying  expe- 
riments in  the  unfrequented  and  unexplored  parts  of  the 
Ocean ; but  chofe  the  beaten  path  (if  the  expreffion  may 
be  ufed),  within  the  limits  of  which  it  was  likely  that  they 
might  meet  with  a Philippine  galleon,  to  make  their  voyage 
profitable  to  themfelves  ; but  could  have  little  profpe(St, 
if  they  had  been  defirous,  of  making  it  ufeful  to  the  public, 
by  gaining  any  acceflion  of  new  land  to  the  Map  of  the 
World. 

By  the  natural  operation  of  thefe  caufes,  it  could  not  but 
happen,  that  little  progrefs  fliould  be  made  toward  obtain- 
ing a full  and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  South  Pacific 
Ocean.  Something,  however,  had  been  attempted  by  the 
induftrious,  and  once  enterprifing  Dutch ; to  whom  we  are 
indebted  for  three  voyages,  undertaken  for  the  purpofes  of 
difcovery  ; and  whofe  refearches,  in  the  Southern  latitudes 
of  this  Ocean,  are  much  better  afcertained  than  are  thofe  of 
the  earlier  Spanifli  navigators  above  mentioned. 

Le  Maire  and  Schouten,  in  i6i6,  and  Roggewein,  in  1722, 
wifely  judging,  that  nothing  new  could  be  gained  by  ad- 
hering to  the  ufual  paflage  on  the  North  fide  of  the  line, 
traverfed  this  Ocean  from  Cape  Horn  to  the  Eafi:  Indies, 
crofiing  the  South  tropic ; a fpace  which  had  been  fo  fel- 
dom,  and  fo  ineffectually  vifited ; though  popular  belief, 
fortified  by  philofophical  fpeculation,  expeCted  there  to 
reap  the  richeft  harveft  of  difcovery. 

Tafman,  in  1642,  in  his  extenfive  circuit  from  Batavia, 
through  the  South  Indian  Ocean,  entered  the  South  Pacific, 
at  its  greateft  diltance  from  the  American  fide,  where  it 
never  had  been  examined  before.  And  his  range,  continued 

b 2 from 


xi 


INTRODUCTION. 


from  a high  Southern  latitude,  Northward  to  New  Guinea, 
and  the  illands  to  the  Eaft  of  it  near  the  equator,  produced 
intermediate  difcoveries,  that  have  rendered  his  voyage  me- 
morable in  the  annals  of  navigation. 

But  Rill,  upon  the  whole,  what  was  effected  in  thefe 
three  expeditions,  ferved  only  to  fliew  how  large  a field 
was  referved  for  future  and  more  perfevering  examination. 
Their  refults  had,  indeed,  enabled  geographers  to  diver- 
fify  the  vacant  uniformity  of  former  charts  of  this  Ocean, 
by  the  infertion  of  fome  new  illands.  But  the  number,  and 
the  extent  of  thefe  infertions  were  fo  inconfiderable,  that 
they  may  be  faid  to  appear 

Rari,  nantes  in  gurgite  vafto. 

And,  if  the  difcoveries  were  few,  thofe  few  were  made 
very  imperfectly.  Some  coafts  were  approached,  but  not 
landed  upon ; and  pafled  without  waiting  to  examine  their 
extent,  and  connection  with  thofe  that  might  exift  at  no 
great  diltance.  If  others  were  landed  upon,  the  vifits  were, 
in  general,  fo  tranfient,  that  it  was  fcarcely  poflible  to  build 
upon  a foundation,  fo  weakly  laid,  any  information  that 
could  even  gratify  idle  curiofity ; much  lefs  fatisfy  philofo- 
phical  inquiry,  or  contribute  greatly  to  the  fafety,  or  to  the 
fuccefs  of  future  navigation. 

Let  us,  however,  do  juftice  to  thefe  beginnings  of  dif- 
covery.  To  the  Dutch  we  mull,  at  leaft,  afcribe  the  merit 
of  being  our  harbingers,  though  we  afterward  went  beyond 
them  in  the  road  they  had  firll  ventured  to  tread.  And  with 
what  fuccefs  his  Majefiy’s  lliips  have,  in  their  repeated 
voyages,  penetrated  into  the  obfcurell  recefles  of  the  South 
Pacific  Ocean,  will  appear  from  the  following  enumeration 
of  their  various  and  very  extenfive  operations,  which  have 

drawn 


INTRODUCTION, 

clra\vn  up  the  veil  that  had  hitherto  been  thrown  over  the 
geography  of  fo  great  a proportion  of  the  globe. 

1.  The  feveral  lands,  of  which  any  account  had  been 
given,  as  feen  by  any  of  the  preceding  navigators,  Spanifli 
or  Dutch,  have  been  carefully  looked  for  ; and  mod:  of 
them  (at  lead;  fuch  as  feemed  to  be  of  any  confequence) 
found  out  and  vidted ; and  not  vidted  in  a curfory  manner, 
but  every  means  ufed  to  corredf  former  midiakes,  and  to 
fupply  former  dedciencies,  by  making  accurate  inquiries 
adiore,  and  taking  fkilful  furveys  of  their  coadis,  by  failing 
round  them.  Who  has  not  heard,  or  read,  of  the  boafted 
"Sierra  Aujiralia  del  Efpiritu  Santo  of  Quiros  ? But  its  bold 
pretendons  to  be  a part  of  a Southern  continent,  could  not 
Rand  Captain  Cook’s  examination,  who  failed  round  it,  and 
adigned  it  its  true  podtion  and  moderate  bounds,  in  the 
Archipelago  of  the  New  Hebrides 

2.  Beddes  perfedting  many  of  the  difcoveries  of  their 
predeceflbrs,  our  late  navigators  have  enriched  geographi- 
cal knowledge  with  a long  catalogue  of  their  own.  The 
Pacidc  Ocean,  wdthin  the  South  tropic,  repeatedly  tra- 
verfed,  in  every  dire61;ion,  was  found  to  fwarm  with  a 
feemingly  endlefs  profudon  of  habitable  fpots  of  land. 
Idands  fcattered  through  the  amazing  fpace  of  near  four- 
fcore  degrees  of  longitude,  feparated  at  various  didances, 
or  grouped  in  numerous  cluders,  have,  at  their  approach, 
as  it  were,  darted  into  exidence ; and  fuch  ample  accounts 
have  been  brought  home  concerning  them  and  their  inha- 
bitants, as  may  ferve  every  ufeful  purpofe  of  inquiry ; and, 


* Bougainville,  in  1768,  did  bo  more  than  difcover  that  the  land  here  was  not  con- 
nefted,  but  compofed  of  iflands.  Captain  Cook,  in  1774,  explored  the  whole  group. 
See  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  96. 


xiii 


to 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  ufe  Captain  Cook’s  words,  who  bore  fo  confiderable  a 
iliare  in  thofe  difcoveries,  have  left  little  more  to  be  done  in 
that  part  *•. 

3.  Byron,  Wallis,  and  Carteret,  bad  each  of  them  con- 
tributed toward  increafing  our  knowledge  of  the  illande. 
that  exift  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  within  the  limits  of  the 
Southern  tropic;  l)ut  how  far  that  ocean  reached  to  the 
Weft,  what  lands  bounded  it  on  that  fide,  and  the  connec- 
tion of  thofe  lands  with  the  difcoveries  of  former  naviga- 
tors, was  ftill  the  reproach  of  geographers,  and  remained 
abfolutely  unknown,  till  Captain  Cook,  during  his  firft 
voyage  in  1770  t,  brought  back  the  moft  fatisfadtory  deci- 
fion  of  this  important  queftion.  With  a wonderful  per- 
feverance,  and  confummate  fkill,  amidft  an  uncommon 
combination  of  perplexities  and  dangers,  he  traced  this 
coaft  near  two  thoufand  miles,  from  the  38°  of  South  lati- 
tude, crofs  the  tropic,  to  its  Northern  extremity,  within 
10°  I of  the  equinodtial,  where  it  was  found  to  join  the  lands 
already  explored  by  the  Dutch,  in  feveral  voyages  from 
their  Afiatic  fettlements,  and  to  which  they  have  given  the 
name  of  New  Holland.  Thofe  difcoveries  made  in  the  laft 
century,  before  Tafman’s  voyage,  had  traced  the  North 
and  the  Weft  coafts  of  this  land ; and  Captain  Cook,  by 
his  extenfive  operations  on  its  Eaft  fide,  left  little  to  be 
done  toward  completing  the  full  circuit  of  it.  Between 
Cape  Hicks,  in  latitude  38°,  where  his  examination  of  this 
coaft  began,  and  that  part  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land,  from 
whence  Tafman  took  his  departure,  was  not  above  fifty- 
five  leagues.  It  was  highly  probable,  therefore,  that  they 
were  connedted;  though  Captain  Cook  cautioufly  fays,  that 
he  could  not  determine  whether  his  New  South  Wales,  that  is, 

* Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  239,  f See  Hawkefworth’s  Colledtion,  Vol.  ili. 

the 


INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


the  Eaft  coaft  of  New  Holland,  joins'to  Fan  Diemen's  Land, 
or  no  But  what  was  thus  left  undetermined  by  the  ope- 
rations of  his  firft  voyage,  was,  in  the  courfe  of  his  fecond, 
foon  cleared  up ; Captain  Furheaux,  in  the  Adventure, 
during  his  feparation  from  the  Refolution  (a  fortunate  fe- 
paration  as  it  thus  turned  out)  in  1773,  having  explored 
Van  Diemen’s  Land,  from  its  Southern  point,  along  the 
Eaft  coaft,  far  beyond  Tafman’s  ftation,  and  on  to  the  lati- 
tude 38'',  where  Captain  Cook’s  examination  of  it  in  1770 
had  commenced  t. 

It  is  no  longer,  therefore,  a doubt,  that  we  have  now  a 
full  knowledge  of  the  whole  circumference  of  this  vaft 
body  of  land,  this  fifth  part  of  the  world  (if  I may  fo 
fpeak),  which  our  late  voyages  have  difcovered  to  be  of  fo 
amazing  a magnitude,  that,  ' to  ufe  Captain  Cook’s  words, 
it  is  of  a larger  extent  than  any  other  country  in  the  known 
worlds  that  does  not  bear  the  name  of  a continent 

4.  Tafman  having  entered  the  Pacific  Ocean,  after  leav- 
ing Van  Diemen’s  Land,  had  fallen  in  with  a coaft  to 
which  he  gave  the  name  of  New  Zealand.  The  extent  of 
this  coaft,  and  its  pofition  in  any  direction  but  a part  of  its 
Weft  fide,  which  he  failed  along  in  his  courfe  Northward, 
being  left  abfolutely  unknown,  it  had  been  a favourite 
opinion  amongft  geographers,  fince  his  time,  that  New 
Zealand  was  a part  of  a Southern  continent,  running  North 
and  South,  from  the  33°  to  the  64°  of  South  latitude,  and 
its  Northern  coaft  ftretching  crofs  the  South  Pacific  to  an 
immenfe  diftance,  where  its  Eaftern  boundary  had  been 
feen  by  Juan  Fernandez,  half  a century  before.  Captain 

* Hawkefworth,  Vol.  iii.  p.  483. 

t Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  114. 

X Hawkefworth,  Vol.  iii.  p.  622. 

Cook’s 


INTRODUCTION. 


iLvi 


Cook’s  voyage  in  the  Endeavour,  has  totally  deftroyed  this 
fuppolition.  Though  Tafman  muft  Rill  have  the  credit 
of  having  firft  feen  New  Zealand;  to  Captain  Cook  folely 
belongs  that  of  having  really  explored  it.  He  fpent  near 
fix  months  upon  its  coafts  in  1769  and  1770  circumna- 
vigated it  completely,  and  afcertained  its  extent  and  divi- 
lion  into  two  illands  t.  Repeated  vifits  lince  that,  have 
perfected  this  important  difcovery,  which  though  now 
known  to  be  no  part  of  a Southern  continent,  will,  proba- 
bly, in  all  future  charts  of  the  world,  be  diftinguiflied  as 
the  largell:  illands  that  exift  in  that  part  of  the  Southern 
hemifphere. 

5.  Whether  New  Holland  did  or  did  not  join  to  New 
Guinea,  was  a queftion  involved  in  much  doubt  and  un- 
certainty, before  Captain  Cook’s  failing  between  them, 
through  Endeavour  Strait,  decided  it.  We  will  not  heli- 
tate  to  call  this  an  important  acquilition  to  geography.  For 
though  the  great  fagacity  and  extenfive  reading  of  Mr. 
Dalrymple,  had  difcovered  fome  traces  of  fuch  a palfage 
having  been  found  before  yet  thefe  traces  were  fo  ob- 
fcure,  and  fo  little  known  in  the  prefent  age,  that  they  had 
not  generally  regulated  the  conftrudtion  of  our  charts  ; the 
Prelident  de  Brolfes  §,  who  wrote  in  1756,  and  was  well 
verfed  in  geographical  refearches,  had  not  been  able  to 

* From  0£tober  6,  1769,  to  March  31,  1770. 

•}-  Its  Southern  extremity  nearly  in  latitude  47°,  and  its  Northern  in  34°  See  Cap- 
tain Cook’s  chart,  in  Hawkefworth,  Vol.  ii.  p.  281. 

t See  the  track  of  Torre,  in  one  of  Quiros’s  fhips,  in  1606,  between  New  Holland 
and  New  Guinea,  upon  Mr.  Dalrymple’s  Chart  of  Difcoveries  in  the  South  Pacific 
Ocean,  before  1764. 

§ M.  de  Brofles  fays  of  New  Guinea ; “ C’eft  une  longue  ifle,  ou  prefqu’  ifle,  fi  elle 
“ touche  a la  Nouvelle  Hollande.”  Navigations  aux  Torres  Aujirales^  Tom.  i.  pi  434. 

fatisfy 


INTRODUCTION. 


xvii 


fatisfy  himfelf  about  them ; and  Monf.  de  Bougainville,  in 
1768,  who  had  ventured  to  fall  in  with  the  South  coaft  of 
New  Guinea,  near  ninety  leagues  to  the  Weftward  of  its 
South  Eaft  point,  chofe  rather  to  work  thofe  ninety  leagues 
directly  to  windward,  at  a time  when  his  people  were  in 
fuch  diftrefs  for  provilions  as  to  eat  the  feal-Ikins  from  off 
the  yards  and  rigging,  than  to  run  the  rifk  of  finding  a paf- 
fage,  of  the  exiftence  of  which  he  entertained  the  ftrongefi; 
doubts,  by  perfevering  in  his  Wellerly  courfe  Captain 
Cook  therefore  in  this  part  of  his  voyage  (though  he  mo- 
deftly  difclaims  all  merit  t),  has  eftabliflied,  beyond  future 
controverfy,  a fa61:  of  eflential  fervice  to  navigation,  by 
opening  if  not  a new,  at  lead:  an  unfrequented  and  for- 
gotten communication  between  the  South  Pacific  and  In- 
dian Oceans. 

6.  One  more  difcovery,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to 
Captain  Carteret,  as  fimilar  in  fome  degree  to  that  lafi: 
mentioned,  may  properly  fucceed  it,  in  this  enumeration. 
Dampier,  in  failing  round  what  was  fuppofed  to  be  part  of 
the  coaft  of  New  Guinea,  difcovered  it  to  belong  to  a fepa- 
rate  ifland,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  New  Britain. 
But  that  the  land  which  he  named  New  Britain,  fhould  be 
fub-divided  again  into  two  feparate  large  iflands,  with  many 
fmaller  intervening,  is  a point  of  geographical  information, 
which,  if  ever  traced  by  any  of  the  earlieft:  navigators  of 
the  South  Pacific,  had  not  been  handed  down  to  the  prefent 
age : and  its  having  been  afcertained  by  Captain  Carteret, 

* “ Le  trifle  etat  ou  nous  etions  reduits,  ne  nous  permettoit  de  chercher  en  faifant 
“ route  a I’ouefl,  un  paflage  au  fud  de  la  Nouvelle  Guinee,  qui  nous  frayat  par  le  Golfe 
“ de  la  Carpenterie  une  route  nouvelle  et  courte  aux  iles  Moluques.  Rien  n'etoit  a la 
“ verite  plus  problematique  que  Vexijience  de  ce  pajfage,”  V oyage  autour  du  Monde,  p.  259, 

t Hawkeflvorth,  Vol.  iii.  p.  660. 

VoL.  I. 


deferves 


xviii 


INTRODUCTION. 

deferves  to  be  mentioned  as  a difcovery,  in  the  ftri6left  fenfe 
of  the  word ; a difcovery  of  the  utmoft  importance  to  na- 
vigation. St.  George’s  Channel,  through  which  his  fliip 
found  a way,  between  New  Britain  and  New  Ireland,  from 
the  Pacific  into  the  Indian  Ocean,  to  ufe  the  Captain’s  own 
words  “ is  a much  better  and  fhorter  paffage,  whether 
from  the  Eaftward  or  Weftward,  than  round  all  the  illands 
and  lands  to  the  Northward  t.” 


V. 

The  voyages  of  Byron,  Wallis,  and  Carteret  were  prin- 
cipally confined  to  a favourite  object  of  difcovery  in  the 
South  Atlantic ; and  though  acceflions  to  geography  were 
procured  by  them  in  the  South  Pacific,  they  could  do  but 
little  toward  giving  the  world  a complete  view  of  the  con- 
tents of  that  immenfe  expanfe  of  ocean,  through  which  they 
only  held  a dire(5l  track,  on  their  way  homeward  by  the 
Eaft-Indies.  Cook,  indeed,  who  was  appointed  to  the  con- 
duct of  the  fucceeding  voyage,  had  a more  accurate  exa- 
mination of  the  South  Pacific  intrufled  to  him.  But  as  the 
improvement  of  aftronomy  went  hand  in  hand,  in  his  in- 
ftruclions,  with  that  of  geography,  the  Captain’s  folicitude 
to  arrive  at  Otaheite  time  enough  to  obferve  the  tranfit  of 
Venus,  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  deviate  from  his  diredt 
track,  in  fearch  of  unknown  lands  that  might  lie  to  the 


* Hawkefworth,  Vol.  i.  p.  563. 

t The  pofition  of  the  Solomon  Iflands,  Mendana’s  celebrated  difcovery,  will  no  longer 
remain  a matter  in  debate  amongft  geographers,  Mr.  Dalrymple  having,  on  the  moft  fa- 
tisfa£lory  evidence,  proved,  that  they  are  the  clufter  of  iflands  which  comprizes  what  has 
fmce  been  called  New  Britain,  New  Ireland,  &c.  The  great  light  thrown  on  that  clufter 
by  Captain  Carteret’s  difcovery,  is  a ftrong  confirmation  of  this.  See  Mr.  Dalrymple’s 
Collection  of  Voyages,  Vol.  i.  p.  16 — 21. 


South 


INTRODUCTION. 

South  Eaft  of  that  ill  and.  By  this  unavoidable  attention  to 
his  duty,  a very  conliderable  part  of  the  South  Pacific,  and 
that  part  where  the  richefi;  mine  of  difcovery  was  fuppofed 
to  exift,  remained  unvifited  and  unexplored,  during  that 
voyage  in  the  Endeavour.  To  remedy  this,  and  to  clear 
up  a point,  which,  though  many  of  the  learned  were  con- 
fident of,  upon  principles  of  fpeculative  reafoning,  and 
many  of  the  unlearned  admitted,  upon  what  they  thought 
to  be  credible  teftimony,  was  ftill  held  to  be  very  pro- 
blematical, if  not  abfolutely  groundlefs,  by  others  who 
were  lefs  fanguine  or  more  incredulous ; his  Majefty,  al- 
ways ready  to  forward  every  inquiry  that  can  add  to  the 
ftock  of  interefiing  knowledge  in  every  branch,  ordered 
another  expedition  to  be  undertaken.  The  fignal  fervices 
performed  by  Captain  Cook,  during  his  firfi:  voyage,  of 
which  we  have  given  the  outlines,  marked  him  as  the  fit- 
teft  perfon  to  finifh  an  examination  which  he  had  already 
fo  fkilfully  executed  in  part.  Accordingly,  he  was  fent  out 
in  1772,  with  two  fhips,  the  Relblution  and  Adventure, 
upon  the  rnofi:  enlarged  plan  of  difcovery  known  in  the 
annals  of  navigation.  For  he  was  inftruiled  not  only  to 
circumnavigate  the  globe,  but  to  circumnavigate  it  in  high 
Southern  latitudes,  making  fuch  traverfes,  from  time  to 
time,  into  every  corner  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  not  before  ex- 
amined, as  might  finally  and  effectually  refolve  the  much 
agitated  queftion  about  the  exiftence  of  a Southern  conti- 
nent, in  any  part  of  the  Southern  hemifphere  acceflible 
by  navigation. 

The  ample  acceffions  to  geography,  by  the  difcovery  of 
many  iflands  within  the  Tropic  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  in  the 
courfe  of  this  voyage,  which  was  carried  on,  with  fingular 
perfeverance,  between  three  and  four  years,  have  been  al- 

c 2 ready 


kix 


XX 


INTRODUCTION. 


ready  Hated  to  the  reader.  But  the  general  fearch  now 
made,  throughout  the  whole  Southern  hemifphere,  as  be- 
ing the  principal  objedl  in  view,  hath  been  referved  for 
this  feparate  article.  Here,  indeed,  we  are  not  to  take 
notice  of  lands  that  have  been  difcovered,  but  of  feas  fail- 
ed through,  where  lands  had  been  fuppofed  to  exift.  In 
tracing  the  route  of  theRefolution  and  Adventure,  through- 
out the  South  Atlantic,  the  South  Indian,  and  the  South 
Pacific  Oceans  that  environ  the  globe,  and  combining  it 
with  the  route  of  the  Endeavour,  we  receive  what  may  be 
called  ocular  demonftration,  that  Captain  Cook,  in  his  per- 
fevering  refearches,  failed  over  many  an  extenfive  conti- 
nent, which,  though  fuppofed  to  have  been  feen  by  for- 
mer navigators,  at  the  approach  of  his  fliips,  funk  into  the 
bofom  of  the  ocean,  and,  like  the  bafelejs  fabric  of  a vijion, 
left  not  a rack  behind  It  has  been  urged,  that  the  exift- 

ence 

* It  muft  be  obferved,  however,  that  Monfieur  le  Monier,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the 
French  Academy  of  Sciences  for  1776,  pleads  for  the  exiftence  of  Cape  Circumcifion, 
feen  by  Bouvet  in  1738,  which  our  Englilh  navigator  fought  for  in  vain,  and  fuppofes  to 
have  been  only  an  ifland  of  ice.  Mr.  Wales,  in  a paper  read  before  the  Royal  Society, 
very  forcibly  replied  to  M.  le  Monier’s  obje£l:ions  ; and  the  attack  having  been  repeated, 
he  has  drawn  up  a more  extended  defence  of  this  part  of  Captain  Cook’s  Journal,  which 
he  hath  very  obligingly  communicated,  and  is  here  inferred. 

Argwnents^  tending  to  prove  that  Captain  Cook  fought  for  Cape  Circumcifion  under  the  proper 

Meridian  ; and  that  the  Objections  which  have  been  made  to  his  Conduct.^  in  this  refpeCt,  are 

not  well  founded. 

- • , 

In  the  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  for  1776,  printed  in  1779, 
M.  Le  Monier  has  made  fome  remarks,  with  a defign  to  fhew  that  Captain  Cook  fought 
the  land,  ufually  called  Cape  Circumcifion,  in  a wrong  place  ; and  that,  inftead  of  looking 
for  it  under  the  meridian  of  9“  § or  10°  of  Eaft  longitude,  he  ought  to  have  looked  for  it 
under  a meridian  which  is  only  3°,  or  3°  \ to  the  Eaftward  of  the  meridian  of  Green- 
wich ; and  confequently  that  this  land  may  e?cift,  notwithftanding  all  that  has  yet  been 

done 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXI 


ence  of  a Southern  continent  is  neceffary  to  preferve  an 
equilibrium  between  the  two  hemifpheres.  But  however 

plaufible 

done  to  find  it.  M.  Le  Monier  has  alfo  two  additional  Memoirs  on  the  fame  fubjedl,  in 
the  volume  for  1779,  occafioned,  as  it  appears,  by  fome  objedlions  which  have  been  made 
to  his  former  Memoir  before  the  Academy.  For  fome  reafon  or  other,  the  Academy  has 
not  thought  proper  to  print  the  objedtions  which  have  been  made  to  M.  Le  Monier’s  hy- 
pothefis  ; nor  has  he  been  particular  enough  in  his  two  Memoirs,  which  reply  to  them, 
to  enable  me  to  fay  of  what  importance  the  objedtions  are.  I can  only  gather,  that  they 
contain  fome  exceptions  to  the  quantity  by  which  M.  Le  Monier  aflerts  the  variation  al- 
ters in  10°  of  longitude,  under  the  parallel  of  54°  South  j and  which,  I conceive,  has  little 
to  do  in  the  difpute. 

Whether  the  land,  ufually  called  Cape  Circumcifion,  exifts  or  not,  is  a point  of  fmall 
importance  to  geography  ; as  the  moft  ftrenuous  aflerters  of  its  exiftence  muft  allow  it  to 
be  a very  inconfiderable  ifland,  and  of  no  ufe.  This,  therefore,  is  not,  in  itfelf,  a matter 
worthy  of  difpute  : but,  in  aflerting  this,  M.  Le  Monier  has,  and  I am  forry  to  obferve  it, 
with  fome  afperity  too,  particularly  in  his  fecond  Memoir,  endeavoured  to  cenfure  the 
judgment  and  condudt  of  Captain  Cook,  whofe  memory  I have  every  reafon  to  revere,  as 
well  as  the  judgment  of  thofe  who  were  with  him ; and  on  this  account,  I cannot  help 
feeling  myfelf  called  on  to  explain  the  motives  which  induced  Captain  Cook  to  place  no  de- 
pendence on  the  arguments,  now  adduced  by  M,  Le  Monier^  in  fupport  of  his  fuppofition ; 
and  which,  M.  Le  Monier  muft  know,  were  not  unattended  to,  at  that  time,  from  what 
the  Captain  has  faid,  p.  236.  Vol.  II.  of  his  Account  of  the  Voyage.  And  it  may  be 
proper  to  obferve  here,  that  what  fell  from  Captain  Cook^  on  this  fubjedt,  was  to  ftiew  that 
this  circumftance  was  then  attended  to,  and  not  to  throw  blame  on  M.  Bouvet^  for  whofe 
memory  and  abilities  Captain  Cook  entertained  great  refpedi ; nor  is  it  incompatible  with 
the  utmoft  refpedi,  for  a man  to  have  a favourable  opinion  of  his  own  labours  ; or  to  en- 
deavour to  Ihew  w’hy  he  thinks  the  difagreement  between  them  and  thofe  of  another  per- 
fon,  when  there  is  one,  does  not  arife  from  an  error  committed  by  himfelf.  There  could, 
therefore,  be  no  occafion  for  M,  Le  Monier  to  exprefs  himfelf  fo  harlhly,  as  he  has 
done,  in  feveral  parts  of  his  fecond  Memoir. 

The  fubftance  of  M.  Le  Monier' argument  is  this.  In  1739,  when  M.  Bouvet’s  dif- 
cov'ery  is  fuppofed  to  have  been  made,  the  methods  for  determining  the  longitude  of  a 
fliip  at  fea  were  very  defedlive  ; and,  of  courfe,  the  longitude  of  any  land  which  happened 
accidentally  to  be  feen  by  one,  was  equally  uncertain.  On  a prefumption  that  this  was  the 
cafe  with  refpedl  to  Cape  Circumcifion,  M.  Le  Monier  enquires  into  the  quantity  of  the 
variation  of  the  magnetic  needle,  obferved  by  M.  Bouvet  at  that  place ; and  alfo  into  ob- 
£,.yations  of  the  fame  kind,  made  at  other  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  it,  about  the 

fame 


"xxii 


INTRODUCTION. 

plaulible  this  theory  may  feem,  at  firft  light,  experience 
has  abundantly  dete(fted  its  fallacy.  In  confequence  of 

Captain 

fame  time,  as  well  as  both  before  and  fmce.  And,  by  comparing  thefe  obfervations  toge- 
ther, he  concludes,  that  at  the  time  when  Captain  Cook  was  in  thefe  feas,  tlie  variation 
of  the  needle  at  Cape  Circumcifion  muft  have  been  io°  Wefterly : whereas,  in  the  moft 
Wefterly  point  of  Captain  Cook’s  track,  where  he  was  fufficiently  near  the  parallel  of 
54°  South,  to  have  feen  land  fituated  in  it,  the  variation  was  13°  f Wefterly.  This  dif- 
ference of  3°  f , in  the  variation,  anfwers  to  about  7°  of  longitude,  in  this  part  of  the  pa- 
rallel of  54°  South  ; and  by  fo  much  did  Captain  Cook  fall  in  with  this  parallel  to  the 
Ealbward  of  what  he  ought  to  have  done  to  fee  the  land  in  queftion.  “ Hence  (M.  Le 
“ Monier  infers),  that  it  is  not  furprizing  the  Britifti  navigator  fliould  not  find  Cape 
“ Circumcifion  under  a meridian  which  is  28°  | to  the  Eaftward  of  Ferro,  when  it  is 
“ really  fituated  under  a meridian  which  is  but  21°  f to  the  Eaftward  of  it.” 

In  replying  to  thefe  allegations,  I fhall,  firft,  ftiew,  that,  granting  the  dependence  which 
M,  Le  Monier  fuppofes  may  be  placed  on  obfervations  of  the  variation  made  at  fea,  he 
has  ftated  the  quantity  of  the  variation,  obferved  on  board  the  Refolution,  very  erro- 
neoufly. 

Secondly,  I fhall  prove,  beyond  contradiflion,  that  obfervations  of  the  variation,  made 
at  fea,  cannot  be  depended  on,  for  the  purpofes  to  which  M.  Le  Monier  has  applied 
them. 

And,  laftly,  that  no  material  error  had  crept  into  M.  Bouvefs  reckoning ; but  that  if 
any  error  did  exift,  it  muft  have  been  of  a contrary  nature  to  that  which  M.  Le  Monier 
fuppofes. 

That  M.  Le  Monier  has  not  given  altogether  a true  reprefentation  of  the  matter,  will 
appear  from  hence.  On  the  i6th  of  February,  at  noon*,  the  Refolution  was  in  latitude 
54°  3I1''  South,  which  is  fufficiently  near  the  parallel  of  54°  South,  to  fee  high  land,  the 
Northern  extremity  of  which  lies  to  the  Southward  of  that  parallel ; and  at  that  time  we 
were  in  6°  Eaft  of  Greenwich,  or  23°  \ Eaft  of  the  ifland  of  Ferro : that  is,  4°  \ lefs 
than  is  affigned  for  our  fituation  by  M.  Le  Monier.  On  the  evening  of  the  fame  day, 
the  (hip  being  in  latitude  54°  24^,  and  longitude  6°  30'',  or  24°  | Eaft  of  Ferro,  the 
variation  was  no  more  than  12°  7''  Weft,  which  alfo  is  near  a degree  and  half  lefs  than 
M.  Le  Monier  fays  it  was,  when  we  firft  arrived  in  a proper  parallel  for  feeing  Cape 
Circumcifion.  It  is  true,  the  next  morning,  in  latitude  54°  2 if''  South,  longitude 

8°  6'  Eaft, 


* I here  go  by  the  dates  in  “ The  Original  Allronomical  Obfervations,”  printed  by  or- 
der of  the  Board  of  Longitude;  which,  after  the  14th  of  February  1775,  differ  one  day 
from  Captain  Cook’s  dates. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxiii- 


Captain  Cook’s  voyage,  now  under  confideration,  we  have 
a thorough  knowledge  of  the  Rate  of  the  Southern  hemi- 

fphere, 

8°  6'  Eaft,  we  had  13®  42''  Weft  variation  ; but  this  was  after  we  had  run  more  than, 
two  degrees  within  fight  of  the  parallel  of  54°  South.  It  is,  moreover,  highly  pro- 
bable, that  both  thefe  variations  were  too  great  j for,  on  the  17th,  in  the  evening,  lati- 
tude 54°‘25''  South,  and  longitude  9°  20''  Eaft;  that  is,  i°|  more  to  the  Eaftward,  and 
after  we  had  run  on  the  parallel  we  were  then  on,  the  variation  was  no  more  than 
13°  16^  Weft.  It  is  alfo  worthy  of  remark,  that  on  the  14th,  in  the  evening,  latitude 
56°  14V  South,  and  longitude  4®  50'  Eaft,  which  is  but  i°  lO''  to  the  Weftward  of  the 
point,  where  the  Refolution  came  firft  into  a proper  fituation  to  fee  land,  fituated  in  the 
parallel  of  54°  South,  the  variation  obferved  was  no  more  than  6°  50'  Weft.  And  we 
may  further  add,  that  on  the  ift  of  March,  1774,  the  Adventure  had  no  more  than  I2°f 
Weft  variation,  though  ftie  was  then  confiderably  both  to  the  Northward  and  Eaftward 
of  our  fituation  on  the  17th  of  February  in  the  morning,  on  both  which  accounts  the  va- 
riation ought  to  have  been  greater,  inftead  of  a whole  degree  lefs.  From  all  thefe  cir- 
cumftances,  there  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  the  two  variations,  obferved  by  us  on  the 
1 6th  and  17  th  of  February,  were  too  great ; or  that  the  variation,  at  the  point  where  the 
Refolution  firft  came  fufficiently  near  the  parallel  of  54°  South,  to  fee  land,  the  Northern 
extremity  of  which  is  fituated  in  that  parallel,  could  not  be  more  than  1 1°  Weft,  inftead 
of  1 3°  I,  as  M.  Le  Monier  has  reprefented  it. 

Under  this  head  of  enquiry  I may  alfo  obferve,  that  although  the  Refolution  was  too 
much  to  the  Southward  of  the  parallel  of  54°  South,  when  fhe  crofted  the  meridian  which 
is  2i°i  to  the  Eaftward  of  Ferro  ; that  is,  3°  \ Eaft  of  Greenwich,  the  longitude  which 
M.  Le  Monier  affigns  for  Cape  Circumcifion,  to  fee  it,  if  it  had  been  in  that  fituation ; yet, 
her  confort,  the  Adventure,  was  for  feveral  degrees  on  each  fide  of  that  meridian ; and 
efpecially  when  fhe  had  10°  | of  Weft  variation,  full  as  near  to  the  parallel  of  54°  South, 
as  M.  Bouvet  was  to  the  land  when  he  faw  it  * : and  on  the  day  that  fhe  adlually  pafted 
that  meridian,  had  fine  clear  weather  f.  Hence,  therefore,  granting  M.  Le  Monier  his 
own  arguments,  which,  however,  I have  proved  to  be  erroneous  ; and  that  obfervations 
made  at  fea,  for  the  variation  of  the  compafs,  may  be  depended  on  for  the  purpofe  of  find- 
ing the  longitude,  it  is  utterly  impoffible  that  both  the  Refolution  and  Adventure  could 
have  pafted  Cape  Circumcifion  without  feeing  it.  But  I fhall  now  fhew,  that  thefe  ob- 
fervations are  liable  to  a much  greater  error  than  the  whole  quantity,  fo  rigoroufly  infilled 
on  by  this  gentleman. 

I will 


• See  The  Original  Aftronomical  Obfervations,  p.  185,  and  Bouvet’s  Voyage,  publilhed 
by  Mr.  Dalrymple,  p.  4,  and  ii. 
t See  the  Obfervations,  p.  218. 


XXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


fphere,  and  can  pronounce  with  certainty,  that  the  equili- 
brium of  the  globe  is  effedlually  preferved,  though  the 

proportion 

I will  not  here  run  the  rifk  of  incurring  M.  Le  Mon'ter's  difpleafure,  by  calling  the  ac- 
curacy of  M.  Bouvet’s  obfervations  in  queftion  ; but  will  admit  every  thing  that  he  him- 
felf  can  think  due  to  the  inftruments  and  obfervations  of  that  deferving  navigator.  It  is 
■enough  for  my  argument,  and  it  is  but  too  evident,  from  the  obfervations  themfelves,  that 
ours  were  by  no  means  capable  of  determining  the  variation  to  fo  fmall  a quantity  as  that 
which  M.  Le  Monier  refts  his  whole  caufe  upon ; and  if  fo,  his  arguments,  which  depend 
wholly  on  a fuppofition,  that  not  only  they,  but  M.  Bouvet’s  alfo,  were  capable  of  deter- 
mining it  with  the  utmoft  exadinefs,  muft  fall  to  the  ground. 

I ft.  It  appears,  from  various  inftances,  that  the  variations  obferved  by  the  fame  com- 
pafs  would  differ  3°  to  5°,  6°,  and  fometimes  even  10°,  from  no  other  caufe  whatever,  but 
putting  the  fhip’s  head  a contrary  way* *. 

2d,  That  the  fame  compafs,  in  the  fame  fituation  in  every  refpedl,  within  a few  miles, 
but  at  two  different  times  of  the  fame  day,  would  give  variations  differing  from  one  ano- 
ther, 3°,  4°,  5°,  6°,  and  even  7°  f. 

3d,  That  the  fame  compafs,  on  the  fame  day,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  fame  obferver, 
will  give  variations  differing  from  one  another  by  5°,  on  board  the  fame  Ihip,  when  under 
fail,  and  when  at  anchor  in  a road-ftead  J. 

4th,  Compafles,  made  by  the  fame  artift,  at  the  fame  time  and  place,  but  on  board  dif- 
ferent ftiips,  differed  3°,  4°,  and  even  5°  in  the  variation  §. 

5th,  The  fame  Compafles,  on  board  the  fame  fhip,  and  within  a few  miles  of  the  fame 
fituation,  but  at  different  times  of  our  being  there,  gave  variations  differing  by  4°  and  5°, 
or  upwards  |1. 

6th,  Different 


* See  the  Original  Aftronomical  Obfervations,  made  in  the  fecond  Voyage,  March  1 1 , 

*773.  P-  372-.  January  24,  1774,  p.  375.  and  July  28,  p.  378. 

t Obfervations  in  the  fecond  Voyage,  February  2,  1773,  p.  371.  and  January  19,  1775, 
p.  382.  Alfo  Obfervations  in  laft  Voyage,  July  17,  1776,  p.  179.  Auguft  30,  p.  181. 
January  24,  1777,  p.  192.  and  September  15,  1778,  p.  205. 

J Aftronomical  Obfervations  of  fecond  Voyage,  July  14,  1775,  p-  385. 

§ Compare  the  Aftronomical  Obfervations,  made  in  the  fecond  Voyage,  Auguft  3,  and  9, 
and  September  4,  1772,  p.  181.  with  thofe  of  the  fame  dates,  p.  369.  Thofe  of  January 
II,  and  14,  and  February  7,  1773,  p.  182,  with  thofe  of  the  fame  dates,  p.  371.  Alfo 
Aftronomical  Obfervations,  made  in  the  laft  Voyage,  of  December  27,  1776,  p.  191.  Fe- 
bruary 22,  1778,  p.  201.  May  5,  and  8,  p.  102.  July  9,  and  24,  1779,  p.  209.  and 
January  16,  1780,  p.  212.  with  thofe  of  the  fame  dates,  p.  291,  293,  294,  297, 
and  298. 

II  Compare  Aftronomical  Obfervations,  made  in  the  fecond  Voyage,  February  10,  p.  375. 
with  Obfervations  of  December  11,  1774,  p.  381.  Alfo  Obfervations,  made  in  the  laft 
Voyage,  May  3,  and  June  18,  1779,  p.  208. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV 


proportion  of  fea  adfually  failed  through,  leaves  no  fuf- 
iicient  fpace  for  the  correfponding  mafs  of  land,  which, 

on 

6th,  DifFerent  compafles,  at  the  fame  time,  on  board  the  fame  (hip,  and  in  every  re- 
fpedt  under  the  fame  circumftances,  will  give  variations  differing  from  one  another,  3", 
4°,  5°,  and  6°  *. 

Thefe  differences,  feveral  of  which  happened  very  near  the  place  in  queftion,  are  all  of 
them  at  leaft  equal  to,  moft  of  them  much  greater,  and  fome  of  them  double  that  which 
M.  Le  Monier  founds  his  argument  on,  even  according  to  his  own  account  of  it,  which  I 
have  already  fhewn  is  by  no  means  admiffible ; and,  therefore,  totally  invalidate  it.  To 
allege  that  the  inftruments  made  ufe  of  in  Captain  Cook’s  two  voyages  were  bad,  or  that 
the  obfervers  were  not  expert  in  the  ufe  of  them,  will  anfwer  no  purpofe  : they  are  the 
inftruments  and  obfervers  which  M.  Le  Monier’s  argument  muft  reft  on ; and,  therefore, 
let  thofe  of  the  French,  or  any  other  navigator,  have  been  ever  fo  much  better  than  they 
were  (which  few  will  be  hardy  enough  to  aflert,  and  fewer  ftill  found  weak  enough  to 
believe),  it  will  avail  nothing  to  the  point  in  difpute,  which  muft  evidently  fall  to  the 
ground,  if  the  obfervations  made  for  finding  the  variation  in  Captain  Cook’s  voyage  are 
not  fufficient  to  fupport  it.  What  then  muft  become  of  it,  if  M.  Bouvet’s  obfervations, 
of  this  kind,  were  liable  to  an  equal,  or  a greater  error  ? which,  without  any  reafonable 
caufe  for  offence,  we  might  fuppofe  they  were. 

It  is  not  neceffary  to  account  for  thefe  differences  in  the  obferved  variations  in  this 
place,  nor  yet  to  point  out  the  reafons  why  fuch  anomalies  have  not  been  noticed  in  ob- 
fervations of  this  kind  before.  I fhall,  however,  remark,  that  I have  hinted  at  fome  of 
the  caufes  in  my  introduftion  to  the  obfervations  which  were  made  in  Captain  Cook’s 
fecond  voyage  ; and  many  others  will  readily  offer  themfelves  to  perfons  who  have  had 
much  practice  in  making  thefe  obfervations,  and  who  have  attentively  confidered  the 
principles  on  which  the  inftruments  are  conftrufted,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
fabricated.  Nor  is  it  at  all  furprizing,  that  the  errors  to  which  the  inftruments  and  ob- 
fervations of  this  kind  are  liable,  fhould  not  have  been  difcovered  before,  fince  no  navi- 
gators before  us  ever  gave  the  fame  opportunity,  by  multiplying  theii»  obfervations,  and 
making  them  under  fuch  a variety  of  circumftances  as  we  did. 

Having  now  fully  fhewn,  that  the  circumftances,  brought  forward  by  ML.  Le  Monier^ 
In  fupport  of  his  argument,  are  neither  fuch  as  can  be  depended  on,  nor  yet  fairly  repre- 

fented 


* Obfervations  made  in  the  fecond  Voyage,  February  2,  1773,  p.  371.  March  18,  p. 
372.  and  January  24,  1774,  p.  375.  See  alfo  Obfervations  made  laft  Voyage,  Auguft  18, 
1776,  p.  180.  Odtober  7,  and  14,  p.  189,  and  190.  December  12,  p.  ibid.  January 
24,  1777,  P-  ‘92*  March  10,  p.  193.  July  9,  and  17,  1779,  p.  209.  January  16,  1780, 
p.  212.  March  24,  p.  213.  and  May  19,  p.  214. 

VoL.  I. 


d 


xxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 

on  fpeculative  arguments,  had  been  maintained  to  be  ne- 
celTary 

If 

fented,  I fhall  next  attempt  to  demonftrate,  that  it  is  utterly  improbable  M.  Bouvet 
could  be  out,  in  his  account  of  longitude,  fo  much  as  is  here  fuppofed,  in  the  fhort  run 
which  had  been  made  from  the  ifland  of  St.  Catherine,  the  place  they  took  their  depar- 
ture from ; on  the  contrary,  that  there  is  fufficient  reafon  to  believe  the  error,  of  what- 
ever magnitude  it  might  be,  was  of  a different  nature  from  that  contended  for,  and  that 
the  two  fhips,  inftead  of  being  to  the  Weft  ward  of  their  account  of  longitude,  were  ac- 
tually to  the  Eaftward  of  it.  For,  according  to  their  Journals,  extrafted  from  the  archives 
of  the  French  Eaft  India  Company,  by  M.  D’Apres^  printed  under  his  infpedllon,  and 
publifhed  by  Mr.  Dalrymple,  F.  R.  S.  amongft  other  voyages  made  for  the  purpofe  of 
examining  the  Southern  parts  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  the  longitude,  according  to  the 
Eagle’s  run  from  St.  Catherine’s,  was  26°  27',  and  according  to  the  Mary’s,  26°  20' 
Eaft  of  TenerifF;  that  is,  9°  57',  and  9°  50'  Eaft  of  Greenwich,  or  27°  43',  and  27* 
36'  Eaft  of  Ferro.  But  the  Mary,  which  went  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  made  7°  13' 
Eaft  longitude  from  the  land  In  queftlon,  to  that  place.  Confequently,  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  being  In  longitude  18°  23''  Eaft  of  Greenwich,  Cape  Circumcifion  will  be  in  11° 
10^  Eaft  of  Greenwich,  or  1°  20'  more  to  the  Eaftward  than  the  run  by  the  fame  fhip 
from  the  ifland  of  St.  Catherine’s  makes  it.  Again,  the  Eagle  made  the  difference  of 
longitude  between  Cape  Circumcifion,  and  the  ifland  of  Rodrigues,  49°  44'' ; and  by  the 
obfervations  of  M.  Pingre^  this  ifland  is  In  62°  50'  of  Eaft  longitude  from  Green- 
wich : Cape  Circumcifion  is  therefore  in  13°  b'  Eaft  of  Greenwich,  or  2°  9'  more  to 
the  Eaftward  than  by  the  Eagle’s  run  from  St.  Catherine’s.  Hence,  therefore,  as  the 
longitude  of  this  land,  relulting  from  a comparifon  of  that  fhewn  by  each  of  the  fhips, 
on  their  making  land  at  places  where  the  longitude  is  exceedingly  well  determined,  is 
greater  than  that  which  refults  from  their  run  from  St.  Catherine’s,  the  longitude  of 
which  Is  not  known  with  certainty  within  feveral  degrees,  we  may  infer,  with  great 
fafety,  that  whatever  the  quantity  of  M.  Bouvet’s  error  might  be,  when  he  is  fuppofed  to 
have  feen  Cape  Circum.cifion,  it  muft  have  been  in  defedl,  and  not  in  excefs,  as  he 
Monier  fuppofes  It. 

Christ’s  Hospital,!  W.  WALES. 

April  20,  1784.  I 

* The  judgment  of  the  ingenious  Author  of  Recherches  fur  les  Americains^  on  this  quef- 
tlon, feems  to  be  very  deferving  of  a place  here  : “ Qu’on  calcule,  comme  on  voudra, 
“ on  fera  toujours  contraint  d’avouer,  qu’il  y a une  plus  grande  portion  de  continent 
“ fituee  dans  la  latitude  feptentrionale,  que  dans  la  latitude  auftrale. 


« C’eft 


INTRODUCTION. 

If  former  navigators  have  added  more  land  to  the  known 
globe  than  Captain  Cook,  to  him,  at  leaft,  was  referved  the 
honour  of  being  foremoft  in  difcloling  to  us  the  extent  of 
fea  that  covers  its  furface.  His  own  fummary  view  of  the 
tranfa6lions  of  this  voyage,  will  be  a proper  conclulion  to 
thefe  remarks  : “ I had  now  made  the  circuit  of  the  South- 
“ ern  Ocean  in  a high  latitude,  and  traverfed  it  in  fuch 
a manner  as  to  leave  not  the  leaft  room  for  there  being 
“ a continent,  unlefs  near  the  pole,  and  out  of  the  reach 
‘‘  of  navigation.  By  twice  vifiting  the  Tropical  Sea,  I had 
not  only  fettled  the  fttuation  of  fome  old  difcoveries, 
“ but  made  there  many  new  ones,  and  left,  1 conceive, 
“ very  little  to  be  done,  even  in  that  part.  Thus  I flatter 
myfelf,  that  the  intention  of  the  voyage  has,  in  every  re- 
‘‘  fpe(ft,  been  fully  anfwered ; the  Southern  hemifphere 
“ fufficiently  explored ; and  a final  end  put  to  the  fearch- 
“ ing  after  a Southern  continent,  which  has,  at  times,  en- 
“ grofled  the  attention  of  fome  of  the  Maritime  Powers 
“ for  near  two  centuries  paft,  and  been  a favourite  theory 
“ amongft  the  geographers  of  all  ages 

Thus  far,  therefore,  the  voyages  to  difclofe  new  tracks 
of  navigation,  and  to  reform  old  defecfts  in  geography,  ap- 
pear to  have  been  profecuted  with  a fatisfacftory  fhare  of 
fuccefs.  A perufal  of  the  foregoing  fummary  of  what  had 

C’eft  fort  mal  a-propos,  qu’on  a foutenu  que  cette  repartition  inegale  ne  fauroit  ex- 
ifter,  fous  pretexte  que  le  globe  perdroit  fon  equilibre,  faute  d’un  contrepoids  fuffifant 
“ au  pole  meridionale.  II  eft  vrai  qu’un  pied  cube  d’eau  falee  ne  pefe  pas  autant  qu’un 
“ pied  cube  de  terre ; mais  on  auroit  du  reflechir,  qu’il  peut  y avoir  fous  I’ocean  des  lits 
“ & des  couches  de  matieres,  dont  la  pefanteur  fpeciflque  varie  a I’infini,  & que  le  peu 
“ de  profondeur  d’une  mer,  verfee  fur  une  grande  furface,  contrebalance  les  endroits  ou  il 
“ y a moins  de  mer,  mais  ou  elle  eft  plus  Y>^oionAe.”—Recherches  Philofophiques^  Tom.  ii. 
P-  375- 

* Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  239. 

d 2 


xxvii 


been 


xxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 

been  done,  will  enable  every  one  to  jndge  what  was  ftill 
wanting  to  complete  the  great  plan  of  difcovery.  The 
Southern  hemifphere  had,  indeed,  been  repeatedly  vihted, 
and  its  utmoft  acceffible  extremities  been  furveyed.  But 
much  uncertainty,  and,  of  courfe,  great  variety  of  opinion, 
fublifted,  as  to  the  navigable  extremities  of  our  own  hemi- 
fphere ; particularly,  as  to  the  exiftence,  or,  at  leaft,  as  to 
the  pradticability  of  a Northern  paflage  between  the  Atlan- 
tic and  Pacific  Oceans,  either  by  failing  Eaftward,  round 
Afia,  or  Weftward,  round  North  America. 

It  was  obvious,  that  if  fuch  a paflage  could  be  effecSled, 
voyages  to  Japan  and  China,  and,  indeed,  to  the  Eaft  Indies 
in  general,  would  be  much  fliortened ; and  confequently 
become  more  profitable,  than  by  making  the  tedious  circuit 
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Accordingly,  it  became  a fa- 
vourite objedt  of  the  Englifh  to  effedluate  this,  above  two 
centuries  ago;  and  (to  fay  nothing  of  Cabot’s  original  at-' 
tempt,  in  1497,  which  ended  in  the  difcovery  of  Newfound- 
land, and  the  Labradore  coaft)  from  Frobiflier’s  firfl:  voyage 
to  find  a Weftern  paflTage,  in  1576,  to  thofe  of  James  and  of 
Fox,  in  1631,  repeated  trials  had  been  made  by  our  enter- 
prizing  adventurers.  But  though  farther  knowledge  of  the 
Northern  extent  of  America  was  obtained  in  the  courfe  of 
thefe  voyages,  by  the  difcovery  of  Hudfon’s  and  Baffin’s 
Bays,  the  wiflied-for  paflage,  on  that  fide,  into  the  Pacific 
Ocean,  was  ftill  unattained.  Our  countrymen,  and  the 
Dutch,  were  equally  unfuccefsful,  in  various  attempts,  to 
find  this  paflage  in  an  Eaftern  diredtion.  Wood’s  failure, 
in  1676,  feems  to  have  clofed  the  long  lift  of  unfortunate 
Northern  expeditions  in  that  century ; and  the  difcovery, 
if  not  abfolutely  defpaired  of,  by  having  been  fo  often 
mifled,  ceafed,  for  many  years,  to  be  fought  for. 


Mr. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Mr.  Dobbs,  a warm  advocate  for  the  probability  of  a 
North  Weft  paflage  through  Hudfon’s  Bay,  in  our  own  time, 
once  more  recalled  the  attention  of  this  country  to  that  un- 
dertaking ; and,  by  his  acftive  zeal,  and  perfevering  folici- 
tation,  renewed  the  fpirit  of  difcovery.  But  it  was  renewed 
in  vain.  For  Captain  Middleton,  fent  out  by  Government 
in  1741,  and  Captains  Smith  and  Moore,  by  a private  fociety, 
in  1746,  though  encouraged  by  an  a(ft  of  Parliament  pafled 
in  the  preceding  year,  that  annexed  a reward  of  twenty 
thoufand  pounds  to  the  difcovery  of  a paflage,  returned 
from  Hudfon’s  Bay  with  reports  of  their  proceedings,  that 
left  the  accomplifliment  of  this  favourite  obje6l  at  as  great 
a diftance  as  ever. 

When  refearches  of  this  kind,  no  longer  left  to  the  fbli- 
citation  of  an  individual,  or  to  the  fubfcriptions  of  private 
adventurers,  became  cheriflied  by  the  Royal  attention,  in 
the  prefent  reign,  and  warmly  promoted  by  the  Minifter  at 
the  head  of  the  naval  department,  it  was  impoflible,  while 
fo  much  was  done  toward  exploring  the  remoteft  corners  of 
the  Southern  hemifphere,  that  the  Northern  paflage  fliould 
not  be  attempted.  Accordingly,  while  Captain  Cook  was 
profecuting  his  voyage  toward  the  South  Pole,  in  1773, 
Lord  Mulgrave  failed  with  two  fliips,  to  determine  how  far 
navigation  was  pradiicable  toward  the  North  Pole,  And 
though  his  Lordfhip  met  with  the  fame  infuperable  bar  to 
his  progrefs,  which  former  navigators  had  experienced ’‘b 
the  hopes  of  opening  a communication  between  the  Pacific 
and  Atlantic  Oceans,  by  a Northerly  courfe,  were  not  aban- 

* See  the  hiftory  of  former  attempts  to  fail  toward  the  North  Pole,  in  the  Introdu<£l:ion 
to  Lord  Mulgrave’s  Journal.  Mr.  Barrington  has  colledled  feveral  inftances  of  ftiips 
advancing  to  very  high  latitudes.  See  his  Mifcellanies,  p.  i.-— 124. 


xxix 


doned ; 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION. 


cloned ; and  a voyage  for  that  pnrpofe,  was  ordered  to  be 
undertaken. 

The  operations  propofed  to  be  pnrfued,  were  fo  new,  fo 
-extenfive,  and  fo  various,  that  the  Ikill  and  experience  of 
Captain  Cook,  it  was  thought,  would  be  requifite  to  conduct 
them.  Without  being  liable  to  any  charge  of  want  of  zeal 
for  the  public  fervice,  he  might  have  pafled  the  reft  of  his 
days  in  the  command  to  which  he  had  been  appointed  in 
Greenwich  Hofpital,  there  to  enjoy  the  fame  he  had  dearly 
earned  in  two  circumnavigations  of  the  world.  But  he 
cheerfully  rehnquiflied  this  honourable  ftation  at  home ; 
and,  happy  that  the  Earl  of  Sandwich  had  not  caft  his  eye 
upon  any  other  Commander,  engaged  in  the  conduct  of  the 
expedition,  the  hiftory  of  which  is  prefented  to  the  Public 
in  thefe  Volumes ; an  expedition  that  would  expofe  him  to 
the  toils  and  perils  of  a third  circumnavigation,  by  a track 
hitherto  unattempted.  Every  former  navigator  round  the 
globe  had  made  his  paflage  home  to  Europe  by  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope  ; the  arduous  tafk  was  now  afligned  to  Cap- 
tain Cook,  of  attempting  it,  by  reaching  the  high  Northern 
latitudes  betwen  Afta  and  America.  So  that  the  ufual  plan 
of  difcovery  was  reverfed ; and,  inftead  of  a paflage  from 
the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  one  from  the  latter  into  the  for- 
mer was  to  be  tried.  For  it  was  wifely  forefeen,  that  what- 
ever openings  or  inlets  there  might  be  on  the  Eaft  fide  of 
America,  which  lie  in  a direction  that  could  give  any  hopes 
of  a paflage,  the  ultimate  fuccefs  of  it  would  ftill  depend 
upon  there  being  an  open  fea  between  the  Weft  fide  of 
that  continent,  and  the  extremities  of  Afia.  Captain  Cook, 
therefore,  was  ordered  to  proceed  into  the  Pacific  Ocean, 
through  the  chain  of  his  new  iflands  in  the  Southern  tropic, 
and  having  crofifed  the  equator  into  its  Northern  Parts,  then 

to 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxi 


to  hold  fuch  a courfe  as  might  probably  fix  many  intereft- 
ing  points  in  geography,  and  produce  intermediate  difco- 
veries,  in  his  progrefs  Northward  to  the  principal  fcene  of 
his  operations. 

But  the  plan  of  the  voyage,  and  the  various  objedts  it  em- 
braced, will  befi;  appear  from  the  Inftrudtions  under  which 
Captain  Cook  failed ; and  the  infertion  of  them  here,  will 
convey  fuch  authentic  information,  as  may  enable  the  Read- 
er to  judge  with  precifion  how  far  they  have  been  carried 
into  execution. 


By  the  Commissioners  for  executing  the  Office  of  Lord 
High  Admiral  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  &c. 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  for  Captain  James 
Cook,  Commander  of  his  Majefty’s  Sloop  the  Reso- 
lution. 


T^f^HEREAS  the  Earl  of  Sandwich  has  fignified  to  us  his  Majejly’s  plea- 
JurCy  that  an  attempt  Jhould  be  made  to  find  out  a Northern  pajfage  by 
Jea  from  the  Pacific  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean ; and  whereas  we  have,  in  purfuance 
thereof,  caufed  his  Majefty's  fioops  Refolution  and  Difcovery  to  be  fitted,  in  all 
refpebls,  proper  to  proceed  upon  a voyage  for  the  purpofe  above-mentioned,  and, 
from  the  experience  we  have  had  of  your  abilities  and  good  conduct  in  your  late 
voyages,  have  thought  fit  to  intruft  you  with  the  conduct  of  the  prejent  intended 
voyage,  and  with  that  view  appointed  you  to  command  the  firji  mentioned  floop, 
and  direbted  Captain  Clerke,  who  commands  the  other,  to  follow  your  orders  for 
his  further  proceedings  ; Tou  are  hereby  required  and  directed  to  proceed  with  the 
Jaid  two  fioops  direbily  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  unlefs  you  Jhall  judge  it  necej- 
fary  to  flop  at  Madeira,  the  Cape  de  Verd,  or  Canary  Ifiands,  to  take  in  wine  far 
the  ufe  of  their  companies ; in  which  cafe  you  are  at  liberty  to  do  fo,  taking  care 
to  remain  there  no  longer  than  may  be  necejfary  for  that  purpofe, 

0« 


'xxxii 


I N T R .O  D U G T I O N. 


On  your  arrival  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  you  are  to  refreflj  the  /loops  com- 
panies, and  to  cauje  the  /loops  to  he  /applied  with  as  much  provi/ions  and  water  as 
they  can  conveniently  /low. 

Tou  are,  if  poffible,  to  leave  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  by  the  end  of  Oblober,  or 
the  beginning  of  November  next,  and  proceed  to  the  Southward  in  fearch  of  feme 
ijlands /aid  to  have  been  lately  feen  by  the  French,  in  the  latitude  of  o'  South, 
and  about  the  meridian  of  Mauritius.  In  cafe  you  find  thofe  ijlands,  you  are  to 
examine  them  thoroughly  for  a good  harbour ; and  upon  difeovering  one,  make  the 
neceffary  obfervations  to  facilitate  the  finding  it  again ; as  a good  port,  in  that 
fituation,  may  hereafter  prove  very  ufeful,  although  it  fhould  afford  little  or  nothing 
more  than  Jhelter,  wood,  and  water.  You  are  not,  however,  to  fpend  too  much 
time  in  looking  out  for  thofe  ijlands,  or  in  the  examination  of  them,  if  found,  but 
proceed  to  Otaheite,  or  the  Society  IJles  ( touching  at  New  Zealand  in  your  way 
thither,  if  you,  fhould  judge  it  neceffary  and  convenient),  and  taking  care  to  ar- 
rive there  time  enough  to  admit  of  your  giving  the  /loops  companies  the  refre/h- 
ment  they  may  /land  in  need  of,  before  you  profecute  the  farther  objebi  of  thefe 
injlrublions. 

Upon  your  arrival  at  Otaheite,  or  the  Society  IJles,  you  are  to  land  Omiah  at 
fuch  of  them  as  he  may  choofe,  and  to  leave  him  there. 

Tou  are  to  dijlribute  among  the  Chiefs  of  thofe  ijlands  fuch  part  of  the  pre- 
Jents  with  which  you  have  been  /applied,  as  you  Jhall  judge  proper,  referving  the 
remainder  to  diflribute  among  the  natives  of  the  countries  you  may  dif cover  in  the 
Northern  Hemifphere : And  having  refrejhed  the  people  belonging  to  the  /loops  un- 
der your  command,  and  taken  on  board  fuch  wood  and  water  as  they  may  refpec- 
tively  /land  in  need  of,  you  are  to  leave  thofe  ijlands  in  the  beginning  of  February, 
or  fooner  if  you  Jhall  judge  it  neceffary,  and  then  proceed  in  as  dire  It  a courfe  as 
you  can  to  the  coajl  of  New  Albion,  endeavouring  to  fall  in  with  it  in  the  latitude 
of  o'  North-,  amd  taking  care,  in  your  way  thither,  not  to  lofe  any  time  in 
fearch  of  new  lands,  or  to  flop  at  any  you  may  fall  in  with,  unlefs  you  find  it  ne- 
ceffary to  recruit  your  wood  and  water. 

You  are  alfo,  in  your  way  thither,  Jiriblly  enjoined  not  to  touch  upon  any  part 
of  the  Spanifh  dominions  on  the  Weftern  continent  of  America,  unlefs  driven  thi- 
ther by  fome  unavoidable  accident-,  in  which  cafe  you  are  to  flay  no  longer' there 
than  Jhall  be  abfolutely  neceffary,  and  to  be  very  careful  not  to  give  any  umbrage 
or  offence  to  any  of  the  inhabitants  or  fubjebls  of  his  Catholic  Majejly.  And  if, 

in 


INTRODUCTION. 

in  your  farther  progrefs  to  the  Northward,  as  hereafter  directed,  you  find  any 
fubjedls  of  any  European  Prince  or  State  upon  any  part  of  the  coaji  you  may  think 
proper  to  vifit,  you  are  not  to  dijiurb  them,  or  give  them  any  juft  caufe  of  offence, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  to  treat  them  with  civility  and  friendfhip. 

Upon  your  arrival  on  the  coaJl  of  New  Albion,  you  are  to  put  into  the  firji  con- 
venient port  to  recruit  your  wood  and  water,  and  procure  refreffments,  and  then 
to  proceed  Northward  along  the  coaji,  as  far  as  the  latitude  of  6 f,  or  farther, 
if  you  are  not  objlrubled  by  lands  or  ice ; taking  care  not  to  lofe  any  time  in  ex- 
ploring rivers  or  inlets,  or  upon  any  other  account,  until  you  get  into  the  before- 
mentioned  latitude  of  6 f , where  we  could  wijh  you  to  arrive  in  the  month  of  June 
next.  When  you  get  that  length,  you  are  very  carefully  to  Jearch  for,  and  to 
explore,  fuch  rivers  or  inlets  as  may  appear  to  be  of  a confiderable  extent,  and 
pointing  towards  Hudfon’s  or  Baffin's  Bays ; and  if,  from  your  own  obfervations, 
cr  from  any  information  you  may  receive  from  the  natives  ( who,  there  is  reajon 
to  believe,  are  the fame  race  of  people,  and fpeak  the  fame  language,  of  which  you 
are  furnijhed  with  a Vocabulary,  as  the  Efquimaux ),  there  Jhall  appear  to  be  a 
certainty,  or  even  a probability,  of  a water  paffage  into  the  afore-mentioned  bays, 
or  either  of  them,  you  are,  in  fuch  cafe,  to  ufe  your  utmojl  endeavours  to  pafs 
through  with  one  or  both  of  the  Jloops,  unlejs  you  Jhall  be  of  opinion  that  the  paf- 
fage may  be  effebied  with  more  certainty,  or  with  greater  probability , by  fmaller 
veffels  j in  which  cafe  you  are  to  Jet  up  the  frames  of  one  or  both  the  fmall 
vejfels  with  which  you  are  provided,  and,  when  they  are  put  together,  and  are 
properly  fitted,  Jlored,  and  viblualled,  you  are  to  dijpatch  one  or  both  of  them,  un- 
der the  care  of  proper  officers,  with  a fufficient  number  of 'petty  officers,  men,  and 
boats,  in  order  to  attempt  the  faid  paffage  j with  fuch  injlrubiions  for  their  re- 
joining you,  if  they  Jhouldfail,  or  for  their  farther  proceedings,  if  they  fbould fuc- 
ceed  in  the  attempt,  as  you  Jhall  judge  mojl  proper.  But,  neverthelejs,  if  you 
Jhall  find  it  more  eligible  to  purjue  any.  other  meajures  than  thoje  above  pointed 
out,  in  order  to  make  a dijcovery  of  the  before-mentioned  paffage  ( if  any  fuch 
there  be),  you  are  at  liberty,  and  we  leave  it  to  your  dijcretion,  to  purjue  fuch 
meafures  accordingly. 

In  cafe  you  Jhall  be  Jatisfied  that  there  is  no  paffage  through  to  the  above-men- 
tioned bays,Jufficient  for  the  purpojes  of  navigation,  you  are,  at  the  proper  feafon 
of  the  year,  to  repair  to  the  port  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  in  Kamtjchatka,  or 
wherever  elje  you  Jhall  judge  more  proper,  in  order  to  refrejh  your  people  and  pafs 

VOL.  I.  e tbd 


xxxiii 


XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION, 


the  Winter-,  and,  in  the  Spring  of  the  enjuingyear  1778,  to  proceed  from  thence 
to  the  Northward,  as  far  as,  in  your  prudence,  you  may  think  proper,  in  further 
fearch  of  a North  Eaji,  or  North  Weji  paffage,  from  the  Pacific  Ocean  into  the 
Atlantic  Ocean,  or  the  North  Sea  -,  and  if,  from  your  own  ohfervation,  or  any  in- 
formation you  may  receive,  there  fhall  appear  to  be  a probability  of  fuch  a paffage, 
you  are  to  proceed  as  above  direSled : and,  having  dif covered  fuch  paffage,  or  failed 
in  the  attempt,  make  the  beft  of  your  way  back  to  England,  by  fuch  route  as  you 
may  think  befi  for  the  improvement  of  geography  and  navigation ; repairing  to 
Spithead  with  both  fioops,  where  they  are  to  remain  till  further  order. 

At  whatever  places  you  may  touch  in  the  courfe  of  your  voyage,  where  accurate 
obfervations  of  the  nature  hereafter  mentioned  have  not  already  been  made,  you 
are,  as  far  as  your  time  will  allotv,  very  carefully  to  obferve  the  true  fituation  of 
fuch  places,  both  in  latitude  and  longitude ; the  variation  of  the  needle ; bearings 
of  head-lands  height,  direSlion,  and  courfe  of  the  tides  and  currents  -,  depths 
and  foundings  of  the  fea ; Jhoals,  rocks,  ^c, ; and  alfo  to  furvey,  make  charts, 
and  take  views  of  fuch  bays,  harbours,  and  different  parts  of  the  coafi,  and  to 
make  fuch  notations  thereon,  as  may  be  ufeful  either  to  navigation  or  commerce. 
You  are  alfo  carefully  to  obferve  the  nature  of  the  foil,  and  the  produce  thereof ; 
the  animals  and  fowls  that  inhabit  or  frequent  it  -y  the  fijhes  that  are  to  be  found 
in  the  rivers  or  upon  the  coafi,  and  in  what  plenty  -,  and,  in  cafe  there  are  any 
peculiar  to  fuch  places,  to  defcribe  them  as  minutely,  and  to  make  as  accurate 
drawings  of  them,  as  you  can : and,  if  you  find  any  metals,  'minerals,  or  valuable 
fiones,  or  any  extraneous  fofiils,  you  are  to  bring  home  fpecimens  of  each  -,  as  alfo 
of  the  feeds  of  fuch  trees,  fhrubs,  plants,  fruits,  and  grains,  peculiar  to  thofe 
places,  as  you  may  he  able  to  colledt,  and  to  tranfmit  them  to  our  Secretary,  thcU 
proper  examination  and  experiments  may  be  made  of  them.  You  are  I fie  wife  to 
obferve  the  genius,  temper,  difpofition,  and  number  of  the  natives  and  inhabitants, 
where  you  find  any  j and  to  endeavour,  by  all  proper  means,  to  cultivate  a friend- 
fhip  with  them  making  them  prefents  of  fuch  trinkets  as  you  may  have  on  board, 
and  they  may  like  befi  inviting  them  to  traffic ; and  fhewing  them  every  kind  of 
civility  and  regard  but  taking  care,  never thelefs,  not  to  fuffer  yourf elf  to  be  fur- 
prized  by  them,  but  to  be  always  on  your  guard  againfi  any  accidents. 

You  are  alfo,  with  the  confent  of  the  natives,  to  take  poffieffion,  in  the  name  of 
the  King  of  Great  Britain,  of  convenient  fituations  in  fuch  countries  as  you  may 
difcover,  that  have  not  already  been  dif  covered  or  vifited  by  any  other  European 

power  j 


INTRODUCTION.. 


XXXV 


^ower-,  and  to  diftribute  among  the  inhabitants  Juch  things  as  will  remain  as 
traces  and  teftimonies  of  your  having  been  there ; but  if  you  find  the  countries  fo 
difcovered  are  uninhabited^  you  are  to  take  poffeffion  of  them  for  his  Majefiy,  by 
fetting  up  proper  marks  and  infcriptions,  as  firft  difcoverers  and  pojfejfors. 

But  forafmuch  as,  in  undertakings  of  this  nature,  fever al  emergencies  may  arife 
not  to  be  for efeen,  and  therefore  not  particularly  to  be  provided  for  by  inflrublions 
before-hand  ■,  you  are,  in  all  fuch  cafes,  to  proceed  as  you  Jhall  judge  moft  ad- 
vantageous to  the  fervice  on  which  you  are  employed. 

T'ou  are,  by  all  opportunities,  to  fend  to  our  Secretary,  for  our  information, 
accounts  of  your  proceedings,  and  copies  of  the furveys  and  drawings  you  Jhall  have 
made  j and  upon  your  arrival  in  England,  you  are  immediately  to  repair  to  this 
office,  in  order  to  lay  before  us  a full  account  of  your  proceedings  in  the  whole  courfe 
of  your  voyage ; taking  care,  before  you  leave  the  floop,  to  demand fro^n  the  officers 
and  petty  officers,  the  log-books  and  journals  they  may  have  kept,  and  to  feal  them 
up  for  our  infpebiion ; and  enjoining  them,  and  the  whole  crew,  not  to  divulge 
where  they  have  been,  until  they  Jhall  have  permiffion  Jo  to  do : and  you  are  to  di- 
reSl  Captain  Clerke  to  do  the  Jame,  with  reJpeSl  to  the  officers,  petty  officers,  and 
crew  of  the  Dijcovery. 

If  any  accident  Jhould  happen  to  the  Refolution  in  the  courfe  of  the  voyage,  fo 
as  to  difable  her  from  proceeding  any  farther,  you  are,  in  fuch  cafe,  to  remove 
yourfelf  and  her  crew  into  the  Difcovery,  and  to  profecute  your  voyage  in  her ; her 
Commander  being  hereby  Jlriblly  required  to  receive  you  on  board,  and  to  obey 
your  orders,  the  Jame,  in  every  reJpeSi,  as  when  you  were  actually  on  board  the 
Rejolufion:  And.,  in  cafe  of  your  inability,  by  ficknejs  or  otherwife,  to  carry 
theje  Infiruliions  into  exe.cution,  you  are  to  be  careful  to  leave  them  with  the 
next  officer  in  command,  who  is  hereby  required  to  execute  them  in  the  bejl  man--. 
ner  he  can. 

Given  under  our  hands  the  ^th  day  of  July,  1776, 


SANDWICH. 

C.  SPENCER. 
H.  P ALLIS ER. 

By  command  of  their  Lordjhips, 

PII.  STEPHENS. 


e 2 


Befides 


xxxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 

Befides  ordering  Captain  Cook  to  fail  on  this  important 
voyage,  Government,  in  earneft  about  the  objedl  of  it, 
adopted  a meafure,  which,  while  it' could  not  but  have  a 
powerful  operation  on  the  crews  of  the  Refolution  and  Dif- 
covery,  by  adding  the  motives  of  intereft,  to  the  obligations 
of  duty;  at  the  fame  time  encouraged  all  his  Majefty’s  fub- 
je6ts  to  engage  in  attempts  toward  the  propofed  difcovery. 
By  the  a6l  of  parliament,  palled  in  1745  a reward  of 
twenty  thoufand  pounds  had  been  held  out.  But  it  had  been 
held  out  only  to  the  Ihips  belonging  to  any  of  his  Majejifs 
fubjehls,  exclulive  of  his  Majelly’s  own  fhips.  The  adf  had 
a ftill  more  capital  defedl.  It  held  out  this  reward  only  to 
fuch  fhips  as  fhould  difcover  a palfage  through  Hudfon's  Bay  \ 
and,  as  we  lliall  foon  take  occalion  to  explain,  it  was,  by  this 
time,  pretty  certain,  that  no  fuch  paflage  exifted  within  thofe 
limits.  Effedlual  care  was  taken  to  remedy  both  thefe  de- 
fedls,  by  palling  a new  law ; which,  after  reciting  the  pro- 
vilions  of  the  former,  proceeds  as  follows  : “ And  whereas 
“ many  advantages,  both  to  commerce  and  fcience,  may  be 
‘‘  alfo  expedfed  from  the  difcovery  of  any  Northern  paffage 
“ for  velfels  by  fea,  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans 
‘‘  — be  it  enadfed.  That  if  any  fhip  belonging  to  any  of  his 
“ Majefty’s  fubjedfs,  or  to  his  Majejly,  lhall  find  out,  and 
‘‘  fail  through,  any  palfage  by  fea,  between  the  Atlantic 
‘‘  and  Pacific  Oceans,  in  any  diredlion^  or  parallel  of  the 
“ Northern  hemifphere,  to  the  Northward  of  the  52°  of 
“ Northern  latitude,  the  owners  of  fuch  fhips,  if  belonging 
“ to  any  of  his  Majefty’s  fubjedls,  or  the  commander^  officer Sy 
“ and  feameny  of  fuch  Jljip  belonging  to  his  Majejiy,  fhaU  re- 
‘‘  ceive,  as  a reward  for  fuch  difcovery,  the  fum  of  twenty 
“ thoufand  pounds. 

* See  the  Statutes  at  Large,  i8  George  II.  chap.  17. 


And 


INTRODUCTION. 

“ And  whereas  fliips  employed,  both  in  the  Spitzbergen 
“ Seas,  and  in  Davis’s  Straits,  have  frequent  opportunities 
“ of  approaching  the  North  Pole,  though  they  have  not 
“ time,  during  the  courfe  of  one  fummer,  to  penetrate  into 
“ the  Pacific  Ocean : and  whereas  fuch  approaches  may 
“ greatly  tend  to  the  difcovery  of  a communication  between 
“ the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans,  as  well  as  be  attended 
“ with  many  advantages  to  commerce  and  fcience,  See.  be 
“ it  enacSted,  That  if  any  fliip  fliall  approach  to  within  i° 
‘‘  of  the  North  Pole,  the  owner.  See.  or  commander,  &:c. 
“ fo  approaching,  fhall  receive,  as  a reward*  for  fuch  firfl: 
approach,  the  fum  of  five  thoufand  pounds 
That  nothing  might  be  omitted  that  could  facilitate  the 
fuccefs  of  Captain  Cook’s  expedition,  fome  time  before  he 
failed,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fummer  of  1776,  Lieutenant 
Pickerfgill,  appointed  Commander  of  his  Majefty’s  armed 
brig  the  Lion,  was  ordered  “ to  proceed  to  Davis’s  Straits, 
“ for  the  protection  of  the  Britifh  whale  fifhers  and  that 
firft  object  being  fecured,  ‘‘  he  was  then  required  and  di- 
“ reCted  to  proceed  up  Baffin’s  Bay,  and  explore  the  coalts 
“ thereof,  as  far  as  in  his  judgment  the  fame  could  be  done 
without  apparent  rifk,  taking  care  to  leave  the  above 
“ mentioned  Bay  fo  timely,  as  to  fecure  his  return  to  Eng- 
“ land  in  the  fall  of  the  year and  it  was  farther  enjoined 
to  him,  to  make  nautical  remarks  of  every  kind,  and  to 
“ employ  Mr.  Lane  (Matter  of  the  veflel  under  his  com- 
“ mand)  in  furveying,  making  charts,  and  taking  views  of 
“ the  feveralbays,  harbours,  and  different  parts  of  the  coalts 
“ which  he  might  vifit,  and  in  making  fuch  notations  there- 
“ on  as  might  be  ufeful  to  geography  and  navigation  +.” 

* See  the  Statutes  at  Large,  1776,  16  George  III.  chap.  6. 
t From  his  MS.  InUrudlions,  dated  May  14,  1776. 


xxxvii 


Pickerfgill, 


xxxviii 


Refolutlon, 

Difcovery. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Pickerfgill,  we  fee,  was  not  to  attempt  the  difcovery  of 
the  paflage.  He  was  directed  to  explore  the  coafts  of  Baf- 
fin’s Bay,  only  to  enable  him  to  bring  back,  the  fame  year, 
fome  information,  which  might  be  an  nfeful  direction  to- 
ward planning  an  intended  voyage  into  that  bay  the  en- 
fning  fummer,  to  try  for  the  difcovery  of  a palfage  on  that 
fide,  with  a view  to  co-operate  with  Captain  Cook ; who, 
it  was  fuppofed  (from  the  tenor  of  his  inftruitions)  would 
be  trying  for  this  palfage,  about  the  fame  time,  from  the 
oppofite  fide  of  America. 

Pickerfgill,  obeying  his  infi:ru61;ions,  at  leafi:  in  this  in- 
fiance, did  return  that  year ; but  there  were  fufficient  rea- 
fons  for  not  fending  him  out  again ; and  the  command  of 
the  next  expedition  into  Baffin’s  Bay  was  conferred  on  Lieu- 
tenant Young;  whofe  Infirudtions,  having  an  immediate 
connexion  with  our  voyage,  are  here  inferted. 


EXTRACT  of  INSTRUCTIONS  to  Lieutenant 
Young,  commanding  the  Lion  armed  Velfel,  dated 
13th  March  1777. 


pj^HEREAS,  in  purfuance  of  the  King's  pleajure,  ftgnified  to  us  by  the 
Earl  of  Sandwich^  his  -Majefty's  foops  named  in  the  margin  have  been 
Jent  out  under  the  command  of  Captain  Cook,  in  order,  during  this  and  the  en- 
Juing  year,  to  attempt  a difcovery  of  a , Northern  pajfage,  by  fea,  from  the  Pacific 
to  the  Atlantic  Ocean ; and,  for  that  purpofe,  to  run  up  as  high  as  the  latitude 
of  6 f North,  where  it  is  hoped  he  will  be  able  to  arrive  in  the  month  of  June 
next } and  there,  and  as  much  further  to  the  Northward  as  in  his  prudence  he 
Jhall  think  proper,  very  carefully  to  fearch  for  and  explore fuch  rivers  or  inlets  as 
may  appear  to  be  of  a confiderable  extent,  and  pointing  to  Hudjon's  or  Baffin's 

Bays, 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxist 


Bays,  or  the  North  Sea ; and,  upon  finding  any  pajfage  through,  Jufficient  for 
the  purpofes  of  navigation,  to  attempt  Juch  pajfage  with  one  or  both  of  the  Jloops  -, 
or,  if  they  are  judged  to  be  too  large,  with  fmaller  veffels,  the  frames  of  which 
have  been  fent  out  with  him  for  that  purpofe : And  whereas,  in  purfuance  of  his 
Majefy's  further  pleafure,fignified  as  aforefaid,  the  armed  vejfel  under  your  com- 
mand hath  been  fitted  in  order  to  proceed  to  Baffin  s Bay,  with  a view  to  explore 
the  IVeflern  parts  thereof,  and, to  endeavour  to  find  a pajfage,  on  that  fide,  from 
the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  we  have  thought  fit  to  intruji  you  with  the 
conduSi  of  that  voyage  j Tou  are  therefore  hereby  required  and  directed  to  put  to 
fea  in  the  faid  armed  vejfel,  without  a moment's  lofs  of  time,  and  make  the  beft  of 
your  way  into  Baffin's  Bay,  and fo  ufe  your  beft  endeavours  to  explore  the  Weftern 
Jhores  thereof,  as  far  as  in  your  judgment  the  fame  can  be  done,  without  apparent 
rifque,  and  to  examine  fuch  confiderable  rivers  or  inlets  as  you  may  dif cover  j and, 
in  cafe  you  find  any,  through  which  there  may  be  a probability  of  pajfing  into  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  you  are  to  attempt  fuch  pajfage  •,  and  if  you  fucceed  in  the  attempt, 
and  fhall  be  able  to  repafs  it  again,  fo  as  to  return  to  England  this  year,  you  are 
to  make  the  beft  of  your  way  to  Spithead,  or  the  Nore,  and  remain  there  until  you 
receive  further  order ; fending  us  an  account  of  your  arrival  and  proceedings. 
But  if  you  ftsall  fucceed  in  the  attempt,  and  fhall  find  the  feafon  too  far  advanced 
for  you  to  return  the  fame  way,  you  are  then  to  look  out  for  the  moft  convenient 
place  to  winter  in,  and  to  endeavour  to  return  by  the  faid  pajfage  as  early  in  the 
next  year  as  the  feafon  will  admit,  and  then  to  make  the  beft  of  your  way  to  Eng- 
land, as  above  direbled. 

In  cafe,  however,  you  fhould  not  find,  or  Jhould  be  fatisfied  there  is  not  any 
probability  of  finding,  any  fuch  pajfage,  or,  finding  it,  you  fhould  not  be  able  to  get 
through  in  the  vejfel  you  command,  you  are  then  to  return  to  England,  as  before 
mentioned,  unlefs  you  fhall  find  any  branch  of  the  fea  leading  to  the  Weftward 
which  you  fhall  judge  likely  to  afford  a communication  between  the  Atlantic  and 
Pacific  Oceans,  and  which  you  fhall  not  be  able  to  explore  in  the  courfe  of  this 
year,  it  being,  in  that  cafe,  left  to  your  difcretion  to  flay  the  Winter  in  the  moft 
commodious  fituation  you  can  find,  in  order  to  purfue  the  dijcovery  next  year,  if  you 
floall  find  it  advifable  fo  to  do ; and,  having  difcovered  fuch  pajfage,  or  not  fuc- 
ceeded  in  the  attempt,  you  are  to  make  the  beft  of  your  way  to  England,  as  above 
direlied. 


It 


xl 


INTRODUCTION. 


It  was  natural  to  hope,  that  fomething  would  have  been 
done  in  one  or  other,  or  in  both  thefe  voyages  of  the  Lion, 
that  might  have  opened  our  views  with  regard  to  the  prac- 
ticability of  a paffage  from  this  fide  of  America.  But,  un- 
fortunately, the  execution  did  not  anfwer  the  expecSlations 
conceived.  Pickerfgill,  who  had  acquired  profeffional  ex- 
perience when  acting  under  Captain  Cook,  juftly  merited 
the  cenfure  he  received,  for  improper  behaviour  when  in- 
trufted  with  command  in  Davis’s  Strait ; and  the  talents  of 
Young,  as  it  afterward  appeared,  were  more  adapted  to 
contribute  to  the  glory  of  a vidlory,  as  Commander  of  a line 
of  battle  fliip,  than  to  add  to  geographical  difcoveries,  by 
encountering  mountains  of  ice,  and  exploring  unknown 
coafts  '-'b 

Both  Pickerfgill  and  Young  having  been  ordered  to  pro- 
ceed into  Baffin’s  Bay ; and  Captain  Cook  being  diredled 
not  to  begin  his  fearch  till  he  ffiould  arrive  in  the  latitude  of 
65°,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  fay  fomething  here  of  the 
reafons  which  weighed  with  thofe  who  planned  the  voyages, 
and  framed  the  inftrucStions,  to  carry  their  views  fo  far 
Northward,  as  the  proper  htuation,  where  the  paffage,  if  it 
exifted  at  all,  was  likely  to  be  attempted  with  fuccefs.  It 
may  be  afked.  Why  was  Hudfon’s  Bay  neglected  on  our 
fide  of  America ; and  why  was  not  Captain  Cook  ordered  to 
begin  his  fearch  on  its  oppofite  fide,  in  much  lower  lati- 


* In  the  Philofophical  Tranfaftions,  Vol.  Ixviii.  p.  1057,  track  of 

Pickerfgill’s  voyage,  which,  probably,  may  be  of  ufe  to  our  Greenland  fhips,  as  it  con- 
tains many  obfervations  for  fixing  the  longitude  and  latitude  of  the  coafts  in  Davis’s  Strait. 
But  it  appears  that  he  never  entered  Baffin’s  Bay,  the  higheft  Northern  latitude  to  which 
he  advanced  being  68°  14^.  As  to  Young’s  proceedings,  having  failed  abfolutely  in 
making  any  difcovery,  it  is  of  lefs  confequence,  that  no  communication  of  his  journal 
..could  be  procured  ^ 


tudes  ? 


INTRODUCTION. 


xli 


tildes  ? Particularly,  why  not  explore  the  ftrait  leading  into 
the  Weftern  fea  of  John  de  Fuca,  between  the  latitudes  of 
47°  and  48° ; the  Archipelago  of  St.  Lazarus  of  Admiral  de 
Fonte,  between  50°  and  55° ; and  the  rivers  and  lakes 
through  which  he  found  a paflage  North  Eaftward,  till  he 
met  with  a fhip  from  Bofton  ? 

As  to  the  pretended  difcoveries  of  de  Fuca,  the  Greek 
Pilot,  or  of  de  Fonte,  the  Spanifli  Admiral,  though  they 
have  fometimes  found  their  way  into  fidlitious  maps,  or 
have  been  warmly  contended  for  by  the  efpoufers  of  fan- 
ciful fyftems  ; to  have  diredted  Captain  Cook  to  fpend  any 
time  in  tracing  them,  would  have  been  as  wife  a meafure 
as  if  he  had  been  dire(51;ed  to  trace  the  lituation  of  Lilli- 
put  or  Brobdignag.  The  latter  are,  indeed,  confelTedly, 
mere  objects  of  imagination ; and  the  former,  deftitute  of 
any  fufficient  external  evidence,  bear  fo  many  ftriking 
marks  of  internal  abfurdity,  as  warrant  our  pronouncing 
them  to  be  the  fabric  of  impofture.  Captain  Cook’s  in- 
Itru6tions  were  founded  on  an  accurate  knowledge  of  what 
had  been  already  done,  and  of  what  Rill  remained  to  do ; 
and  this  knowledge  pointed  out  the  inutility  of  begin- 
ning his  fearch  for  a paffage  till  his  arrival  in  the  lati- 
tude of  65°.  Of  this  every  fair  and  capable  inquirer  will 
be  abundantly  convinced,  by  an  attention  to  the  following 
particulars. 

Middleton,  who  commanded  the  expedition  in  1741  and 
1742,  into  Hudfon’s  Bay,  had  proceeded  farther  North  than 
any  of  his  predeceflbrs  in  that  navigation.  But  though, 
from  his  former  acquaintance  with  that  Bay,  to  which  he 
had  frequently  failed  in  the  fervice  of  the  Company,  he 
had  entertained  hopes  of  finding  out  a paflage  through  it 
into  the  Pacific  Ocean,  the  obfervations  which  he  was  now 
VoL.  I.  f enabled 


xlii 


I N T R OiD  U C T I O N. 


enabled  to  make,  induced  him  to  change  his  opinion  ; and, 
on  his  return  to  England,  he  made  an  unfavourable  report. 
Mr.  Dobbs,  the  patron  of  the  enterprize,  did  not  acquiefce 
in  this ; and,  fortified  in  his  original  idea  of  the  pra6tica- 
bility  of  the  paflage,  by  the  teftimony  of  fome  of  Mid- 
dleton’s officers,  he  appealed  to  the  Public,  accufing  him 
of  having  mifreprefented  fa£ts,  and  of  having,  from  in- 
terefted  motives,  in  concert  with  the  Hudfon’s  Bay  Com- 
pany, decided  againff;  the  practicability  of  the  pafTage, 
though  the  difcoveries  of  his  own  voyage  had  put  it  with- 
in his  reach. 

He  had,  between  the  latitude  of  65°  and  66°,  found  a very 
confiderable  inlet  running  Weftward,  into  which  he  entered 
with  his  fhips ; and,  “ after  repeated  trials  of  the  tides,  and 
‘‘  endeavours  to  difcover  the  nature  and  courfe  of  the 
“ opening,  for  three  weeks  fucceffively,  he  found  the  flood 
“ conftantly  to  come  from  the  Eaftward,  and  that  it  was  a 
“ large  river  he  had  got  into,”  to  which  he  gave  the  name 
of  Wager  River 

The  accuracy,  or  rather  the  fidelity  of  this  report  was 
denied  by  Mr.  Dobbs,  who  contended  that  this  opening  is  a 
Strait^  and  not  a frejh  water  river,  and  that  Middleton,  if 
he  had  examined  it  properly,  would  have  found  a paflage 
through  it  to  the  Weftern  American  Ocean.  The  failure 
of  this  voyage,  therefore,  only  ferved  to  furnifh  our  zeal- 
ous advocate  for  the  difcovery,  with  new  arguments  for  at- 
tempting it  once  more  ; and  he  had  the  good  fortune,  after 
getting  the  reward  of  twenty  thoufand  pounds  eftabliflied 
by  acSt  of  parliament,  to  prevail  upon  a fociety  of  gentle- 
men and  merchants  to  fit  out  the  Dobbs  and  California ; 
which  (hips,  it  was  hoped,  would  be  able  to  find  their  way 
* See  the  Abftradl  of  his  Journal,  publiftied  by  Mr.  Dobbs. 

inta 


INTRODUCTION. 


xliii 


into  the  Pacific  Ocean,  by  the  very  opening  which  Middle- 
ton’s voyage  had  pointed  out,  and  which  he  was  believed  to 
have  mifreprefented. 

This  renovation  of  hope  only  produced  frefh  difappoint- 
ment.  For  it  is  well  known,  that  the  voyage  of  the  Dobbs 
and  California,  inftead  of  confuting,  ftrongly  confirmed  all 
that  Middleton  had  afierted.  The  fuppofed  Strait  was  found 
to  be  nothing  more  than  a frefli  water  river,  and  its  utmofi: 
Weftern  navigable  boundaries  were  now  afcertained,  by  ac- 
curate examination.  But  though  Wager’s  Strait  had  thus 
difappointed  our  hopes,  as  had  alfo  done  Rankin’s  Inlet, 
which  was  now  found  to  be  a clofe  Bay ; and  though  other 
arguments,  founded  on  the  fuppofed  courfe  of  the  tides  in 
Hudfon’s  Bay,  appeared  to  be  groundlefs ; fuch  is  our  at- 
tachment to  an  opinion  once  adopted,  that,  even  after  the 
unfuccefsful  iffue  of  the  voyage  of  the  Dobbs  and  Califor- 
nia, a pafiage  through  fome  other  place  in  that  Bay  was, 
by  many,  confidered  as  attainable ; and,  particularly,  Chef- 
terfield’s  (formerly  called  Bowden’s)  Inlet,  lying  between 
latitude  63°  and  64°,  fucceeded  Wager’s  Strait,  in  the  fan- 
guine  expedlations  of  thofe  who  remained  unconvinced  by 
former  difappointments.  Mr.  Ellis,  who  was  on  board  the 
Dobbs,  and  who  wrote  the  hiftory  of  the  voyage,  holds 
up  this  as  one  of  the  places  where  the  paffage  may  be 
fought  for,  upon  very  rational  grounds^  and  with  very  good 
effedls  He  alfo  mentions  Repulfe  Bay,  nearly  in  latitude 
67° ; but  as  to  this  he  fpeaks  lefs  confidently  ; only  faying, 
that  by  an  attempt  there,  we  might  probably  approach 
nearer  to  the  difcovery  t.  He  had  good  reafon  for  thus 
guarding  his  expreflion ; for  the  Committee,  who  directed 
this  voyage,  admitting  the  impracSticability  of  effedling  a 


* Ellis’s  Voyage,  p.  328. 


t Ibid.  p.  330. 


f 2 


xliv 


INTRODUCTION. 


paflage  at  Repulfe  Bay,  had  refufed  allowing  the  Ihips  ta 
go  into  it,  being  fatisfied  as  to  that  place 

Setting  Repulfe  Bay,  therefore,  alide,  within  which  we 
have  no  reafon  for  believing  that  any  inlet  exifts,  there 
did  not  remain  any  part  of  Hiidfon’s  Bay  to  be  fearched, 
but  Chefterfield’s  Inlet,  and  a fmall  tradf  of  coaft  between 
the  latitude  62%  and  what  is  called  the  South  Point  of 
Main,  which  had  been  left  unexplored  by  the  Dobbs  and 
California. 

But  this  laft  gleam  of  hope  has  now  difappeared.  The 
averlion  of  the  Hudfon’s  Bay  Company  to  contribute  any 
thing  to  the  difcovery  of  a North  Weft  paflage,  had  been 
loudly  reported  by  Mr.  Dobbs ; and  the  Public  leemed  to  be- 
lieve that  the  charge  was  well  founded.  But  ftiU,  in  juftice 
to  them,  it  muft  be  allowed,  that,  in  1720,  they  had  fent 
Meflfs.  Knight  and  Barlow,  in  a floop  on  this  very  difco- 
very ; but  thefe  unfortunate  people  were  never  more  heard 
of.  Mr.  Scroggs,  who  failed  in  fearch  of  them,  in  1722, 
only  brought  back  proofs  of  their  ftiipwreck,  but  no  frefti 
intelligence  about  a paflage,  which  he  was  alfo  to  look  for. 
They  alfo  fent  a floop,  and  a fliallop,  to  try  for  this  difco- 
very, in  1737  ; but  to  no  purpofe.  If  obftrucftions  were 
thrown  in  the  way  of  Captain  Middleton,  and  of  the  Com- 
manders of  the  Dobbs  and  California,  the  Governor  and 
Committee  of  the  Hudfon’s  Bay  Company,  fince  that  time, 
we  muft  acknowledge,  have  made  amends  for  the  narrow 
prejudices  of  their  predeceflbrs ; and  we  have  it  in  our 
power  to  appeal  to  fa(fts,  which  abundantly  teftify,  that 

* Account  of  the  Voyage,  by  the  Clerk  of  the  California,  Vol.  ii.  p.  273.  Mr. 
Dobbs  himfelf  fays.  That  he  thought  the  pajfage  would  be  impraSlicable^  or^  at  leajl.y  very 
difficulty  in  cafe  there  was  one  farther  North  than  67°.— Account  of  Hudfon’s  Bay, 
p.  99. 


every 


INTR^JDUGTION. 


xlv 


every  thing  has  been  done  by  them,  that  could  be  required 
by  the  Public,  toward  perfecting  the  fearch  for  a North 
Weft  paflage. 

In  the  year  1761,  Captain  Chriftopher  failed  from  Fort 
Churchill,  in  the  Hoop  Churchill ; and  his  voyage  was  not 
quite  fruitlefs ; for  he  failed  up  Chefterfield’s  Inlet,  through 
which  a paflage  had,  by  Mr.  Ellis’s  account  of  it,  been  fo 
generally  expeCled.  But  when  the  water  turned  brackifli, 
which  marked  that  he  was  not  in  a ftrait,  but  in  a river, 
he  returned. 

To  leave  no  room  for  a variety  of  opinion,  however,  he 
was  ordered  to  repeat  the  voyage  the  enfuing  fummer,  in 
the  fame  floop,  and  Mr.  Norton,  in  a cutter,  was  appointed 
to  attend  him.  By  the  favour  of  the  Governor  and  Com- 
mittee of  the  Company,  the  Journals  of  Captain  Chrifto- 
pher, and  of  Mr.  Norton,  and  Captain  Chriftopher’s  chart 
of  the  Inlet,  have  been  readily  communicated.  From 
thefe  authentic  documents,  it  appears  that  the  fearch  and 
examination  of  Chefterfield’s  Inlet  was  now  completed.  It 
was  found  to  end  in  a frefh  water  lake,  at  the  diftance  of 
about  one  hundred  and  feventy  miles  from  the  fea.  This 
lake  was  found  alfo  to  be  about  twenty-one  leagues  long, 
and  from  five  to  ten  broad,  and  to  be  completely  clofed 
up  on  every  fide,  except  to  the  Weft,  where  there  was  a 
little  rivulet ; to  furvey  the  ftate  of  which,  Mr.  Norton 
and  the  crew  of  the  cutter  having  landed,  and  marched 
up  the  country,  faw  that  it  foon  terminated  in  three  falls, 
one  above  another,  and  not  water  for  a fmall  boat  over 
them  ; and  ridges,  moftly  dry  from  fide  to  fide,  for  five  or 
fix  miles  higher. 

Thus  ends  Chefterfield’s  Inlet,  and  all  Mr.  Ellis’s  expedta- 
tions  of  a paffage  through  it  to  the  Weftern  Ocean.  The 

other 


I N‘  T R O D U C'T  I O N. 


xhd 

other  parts  of  the  coaft,  from  latitude  62°,  to  the  South  Point 
of  Main,  within  which  limits  hopes  were  alfo  entertained 
of  finding  a paflage,  have,  of  late  years,  been  thoroughly 
explored.  It  is  here  that  Piftol  Bay  is  fituated ; which  the 
author  who  has  writ  lafi:  in  this  country,  on  the  probability 
of  a North  Wefl  paffage  *,  fpeaks  of  as  the  only  remaining 
part  of  Hudfon’s  Bay  where  this  Weftern  communication 
may  exift.  But  this  has  been  alfo  examined ; and,  on  the 
authority  of  Captain  Chriftopher,  we  can  affure  the  Reader, 
that  there  is  no  inlet  of  any  confequence  in  all  that  part  of 
the  coaft.  Nay,  he  has,  in  an  open  boat,  failed  round  the 
bottom  of  what  is  called  Piftol  Bay,  and,  inftead  of  a paf- 
fage to  a Weftern  Sea,  found  it  does  not  run  above  three 
or  four  miles  inland. 

Befides  thefe  voyages  by  fea,  which  fatisfy  us,  that  we 
muft  not  look  fot  a paflage  to  the  South  of  67°  of  latitude  ; 
we  are  indebted  to  the  Hudfon’s  Bay  Company,  for  a jour- 
ney by  land,  which  has  thrown  much  additional  light  on 
this  matter,  by  affording  what  may  be  called  demonftra- 
tion,  how  much  farther  North,  at  leaft  in  fome  part  of  their 
voyage,  fliips  muft  hold  their  courfe,  before  they  can  pafs 
from  one  fide  of  America  to  the  other.  The  Northern  In- 
dians, who  come  down  to  the  Company’s  forts  for  trade, 
had  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  our  people,  the  exiftence 
of  a river ; which,  from  copper  abounding  near  it,  had  got 
the  name  of  the  Copper-mine  River.  We  read  much  about 
this  river  in  Mr.  Dobbs’s  publications,  and  he  confiders  the 
Indian  accounts  of  it  as  favourable  to  his  fyftem.  The  Com- 
pany being  defirous  of  examining  the  matter  with  precifion, 

* Printed  for  Jeffreys,  in  1768.  His  words  are,  “ There  remains  then  to  be 
, fearched  for  the  difcovery  of  a palfage,  the  opening  called  Piftol  Bay,  in  Hudfon’s 

Bay.”  P.  122, 


inftrufted 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlvii 


inftru6led  their  Governor  of  Prince  of  Wales’s  Fort,  to  fend 
a proper  perfon  to  travel  by  land,  under  the  efcort  of  fome 
trully  Northern  Indians,  with  orders  to  proceed  to  this 
famous  river,  to  take  an  accurate  furvey  of  its  courfe,  and 
to  trace  it  to  the  fea,  into  which  it  empties  itfelf.  Mr. 
Hearne,  a young  gentleman  in  their  fervice,  who^  having 
been  an  officer  in  the  Navy,  was  well  qualified  to  make  ob- 
fervations  for  fixing  the  longitude  and  latitude,  and  make 
drawings  of  the  country  he  ffiould  pafs  through,  and  of 
the  river  which  he  was  to  examine,  was  appointed  for  this 
fervice. 

Accordingly,  he  fet  out  from  Fort  Prince  of  Wales,  on 
Churchill  River,  in  latitude  58°  50',  on  the  7th  of  Decem- 
ber 1770  ; and  the  whole  of  his  proceedings,  from  time  to 
time,  are  faithfully  preferved  in  his  written  Journal.  The 
publication  of  this  would  not  be  an  unacceptable  prefent  to 
the  world,  as  it  draws  a plain  artlefs  picture  of  the  favage 
modes  of  life,  the  fcanty  means  of  fubffilence,  and  indeed 
of  the  fingular  wretchednefs,  in  every  refpe(5t,  of  the  vari- 
ous tribes,  who,  without  fixed  habitations,  pafs  their  mi- 
ferable  lives,  roving  throughout  the  dreary  deferts,  and 
over  the  frozen  lakes  of  the  immenfe  tradf  of  continent 
through  which  Mr.  Hearne  paffed,  and  which  he  may  be 
faid  to  have  added  to  the  geography  of  the  globe.  His  ge- 
neral courfe  was  to  the  North  Weft.  In  the  month  of  June 
1771,  being  then  at  a place  called  Conge  catha  wha  Chaga^  he 
had,  to  ufe  his  own  words,  two  good  obfervations^  both  by 
meridian  and  double  altitudes^  the  mean  of  which  determines 
this  place  to  be  in  latitude  68°  46'  North,  and,  by  account, 
in  longitude  24°  2'  Weft  of  Churchill  River,  On  the  13th 
of  July  (having  left  Conge  catha  wha  Chaga  on  the  2d, 
and  travelling  ftill  to  the  Weft  of  North)  he  reached  the 

Copper- 


xlviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


Copper-mine  River ; and  was  not  a little  furprized  to  find 
it  differ  fo  much  from  the  defcriptions  given  of  it  by  the 
natives  at  the  fort ; for,  inftead  of  being  likely  to  be  navi- 
gable for  a fliip,  it  is,  at  this  part,  fcarcely  navigable  for  an 
Indian  canoe ; three  falls  being  in  fight,  at  one  view,  and 
being  choaked  up  with  flioals  and  ftony  ridges. 

Here  Mr.  Hearne  began  his  furvey  of  the  river.  This  he 
continued  till  he  arrived  at  its  mouth,  near  which  his 
Northern  Indians  maffacred  twenty-one  Efquimaiix,  whom 
they  furprized  in  their  tents.  We  fliall  give  Mr.  Hearne’s 
account  of  his  arrival  at  the  fea,  in  his  own  words  : “ After 
“ the  Indians  had  plundered  the  tents  of  the  Efquimaux  of 
“ all  the  copper,  &c.  they  were  then  again  ready  to  aflift 
“ me  in  making  an  end  to  the  furvey  ; the  fea  then  in  fight 
from  the  North  Weft  by  Weft  to  the  North  Eaft,  diftant 
“ about  eight  miles.  It  was  then  about  five  in  the  morning 
of  the  17th,  when  I again  proceeded  to  furvey  the  river  to 
‘‘  the  mouth,  ftill  found,  in  every  refpedf,  no  ways  likely, 
or  a poflibility  of  being  made  navigable,  bejjjg  full  of 
“ llioals  and  falls  ; and,  at  the  entrance,  the  river  emptying 
itfelf  over  a dry  flat  of  the  fhore.  For  the  tide  was  then 
‘‘  out,  and  feemed,  by  the  edges  of  the  ice,  to  flow  about 
“ twelve  or  fourteen  feet,  which  will  only  reach  a little 
“ within  the  river’s  mouth.  That  being  the  cafe,  the  wa- 
ter  in  the  river  had  not  the  leaft  brackifli  tafte.  But  I am 
fure  of  its  being  the  fea,  or  fome  part  thereof,  by  the 
quantity  of  whale-bone  and  feal-fkins  the  Efquimaux  had 
‘‘  at  their  tents ; as’  alfo  the  number  of  feals  which  I faw 
“ upon  the  ice.  The  fea,  at  the  river’s  mouth,  was  full 
“ of  iflands  and  llioals,  as  far  as  I could  fee,  by  the  aflift- 
ance  of  a pocket  telefcope ; and  the  ice  was  not  yet  broken 
up,  only  thawed  away  about  three  quarters  of  a mile 

from 


INTRODUCTION. 

“ from  the  fliore,  and  a little  way  round  the  iflands  and 
“ flioals. 

‘‘By  the  time  I had  completed  this  furvey,  it  was  about 
“ one  in  the  morning  of  the  i8th;  but  in  thefe  high  la- 
“ titudes,  and  this  time  of  the  year,  the  fun  is  always  a 
“ good  height  above  the  horizon.  It  then  came  on  a thick 
“ drizzling  rain,  with  a thick  fog ; and,  as  finding  the  river 
“ and  fea,  in  every  refpecSt,  not  likely  to  be  of  any  utility, 
“ I did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  wait  for  fair  weather,  to 
“ determine  the  latitude  exa6fly  by  an  obfervation.  But,  by 
“ the  extraordinary  care  I took  in  obferving  the  courfes 
“ and  diftances,  walked  from  Congecathawbachaga,  where 
“ I had  two  good  obfervations,  the  latitude  may  be  de- 
“ pended  on,  within  twenty  miles  at  fartheft.” 

From  the  map  which  Mr.  Hearne  conftrutTed  of  the 
country  through  which  he  paffed,  in  this  lingular  journey, 
and  which  we  have  been  permitted  to  copy  upon  our  gene- 
ral chart,  it  appears  that  the  mouth  of  the  Copper-mine 
River  lies  in  the  latitude  72°,  and  above  25°  Weft  longitude 
from  the  fort,  from  whence  he  took  his  departure 

The  confequences  refulting  from  this  extenfive  difcovery, 
are  obvious.  We  now  fee  that  the  continent  of  North  Ame- 
rica ft  retches  from  Hudfon’s  Bay  fo  far  to  the  North  Weft, 
that  Mr.  Hearne  had  travelled  near  thirteen  hundred  miles 
before  he  arrived  at  the  fea.  His  moft  Weftern  diftance 
from  the  coaft  of  Hudfon’s  Bay  was  near  fix  hundred 

* Mr.  Hearne ’s  journey,  back  from  the  Copper-mine  River,  to  Fort  Prince  of  Wales, 
lafted  till  June  30,  1772.  From  his  firft  fetting  out  till  his  return,  he  had  employed 
near  a year  and  feven  months.  The  unparalleled  hardlhips  he  fuffered,  and  the  eflential 
fcrvice  he  performed,  met  with  a fuitable  reward  from  his  mafters,  and  he  is  now  the  Go- 
vernor of  Fort  Prince  of  Wales,  where  he  was  taken  prifoner  by  the  French  in  17825 
and  laft  fummer  returned  to  his  Ration. 

VoL.  I. 


xliK 


g 


miles ; 


1 


INTRODUCTION. 


miles  "'i'* ; and  that  his  Indian  guides  were  well  apprized  of 
a vaft  tradt  of  continent  ftretching  farther  on  in  that  direc- 
tion, is  certain  from  many  circumftances  mentioned  in  his 
Journal ; one  of  which,  as,  belides  eftablifliing  this  fa6t,  it 
prefents  us  with  a very  ftriking  picture  of  favage  Jife,  has 
been  tranfcribed  in  the  following  note  t. 

What 

* The  Hudfon’s  Bay  Company  have  a trading  poft,  called  Hudfori’s  Houfe,  above  five 
hundred  miles  up  the  country,  in  lat.  53°  o''  32''',  and  in  long.  106°  27''  30''. 

f This  day,  Jan.  ii,  1772,  as  the  Indians  were  hunting,  fome  of  them  faw  a ftrange 
fnow-fhoe  track,  which  they  followed,  and  at  a confiderable  diftance  came  to  a little  hut^ 
where  they  found  a young  woman  fitting  alone.  They  brought  her  to  the  tents ; and, 
on  examining  her,  found  that  fhe  was  one  of  the  Weftern  Dog-ribbed  Indians,  and  had 
been  taken  prifoner  by  the  Arathapefcow  Indians  in  the  fummer  1770 ; and  when  the  In- 
dians, who  took  her  prifoner,  were  near  this  part  in  the  fummer  1771,  fhe  eloped  from 
them,  with  an  intent  to  return  to  her  own  country ; but  it  being  fo  far  ojf  and,  after  being 
taken  prifoner,  having  come  the  whole  way  in  canoes,  with  the  winding  of  rivers  and 
lakes,  fhe  had  forgot  the  way ; and  had  been  in  this  little  hut  ever  fince  the  firft  fetting 
in  of  the  fall.  By  her  account  of  the  moons  paft,  fince  her  elopement,  it  appears  to  be 
the  middle  of  laft  July  when  fhe  left  the  Arathapefcow  Indians,  and  had  not  feen  a hu- 
man face  ever  fince.  She  fupported  herfelf  very  well  by  fnaring  of  rabbits,  partridges, 
and  fquirrels,  and  was  now  in  good  health  and  flefh  j and,  I think,  as  fine  a woman,  of  a 
real  Indian,  as  I have  feen  in  any  part  of  North  America.  She  had  nothing  to  make 
fnares  of  but  the  fmews  of  rabbits  legs  and  feet,  which  fhe  twifted  together  for  that  pur- 
pofe  ; and  of  the  rabbits  fkins  had  made  herfelf  a neat  and  warm  winter’s  clothing.  The 
flock  of  materials  fhe  took  with  her,  when  fhe  eloped,  confifted  of  about  five  inches  of  an 
iron  hoop  for  a knife ; a ftone  fteel,  and  other  hard  ftones  as  flints,  together  with  other 
fire  tackle,  as  tinder,  &c. ; about  an  inch  and  half  of  the  fhank  of  the  fhoeing  of  an  ar- 
row, of  iron,  of  which  fhe  made  an  awl.  She  had  not  been  long  at  the  tents,  when  half 
a fcore  of  men  wreftled  to  fee  who  fhould  have  her  for  their  wife.  She  fays,  when  the 
Arathapefcow  Indians  took  her  prifoner,  that  they  ftole  on  the  tents  in  the  night,  when 
the  inhabitants  were  all  afleep,  and  killed  every  foul  except  herfelf  and  three  other  young 
women.  Her  father,  mother,  and  hufband  were  in  the  fame  tent  with  her,  and  they  were 
all  killed.  Her  child,  of  about  five  months  old,  fhe  took  with  her,  wrapped  in  a bundle  of 
her  clothing,  undifcovered,  in  the  night.  But  when  arrived  at  the  place  where  the  Ara- 
thapefcows  had  left  their  wives,  which  was  not  far  ofF,  it  being  then  day-break,  thefe  In- 
dian women  immediately  began  to  examine  her  bundle  j and  having  there  found  the  child, 

took 


INTRODUCTION. 


li 


What  is  now,  for  the  firft  time,  authentically  laid  before 
the  Public,  with  regard  to  the  difcoveries  made  by  the 
Hudfon’s  Bay  Company,  was  well  known  to  the  noble  Lord 
who  prefided  at  the  board  of  Admiralty,  when  this  voyage 
was  undertaken ; and  the  intimate  conne6lion  of  thofe  dif- 
coveries with  the  Plan  of  the  Voyage,  of  courfe,  regulated 
the  inftrudlions  given  to  Captain  Cook. 

And  now,  may  we  not  take  it  upon  us  to  appeal  to  every 
candid  and  capable  inquirer,  whether  that  part  of  the  in- 
ftrudlions  which  diredfed  the  Captain  not  to  lofe  time^  in 
exploring  rivers  or  inlets^  or  upon  any  other  account^  till  he 
got  into  the  latitude  of  65°,  was  not  framed  judicioully ; 
as  there  were  fuch  indubitable  proofs  that  no  paiTage  ex- 
ifted  fo  far  to  the  South  as  any  part  of  Hudfon’s  Bay,  and 
that,  if  a paffage  could  be  effedted  at  all,  part  of  it,  at 
leaft,  muft  be  traverfed  by  the  fliips  as  far  to  the  North- 
ward as  the  latitude  72°,  where  Mr.  Hearne  arrived  at 
the  fea  ? 

We  may  add,  as  a farther  conhderation  in  fupport  of  this 
article  of  the  Inifrudlions,  that  Beering’s  Afiatic  difcoveries, 
in  1728,  having  traced  that  continent  to  the  latitude  of  67°, 
Captain  Cook’s  approach  toward  that  latitude  was  to  be 
wiflied  for,  that  he  might  be  enabled  to  bring  back  more 

took  it  from  her  and  killed  it  immediately.  The  relation  of  this  {hocking  fcene  only 
ferved  the  favages  of  my  gang  for  laughter.  Her  country  is  fo  far  to  the  Wejlward^  that  fhe 
fays  {he  never  faw  any  iron,  or  other  kind  of  metal,  till  taken  prifoner  j thofe  of  her  tribe 
making  their  hatchets  and  chifels  of  deers  horns,  and  knives  of  ftone  and  bone ; their  ar- 
rows are  {hod  with  a kind  of  Hate,  bones,  and  deers  horns  ; and  their  inftruments,  to  make 
their  wood  work,  are  nothing  but  beavers  teeth.  They  have  frequently  heard  of  the  ufe- 
ful  materials  the  nations  to  the  Eaft  of  them  are  fupplied  with  from  the  Englilh ; but, 
inftead  of  drawing  nearer  to  be  in  the  way  of  trading  for  Iron  work,  &c.  are  obliged  to 
retreat  fartlier  back,  to  avoid  the  Arathapefcow  Indians,  as  they  make  furpri:&ing  {laughter 
amongft  them  every  year,  both  winter  and  fummer.  Hearne’s  MS.  Journal. 

g 2 authentic 


lii 


INTRODUCTION. 


authentic  information  than  the  world  had  hitherto  ob- 
tained, about  the  relative  lituation  and  vicinity  of  the  two 
continents,  which  was  abfolutely  neceffary  to  be  known, 
before  the  practicability  of  failing  between  the  Pacific  and 
Atlantic  Oceans,  in  any  Northern  direction,  could  be  afcer- 
tained. 

After  all,  that  fearch,  in  a lower  latitude,  which  they 
who  give  credit  (if  any  fuch  there  now  be)  to  the  pretended 
difcoveries  of  de  Fonte,  affeCt  to  wifli  had  been  recommend- 
ed to  Captain  Cook,  has  (if  that  will  cure  them  of  their 
credulity)  been  fatisfaCtorily  made.  The  Spaniards,  roufed 
from  their  lethargy  by  our  voyages,  and  having  caught  a 
fpark  of  enterprize  from  our  repeated  vifits  to  the  Pacific 
Ocean,  have  followed  us  more  than  once  into  the  line  of  our 
difcoveries  within  the  Southern  tropic ; and  have  alfo  fitted 
out  expeditions  to  explore  the  American  continent  to  the 
North  of  California.  It  is  to  be  lamented,  that  there  fliould 
be  any  reafons  why  the  tranfaClions  of  thofe  Spanifii  voyages 
have  not  been  fully  difclofed,  with  the  fame  liberal  fpirit  of 
information  which  other  nations  have  adopted.  But,  for- 
tunately, this  excelfive  caution  of  the  court  of  Spain  has 
been  defeated,  at  lead:  in  one  inftance,  by  the  publication  of 
an  authentic  Journal  of  their  laid  voyage  of  difcovery  upon 
the  coaft  of  America,  in  1775,  for  which  the  world  is  in- 
debted to  the  Honourable  Mr.  Daines  Barrington.  This 
publication,  which  conveys  fome  information  of  real  con- 
fequence  to  geography,  and  has  therefore  been  referred  to 
more  than  once  in  the  following  work,  is  particularly  va- 
luable in  this  refpedl,  that  fome  parts  of  the  coaft  which 
Captain  Cook,  in  his  progrefs  Northward,  was  prevented, 
by  unfavourable  winds,  from  approaching,  were  feen  and 
examined  by  the  Spanifli  fhips  who  preceded  him ; and 

the 


INTRODUCTION. 


liii 


the  perufal  of  the  following  extradf  from  their  Journal, 
may  be  recommended  to  thofe  (if  any  fuch  there  be)  who 
would  reprefent  it  as  an  imperfection  in  Captain  Cook’s 
voyage,  that  he  had  not  an  opportunity  of  examining  the 
coaft  of  America,  in  the  latitude  affigned  to  the  difcoveries 
of  Admiral  Fonte.  ‘‘We  now  attempted  to  find  out  the 
“ flraits  of  Admiral  Fonte,  though,  as  yet,  we  had  not  dif- 
“ covered  the  Archipelago  of  St.  Lazarus,  through  which 
“ he  is  faid  to  have  failed.  With  this  intent,  we  fearched 
“ every  bay  and  recefs  of  the  coaft,  and  failed  round  every 
“ headland,  lying  to  in  the  night,  that  we  might  not  lofe 
“ fight  of  this  entrance.  After  thefe  pains  taken-^  and  being 
“ favoured  by  a North  Weft  wind,  it  may  be  pronounced  that 
“ no  fuch  flraits  are  to  be  found 

In  this  Journal,  the  Spaniards  boaft  of  “ having  reached 
“ fo  high  a latitude  as  58°,  beyond  what  any  other  naviga- 
“ tors  had  been  able  to  effeCt  in  thofe  feas  t.”  Without 
dimin idling  the  merit  of  their  performance,  we  may  be 
permitted  to  fay  that  it  will  appear  very  inconfiderable,  in- 
deed, in  comparifon  of  what  Captain  Cook  effected,  in  the 
voyage  of  which  an  account  is  given  in  thefe  volumes.  Be^ 
fides  exploring  the  land  in  the  South  Indian  Ocean,  of  which 
Kerguelen,  in  two  voyages,  had  been  able  to  obtain  but  a 
very  imperfeCt  knowledge  ; adding  alfo  many  confiderable 
acceflions  to  the  geography  of  the  Friendly  Iflands ; and 
difcovering  the  noble  group,  now  called  Sandwich  Iflands, 
in  the  Northern  part  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  of  which  not 

* Journal  of  a voyage  in  1775  by  Don  Francifco  Antonio  Maurelle,  in  Mr.  Barring- 
ton’s Mifcellanies,  p.  508. 

t Ibid.  p.  507.  We  learn  from  Maurelle’s  Journal  that  another  voyage  had  been  fome 
time  before  performed  upon  the  coaft  of  America  j but  the  utmoft  Northern  progrefs  of 
it  was  to  latitude  55°. 


the 


iiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  fainteft  trace  can  be  met  with  in  the  account  of  any 
former  voyage ; hehdes  thefe  preliminary  difcoveries,  the 
Reader  of  the  following  work  will  find,  that  in  one  fum- 
mer,  our  Englifli  Navigator  difcovered  a much  larger  pro- 
portion of  the  North  Weft  coaft  of  America  than  the  Spa- 
niards, though  fettled  in  the  neighbourhood,  had,  in  all 
their  attempts,  for  above  two  hundred  years,  been  able  to 
do ; That  he  has  put  it  beyond  all  doubt  that  Beering  and 
Tfcherikoff  had  really  difcovered  the  continent  of  America 
inT74r,  and  has  alfo  eftablifhed  the  prolongation  of  that 
continent  Weft  ward  oppofite  Kamtfchatka,  which  fpecula- 
tive  writers,  wedded  to  favourite  fyftems,  had  affecfted  fo 
much  to  difbelieve  and  which,  though  admitted  by  Mul- 
ler, had,  fince  he  wrote,  been  confidered  as  difproved  by 
later  Ruffian  difcoveries  t ; That,  befides  afcertaining  the 
true  pofition  of  the  Weftern  coafts  of  America,  with  fome 
inconfiderable  interruptions,  from  latitude  44°  up  to  beyond 
the  latitude  70“,  he  has  alfo  afcertained  the  pofition  of  the 
North  Eaftern  extremity  of  Afia,  by  confirming  Beering’s 
difcoveries  in  1728,  and  adding  extenfive  acceffions  of  his 
own ; That  he  has  given  us  more  authentic  information 
concerning  the  iflands  lying  between  the  two  continents, 
than  the  Kamtfchatka  traders,  ever  fince  Beering  firft  taught 

* Dr.  Campbell,  fpeaking  of  Beering’s  voyage  in  1741,  fays,  “Nothing  can  be  plainer 
“ than  this  truth,  that  his  difcovery  does  not  warrant  any  fuch  fuppofition,  as  that  the 
“ country  he  touched  at  was  a great  continent  making  part  of  North  America.” 

t See  Coxe’s  Ruffian  Difcoveries,  p.  26,  27,  &c.  The  fidlions  of  fpeculative  geo- 
graphers in  the  Southern  hemifphere,  have  been  continents  ; in  the  Northern  hemifphere, 
they  have  been  feas.  It  may  be  obferved,  therefore,  that  if  Captain  Cook  in  his  firft 
voyages  annihilated  imaginary  Southern  lands,  he  has  made  amends  for  the  havock,  in  his 
third  voyage,  by  annihilating  imaginary  Northern  feas,  and  filling  up  the  vaft  fpace, 
which  had  been  allotted  to  them,  with  the  folid  contents  of  his  new  difcoveries  of  Ame- 
rican land  farther  Weft  and  North  than  had  hitherto  been  traced. 


them 


INTRODUCTION. 


Iv 


th^m  to  venture  on  this  fea,  had  been  able  to  procure  ; 
That,  by  fixing  the  relative  fituation  of  Afia  and  America, 
and  difcovering  the  narrow  bounds  of  the  firait  that  divides 
them,  he  has  thrown  a blaze  of  light  upon  this  important 
part  of  the  geography  of  the  globe,  and  folved  the  puzzling 
problem  about  the  peopling  of  America,  by  tribes  deftitute 
of  the  neceflary  means  to  attempt  long  navigations  ; and, 
laftly.  That,  though  the  principal  object  of  the  voyage  fail- 
ed, the  world  will  be  greatly  benefited  even  by  the  failure, 
as  it  has  brought  us  to  the  knowledge  of  the  exiftence  of 
the  impediments,  which  future  navigators  may  expert  to 
meet  with  in  attempting  to  go  to  the  Eaft  Indies  through 
Beering’s  firait. 

The  extended  review  we  have  taken  of  the  preceding 
voyages,  and  the  general  outline  we  have  Iketched  out,  of 
the  tranfacfiions  of  the  lafi,  which  are  recorded  at  full 
length  in  thefe  volumes,  will  not,  it  is  hoped,  be  confidered 
as  a prolix  or  unneceflary  detail.  It  will  ferve  to  give  a 
jufi  notion  of  the  whole  plan  of  difcovery  executed  by  his 
Majefiy’s  commands.  And  it  appearing  that  much  was 
aimed  at,  and  much  accompliflied,  in  the  unknown  parts 
of  the  globe,  in  both  hemifpheres,  there  needs  no  other 

* The  Ruffians  feem  to  owe  much  to  England,  in  matters  of  this  fort.  It  is  fingular 
enough  that  one  of  our  countrymen,  Dr.  Campbell  [See  his  edition  of  Harris’s  voyages, 
Vol.  ii.  p.  1021.]  has  preferred  many  valuable  particulars  of  Beering’s  firft  voyage,  of 
which  Muller  himfelf,  the  Hiftorian  of  their  earlier  difcoveries,  makes  no  mention ; that 
it  fhould  be  another  of  our  countrymen,  Mr.  Coxe,  who  firft  publiftied  a fatisfadfory  ac- 
count of  their  later  difcoveries  ; and  that  the  King  of  Great  Britain’s  fhips  fhould  tra- 
verfe  the  globe  in  1778,  to  confirm  to  the  Ruffian  empire  the  pofleffion  of  near  thirty 
degrees,  or  above  fix  hundred  miles,  of  continent,  which  Mr.  Engel,  in  his  zeal  for  the 
pradlicability  of  a North  Eaft  paflage,  would  pnme  away  from  the  length  of  Afia  to  the 
Eaftward.  See  his  Memoires  Geograpbiques^  &c.  Laufanne  1765  ; which,  however,  con- 
tains much  real  information ; and  many  parts  of  which  are  confirmed  by  Captain 
Cook’s  American  difcoveries. 


confideration, 


INTRODUCTION. 


1 • 


conRderation,  to  give  full  fatisfa^Iion  to  thofe  who  poffefs 
an  enlarged  way  of  thinking,  that  a variety  of  ufeful  pur- 
pofes  muft  have  been  elfedted  by  thefe  refearches.  But 
there  are  others,  no  doubt,  who,  too  diffident  of  their  own 
abilities,  or  too  indolent  to  exert  them,  would  wiffi  to  have 
their  reflections  affifted,  by  pointing  out  what  thofe  ufeful 
purpofes  are.  For  the  fervice  of  fuch,  the  following  enu- 
meration of  particulars  is  entered  upon.  And  if  there 
fhould  be  any,  who  affeCt  to  undervalue  the  plan  or  the 
execution  of  our  voyages,  what  fliall  now  be  offered,  if  it 
do  not  convince  them,  may,  at  leaft,  check  the  influence  of 
their  unfavourable  deciflon. 

I.  It  may  be  fairly  confldered,  as  one  great  advantage 
accruing  to  the  world  from  our  late  furveys  of  the  globe, 
that  they  have  confuted  fanciful  theories,  too  likely  to  give 
birth  to  impracticable  undertakings. 

After  Captain  Cook’s  perfevering  and  fruitlefs  traverfes 
through  every  corner  of  the  Southern  hemifphere,  who,  for 
the  future,  will  pay  any  attention  to  the  ingenious  reveries  of 
Campbell,  de  Brofles,  and  de  Buffbn  ? or  hope  to  eftabliffi  an 
intercourfe  with  fuch  a continent  as  Maupertuis’s  fruitful 
imagination  had  pictured  ? A continent  equal,  at  leaft,  in  ex- 
tent, to  all  the  civilized  countries  in  the  known  Northern 
hemifphere,  where  new  men,  new  animals,  new  produdtions 
of  every  kind,  might  be  brought  forward  to  our  view,  and 
difeoveries  be  made,  which  would  open  inexhauftible  trea- 
fures  of  commerce  We  can  now  boldly  take  it  upon  us 

* See  Maupertuis’s  Letter  to  the  King  of  Pruffia.  The  author  of  the  Preliminary 
Difeourfe  to  Bougainville’s  Voyage  aux  IJles  Malouines^  computes  that  the  Southern  con- 
tinent (for  the  exiftence  of  which,  he  owns,  we  muft  depend  more  on  the  conjedfures  of 
philofophers,  than  on  the  teftimony  of  voyagers)  contains  eight  or  ten  millions  of  fquare 
leagues . 


to 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ivii 


to  difcourage  all  expeditions,  formed  on  fuch  reafonings 
of  fpeculative  philofophers,  into  a quarter  of  the  globe, 
where  our  perfevering  Englhli  navigator,  inftead  of  this 
promifed  fairy  land,  found  nothing  but  barren  rocks, 
fcarcely  affording  flielter  to  penguins  and  feals  ; and  dreary 
feas,  and  mountains  of  ice,  occupying  the  immenfe  fpace 
allotted  to  imaginary  paradifes,  and  the  only  treafures  there 
to  be  difcovered,  to  reward  the  toil,  and  to  compenfate  the 
dangers  of  the  unavailing  fearch. 

Or,  if  we  carry  our  refie(Tions  into  the  Northern  hemi- 
fphere,  could  Mr.  Dobbs  have  made  a fingle  convert,  much 
lefs  could  he  have  been  the  fuccefsful  folicitor  of  two  dif- 
ferent expeditions,  and  have  met  with  encouragement  from 
the  legillature,  with  regard  to  his  favourite  paffage  through 
Hudfon’s  Bay,  if  Captain  Chriftopher  had  previoufly  ex- 
plored its  coafts,  and  if  Mr.  Hearne  had  walked  over  the  im- 
menfe continent  behind  it  ? Whether,  after  Captain  Cook’s 
and  Captain  Clerke’s  difcoveries  on  the  Weft  fide  of  Ame- 
rica, and  their  report  of  the  ftate  of  Beering’s  Strait,  there 
can  be  fufiicient  encouragement  to  make  future  attempts 
to  penetrate  into  the  Pacific  Ocean  in  any  Northern  direc- 
tion, is  a queftion,  for  the  decifion  of  which  the  Public  will 
be  indebted  to  this  work. 

-2.  But  our  voyages  will  benefit  the  world,  not  only  by 
difcouraging  future  unprofitable  fearches,  but  alfo  by  lef- 
fening  the  dangers  and  diftreftes  formerly  experienced  in 
thofe  feas,  which  are  within  the  line  of  commerce  and  na- 
vigation, now  actually  fubfifting.  In  how  many  inftances 
have  the  miftakes  of  former  navigators,  in  fixing  the  true 
fituations  of  important  places,  been  recftified  ? What  accef- 
fion  to  the  variation  chart  ? How  many  nautical  obferva- 
tions  have  been  colle(5led,  and  are  now  ready  to  be  confulteci, 

VoL.  I.  h in 


Iviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


in  directing  a fliip’s  coiirfe,  along  rocky  fhores,  through 
narrow  ftraits,  amidft  perplexing  currents,  and  dangerous 
fhoals  ? But,  above  all,  what  numbers  of  new  bays,  and 
harbours,  and  anchoring-places,  are  now,  for  the  firft  time, 
brought  forward,  where  Ihips  may  be  flieltered,  and  their 
crews  find  tolerable  refrefliments  ? To  enumerate  all  thefe 
would  be  to  tranfcribe  great  part  of  the  journals  of  our  feve- 
ral  Commanders,  whofe  labours  will  endear  them  to  every 
navigator  whom  trade  or  war  may  carry  into  their  tracks. 
Every  nation  that  fends  a fliip  to  fea,  will  partake  of  the 
benefit ; but  Great  Britain  herfelf,  whofe  commerce  is 
boundlefs,  mull  take  the  lead  in  reaping  the  full  advan- 
tage of  her  own  difcoveries. 

In  confequence  of  aU  thefe  various  improvements,  leffen- 
ing  the  apprehenfions  of  engaging  in  long  voyages,  may 
we  not  reafonably  indulge  the  pleafing  hope,  that  frefh 
branches  of  commerce  may,  even  in  our  own  time,  be  at- 
tempted, and  fuccefsfully  carried  on  ? Our  hardy  adven- 
turers in  the  whale-fifhery,  have  already  found  their  way, 
within  thefe  few  years,  into  the  South  Atlantic ; and  who 
knows  what  frefli  fources  of  commerce  may  ftill  be  opened, 
if  the  profpedf  of  gain  can  be  added,  to  keep  alive  the  fpirit 
of  enterprize  ? If  the  fituation  of  Great  Britain  be  too  re- 
mote, other  trading  nations  will  afluredly  avail  themfelves 
of  our  difcoveries.  We  may  foon  expedl  to  hear  that  the 
Ruffians,  now  inftrudled  by  us  where  to  find  the  American 
continent,  have  extended  their  voyages  from  the  Fox  Iflands 
to  Cook’s  River,  and  Prince  William’s  Sound.  And  if  Spain 
itfelf  fhould  not  be  tempted  to  trade  from  its  mofl;  Northern 
Mexican  ports,  by  the  frefli  mine  of  wealth  difcovered  in 
the  furs  of  King  George’s  Sound,  which  they  may  tranfport 
in  their  Manilla  fliips,  as  a favourite  commodity  for  the 

Chinefe 


INTRODUCTION. 

Chinefe  market ; that  market  may  probably  be  fupplied  by 
a diredl  trade  to  America,  from  Canton  itfelf,  with  thofe 
valuable  articles  which  the  inhabitants  of  China  have  hi- 
therto received,  only  by  the  tedious  and  expenlive  circuit 
of  Kamtfchatka  and  Kiachta. 

Thefe  and  many  other  commercial  improvements  may 
reafonably  be  expected  to  refult  from  the  Britifli  difcoveries, 
even  in  our  own  times.  But  if  we  look  forward  to  future 
ages,  and  to  future  changes  in  the  hiftory  of  commerce,  by 
recollecting  its  various  pall  revolutions  and  migrations,  we 
may  be  allowed  to  pleafe  ourfelves  with  the  idea  of  its  find- 
ing its  way,  at  lall,  throughout  the  extent  of  the  regions 
with  which  our  voyages  have  opened  an  intercourfe  ; and 
there  will  be  abundant  reafon  to  fubfcribe  to  Captain  Cook’s 
obfervation  with  regard  to  New  Zealand,  which  may  be  ap- 
plied to  other  traCls  of  land  explored  byh  im,  that  ‘‘  al- 
“ though  they  be  far  remote  from  the  prefent  trading 
“ world,  we  can,  by  no  means,  tell  what  ufe  future  ages 
“ may  make  of  the  difcoveries  made  by  the  prefent  In 
this  point  of  view,  furely,  the  utility  of  the  late  voyages 
mull  Hand  confelfed ; and  we  may  be  permitted  to  fay,  that 
the  hiltory  of  their  operations,  which  will  be  completed  in 
thefe  volumes,  has  the  jullell  pretenlions  to  be  called  KTyj/xiz 
sg  del,  as  it  will  convey  to  latell  pollerity  a treafure  of  inte- 
relling  information. 

3.  Admitting,  however,  that  we  may  have  exprelfed  too 
fanguine  expeClations  of  commercial  advantages,  either 
within  our  own  reach,  or  gradually  to  be  unfolded  at  fome 
future  period,  as  the  refult  of  our  voyages  of  difcovery ; we 
may  llill  be  allowed  to  conlider  them  as  a laudable  effort  to 
add  to  the  flock  of  human  knowledge,  with  regard  to  an 

* Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  92. 

h 2 


lix 


objeCl 


]x  INTRODUCTION, 

object  which  cannot  but  deferve  the  attention  of  enlight- 
ened man.  To  exert  our  faculties  in  deviling  ingenious 
modes  of  fatisfying  ourfelves  about  the  magnitude  and 
diftance  of  the  fun ; to  extend  our  acquaintance  with  the 
fyftem  to  which  that  luminary  is  the  common  centre,  by 
tracing  the  revolutions  of  a new  planet,  or  the  appearance 
of  a new  comet ; to  carry  our  bold  refearches  through  all 
the  immenhty  of  fpace,  where  world  beyond  world  rifes  to 
the  view  of  the  aftoniflied  obferver ; thefe  are  employ- 
ments which  none  but  thofe  incapable  of  purfuing  them 
can  depreciate,  and  w'hich  every  one  capable  of  purfuing 
them  mull  delight  in,  as  a dignified  exercife  of  the  powers 
of  the  human  mind.  But  while  we  dire6t  our  ftudies  to 
diftant  worlds,  which,  after  all  our  exertions,  we  mull 
content  ourfelves  with  having  barely  difcovered  to  exill,  it 
would  be  a ftrange  neglect,  indeed,  and  would  argue  a 
moft  culpable  want  of  rational  curiolity,  if  we  did  not  ufe 
our  beft  endeavours  to  arrive  at  a full  acquaintance  with 
the  contents  of  our  own  planet ; of  that  little  fpot  in  the 
immenfe  univerfe,  on  which  we  have  been  placed,  and  the 
utmoll  limits  of  which,  at  lead;  its  habitable  parts,  we  pof- 
fefs  the  means  of  afcertaining,  and  defcribing,  by  acSlual  ex- 
amination. 

So  naturally  doth  this  reflection  prefent  itfelf,  that  to 
know  fomething  of  the  terraqueous  globe,  is  a favourite 
objedf  with  every  one  who  can  tafte  the  lowed:  rudiments 
of  learning.  Let  us  not  therefore  think  fo  meanly  of  the 
times  in  which  we  live,  as  to  fuppofe  it  poflible  that  full 
judice  will  not  be  done  to  the  noble  plan  of  difcovery,  fo 
Readily  and  fo  fuccefsfully  carried  on,  fince  the  accedion  of 
his  Majedy ; which  cannot  fail  to  be  conddered,  in  every 
fucceeding  age,  as  a fplendid  period  in  the  hidory  of  our 

country, 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixi. 


country,  and  to  add  to  our  national  glory,  by  diftinguifliing 
Great  Britain  as  taking  the  lead  in  the  naoft  arduous  under- 
takings for  the  common  benefit  of  the  human  race.  Be- 
fore thefe  voyages  took  place,  nearly  half  the  furface  of  the 
globe  we  inhabit  was  hid  in  obfcurity  and  confufion.  What 
is  ftill  wanting  to  complete  our  geography,  may  juftly  be 
termed  the  minuti^  of  that  fcience. 

4.  Let  us  now  carry  our  thoughts  fomewhat  farther.  It 
is  fortunate  for  the  interefiis  of  knowledge,  that  acquifitions 
in  any  one  branch,  generally,  and  indeed  unavoidably,  lead 
to  acquifitions  in  other  branches,  perhaps  of  ftill  greater 
confequence ; and  that  we  cannot  even  gratify  mere  curio- 
fity,  without  being  rewarded  with  valuable  inftrudtion. 
This  obfervation  applies  to  the  fubjedt  before  us.  Voyages, 
in  which  new  oceans  have  been  traverfed,  and  in  which 
new  countries  have  been  vifited,  can  fcarcely  ever  be  per- 
formed, without  bringing  forward  to  our  view  frefh  ob- 
jedls  of  fcience.  Even  when  we  are  to  take  our  report  of 
what  was  difcovered,  from  the  mere  failor,  whofe  know- 
ledge fcarcely  goes  beyond  the  marrow  limits  of  his  own 
profelfion,  and  whofe  inquiries  are  not  directed  by  philofo- 
phical  difcernment,  it  will  be  unfortunate  indeed,  if  fome- 
thing  hath  not  been  remarked,  by  which  the  fcholar  may 
profit,  and  ufeful  acceffions  be  made  to  our  old  ftock  of  in- 
formation. And  if  this  be  the  cafe  in  general,  how  much 
more  muft  be  gained  by  the  particular  voyages  now  under 
confideration  ? Befides  naval  officers  equally  fkilled  to  exa- 
mine the  coafts  they  might  approach,  as  to  delineate  them 
accurately  upon  their  charts,  artifts  were  engaged,  who, 

* MeflT.  Hodges  and  Webber,  whofe  drawings  have  ornamented  and  illuftrated  this  and 
Captain  Cook’s  fecond  voyage. 


by 


Ixii 


INTRODUCTION. 


by  their  drawings,  might  illuftrate  what  could  only  be  im- 
perfedlly  defcribed ; mathematicians  ■'■•S  who  might  treafure 
-lip  an  extenlive  feries  of  fcientific  obfervations  ; and  per- 
fons  verfed  in  the  various  departments  of  the  hiftory  of 
nature,  who  might  collect,  or  record,  all  that  they  fhould 
find  new  and  valuable,  throughout  the  wide  extent  of 
their  refearches.  But  while  moft  of  thefe  aflbciates  of  our 
naval  difcoverers,  were  liberally  rewarded  by  the  Public, 
there  was  one  gentleman,  who  thinking  it  the  nobleft  re- 
ward he  could  receive,  to  have  an  opportunity  of  making 
the  ample  fortune  he  inherited  from  his  anceftors,  fubfer- 
vient  to  the  improvement  of  fcience,  ftepped  forward  of 
his  own  accord,  and  fubmitting  to  the  hardfhips  and  dan- 
gers of  a circumnavigation  of  the  globe,  accompanied  Cap- 
tain Cook  in  the  Endeavour.  The  learned  world,  I may 
alfo  fay  the  unlearned,  will  never  forget  the  obligations 
which  it  owes  to  Sir  Jofeph  Banks. 

What  real  acquifitions  have  been  gained,  by  this  mu- 
nificent attention  to  fcience,  cannot  be  better  exprefled  than 
in  the  words  of  Mr.  Wales,  who  engaged  in  one  of  thefe 
voyages  himfelf,  and  contributed  largely  to  the  benefits  de- 
rived from  them. 

That  branch  of  natural  knowledge  which  may  be 
called  nautical  ajironomy-)  was  undoubtedly  in  its  infancy, 
‘‘  when  thefe  voyages  were  firft  undertaken.  Both  inftru- 

* Mr.  Green,  in  the  Endeavour ; Meflrs.  W ales  and  Bayly,  in  the  Refolution  and 
Adventure  j Mr.  Bayly,  a fecond  time,  jointly  with  Captains  Cook,  and  King  in  this 
voyage  j and  Mr.  Lyons,  who  accompanied  Lord  Mulgrave.  The  obfervations  of 
Meflrs.  Wales  and  Bayly,  during  Captain  Cook’s  fecond  voyage,  are  already  in  the 
hands  of  the  Public,  by  the  favour  of  the  Board  of  Longitude ; and  thofe  of  Captains 
[Cook  and  King,  and  Mr.  Bayly,  during  this  laft,  will  appear  immediately  after  our  Publi- 
cation. 


‘‘  ments 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixiii 


ments  and  obfervers,  which  deferved  the  name,  were 
“ very  rare ; and  fo  late  as  the  year  1770,  it  was  thought 
“ necelTary,  in  the  appendix  toMayefs  ‘Tables^  publifhed  by 
“ the  Board  of  Longitude,  to  Rate  fa6ts,  in  contradiction  to 
“ the  affertions  of  fo  celebrated  an  aftronomer  as  the  Abbe 
“ de  la  CaiUe,  that  the  altitude  of  the  fun  at  noon,  the 
‘‘  ealieft  and  moft  limple  of  all  obfervations,  could  not  be 
taken  with  certainty  to  a lefs  quantity  than  five,  fix, 
“ feven,  or  even  eight  minutes  But  thofe  who  wiU  give 
‘‘  themfelves  the  trouble  to  look  into  the  aftronomical  ob~ 
“ fervations,  made  in  Captain  Cook’s  lafi;  voyage,  will  find, 
“ that  there  were  few,  even  of  the  petty  officers,  who 
“ could  not  obferve  the  diftance  of  the  moon  from  the 
“ fun,  or  a ftar,  the  moft  delicate  of  all  obfervations,  with 
“ fufficient  accuracy.  It  may  be  added,  that  the  method 
“ of  making  and  computing  obfervations  for  finding  the 
variation  of  the  compafs,  is  better  known,  and  more  fre- 
“ quently  pracftifed  by  thofe  who  have  been  on  thefe  voy- 
“ ages,  than  by  moft  others.  Nor  is  there,  perhaps,  a per- 
‘‘  fon  who  ranks  as  an  officer,  and  has  been  concerned  in 

* The  Abbe’s  words  are,  “ Si  ceux  qui  promettent  une  fi  grande  precifion  dans  ces 
“ fortes  de  methodes,  avoient  navigue  quelque  temps,  ils  auroient  vu  fouvent,  que  dans 
“ I’obfervation  la  plus  fimple  de  toutes,  qui  eft  celle  de  la  hauteur  du  foleil  a midi,  deux 
“ obfervations,  munis  de  bons  quartiers  de  reflexion,  bien  redlifies,  different  entr’eux, 

“ lorfqu’ils  obfervent  chacun  a part,  de  5',  6^,  7',  & 8',”  Ephemer.  1755 — 1765. 
lntrodu£ilon^  p.  32. 

It  muft  be,  however,  mentioned,  injufticetoM.de  la  Caille,  that  he  attempted  to 
introduce  the  lunar  method  of  difcovering  the  longitude,  and  propofed  a plan  of  calcula- 
tions of  the  moon’s  diftance  from  the  fun  and  fixed  ftars  ; but  through  the  imperfedlion 
of  his  inftruments,  his  fuccefs  was  much  lefs  than  that  method  was  capable  of  afford- 
ing. The  bringing  it  into  general  ufe  was  referved  for  Dr.  Mafkelyne,  our  Aftronomer 
Royal.  See  the  preface  to  the  Tables  for  correcltng  the  EffeSls  of  RefraSlion  and  Parallax^ 
publifhed  by  the  Board  of  Longitude,  under  the  Direcftion  of  Dr.  Shepherd,  Plumian 
Profeffor  of  Aftronomy  and  Experimental  Philofophy  at  Cambridge,  in  1772. 

them. 


Ixiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


them,  who  would  not,  whatever  his  real  fkill  may  be,  feel 
afliamed  to  have  it  thought  that  he  did  not  know  how  to 
obferve  for,  and  compute  the  time  at  fea ; though,  but 
a fliort  while  before  thefe  voyages  were  fet  on  foot,  fuch 
“ a thing  was  fcarcely  ever  heard  of  amongft  feamen ; and 
“ even  firft-rate  aftronomers  doubted  the  poffibility  of  do- 
“ ing  it  with  fudicient  exadlnefs 

“ The  number  of  places,  at  which  the  rife  and  times  of 
flowing  of  tides  have  been  obferved,  in  thefe  voyages, 
“ is  very  great ; and  hence  an  important  article  of  ufeful 
‘‘  knowledge  is  afforded.  In  thefe  obfervations,  fome  very 
‘‘  curious  and  even  unexpedted  circumftances  have  offered 

* In  addition  to  Mi'.  Wales’s  Remark,  it  maybe  obferved,  tliat  the  proficiency  of  our 
naval  officers  in  taking  obfervations  at  fea,  muft  ultimately  be  attributed  to  the  great  at- 
tention paid  to  this  important  obje£l:  by  the  Board  of  Longitude  at  home  ; liberal  rewards 
having  been  given  to  mathematicians  for  perfecting  the  lunar  tables,  and  facilitating  cal- 
culations ; and  to  artifts  for  conftruCting  more  accurate  inftruments  for  obferving,  and 
watches  better  adapted  to  keeping  time  at  fea.  It  appears,  therefore,  tliat  the  voyages  of 
difcovery,  and  the  operations  of  the  board  of  longitude  went  hand  in  hand  ; and  they  muft 
be  combined,  in  order  to  form  a juft  eftimate  of  the  extent  of  the  plan  carried  into  execu- 
tion fince  his  Majefty’s  acceffion,  for  improving  aftronomy  and  navigation.  But,  befides 
the  eftabliftiment  of  the  Board  of  Longitude  on  its  prefent  footing,  which  has  had  fuch 
important  confequences,  it  muft  alfo  be  ever  acknowledged,  that  his  prefent  Majefty  has 
extended  his  royal  patronage  to  every  branch  of  the  liberal  arts  and  ufeful  fcience. 
The  munificent  prefent  to  the  Royal  Society  for  defraying  the  expence  of  obferving 
the  tranfit  of  Venus  ; — the  inftitution  of  the  Academy  of  Painting  and  Sculpture  ; — the 
magnificent  apartments  allotted  to  the  Royal  and  Antiquary  Societies,  and  to  the  Royal 
Academy,  at  Somerfet  Place  ; — the  fupport  of  the  Garden  of  Exotics  at  Kew,  to  improve 
which,  Mr.  MaiTon  was  fent  to  the  extremities  of  Africa  ; — the  fuhjlantial  encouragement 
afforded  to  learned  men  and  learned  works,  in  various  departments  ; and  particularly,  that 
afforded  to  Mr.  Herfchell,  which  has  enabled  him  to  devote  himfelf  entirely  to  the  im- 
provement of  aftronomy ; thefe,  and  many  other  inftances  which  might  be  enumerated, 
would  have  greatly  diftinguiftied  his  Majefty’s  reign,  even  if  he  had  not  been  the  patron  of 
thofe  fuccefsful  attempts  to  perfedl  geography  and  navigation  by  fo  many  voyages  o!  difco- 
very. 


them- 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixv 


themfelves  to  our  conficleration.  It  will  be  fufficient  to 
“ inftance  the  exceedingly  fmall  height  to  which  the  tide 
‘‘  rifes,  in  the  middle  of  the  great  Pacific  Ocean  ; where  it 
“ falls  fliort,  two-thirds  at  leaft,  of  what  might  have  been 
“ expe6led  from  theory  and  calculation. 

“ The  direcSlion  and  force  of  currents  at  fea,  make  alfo 
“ an  important  objetfi;.  Thefe  voyages  will  be  found  to 
“ contain  much  ufeful  information  on  this  head ; as  well 
“ relating  to  feas  nearer  home,  and  which,  in  confequence,- 
“ are  navigated  every  day,  as  to  thofe  which  are  more  re- 
“ mote,  but  where,  notwithftanding,  the  knowledge  of 
‘‘  thefe  things  may  be  of  great  fervice  to  thofe  who  are 
“ deftined  to  navigate  them  hereafter.  To  this  head  alfo 
‘‘  we  may  refer  the  great  number  of  experiments  which 
“ have  been  made  for  inquiring  into  the  depth  of  the  fea, 
‘‘  its  temperature,  and  faltnefs  at  different  depths,  and  in  a 
variety  of  places  and  climates. 

“ An  extenfive  foundation  has  alfo  been  laid  for  improve- 
“ ments  in  magnetifm,  for  difcovering  the  caufe  and  nature 
“ of  the  polarity  of  the  needle,  and  a theory  of  its  varia- 
“ tions,  by  the  number  and  variety  of  the  obfervations  and 
experiments  which  have  been  made,  both  on  the  variation 
“ and  dip,  in  almoft:  all  parts  of  the  world.  Experiments  alfo 
“ have  been  made,  in  confequence  of  the  late  voyages,  on 
“ the  effedls  of  gravity,  in  different  and  very  diftant  places, 
“ which  may  ferve  to  increafe  our  ftock  of  natural  know- 
“ ledge.  From  the  fame  fource  of  information  we  have 
“ learned,  that  the  phenomenon,  ufually  called  the  aurora 
borealis^  is  not  peculiar  to  high  Northern  latitudes,  but 
“ belongs,  equally,  to  all  cold  climates,  whether  they  be 
North  or  South. 

But,  perhaps,  no  part  of  knowledge  has  been  fo  great 
VoL.  I.  i “a  gainer 


/ 


Ixvi 


INTRODUCTION* 


“ a gainer  by  the  late  voyages,  as  that  of  botany.  We  are 
“ told  that,  at  leaft,  twelve  hundred  new  plants  have 
been  added  to  the  known  fyftem;  and  that  very  confi- 
“ derable  additions  have  been  made  to  every  other  branch 
“ of  natural  hiftory,  by  the  great  fkill  and  induftry  of  Sir 
“ Jofeph  Banks,  and  the  other  gentlemen  t who  have  ac- 
“ companied  Captain  Cook  for  that  purpofe.” 

To  our  naval  officers  in  general,  or  to  their  learned  af- 
fociates  in  the  expeditions,  all  the  foregoing  improvements 
of  knowledge  may  be  traced ; but  there  is  one  very  lingular 
improvement  indeed.  Hill  behind,  for  which,  as  we  are 
folely  indebted  to  Captain  Cook,  let  us  Rate  it  in  his  own 
words  : “ Whatever  may  be  the  public  judgment  about 
“ other  matters,  it  is  with  real  fatisfadfion,  and  without 
“ claiming  any  merit  but  that  of  attention  to  my  duty, 
“ that  I can  conclude  this  account  with  an  obfervation, 
“ which  fadts  enable  me  to  make,  that  our  having  dif- 
“ covered  the  poffibility  of  preferving  health  amongft  a 
“ numerous  Ihip’s  company,  for  fuch  a length  of  time,  in 
“ fuch  varieties  of  climate,  and  amidft  fuch  continued  hard- 
“ fhips  and  fatigues,  will  make  this  voyage  remarkable,  in 
“ the  opinion  of  every  benevolent  perfon,  when  the  dif- 
“ putes  about  a Southern  continent  ffiall  have  ceafed  to  en- 
attention,  and  to  divide  the  judgment  of  philo- 
“ fophers  i.” 

* See  Dr.  Shepherd’s  Preface,  as  above. 

t Dr.  Solander,  Dr.  Forfter  and  his  fon,  and  Dr.  Sparman.  Dr.  Forfter  has  given 
us  a fpecimen  of  the  botanical  difcoveries  of  his  voyage  in  the  Chara£ieres  Generum  Plan- 
iarum^  &c.  and  much  curious  philofophical  matter  is  contained  in  his  Obfervations  made 
in  a Voyage  round  the  World.  Dr.  Sparman  alfo,  on  his  return  to  Sweden,  fevoured  us 
with  a publication,  in  which  he  expatiates  on  the  advantages  accruing  to  natural  hiftory, 
to  aftronomy,  geography,  general  phyfics,  and  navigation,  from  our  South  Sea  voyages, 
t Cook’s  Voyage,  VoL  ii,  p.  393. 


5.  But 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixvii 


5.  But  while  our  late  voyages  have  opened  fo  many  chan- 
nels to  an  increafe  of  knowledge  in  the  feveral  articles  al- 
ready enumerated ; while  they  have  extended  our  acquaint- 
ance with  the  contents  of  the  globe  ; while  they  have  faci- 
litated old  tracks,  and  have  opened  new  ones  for  com- 
merce ; while  they  have  been  the  means  of  improving  the 
Ikill  of  the  navigator,  and  the  fcience  of  the  aftronomer ; 
while  they  have  procured  to  us  fo  valuable  acceflions  in  the 
feveral  departments  of  natural  hiftory,  and  furnifhed  fuch 
opportunities  of  teaching  us  how  to  preferve  the  healths 
and  lives  of  feamen,  let  us  not  forget  another  very  impor- 
tant objecSt  of  ftudy,  for  which  they  have  afforded  to  the 
fpeculative  philofopher  ample  materials  : I mean  the  ftudy 
of  human  nature  in  various  fituations,  equally  interefting 
as  they  are  uncommon. 

However  remote  or  fecluded  from  frequent  intercourfe 
with  more  poliftied  nations,  the  inhabitants  of  any  parts  of 
the  world  be,  if  hiftory  or  our  own  obfervation  ftiould  make 
it  evident  that  they  have  been  formerly  viftted,  and  that 
foreign  manners  and  opinions,  and  languages,  have  been 
blended  with  their  own,  little  ufe  can  be  made  of  what  is 
obferved  amongft  fuch  people,  toward  drawing  a real  pic- 
ture of  man  in  his  natural  uncultivated  ftate.  This  feems 
to  be  the  fituation  of  the  inhabitants  of  moft  of  the  iflands 
that  lie  contiguous  to  the  continent  of  Aft  a,  and  of  whofe 
manners  and  inftitutions  the  Europeans,  who- occaftonally 
viftt  them,  have  frequently  given  us  accounts.  But  the 
iflands  which  our  enterprizing  difcoverers  viftted  in  the 
centre  of  the  South  Pacific  Ocean,  and  are,  indeed,  the  prin- 
cipal fcenes  of  their  operations,  were  untrodden  ground. 
The  inhabitants,  as  far  as  could  be  obferved,  were  unmixed 
with  any  different  tribe,  by  occaftonal  intercourfe,  fubfe- 

i 2 quent 


Ixviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


quent  to  their  original  fettlement  there ; left  entirely  to 
their  own  powers  for  every  art  of  life ; and  to  their  own  re- 
mote traditions  for  every  political  or  religious  cuftom  or  in- 
ifitution ; uninformed  by  fcience ; unimproved  by  educa- 
tion ; in  fliort,  a fit  foil  from  whence  a careful  obferver 
could  colle6l  fa6ts  for  forming  a judgment,  how  far  unaf- 
fifted  human  nature  will  be  apt  to  degenerate ; and  in  what 
refpe6ts  it  can  ever  be  able  to  excel.  Who  could  have  thought, 
that  the  brutal  ferocity  of  feeding  upon  human  flefli,  and 
the  horrid  fuperftition  of  offering  human  facrifices,  fliould 
be  found  to  exift  amongft  the  natives  lately  difcovered  in 
the  Pacific  Ocean,  who,  in  other  refpecRs,  appear  to  be  no 
Grangers  to  the  fine  feelings  of  humanity,  to  have  arrived 
at  a certain  ftage  of  focial  life,  and  to  be  habituated  to  fub- 
ordination  and  government,  which  tend  fo  naturally  to  re- 
prefs  the  ebullitions  of  wild  paflion,  and  expand  the  latent 
powers  of  the  underftanding  ? 

Or,  if  we  turn  from  this  melancholy  pidture,  which  will 
fugged:  copious  matter  for  philofophical  fpeculation,  can 
we,  without  aftonifliment,  obferve  to  what  a degree  of  per- 
fedtion  the  fame  tribe  (and  indeed  we  may  here  join,  in 
fome  of  thofe  indances,  the  American  tribes  vifited  in  the 
courfe  of  the  prefent  voyage)  have  carried  their  favourite 
amufements,  the  plaintive  fongs  of  their  women,  their  dra- 
matic entertainments,  their  dances,  their  Olympian  games, 
as  we  may  call  them ; the  orations  of  their  Chiefs ; the 
chants  of  their  prieds ; the  folemnity  of  their  religious  pro- 
cedions  ; their  arts  and  manufadtures ; their  ingenious  con- 
trivances to  fupply  the  want  of  proper  materials,  and  of  effec- 
tive tools  and  machines  ; and  the  wonderful  produdtions  of 
their  perfevering  labour  under  a complication  of  difadvan- 
tages ; their  cloth  and  their  mats ; their  weapons ; their  fifh- 

ing- 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixix 


ing-inftruments ; their  ornaments ; their  utenlils ; which  in 
defign  and  in  execution,  may  vie  with  whatever  modern 
Europe,  or  claflical  antiquity  can  exhibit  ? 

It  is  a favourite  ftudy  with  the  fcholar  to  trace  the  re- 
mains of  Grecian  or  Roman  workmanfliip ; he  turns  over 
his  Montfaucon  with  learned  fatisfa6tion ; and  he  gazes 
with  rapture  on  the  noble  colledfion  of  Sir  William  Hamil- 
ton. The  amufement  is  rational  and  inftrudfive.  But  will 
not  his  curiofity  be  more  awakened,  will  he  not  find  even 
more  real  matter  for  important  refledlion,  by  pafling  an 
hour  in  furveying  the  numerous  fpecimens  of  the  inge- 
nuity of  our  newly-difcovered  friends,  brought  from  the 
utmoft  recedes  of  the  globe,  to  enrich  the  Britifli  Mufeum, 
and  the  valuable  repofitory  of  Sir  Afliton  Lever  ? If  the 
curiofities  of  Sir  Afhton’s  Sandwich-room  alone,  were  the 
only  acquifition  gained  by  our  vifits  to  the  Pacific  Ocean, 
who  that  has  tafte  to  admire,  or  even  eyes  to  behold,  could 
hefitate  to  pronounce,  that  Captain  Cook  had  not  failed 
in  vain  ? The  expence  of  his  three  voyages  did  not,  per- 
haps, far  exceed  that  of  digging  out  the  buried  contents 
of  Herculaneum.  And  we  may  add,  that  the  novelties 
of  the  Society  or  Sandwich  Ifiands,  feem  better  calculated 
to  engage  the  attention  of  the  fiudious  in  our  times,  than 
the  antiquities^^  which  exhibit  proofs  of  Roman  magni- 
ficence. 

The  grounds  for  making  this  remark  cannot  be  better 
explained,  than  in  the  words  of  a very  ingenious  writer : 
“ In  an  age'  (fays  Mr.  Warton^^),  advanced  to  the  highefi: 
‘‘  degree  of  refinement,  that  fpecies  of  curiofity  com- 
“ mences,  which  is  bufied  in  contemplating  the  progrefs 
“ of  focial  life,  in  difplaying  the  gradation  of  fcience,  and 

* Preface  to  his  Hiftory  of  Englifti  Poetry. 


‘‘  in 


INTRODUCTION. 


-Ixx 


‘‘  in  tracing  the  tranfition  from  barbarifm  to  civility, 
‘‘  That  thefe  fpeculations  fliould  become  the  favourite  to- 
“ pics  of  fuch  a period  is  extremely  natural.  We  look 
“ back  on  the  favage  condition  of  our  anceftors  with  the 
triumph  of  fuperiority;  and  are  pleafed  to  mark  the 
“ fteps  by  which  we  have  been  raifed  from  rudenefs  to 
“ elegance  ; and  our  refledlions  on  this  fubje(5t  are  accom- 
“ panied  with  a confcious  pride,  ariling,  in  a great  mea- 
fure,  from  a tacit  comparifon  of  the  infinite  difpropor- 
“ tion  between  the  feeble  efforts  of  remote  ages,  and  our 
prefent  improvements  in  knowledge.  In  the  mean  time, 
“ the  manners,  monuments,  cuftoms,  pra6tices,  and  opi- 
‘‘  nions  of  antiquity,  by  forming  fo  ftrong  a contrail:  with 
thofe  of  our  own  times,  and  by  exhibiting  human  na- 
ture  and  human  inventions  in  new  lights,  in  unexpected 
‘‘  appearances,  and  in  various  forms,  are  objeCts  which 
“ forcibly  ftrike  a feeling  imagination.  Nor  does  this  fpec- 
‘‘  tacle  afford  nothing  more  than  a fruitlefs  gratification 
‘‘  to  the  fancy.  It  teaches  us  to  fet  a juft  eflimation  on 
our  own  acquifitions,  and  encourages  us  to  cherifh  that 
cultivation,  which  is  fo  clofely  connected  with  the  exift- 
‘‘  ence  and  the  exercife  of  every  focial  virtue.”  We  need 
not  here  obferve,  that  the  manners^  monuments,,  cuftoms^ 
pra&ices,  and  opinions  of  the  prefent  inhabitants  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  or  of  the  Weft  fide  of  North  America, 
form  the  JirongeJl  contrajl  with  thofe  of  our  own  time 
in  poliflied  Europe ; and  that  a feeling  imagination  will 
probably  be  more  ftruck  with  the  narration  of  the  cere- 
monies of  a Natche  at  Tongataboo,  than  of  a Gothic 
tournament  at  London ; with  the  contemplation  of  the 
■coloffufes  of  Eafter  Ifland,  than  of  the  myfterious  remains 
of  Stonehenge. 


Many 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxi 


Many  Angularities,  refpedling  what  may  be  called  the 
natural  hiftory  of  the  human  fpecies,  in  different  climates, 
will,  on  the  authority  of  our  late  navigators,  open  abun- 
dant fources  for  philofophical  difcuflion.  One  queftion  of 
this  fort,  in  particular,  which  had  formerly  divided  the 
opinions  of  the  inquifitive,  as  to  the  exiftence,  if  not  of 
“ giants  on  the  earth,”  at  leaft  of  a race  (inhabiting  a dif- 
tri^  bordering  on  the  North  Ade  of  the  Arait  of  Magal- 
haens),  whofe  ftature  conAderably  exceeds  that  of  the  bulk 
of  mankind,  will  no  longer  be  doubted  or  difbelieved. 
And  the  ingenious  objections  of  the  fceptical  author  of 
Recherches  fur  les  Americains  will  weigh  nothing  in  the 
balance  againft  the  concurrent  and  accurate  teAimony  of 
Byron,  Wallis,  and  Carteret. 

Perhaps  there  cannot  be  a more  intereAing  inquiry  than 
to  trace  the  migrations  of  the  various  families  or  tribes 
that  have  peopled  the  globe ; and  in  no  refpeCl  have  our 
late  voyages  been  more  fertile  in  curious  difcoveries.  It 
was  known  in  general  (and  I Aiall  ufe  the  words  of 
Kaempfer  f),  that  the  AAatic  nation  called  Malayans,  “ in 
‘‘  former  times,  had  by  much  the  greateA  trade  in  the  In- 
“ dies,  and  frequented  with  their  merchant  fhips,  not  only 
“ all  the  coaAs  of  AAa,  but  ventured  even  over  to  the 
“ coaAs  of  Africa,  particularly  to  the  great  iAand  of  Ma- 
« dagafcar  The  title  which  the  king  of  the  Malayans 

“ aAumed 

* Tom.  i.  p.  331, 

+ Hiftory  of  Japan,  Vol.  i.  p.  93, 

X That  the  Malayans  have  not  only  freque  nted  Madagafcar,  but  have  alfo  been  the 
progenitors  of  fome  of  the  prefent  race  of  inhabitants  there,  is  confirmed  to  us  by  the 
teftimony  of  Monfieur  de  Pages,  who  vifited  that  ifland  fo  late  as  1774.  “ Ils  m’ont 

“ paru  provenir  des  diveries  Races ; leur  couleur,  leurs  cheveux,  et  leur  corps  I’indi- 
* quent.  Ceux  que  je  n’ai  pas  cru  originaires  des  anciens  naturels  du  paysj  font  petits 

« et 


Ixxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


affamed  to  himfelf,  of  Lord  of  the  Winds  and  Seas  to 
“ the  Eajl  and  to  the  WeJij  is  an  evident  proof  of  this ; 
“ but  much  more  the  Malayan  language,  which  fpread 
moft  all  over  the  Eaft,  much  after  the  fame  manner  as 
‘‘  formerly  the  Latin,  and  of  late  the  French,  did  all  over 
“ Europe.”  Thus  far,  I fay,  was  known.  But  that  from 
Madagafcar  to  the  Marquefes  and  Eafter  Ifland,  that  is, 
nearly  from  the  Eaft  fide  of  Africa,  till  we  approach  to- 
ward the  Weft  ftde  of  America,  a fpace  including  above 
half  the  circumference  of  the  globe,  the  fame  tribe  or  na- 
tion, the  Phoenicians,  as  we  may  call  them,  of  the  Oriental 
world,  fliould  have  made  their  fettlements,  and  founded 
colonies  throughout  almoft  every  intermediate  ftage  of  this 
immenfe  tracft,  in  iflands  at  amazing  diftances  from  the 
mother  continent,  and  ignorant  of  each  other's  exiftence ; 
this  is  an  hiftorical  fadl,  which  could  be  but  very  imper- 
fectly known  before  Captain  Cook’s  two  firft  voyages  difco- 
vered  fo  many  new  inhabited  fpots  of  land  lurking  in  the 
bofom  of  the  South  Pacific  Ocean  ; and  it  is  a fact  which 
does  not  reft  folely  on  fimilarity  of  cuftoms  and  inftitutions, 
but  has  been  eftablifhed  by  the  moft  fatisfadlory  of  all 
proofs,  that  drawn  from  affinity  of  language.  Mr.  Marfden, 
who  feems  to  have  confidered  this  curious  fubject  with 
much  attention,  fays,  that  the  links  of  the  latitudinal  chain 
remain  yet  to  be  traced  The  difcovery  of  the  Sandwich 

Iflands 


“ et  trapus  j ils  ont  les  cheveux  prefque  unis,  et  font  oUvatres  comme  les  Malayes, 
“ avec  qul  ih  ont^  en  general^  une  efpece  de  refemblance.”  — Voyages  des  M.  des  Pages, 
T.  ii.  p.  90. 

* Archaeolog.  Vol.  vi.  p.  155.  See  alfo  his  Hiftory  of  Sumatra,  p.  166.  from  which 
the  following  palTage  is  tranfcribed.  “ Befides  the  Malaye,  there  are  a variety  of  lan- 
“ guages  fpoken  on  Sumatra,  which,  however,  have  not  only  a manifeft  affinity  among 

“ themfelves, 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxiii 


Iflands  in  this  laft  voyage,  has  added  fome  links  to  the 
chain.  But  Captain  Cook  had  not  an  opportunity  of  carry- 
ing his  refearches  into  the  more  Wefterly  parts  of  the  North 
Pacific.  The  Reader,  therefore,  of  the  following  work  will 
not,  perhaps,  think  that  the  Editor  was  idly  employed  when 
he  fubjoined  fome  notes,  which  contain  abundant  proof 
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Ladrones,  or  Marianne  iflands, 
and  thofe  of  the  Carolines,  are  to  be  traced  to  the  fame 
common  fource,  with  thofe  of  the  iflands  vifited  by  our 
fliips.  With  the  like  view,  of  exhibiting  a ftriking  pidfure 
of  the  amazing  extent  of  this  Oriental  language,  which 
marks,  if  not  a common  original,  at  leafl:  an  intimate  inter- 
courfe  between  the  inhabitants  of  places  fo  very  remote 
from  each  other,  he  has  inferted  a comparative  table  of 
their  numerals,  upon  a more  enlarged  plan  than  any  that 
has  hitherto  been  executed 

Our  Britilh  difcoverers  have  not  only  thrown  a blaze  of 
light  on  the  migrations  of  the  tribe  which  has  fo  wonder- 
fully fpread  itfelf  throughout  the  iflands  in  the  Eaftern 
Ocean ; but  they  have  alfo  favoured  us  with  much  curious 
information  concerning  another  of  the  families  of  the  earth, 

“ themfelves,  but  alfo  to  that  general  language  which  is  found  to  prevail  in,  and  to  be 
“ indigenous  to,  all  the  iflands  of  the  Eaftern  feas ; from  Madagafcar  to  the  remoteft  of 
“ Captain  Cook’s  difcoveries,  comprehending  a wider  extent  than  the  Roman  or  any 
“ other  tongue  has  yet  boafted.  In  different  places,  it  has  been  more  or  lefs  mixed  and 
“ corrupted ; but  between  the  moft  difllmilar  branches,  an  eminent  famenefs  of  many 
“ radical  words  is  apparent ; and  in  fome  very  diftant  from  each  other,  in  point  of  11- 
“ tuation ; As,  for  inftance,  the  Philippines  and  Madagafcar,  the  deviation  of  the  words 
“ is  fcarcely  more  than  is  obferved  in  the  dialeds  of  neighbouring  provinces  of  the  fame 
“ kingdom.” 

* We  are  indebted  to  Sir  Jofeph  Banks,  for  a general  out-line  of  this,  in  Hawkef- 
worth’s  Colleition,  Vol.  iii.  p.  777.  The  Reader  will  find  our  enlarged  Table  at  the 
end  of  the  third  volume,  Appendix,  N”  2. 

VOL.  I. 


k 


whofe 


Ixxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


whofe  lot  has  fallen  in  lefs  hofpitable  climates.  We  fpeak 
of  the  Efquimaux,  hitherto  only  found  feated  on  the  coafts 
of  Labradore  and  Hudfon’s  Bay,  and  who  differ  in  feveral 
charadferiftic  marks  from  the  inland  inhabitants  of  North 
America.  That  the  Greenlanders  and  they  agree  in  every 
circumftance  of  cuftoms,  and  manners,  and  language,  which 
are  demonftrations  of  an  original  identity  of  nation,  had 
been  difcovered  about  twenty  years  ago  Mr.  Hearne,  in 
1771,  traced  this  unhappy  race  farther  back,  toward  that 
part  of  the  globe  from  whence  they  had  originally  coafted 
along  in  their  fkin  boats,  having  met  with  fome  of  them  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Copper-mine  River,  in  the  latitude  of  72% 
and  near  five  hundred  leagues  farther  Weft  than  Pickerf- 
gill’s  moft  Wefterly  Ration  in  Davis’s  Strait.  Their  being 
the  fame  tribe  who  now  acStually  inhabit  the  iflands  and 
coafts  on  the  Weft  fide  of  North  America,  oppofite  Kamt- 
fchatka,  was  a difcovery,  the  completion  of  which  was 
referved  for  Captain  Cook.  The  Reader  of  the  follow- 
ing work  will  find  them  at  Norton  Sound;  and  at  Oona- 
laflika,  and  Prince  William’s  Sound ; that  is,  near  1 500 
leagues  diftant  from  their  Rations  in  Greenland,  and  on 
the  Labradore  coaft.  And  left  fimilitude  of  manners 
fliould  be  thought  to  deceive  us,  a table  exhibiting  proofs 
of  affinity  of  language,  which  was  drawn  up  by  Captain 
Cook,  and  is  inferted  in  this  work  t,  will  remove  every 

* See  Crantz’s  Hiftory  of  Greenland,  Vol.  i.  p.  262  j where  we  are  told  that  the 
Moravian  Brethren,  who,  with  the  confent  and  furtherance  of  Sir  Hugh  Pallifer,  then  Go- 
vernor of  Newfoundland,  vifited  the  Efquimaux  on  the  Labradore  coaft,  found  that  their 
language,  and  that  of  tlie  Greenlanders,  do  not  differ  fo  much  as  that  of  the  High  and 
Low  Dutch. 

t See  Appendix,  N°  6.  The  Greenlanders,  as  Crantz  tells  us,  call  themfelves  Ka- 
ralit ; a word  not  very  unlike  Kanagyji^  the  name  affumed  by  the  inhabitants  of  Kodiack,, 
one  of  the  Schumagin  illands,  as  Staehlin  informs  us. 


doubt 


INTRODUCTION, 


Ixxv 


doubt  from  the  mind  of  the  molt  fcrupulous  inquirer  after 
truth. 

There  are  other  doubts  of  a more  important  kind,  which, 
it  may  be  hoped,  will  now  no  longer  perplex  the  ignorant, 
or  furnifli  matter  of  cavil  to  the  ill-intentioned.  After  the 
great  difcovery,  or  at  lead:  the  full  confirmation  of  the  great 
difcovery,  of  the  vicinity  of  the  two  continents  of  Alia  and 
America,  we  truft  that  we  fhall  not,  for  the  future,  be  ridi- 
culed, for  believing  that  the  former  could  ealily  furnifh  its 
inhabitants  to  the  latter.  And  thus,  to  all  the  various  good 
purpofes  already  enumerated,  as  anfwered  by  our  late  voy- 
ages, we  may  add  this  laft,  though  not  the  leaft  important, 
that  they  have  done  fervice  to  religion,  by  robbing  infide- 
lity of  a favourite  objedlion  to  the  credibility  of  the  Mofaic 
account  of  the  peopling  of  the  earth 

6.  Hitherto  we  have  confidered  our  voyages  as  having  be- 
nefited the  difcoverers.  But  it  will  be  afked.  Have  they  con- 
veyed, or  are  they  likely  ever  to  convey,  any  benefit  to  the 
difcoveredf  It  would  afford  exquifite  fatisfadtion  to  every 
benevolent  mind,  to  be  inftrudled  in  fadts,  which  might 
enable  us,  without  hefitation,  to  anfwer  this  queftion  in  the 
affirmative.  And  yet,  perhaps,  we  may  indulge  the  pleaf- 
ing  hope,  that,  even  in  this  refpecft,  our  fhips  have  not 

* A contempt  of  Revelation  is  generally  the  refult  of  ignorance,  conceited  of  its  pof- 
fcfling  fuperior  knowledge.  Obferve  how  the  Author  of  Recherches  Philofophiques  fur  les 
Amcricaim^  exprefles  himfelf  on  this  very  point.  “ Cette  diftance  que  Mr.  Antermony 
“ veut  trouver  fi  peu  importante,  eft  a-peu-pres  de  huh  cent  Iteues  Gaulofes  au  tr avers  d’un 
“ ocean  perilleux^  et  impoflible  a franchir  avec  des  canots  aufli  chetifs  et  aufli  fragiles  que 
“ le  font,  au  rapport  d’Yfbrand  Ides,  les  chaloupes  des  Tungufes,”  &c.  &c.  T.  i. 
p.  156.  Had  this  writer  known  that  the  two  continents  are  not  above  thirteen  leagues 
(inftead  of  eight  hundred)  diftant  from  each  other,  and  that,  even  in  that  narrow  fpace  of 
fea,  there  are  intervening  iflands,  he  would  not  have  ventured  to  urge  this  argument  in 
oppofition  to  Mr.  Bell’s  notion  of  the  quarter  from  which  North  America  received  its 
original  inhabitants. 

k 2 


failed 


Ixxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


failed  in  vain.  Other  difcoveries  of  new  countries  have, 
in  effedf,  been  wars,  or  rather  maflacres ; nations  have  been 
no  fooner  found  out,  than  they  have  been  extirpated ; and 
the  horrid  cruelties  of  the  conquerors  of  Mexico  and  Peru 
can  never  be  remembered,  without  blulhing  for  religion 
and  human  nature.  But  when  the  receffes  of  the  globe 
are  inveftigated,  not  to  enlarge  private  dominion,  but  to  pro- 
mote general  knowledge ; when  we  vifit  new  tribes  of  our 
fellow-creatures  as  friends ; and  wifli  only  to  learn  that  they 
exift,  in  order  to  bring  them  within  the  pale  of  the  offices 
of  humanity,  and  to  relieve  the  wants  of  their  imperfecSl 
jftate  of  fociety,  by  communicating  to  them  our  fuperior 
attainments ; voyages  of  difcovery  planned  with  fuch  bene- 
volent views  by  George  the  Third,  and  executed  by  Cook, 
have  not,  we  truft,  totally  failed  in  this  refpecSl.  Our  repeated 
vifits,  and  long-continued  intercourfe  with  the  natives  of 
the  Friendly,  Society,  and  Sandwich  lllands,  cannot  but  have 
darted  fome  rays  of  light  on  the  infant  minds  of  thofe  poor 
people.  The  uncommon  objedts  they  have  thus  had  oppor- 
tunities of  obferving  and  admiring,  will  naturally  tend  to 
enlarge  their  flock  of  ideas,  and  to  furnifli  new  materials 
for  the  exercife  of  their  reafon.  Comparing  themfelves 
with  their  vifiters,  they  cannot  but  be  ftruck  with  the  deepefl 
convicSlion  of  their  own  inferiority,  and  be  impelled,  by 
the  flrongefl  motives,  to  flrive  to  emerge  from  it,  and  to 
rife  nearer  to  a level  with  thofe  children  of  the  Sun  who 
deigned  to  look  upon  them,  and  left  behind  fo  many  fpeci- 
mens  of  their  generous  and  humane  attention.  The  very 
introdu6lion  of  our  ufeful  animals  and  vegetables,  by  add- 
ing frefh  means  of  fubfiftence,  will  have  added  to  their  com- 
forts of  life,  and  immediate  enjoyments ; and  if  this  be  the 
only  benefit  they  are  ever  to  receive,  who  will  pronounce 

that 


INTRODUCTION. 


Jxxvii 


that  much  has  not  been  gained?  But  may  we  not  carry 
our  whhes  and  our  hopes  Rill  farther  ? Great  Britain  it- 
felf,  when  firft  viiited  by  the  Phoenicians,  was  inhabited  by 
painted  Savages,  not,  perhaps,  bleffed  with  higher  attain- 
ments than  are  poffeffed  by  the  prefent  natives  of  New  Zea- 
land; certainly  lefs  civilized  than  thofe  of  Tongataboo  or 
Otaheite.  Our  having  opened  an  intercourfe  with  them,  is 
the  firft  ftep  toward  their  improvement.  Who  knows,  but 
that  our  late  voyages  may  be  the  means  appointed  by  Pro- 
vidence, of  fpreading,  in  due  time,  the  bleflings  of  civi- 
lization amongft  the  numerous  tribes  of  the  South  Pacific 
Ocean  ; of  abolifhing  their  horrid  repafts  and  their  horrid 
rites ; and  of  laying  the  foundation  for  future  and  more 
effedlual  plans,  to  prepare  them  for  holding  an  honourable 
Ration  amongft  the  nations  of  the  earth  ? This,  at  leaft,  is- 
certain,  that  our  having,  as  it  were,  brought  them  into  ex- 
iftence  by  our  extenfive  refearches,  will  fuggeft  to  us  frefh 
motives  of  devout  gratitude  to  the  Supreme  Being,  for  hav- 
ing blelTed  us  with  advantages  hitherto  withheld  from  fo 
great  a proportion  of  the  human  race;  and  will  operate 
powerfully  to  incite  us  to  perfevere  in  every  feafible  at- 
tempt, to  be  his  inftruments  in  refcuing  millions  of  fellow- 
creatures  from  their  prefent  Rate  of  humiliation. 

The  feveral  topics,  which  occurred,  as  fuitable  to  this  ge- 
neral Introdudtion,  being  now  difcuflTed,  nothing  remains 
but  to  Rate  a few  particulars,  about  which  the  reader  of 
thefe  volumes  has  a right  to  expecft  fome  information. 

Captain  Cook,  knowing,  before  he  failed  upon  this  laft 
expedition,  that  it  was  expected  from  him  to  r-elate^  as  well 
as  to  execute^  its  operations,  had  taken  care  to  prepare  Rich 
a jom'nal  as  might  be  made  ufe  of  for  publication.  This 

journal. 


Ixxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


journal,  which  exifts  in  his  own  hand-writing,  has  been 
faithfully  adhered  to.  It  is  not  a bare  extract  from  his  log- 
books, but  contains  many  remarks  which,  it  appears,  had 
not  been  inferted  by  him  in  the  nautical  regifter  ; and  it  is 
alfo  enriched  with  conhderabie  communications  from  Mr. 
Anderfon,  Surgeon  of  the  Refolution.  The  confeffed  abi- 
lities, and  great  afliduity,  of  Mr.  Anderfon,  in  obferving 
every  thing  that  related  either  to  natural  hiftory,  or  to 
manners  and  language;  and  the  defire  which,  it  is  well 
known.  Captain  Cook,  on  all  occafions,  fliewed  to  have 
the  affiftance  of  that  gentleman.  Ramped  a great  value  on 
his  colledtions.  That  nothing,  therefore,  might  be  want- 
ing to  convey  to  the  Public  the  bell  poflible  account  of  the 
tranfadtions  of  the  voyage,  his  journal,  by  the  order  of 
Lord  Sandwich,  was  alfo  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Editor, 
who  was  authorized  and  directed  to  avail  himfelf  of  the 
information  it  might  be  found  to  contain,  about  matters 
imperfectly  touched,  or  altogether  omitted,  in  Captain 
Cook’s  manufcript.  This  talk  has  been  executed  in  fuch 
a manner,  that  the  reader  will  fcarcely  ever  be  at  a lofs  to 
diftinguhli  in  what  inftances  recourfe  has  been  had  to  Mr. 
Anderfon.  To  preclude,  if  poflible,  any  miftake,  the  copy 
of  the  firfl:  and  fecond  volumes,  before  it  went  to  the 
printer,  was  fubmitted  to  Captain  King ; and  after  it  had 
been  read  over  and  corrected  by  one  fo  well  qualified  to 
point  out  any  inaccuracies,  the  Earl  of  Sandwich  had  the 
goodnefs  to  give  it  a perufal.  As  to  the  third  volume,  no- 
thing more  need  be  faid,  than  that  it  was  completely  pre- 
pared for  the  prefs  by  Captain  King  himfelf.  All  that 
the  Editor  of  the  work  has  to  anfwer  for,  are  the  notes  oc- 
cafionally  introduced  in  the  courfe  of  the  two  volumes, 
.contributed  by  Captain  Cook ; and  this  introduction,  which 

was 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxix 


was  intended  as  a kind  of  epilogue  to  our  Voyages  of  dif- 
covery.  He  muft  be  permitted,  however,  to  fay,  that  he 
confiders  himfelf  as  intitled  to  no  inconliderable  fhare  of 
candid  indulgence  from  the  Public ; having  engaged  in  a 
very  tedious  and  troublefome  undertaking  upon  the  moft 
diftnterejied  motives  ; his  only  reward  being  the  fatisfadtion 
he  feels,  in  having  been  able  to  do  an  eflential  fervice  to  the 
family  of  our  great  navigator,  who  had  honoured  him,  in 
the  journal  of  this  voyage,  with  the  appellation  of  Friend. 

They  who  have  repeatedly  afked  why  this  publication 
has  been  fo  long  delayed,  need  only  look  at  the  volumes,  and 
their  attendant  illuftrations  and  ornaments,  to  be  fatisfied 
that  it  might,  with  at  leaft  equal  reafon,  be  wondered  at,^ 
that  it  has  not  been  delayed  longer.  The  journal  of  Captain 
Cook,  from  the  firft  moment  that  it  came  into  the  hands  of 
the  Editor,  had  been  ready  for  the  Prefs  ; and  Captain  King- 
had  left  with  him  his  part  of  the  narrative,  fo  long  ago  as 
his  departure  for  the  Weft  Indies,  when  he  commanded  the 
Reftftance  man  of  war.  But  much,  befides,  remained  to  be 
done.  The  charts,  particularly  the  general  one,  were  to  be 
prepared  by  Mr.  Roberts,  who  gives  an  account  of  his  work 
in  the  note  the  very  numerous  and  elegant  drawings  of 

Mr. 


* Soon  after  our  departure  from  England,  I was  inftrufted  by  Captain  Cook  to  com- 
plete a map  of  the  world  as  a general  chart,  from  the  beft  materials  he  was  in  poflellion 
of  for  that  purpofe ; and  before  his  death  this  bufinefs  was  in  a great  meafure  accom- 
plifhed : That  is,  the  grand  outline  of  the  whole  was  arranged,  leaving  only  thofe  parts 
vacant  or  unfinifhed,  which  he  expected  to  fall  in  with  and  explore.  But  on  our  return 
home,  when  the  fruits  of  our  voyage  were  ordered  by  the  Lords  CommifTioners  of  the 
Admiralty  to  be  publifhed,  the  care  of  the  general  chart  being  configned  to  me,  I was 
directed  to  prepare  it  from  the  lateft  and  beft  authorities ; and  alfo  to  introduce  Captain 
Cook’s  three  fucceffive  tracks,  that  all  his  difcoveries,  and  the  different  routes  he  had  ' 
taken,  might  appear  together  ; by  this  means  to  give  a general  idea  of  the  whole.  This 
talk  having  been  performed  by  me,  it  is  neceffary,  for  the  information  of  the  Reader,  to' 

ftatc 


INTRODUCTION. 


Mr.  Webber  were  to  be  reduced  by  him  to  the  proper  fize ; 
artifts  were  next  to  be  found  out  who  would  undertake  to 

engrave 

ftate  the  heads  of  the  feveral  authorities  which  I have  followed  in  fuch  parts  of  the  chart 
as  differ  from  what  was  drawn  up  immediately  under  the  infpeftion  of  Captain  Cook  : 
And  when  the  Public  are  made  acquainted,  that  many  materials,  neceffary  to  complete 
and  elucidate  the  work,  were  not,  at  the  time,  on  board  the  Refolution,  or  in  his  poffef- 
fion,  the  reafon  will  appear  very  obvious,  why  thefe  alterations  and  additions  were  in- 
troduced contrary  to  the  original  drawing. 

Fir  ft  then,  I have  followed  clofely  the  very  excellent  and  corre£l:  charts  of  the  Northern 
Atlantic  Ocean,  publifhed  by  Melirs.  de  Verdun  de  la  Crenne,  de  Borda,  et  Pringre,  in 
1775  and  1776  ; which  comprife  the  coaft  of  Norway  from  the  Sud  Hoek,  in  the  lati- 
tude of  62  degrees  North,  to  Trelleburg,  Denmark,  the  coaft  of  Holland,  North  coaft; 
of  Great  Britain,  Orkneys,  Shetland,  Ferro  Ifles,  Iceland,  coafts  of  France,  Spain,  and 
Portugal,  to  Cape  St.  Maria  on  the  coaft  of  Africa ; including  the  Azores,  Canaries, 
Cape  de  Verd,  Antilles,  and  Weft  India  iflands  from  Barbadoes  to  the  Eaft  end  of  Cuba ; 
the  North  part  of  Newfoundland  and  the  Labradore  coaft,  as  far  as  the  latitude  of  57 
degrees  North. 

Ireland,  and  part  of  the  coaft  of  Scotland,  is  laid  down  from  Mr.  Mackenzie’s  late 
furveys ; and  the  fouth  coaft  of  England  from  a chart  publifhed  by  Mr.  Faden  in  1780, 
taken  from  Mr.  I’Abbe  Dicquemare. 

The  North  part  of  the  coaft  of  Labradore,  from  the  latitude  of  57°  North,  to  Button’s 
lAands  in  the  entrance  of  Hudfon’s  Strait,  is  taken  from  Monfieur  Beilin’s  chart,  as  is 
alfo  the  North  coaft  of  Norway  and  Lapland,  including  the  White  Sea,  Gulf  of  Bothnia, 
Baltic  Sea,  and  the  Eaft  coaft  of  Greenland. 

The  Gulf  of  Finland,  from  a large  (MS)  chart,  now  engraving  for  the  ufe  of  fomc 
private  merchants. 

The  Weft  India  iflands,  from  the  Eaft  end  of  Cuba  to  the  Weft  end,  including  Ja- 
maica and  the  Bahama  iflands,  are  from  a chart  publifhed  in  London  by  Sayer  and  Ben- 
nett, in  1779. 

The  South  fide  of  Cuba,  from  Point  Gorda  to  Cape  de  Cruz,  is  laid  down  from  Mon- 
fieur Beilin,  in  1762. 

The  coafts  of  Newfoundland,  and  the  Gulf  of  St.  Laurence,  from  the  furveys  made 
by  Captain  Cook,  and  Mefirs.  Gilbert  and  Lane. 

Nova  Scotia,  Cape  Breton,  Ifland  of  St.  John,  River  St.  Laurence,  Canada,  and  New 
England  to  the  River  Delaware,  from  J.  F.  W.  des  Barres,  Efq;  in  1777  and  1778  j 
and  charts  publifhed  in  France  by  order  of  the  King,  In  1780,  intituled,  Neptune 
Americo-Septentrional,  See.  And  from  thefe  charts  alfo  are  taken  the  coafts  of  Pen- 
fylvania,  New  Jerfey,  Maryland,  Virginia,  North  and  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Eaft 

and 


INTRODUCTION, 


Ixxxi 


engrave  them ; the  prior  engagements  of  thofe  artifts  were 
to  be  fulfilled  before  they  could  begin  ; the  labour  and  Ikill 

to 

and  Weft  Florida,  as  well  as  the  interior  parts  of  the  country  to  the  Eaft  fide  of  Lake 
Ontario. 

The  other  parts  of  this  lake,  as  likewife  Lakes  Eria,  Hurons,  Michigan,  and  Superior, 
were  copied  from  Mr.  Green’s  maps  of  America  : The  Northern  part  of  this  laft-men- 
tioned  lake  is  fixed  from  the  aftronomical  obfervations  made  by  order  of  the  Hudfon’s  Bay 
Company,  at  Mifhippicotton  Houfe. 

The  whole  of  Hudfon’s  Bay  I took  from  a chart,  compiled  by  Mr.  Marley,  from  all  the 
moft  authentic  maps  he  could  procure  of  thofe  parts,  with  which  I was  favoured  by  Samuel 
Wegg,  Efq;  F.  R.  S.  and  Governor  of  that  Company,  who  alfo  politely  furnifhed  me  with 
Mr.  Hearne’s  Journals,  and  the  map  of  his  route  to  the  Copper-mine  River,  which  is 
faithfully  inferted  on  the  chart,  together  with  the  furvey  of  Chefterfield  Inlet  made  by  Cap- 
tain Chriftopher  and  Mr.  Mofes  Norton,  in  1762  ; and  the  difcoveries  from  York  Fort 
to  Cumberland,  and  Hudfon  Houfes  (this  laft  is  the  moft  Wefternfettlement  belonging  to 
the  Company),  extending  to  Lake  Winipeg,  from  the  drafts  of  Mr.  Philip  Tumor,  made 
in  1778  and  1779,  corrected  by  aftronomical  obfervations.  And  from  this  lake,  the  difpo- 
fition  of  the  other  lakes  to  the  Southward  of  it,  and  which  communicate  with  it,  is  formed, 
and  laid  down  from  a map  conftrudled  by  Mr.  Spurrel,  in  the  Company’s  fervice.  The 
Albany  and  Moofe  rivers  to  Gloucefter  Houfe,  and  to  Lake  Abbitibbe  and  Superior,  are 
alfo  drawn  from  a map  of  Mr.  Tumor’s,  adjufted  by  obfervations  for  the  longitudes. 

The  Weft  coaft  of  Greenland,  is  chiefly  laid  down  from  the  obfervations  made  by 
Lieut.  R.  Pickerfgill  in  the  Lion  brig  in  1776,  which  determine  the  line  of  the  coaft 
only,  as  the  immenfe  quantities  of  ice  choak  up  every  bay  and  inlet  on  this  coaft,  which 
formerly  were,  in  the  fummer  feafon,  quite  free  and  open. 

From  the  mouth  of  the  Miflifippi  River,  including  its  fource,  and  the  other  rivers 
branching  from  it ; all  the  coaft  of  New  Leon  to  Cape  Rozo,  and  the  Weftern  coaft  of 
America,  from  Cape  Corrientes  to  the  Great  Bay  of  Tecoantepec,  is  taken  from  Mon- 
fieur  D’Anville. 

The  Gulf  of  California  I have  laid  down  from  a German  publication  in  1773,  put  into 
my  hands  by  Sir  Jofeph  Banks,  Bart.  P.  R.  S. ; and  the  Weftern  fide  of  it  is  brought  to- 
gether from  a Spanifti  MS.  chart,  with  which  A.  Dalrymple,  Efq;  F.  R.  S.  obliged  me. 

The  coaft  of  Brazil,  from  Sera  to  Cape  F rio,  is  copied  from  a fmall  chart  of  that  part 
by  Mr.  Dalrymple. 

For  the  Southern  part  of  Africa,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  Point  Natal,  I have 
taken  the  authority  of  the  chart  of  JVIajor  J.  Rennels,  F.  R.  S.  (hewing  the  extent  of  the 
bank  of  Lagullus. 

F or  the  exiftence  of  the  fmall  iflands,  Ihoals,  and  banks  to  the  Eaftward  of  Madagafcar, 
together  with  the  Archipelago  of  the  Maidive  and  Laccidive  Iflands  3 for  the  coafts  of 
VoL.  I.  1 Malacca, 


Ixxxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  be  exerted  in  finifhing  many  of  them,  rendered  this  a 
tedious  operation  ; paper  fit  for  printing  them  upon  was  to 
be  procured  from  abroad ; and  after  all  thefe  various  and 
tmavoidable  difficulties  were  furmounted,  much  time  was 
neceflarily  required  for  executing  a numerous  impreflion  of 
the  long  lift;  of  plates,  with  fo  much  care  as  might  do  juftice 
both  to  Mr.  Webber,  and  to  his  feveral  engravers.  When 
all  thefe  circumftances  are  taken  into  confideration,  we  truft 


Malacca,  part  of  Cambodia,  and  the  Ifland  Sumatra,  I have  ufed  the  lateft  authority  of 
Monfieur  D’Apres  de  Mannevillette’s  publications  in  the  Neptune  Oriental. 

The  coafts  of  Guzerat,  Malabar,  Coromandel,  and  the  oppofite  fhore,  containing  the 
Great  Bay  of  Bengal,  and  the  Ifland  of  Ceylon,  and  exhibiting  the  Heads  of  the  Ganges, 
and  Barampooter  or  Sanpoo  Rivers,  are  inferted  from  the  work  of  the  ingenious  Author 
of  the  map  of  Hindooftan,  publifhed  in  1782. 

The  China  fea  is  laid  down  from  the  chart  publilhed  by  Mr.  Dalrymple  ; but  the  longi- 
tudes of  Pulo  Sapata,  Pu]o  Condore,  Pulo  Timoan,  Straits  of  Banca  and  Sunda,  and  the 
parts  we  faw,  are  as  fettled  by  us,  together  with  the  Eaft  coaft  of  Niphon,  the  principal  of 
the  Japanefe  Iflands. 

The  Jefo  and  Kurile  iflands,  the  Eaft  coaft  of  Afia  and  Kamtfchatka,  as  well  as  the  fea 
of  Okotlk,  and  the  iflands  lying  between  Kamtfchatka  and  America  that  were  not  feen  in 
the  voyage,  are  taken  from  a Ruffian  MS.  chart,  got  by  us  at  the  Ifland  of  Oonalalhka. 

The  Northern  countries  from  Cape  Kanin,  near  the  White  Sea,  as  far  Eaft  as  the  Ri- 
ver Lena,  I have  given  from  the  Great  Ruffian  Map,  publilhed  at  Peterfburg  in  1776, 
including  the  Euxine,  Cafpian,  and  Aral  Seas,  as  alfo  the  principal  lakes  to  the  Eaftward  5 
the  intent  of  which  is  to  Ihew  the  fource  of  the  large  rivers  that  empty  themfelves  into 
the  different  oceans  and  feas. 

Every  other  part  of  the  chart  not  mentioned  in  this  account,  is  as  originally  placed  by 
Captain  Cook. 

The  whole  has  been  corredled  from  the  lateft  aftronomical  obfervations,  feledled  from 
the  Tables  compiled  by  Mr.  William  Wales,  F.  R.  S.  and  mathematical  mafter  of  Chrift’s 
Hofpital,  for  the  Nautical  Almanacs  ; From  thofe  in  the  Mariner’s  Guide  by  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Mafkelyne,  F.  R.  S.  and  Aftronomer  Royal,  publilhed  in  1763  ; From  the  Connoiffance 
des  Temps  for  1780  and  1781  ; From  Profeflbr  Mayer’s  Geographical  Table;  From 
the  Voyages  of  Meffrs.  d’Eveux  de  Fleuiieu,  Verdun,  de  Borda,  and  Chabet,  &c.;  From 
the  Table  lately  publifhed  by  Mr.  Dalrymple  for  the  ufe  of  the  Eaft  India  fhips ; From 
the  Philofophical  Tranfadlions  of  the  Royal  Society;  and  from  the  Obfervations  of  our 
late  Navigators. 

HEN^.  ROBERTS. 


Shoreham,  Sussex,  May  18,  1784. 


that 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxxiii 


that  we  fliall  hear  no  more  of  the  delay ; and  only  be  grate- 
ful to  that  munificent  Patron  of  Science,  who  not  only  di- 
redted  the  hiflory  of  the  voyage  to  be  publilhed ; but  to  be 
publiflied  with  fuch  a fplendid  train  of  ornaments,  at  the 
public  expence,  as  will  Rill  add  to  the  merit  of  having  or- 
dered the  voyage  itfelf  to  be  undertaken. 

And  here  it  feems  to  be  incumbent  upon  us  to  add,  as 
another  inftance  of  munificent  attention,  that  care  has  been 
taken  to  mark,  in  the  mofl  fignificant  manner,  the  juft  fenfe 
entertained  of  the  humane  and  liberal  relief  afforded  to  our 
fhips  in  Kamtfchatka.  Colonel  Behm,  the  commandant  of 
that  province,  has  not  been  rewarded  merely  by  the  plea- 
fure  which  a benevolent  mind  feels  in  refledling  upon  the 
bleflings  it  confers;  but  has  been  thanked  in  a manner 
equally  confiftent  with  the  dignity  of  his  own  fovereign 
and  of  ours,  to  whofe  fubjedfs  he  extended  protedlion.  A 
magnificent  piece  of  plate  was  prefented  to  him,  with  an 
infcription,  worthy  of  a place  in  the  fame  book  where  the 
hiftory  of  his  humanity  to  our  countrymen  is  recorded,  and 
which,  while  it  does  honour  to  our  national  gratitude,  de- 
ferves  alfo  to  be  preferved  as  a monument  of  our  national 
tafte  for  elegant  compofition.  It  is  as  follows  : 

ViRo  EGREGio  MAGNo  DE  Behm  } qut,  Imperatricls  Auguf>- 
tijjimce  Catharine  aufpiciis,  Jummdque  animi  benignitate,  fava^  quibus 
praeraty  Kamtfchatka  littora,  navibus  nautifque  Britannicis,  hofpita 
prabuit  i eofquey  tn  terminiSyfi  qut  ejfent  Imperio  BuJJtcOyfruJlra  explo- 
randtSy  mala  mult  a perpejfosy  iter  at  d vice  excepity  refecit  y recreavity  et 
commeatu  omni cumulate  audios  dimifit-y  Rei  navalis  Britannic^ 
Septemviri  tn  aliquam  benevolenttce  tarn  infgnis  memoriamy  amici f- 
fmOy  gratijjimoque  animo,  fuoy  patriceque  nomine y D.  D.  D. 

MDCCLXXXI. 

1 2 


This 


I 


Ixxxiv^ 


INTRODUCTION. 

This  teftimony  of  public  gratitude,  reminds  the  Editor, 
that  there  are  fimilar  calls  upon  himfelf.  lie  owes  much 
to  Captain  King  for  his  advice  and  direction,  in  a variety  of 
inftances,  where  Captain  Cook’s  Journal  required  explana- 
tion ; for  filling  up  feveral  blanks  with  the  proper  longi- 
tude and  latitude ; and  for  fupplying  deficiencies  in  the 
tables  of  aftronomical  obfervations. 

Lieutenant  Roberts  was  alfo  frequently  confulted,  and 
was  always  found  to  be  a ready  and  efFe6lual  afiiftant,  when 
any  nautical  difficulties  were  to  be  cleared  up. 

But  particular  obligations  are  due  to  Mr.  Wales,  who, 
befides  the  valuable  communications  which  have  been 
adopted  in  this  Introdudlion,  feconded  moft  liberally  the 
Editor’s  views  of  ferving  Mrs.  Cook,  by  cheerfully  taking 
upon  himfelf  the  whole  trouble  of  digefting,  from  the  log- 
books, the  tables  of  the  route  of  the  lliips,  which  add  fo 
greatly  to  the  utility  of  this  publication. 

Mr.  Wegg,  befides  fliaring  in  the  thanks  fo  juftly  due  to 
the  committee  of  the  Hudfon’s  Bay  Company,  for  their  un- 
referved  communications,  was  particularly  obliging  to  the 
Editor,  by  giving  him  repeated  opportunities  of  converfing 
with  Governor  Hearne,  and  Captain  Chriflopher. 

The  Honourable  Mr.  Daines  Barrington  had  the  good- 
nefs  to  intereft  himfelf,  with  his  ufual  zeal  for  every 
work  of  public  utility,  in  procuring  fome  neceffary  in- 
formation, and  fuggefting  fome  valuable  hints  which  were 
adopted. 

It  would  be  great  injuflice  not  to  exprefs  our  acknow- 
ledgments to  Mr.  Pennant,  who,  befides  enriching  the  third 
volume  with  references  to  his  ArBic  Zoology-)  the  publica- 
tion of  which  will  be  an  important  acceflion  to  Natural 
Hiftory,  alfo  communicated  fome  very  authentic  and  fatis- 
fa6tory  manufcript  accounts  of  the  Ruffian  difcoveries. 

The 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxxv 


The  vocabularies  of  the  Friendly  and  Sandwich  Iflands, 
and  of  the  natives  of  Nootka,  had  been  furnifhed  to  Cap- 
tain Cook,  by  his  moft  ufeful  alTociate  in  the  voyage,  Mr. 
Anderfon ; and  a fourth,  in  which  the  language  of  the 
Efquimaux  is  compared  with  that  of  the  Americans  on  the 
oppolite  fide  of  the  continent,  had  been  prepared  by  the 
Captain  himfelf.  But  the  comparative  Table  of  Numerals, 
which  is  marked  N°  2.  in  the  Appendix,  was  very  obli- 
gingly drawn  up,  at  the  requefl;  of  the  Editor,  by  Mr. 
Bryant,  who,  in  his  ftudy,  has  followed  Captain  Cook, 
and,  indeed,  every  traveller  and  hiftorian,  of  every  age, 
into  every  part  of  the  globe.  The  Public  will  confider  this 
Table  as  a very  ftriking  illuftration  of  the  wonderful  mi- 
grations of  a nation,  about  whom  fo  much  additional  in- 
formation has  been  gained  by  our  voyages,  and  be  ready  to 
acknowledge  it  as  a very  ufeful  communication. 

One  more  communication  remains  to  be  not  only  ac- 
knowledged, but  to  be  inferted  at  the  clofe  of  this  Intro- 
duction. The  tejlimonies  of  learned  contemporaries,  in 
commendation  of  a deceafed  Author,  are  frequently  dif- 
played  in  the  front  of  his  book.  It  is  with  the  greatefl;  - 
propriety,  therefore,  that  we  prefix  to  this  pofihumous 
work  of  Captain  Cook  the  teftimony  of  one  of  his  own 
profeflion,  not  more  diflinguiflied  by  the  elevation  of 
rank,  than  by  the  dignity  of  private  virtues.  As  he  willies 
to  remain  concealed,  perhaps  this  allufion,  for  which  we 
intreat  his  indulgence,  may  have  given  too  exacSl  direc- 
tion to  the  eyes  of  the  Public  where  to  look  for  fuch  a 
characSler.  Let  us,  however,  reft  fatisfied  with  the  intrinfic 
merit  of  a compofition,  conveyed  under  the  injunction 
of  fecrecy  ; and  conclude  our  long  preliminary  dilTertation 
with  exprefting  a wifli,  or  rather  a well-grounded  hope, 

that 


Ixxxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


that  this  volume  may  not  be  the  only  place  where  pofle- 
rity  can  meet  with  a monumental  infcription,  commemo- 
rative of  a man,  in  recounting  and  applauding  whofe  fer- 
vices,  the  whole  of  enlightened  Europe  will  equally  concur 
with  Great  Britain. 


T O 


[ Ixxxvii  ] ■ 


TO  THE  MEMORY  OF 

Captain  JAMES  COOK, 


The  ableft  and  mofl:  renowned  Navigator  this 
or  any  country  hath  produced. 


TJfE  raifed  himfelf^  folely  by  his  merit,  from  a very  obfcure 
birth,  to  the  rank  of  Pojl  Captain  in  the  royal  navy, 
and  was,  unfortunately,  killed  by  the  Savages  of  the  ijland 
Owhyhee,  on  the  i^th  of  February  1779  ; which  ifland  he  had, 
not  long  before,  difcovered,  when  profecuting  his  third  voyage 
'round  the  globe. 

He  poffejfed,  in  an  eminent  degree,  all  the  qualifications 
requifite  for  his  profejjion  and  great  undertakings  ; together 
with  the  amiable  and  worthy  qualities  of  the  beji  men. 

Cool  and  deliberate  in  judging  : fugacious  in  determining  : 
adlive  in  executing : fteady  and  perfevering  in  enterprfing 
from  vigilance  and  unremitting  caution  : unfubdued  by  labour , 
difficulties,  and  difapp ointments  : fertile  in  expedients  : never 
wanting  prefence  of  mind : always  pojf effing  himfelf,  and  the 
full  ufe  of  a found  underjlanding. 

Mild,  juji,  but  exaB  in  difcipline : he  was  a father  to  his 
people,  who  were  attached  to  him  from  affeSlion,  and  obedient 
from  confidence. 

His  knowledge,  his  experience,  his  fagacity,  rendered  him  fo 
entirely  majler  of  his  fubjeci,  that  the  greateft  objiacles  were 
furmounted,  and  the  moji  dangerous  navigations  became  eafy, 
pnd  almoft  fafe,  under  his  direFlion. 


He 


Ixxxviii 


INSCRIPTION  TO  THE 


He  explored  the  Southern  hemifphere  to  a much  higher  la^ 
titude  than  had  ever  been  reached^  and  with  fewer  accidents 
than  frequently  befal  thofe  who  navigate  the  coafts  of  this 
ijland. 

By  his  benevolent  and  unabating  attention  to  the  welfare 
of  his  /Inf’s  company^  he  difcovered  and  introduced  a fyftem 
for  the  prefervation  of  the  health  of  feamen  in  long  voyages, 
which  has  proved  wonderfully  efficacious : for  in  his  fecond  voy- 
age round  the  world,  which  continued  upwards  of  three  years, 
helojl  only  one  man  by  dijlemper,  of  one  hundred  and  eighteen, 
of  which  his  company  conftjied. 

/‘he  death  of  this  eminent  and  valuable  man  was  a lofs  to 
mankind  in  general ; and  particularly  to  be  deplored  by  every 
nation  that  refpeBs  ufeful  accomplifloments,  that  honours  fci- 
ence,  and  loves  the  benevolent  and  amiable  affediions  of  the 
heart.  It  is  Jiill  more  to  be  deplored  by  this  country,  which 
may  jujily  boaji  of  having  produced  a man  hitherto  unequalled 
for  nautical  talents ; and  that  forrow  is  farther  aggravated 
by  the  reflediion,  that  his  country  was  deprived  of  this  orna- 
ment by  the  enmity  of  a people,  from  whom,  indeed,  it  might 
have  been  dreaded,  but  from  whom  it  was  not  deferved.  For, 
adiuated  always  by  the  moji  attentive  care  and  tender  com- 
paffion  for  the  favages  in  general,  this  excellent  man  was  ever 
affiduoujly  endeavouring,  by  kind  treatment,  to  diffipate  their 
fears,  and  court  their  friendjljip\  overlooking  their  thefts  and 
treacheries,  and  frequently  interpojing,  at  the  hazard  of  his 
life,  to  protedi  them  from  the  fudden  refentment  of  his  own 
injured  people. 

/he  objedi  of  his  laft  miffiion  was  to  difcover  and  afcer- 
tain  the  boundaries  of  Afia  and  America,  and  to  penetrate  in- 
to the  Northern  Ocean  by  the  North  Faft  Cape  of  AJia. 

/raveller  I contemplate,  admire,  revere,  and  emulate  this 
great  majler  in  his  profeffiion ; whofe /kill  and  labours  have  en- 
larged 


MEMORY  OF  CAPTAIN  COOK. 


Ixxxix 


larged  natural  philofophy  ; have  extended  nautical  fcience ; 
and  have  difclofed  the  long-concealed  and  admirable  arrange- 
ments of  the  Almighty  in  the  formation  of  this  globe,  and,  at 
the  fame  time,  the  arrogance  of  mortals,  in  prefuming  to  ac- 
count, by  their  fpeculations,  for  the  laws  by  which  he  was 
pleafed  to  create  it.  It  is  now  difcovered,  beyond  all  doubt, 
that  the  fame  Great  Being  who  created  the  univerfe  by  his 
fiat,  by  the  fame  ordained  our  earth  to  keep  a juji  poife,  with- 
out a correfponding  Southern  continent — and  it  does  fo  ! “ He 
“ Jiretches  out  the  North  over  the  empty  place,  and  hangeth 
“ the  earth  upon  nothingl^  Job,  xxvi.  7. 

If  the  arduous  but  exa£l  refearches  of  this  extraordinary 
man  have  not  difcovered  a new  world,  they  have  difcovered 
feas  unnavigated  and  unknown  before.  They  have  made  us 
acquainted  with  {/lands,  people  and  produ&ions,  of  which  we 
had  no  conception.  And  if  he  has  not  been  fo  fortunate  as 
Americas  to  give  his  name  to  a continent,  his  pretenfions  to 
fuch  a diftinBion  remain  unrivalled ; and  he  will  be  revered, 
while  there  remains  a page  of  his  own  modejl  account  of  his 
voyages,  and  as  long  as  mariners  and  geographers  floall  be  in- 
JlruBed,  by  bis  new  map  of  the  Southern  hemifphere,  to  trace 
the  various  courfes  and  difcoveries  he  has  made. 

If  public  fervices  merit  public  acknowledgments ; if  the  man 
who  adorned  and  raifed  the  fame  of  his  country  is  defer  ving  of 
honours,  then  Captain  Cook  deferves  to  have  a monument 
raifed  to  his  memory,  by  a generous  and  grateful  nation. 

Virtutis  uberrimum  alimentum  eft  honos, 

Val.  Maximus,  Lib.  ii.  Cap.  6. 


VoL.  L 


m 


LIST 


. tti-- 


l.  rih'. 


>»  . • 


rn 

: 

r 


* y^K’wv 


-’  :-:v; 


V,. 


jf 


,.S)  -I/  : ■'. " -;  A :^''{ip  y /t; 

iiAy 


■ •-  . ty,  ■ ' '■  •■  t 

< T,  ;i\'  Jt=\ 


.<■  * 


-i  V*  H* 


*.>  "-.y.-  V'.. 

\ »>.  f \{\  -.. ' r ' 1 

;'^  >1  ■ V . ’ ' 

C^\v  V;W  ,.i  A^’'  ■ y * y-  - '•lii 

■ /V  ;>\“,>*:vy%  - •^:  '■  ' 

' V • ■ t Y \ •'-'■!  ■ if'j 

’.  ■*  ;,  « , ' 

* ♦ , * . 

> v ■ «r  '^  '■/  • • 

■ . 1 1VJ-.'r^'  .V»  '■•: ' ' t'  ^ ,’ 

V^^>‘^V/.;V  VViV^f•  rtv".  . ■ V'Vv'-  V ' * 

A..  " -.  Jf  A- 


yy  • 


A,; 


U -v.-c^  oA-.  /Vr  ' ..A 

■ ■'  : i . . >*  • •.,.•»  "i-  .I’v.  ,."-4.-^’»  t 


■ 1»\  V v 


V .-  ?•  : i? . u\ • A.A'ftji*  •iW'i’iyJ^Vu 

^ ' vV-V^f 

• . '»*■  _ .-.■•*'  ■ 


V.^  ■ . ; ■ . ,:-.:'.v:--  ■ . V ' . ■ ^ ' ■''‘-  " ■ 


iA-' 


. .. 


V*  .r 


• ^ .f;i  . , i >” 


y , • evJfxO  ‘ .'jvfpA'-  - 

* #«  -■ 


' •'.-  , '-. 

' : '; . r vjVL'  uUt'^l  ^ ~ 


: "t- 


r. 


• A/ 


• > . 
• • ■% 


t?n. 


■ A 


• * 


' : A>y 
•-  .•  ••.; 


[ xci  ] 


LIST  OF  THE  PLATES, 

With  Directions  for  placing  them. 

[As  many  of  the  Purchafers  of  this  Work  may  choofe  to  preferve 
the  larger-fized  Plates  in  a feparate  volume  in  folio,  thefe 
have  been  here  marked  with  Afterifks ; and  Bookfellers  are 
cautioned  not  to  have  them  bound  up,  with  the  red;  of  the 
Plates,  in  the  places  of  thefe  volumes  pointed  out  by  the  re- 
fpeftive  References,  unlefs  they  receive  particular  directions 
for  that  purpofe.] 


VOL.  I. 

Page  Plate  N* 

I ^General  Chart  exhibiting  Captain  Cook’s 

difcoveries  - - - I. 

51  Chart  of  Kerguelen’s  Land,  with  a Iketch  of 

Prince  Edward’s  Iflands  - - II. 

61  Sketches  of  Chridmas  Harbour,  and  Port 

Pallifer,  in  Kerguelen’s  Land  - - III. 

71  ^View  of  Chridmas  Harbour  in  Kerguelen’s 

Land  - - _ » IV. 

83  Views  on  the  Coad  of  Kerguelen’s  Land  LXXXII. 
91  Chart  and  Views  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land  - V. 

96  *A  Man  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land  - VI. 

loi  *A  Woman  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land  - VII. 

109  *An  Opodum  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land  - VIII. 


t A few  of  the  Plates  are  not  numbered  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  to  be  placed ; 
but  no  inconvenience  can  enfue,  as  the  references  to  the  Pages  of  each  Volume  will 
remedy  this  unavoidable  imperfedion. 


m 2 


xcli  LIST  OF  THE  PLATES. 

Page  Plate  N* 

1 17  Plan  of  Adventure  Bay,  in  Van  Diemen’s 

Land  - - - - IX. 

157  *The  Inlide  of  a Hippah,  in  New  Zealand  X. 

173  *A  Man  of  Mangea  - _ _ XL 

225  Chart  of  the  Friendly  Illands  - - XII. 

230  *View  at  Annamooka  - - XIII. 

244  ^The  Reception  of  Captain  Cook  in  Hapaee  XIV. 

246  ^A  Boxing  Match  in  Hapaee  - - XV. 

249  *A  Night  Dance  by  Men  in  Hapaee  - XVI. 

250  *A  Night  Dance  by  Women  in  Hapaee  - XVII. 

264  ^Poulaho,  King  of  the  Friendly  Iflands  - XVIII. 
277  Sketch  of  Tongataboo  Harbour  - - XIX. 

312  ^Poulaho,  King  of  the  Friendly  Illands, 

drinking  Kava  _ - _ XX. 

314  ^A  Fiatooka  or  Moraiy  in  Tongataboo  - XXL 

337  *The  Natchcy  a Ceremony  in  honour  of  the 

King’s  Son,  in  Tongataboo  - - XXII. 

355  *A  Woman  of  Eaoo  or  Eooa  - XXIIL 

VOL.  II. 

5 Sketches  of  Mangea,  Vol.  i.  p.  170  j — of 
Wateeoo,  Vol.  i.  p.  180;— of  Wenooa 
ette,  Vol.  i.  p.  205; — and  of  Toobouai  - XXIV. 
32  *A  Human  Sacrifice  in  -ai  Moraiy  in  Otaheite  XXV. 

51  *A  young  Woman  of  Otaheite  bringing  a 

prefent  _ _ . - XXVII. 

52  *The  Body  of  Tee,  a Chief,  as  preferved  af- 

ter death,  in  Otaheite  - - XXVI. 

58  *A  Dance,  in  Otaheite  - - XXVIII. 

69  *A  young  Woman  of  Otaheite,  dancing  - XXIX.. 
79  Sketch  of  two  Harbours  on  the  North  fide 

of  Eimeo  - - _ XXX. 


xcm 


LIST  OF  THE  FLAl'J 

Page 

91  view  of  Huaheine  - - _ 

179  Chriftmas  Ifland  - - 

200  *A  Moral  in  Atooi  _ _ _ 

202  *The  Infide  of  the  Houfe  in  the  Moral,  in 
Atooi  _ _ - - 

205  *An  Inland  View  in  Atooi  - - - 

258  Views  on  the  Weft  coaft  of  North  America 
269  ^Chart  of  the  North  Weft  coaft  of  North 
America,  and  North  Eaft  coaft  of  Alia  - 
279  Sketch  of  Nootka  Sound  - - 

295  *A  Sea  Otter  - - _ _ 

301  *A  Man  of  Nootka  Sound  _ _ _ 

303  ^A  Woman  of  Nootka  Sound 
306  ^Various  Articles  at  Nootka  Sound  - 

1 . A bird,  made  of  wood  j hollow,  with  ftones 

in  the  infide,  which  the  Natives  lhake 
when  they  dance. 

2.  A Seal’s  head,  made  of  wood,  worn  upon 

their  heads. 

3.  A bird’s  head,  compofed  of  wood  and  fea- 

thers, alfo  worn  upon  their  heads. 

4.  Another  for  the  fame  purpofe,  and  orna- 

mented with  green  talc. 

313  *View  of  the  Habitations  in  Nootka  Sound 
317  *The  Infide  of  a Houfe  in  Nootka  Sound  - 
333  Chart  of  Cook’s  River,  and  Prince  William’s 
Sound  _ _ - _ 

361  *A  view  of  Snug  Corner  Cove  in  Prince 
William’s  Sound  _ _ _ 

367  *A  Man  of  Prince  William’s  Sound  - 
369  *A  Woman  of  Prince  William’s  Sound 


; S. 

Plate  N® 
XXXI. 
XXXII. 
XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

LXXXVI. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XLIIL 

XXXVIIL 

XXXIX. 

XL. 


XLI.^ 

XLII. 

XLIV. 

XLV. 
XL  VI. 
XLVIL 


ACir 


LIST  OF  THE  PLATES. 


Page 

410  Views  on  the  Weft  coaft  of  North  America, 
to  the  Weftward  of  Cook’s  River  - 

421  ^A  Man  of  Oonalafhka  - - 

422  *A  Woman  of  Oonalafhka  _ _ » 

423  ^Canoes  of  Oonalafhka  - - 

424  Sketch  of  Samganoodha  Harbour  at  the 

Ifland  Oonalafhka  - _ _ 

446  *The  Tfchuktfchi,  or  Tfchutfki,  and  their 
Habitations  _ - _ - 

456  *Sea  Horfes  _ _ _ _ 

466  Chart  of  Norton  Sound  and  Beering’s  Strait 
470  Views  on  the  coaft  of  Afia  _ » « 

483  ^Inhabitants  of  Norton  Sound,  and  their 
Habitations  _ _ _ _ 

509  *Caps  of  the  Natives  of  Oonalafhka  - 
3:11  ^Natives  of  Oonalafhka,  and  their  Habita- 
tions - - - - 

313  *The  Infide  of  a Houfe  in  Oonalafhka 
529  Views  of  the  Sandwich  Iflands 


VOL.  III. 

I Chart  of  the  Sandwich  Iflands,  and  View  of 
Karakakooa  Bay  _ _ _ 

13  *An  Offering  before  Captain  Cook  in  the 
Sandwich  Iflands  _ _ _ 

17  ^Tereoboo  or  Terreeoboo,  King  of  Owhyhee, 
bringing  prefents  to  Captain  Cook 
27  *A  Man  of  the  Sandwich  Iflands,  dancing  - 
54  ^A  View  of  Karakakooa  in  Owhyhee  - 
125  *A  young  Woman  of  the  Sandwich  Iflands  - 


Plate  N" 

LXXXVII. 

XLVIII. 

XLIX. 

L. 

LV. 

LI. 

LIL 

LIII. 

LXXXIV. 

LIV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIll. 

LXXXIII. 


LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXVIII. 

LXIII. 


LIST  OF  THE  PLATES. 


xcr 


Page  Plate  N* 

126  *A  Man  of  the  Sandwich  Iflands,  with  his 

helmet  _ . - - LXIV. 

1 39  *A  Canoe  of  the  Sandwich  Iflands,  the  Row- 

ers maflced  - - ’ - - LXV. 

140  *A  Man  of  the  Sandwich  Iflands  in  a maflc  LXVI. 
J51  ^Various  Articles  at  the  Sandwich  Iflands  - LXVII. 


N°  I.  A wooden  Inftrument  or  Weapon,  fet  round 
with  the  teeth  of  Sharks,  with  which  they 
cut  up  their  prifoners. 

2.  Another,  for  the  fame  purpofe.  - 

3.  A mufical  Inftrument  j the  upper  part  wicker- 

work, covered  with  feathers ; the  bottom 
part  a gourd  with  ftones  in  it,  which  the 
dancer  (hakes  about. — See  Plate  LXII. 

4.  An  Idol  upon  wicker-work,  covered  with 

feathers  j the  eyes  mother  of  pearl,  with  a 
black  nut ; the  mouth  fet  with  teeth  of 
dogs. 

5.  A Bracelet,  compofed  of  the  tulks  of  hogs. 

6.  A wooden  Dagger  called  Pahooah. 

184  Sketch  of  Awatfka  Bay  in  Kamtfchatka  - LXIX. 

201  *A  Man  in  Kamtfchatka  travelling  in  winter  LXX. 

202  *A  Sledge  in  Kamtfchatka  - - - LXXI. 

215  *A  View  at  Bolcheretfk  or  Bolcheretzkoi  in 

Kamtfchatka  -----  LXXII. 
252  *A  white  Bear  - - - - LXXIII. 

281  *A  View  of  the  Town  and  Harbour  of  St. 

Peter  and  St.  Paul,  in  Kamtfchatka  - - LXXIV. 

312  Views  on  the  coafl:  of  Kamtfchatka  - - LXXXV. 

358  *A  Man  of  Kamtfchatka  - - - LXXV. 

359  *A  Woman  of  Kamtfchatka  - - - LXX VI. 

373  ^Summer  and  Winter  Habitations  in  Kamt- 
fchatka - - - - - LXXVII. 


XCVl 


LIST  OF  THE  PLATES. 


Page 

375  ^The  Infide  of  a Winter  Habitation  in 


Plate  N* 


Kamtfchatka 

395  Chart  of  the  Coaft  of  Japan 
407  Sketch  of  Sulphur  Ifland 
417  Sketch  of  the  Typa  and  Macao 


LXXVIIL 

LXXIX. 

LXXX. 

LXXXI. 


[N.  B.  The  longitude  in  thefe  Volumes  is  reckoned  from 
the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  and  after  paffing  it  to  the  Eaft,  in 
the  South  Atlantic,  is  carried  on  Eafterly  beyond  the  180th 
degree,  to  the  utmoll  extent  of  the  voyage  j and  back,  to  the 
fame  meridian.] 


A VOYAGE 


A 


V 

0 

Y 

T 0 

A 

T H F 

G 

E 

PAG 

I F I 

c 

X X Jl 

0 

C E 

A N, 

BOOK  1. 

TRANSACTIONS  FROM  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  VOYAGE  TILL 
OUR  DEPARTURE  FROM  NEW  ZEALAND. 


CHAP.  1. 

Various  Preparations  for  the  Voyage. — OmaPs  Behaviour 
on  embarking. — Obfervations  for  determining  the  Lon- 
gitude of  Sheernefs,  and  the  North  Foreland. — Paffage 
of  the  Refolution  from  Deptford  to  Plymouth. — Employ- 
ments there. — Complements  of  the  Crews  of  both  Ships, 
and  Names  of  the  Officers. — Obfervations  to  fix  the  Longi- 
tude of  Plymouth. — Departure  of  the  Refolution. 


Having,  on  the  ninth  Day  of  February  1776,  re- 
ceived a commiffion  to  command  his  Majefty’s 
hoop  the  Refolution,  I went  on  board  the  next  day, 
hoifted  the  pendant,  and  began  to  enter  men.  At  the  fame 
time,  the  Difcovery,  of  three  hundred  tons  burthen,  was 
VoL.  I.  B purchafed 


1776. 

February, 

' r-—J 

Saturday  lo 


2 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

February. 


March. 
Saturday  9. 


May. 

Monday  6. 


Thurfday  30. 


June. 


Saturday  8. 


piirchafed  into  the  fervice,  anil  the  command  of  her  given 
to  Captain  Clerke,  who  had  been  my  fecond  Lieutenant  on 
board  theRefohition,  in  my  fecond  voyage  round  the  world, 
from  which  we  had  lately  returned. 

Thefe  two  fliips  were,  at  this  time,  in  the  dock  at  Dept- 
ford, under  the  hands  of  the  fliipwrights ; being  ordered  to 
be  equipped  to  make  farther  difcoveries  in  the  Pacific  Ocean, 
under  my  diredtion. 

On  the  9th  of  March,  the  Refolution  was  hauled  out  of 
dock  into  the  River;  where  we  completed  her  rigging,  and 
took  on  board  the  ftores  and  provifions  requifite  for  a voy- 
age of  fuch  duration.  Both  fliips,  indeed,  were  fupplied 
with  as  much  of  every  necefiTary  article  as  we  could  conve- 
niently flow,  and  with  the  befi:  of  every  kind  that  could  be 
procured.  And,  befides  this,  every  thing  that  had  been 
found,  by  the  experience  acquired  during  our  former  ex- 
tenfive  voyages,  to  be  of  any  utility  in  preferving  the  health 
of  feamen,  was  fupplied  in  abundance. 

It  was  our  intention  to  have  failed  to  Long  Reach  on  the 
6th  of  May,  when  a pilot  came  on  board  to  carry  us  thither; 
but  it  was  the  29th  before  the  wind  would  permit  us  to 
move ; and  the  30th  before  we  arrived  at  that  ftation,  where 
our  artillery,  powder,  fliot,  and  other  ordnance  ftores  were 
received. 

While  we  lay  in  Long  Reach,  thus  employed,  the  Earl  of 
Sandwich,  Sir  Hugh  Pallifer,  and  others  of  the  Board  of  Ad- 
miralty, as  the  laft  mark  of  the  very  great  attention  they 
had  all  along  fliewn  to  this  equipment,  paid  us  a vifit  on 
the  8th  of  June,  to  examine  whether  every  thing  had  been 
completed  conformably  to  their  intentions  and  orders,  and- 
to  the  fatisfadfion  of  all  who  were  to  embark  in  the  voyage. 
They,  and  feveral  other  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  their 

friends, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


3 


friends,  honoured  me  with  their  company  at  dinner  on  that 
day ; and,  on  their  coming  on  board,  and  alfo  on  their  go- 
ing alliore,  we  faluted  them  with  feventeen  guns,  and  three 
cheers. 

With  the  benevolent  view  of  conveying  fome  permanent 
benefit  to  the  inhabitants  of  Otaheite,  and  of  the  other 
illands  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  whom  we  might  happen  to 
vilit,  his  Majefly  having  commanded  fome  ufeful  animals 
to  be  carried  out,  we  took  on  board,  on  the  loth,  a buU, 
two  cows  with  their  calves,  and  fome  fheep,  with  hay  and 
corn  for  their  fubfiftence ; intending  to  add  to  thefe,  other 
ufeful  animals,  when  I fliould  arrive  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope. 

I was  alfo,  from  the  fame  laudable  motives,  furnifhed 
with  a fufficient  quantity  of  fuch  of  our  European  garden 
feeds,  as  could  not  fail  to  be  a valuable  prefent  to  our  newly- 
difcovered  iflands,  by  adding  frefh  fupplies  of  food  to  their 
own  vegetable  produdfions. 

Many  other  articles,  calculated  to  improve  the  condition 
of  our  friends  in  the  other  hemifphere  in  various  ways, 
were,  at  the  fame  time,  delivered  to  us  by  order  of  the 
Board  of  Admiralty.  And  both  fliips  were  provided  with  a 
proper  affortment  of  iron  tools  and  trinkets,  as  the  means 
of  enabling  us  to  traffic,  and  to  cultivate  a friendly  inter- 
courfe  with  the  inhabitants  of  fuch  new  countries  as  we 
might  be  fortunate  enough  to  meet  with. 

The  fame  humane  attention  was  extended  to  our  own 
wants.  Some  additional  clothing,  adapted  to  a cold  climate, 
was  ordered  for  our  crews : and  nothing  was  denied  to  us 
that  could  be  fuppofed  in  the  leaft  conducive  to  health,  or 
even  to  convenience. 

Nor  did  the  extraordinary  care  of  thofe  at  the  head  of  the 

B 2 naval 


f776. 

June. 


Monday  lo. 


4 


A VOYAGE  TO 


I 

c 


1776.  naval  department  flop  here.  They  were  equally  folicitous 
. . to  afford  us  every  affiftance  towards  rendering  our  voyage 

of  public  utility.  Accordingly,  we  received  on  board,  next 
Tuefdayii.  day,  feveral  aftronomical  and  nautical  inftruments,  which 
the  Board  of  Longitude  intrufted  to  me,  and  to  Mr.  King, 
my  fecond  Lieutenant ; we  having  engaged  to  that  Board  to 
make  all  the  neceffary  obfervations,  during  the  voyage,  for 
the  improvement  of  aftronomy  and  navigation ; and,  by  our 
joint  labours,  to  fupply  the  place  of  a profeffed  obfervator. 
Such  a perfon  had  been  originally  intended  to  be  fent  out  in 
my  Blip. 

The  Board,  likewife,  put  into  our  poffeffion  the  fame 
watch,  or  time-keeper,  which  I had  carried  out  in  my  laft 
voyage,  and  had  performed  its  part  fo  well.  It  was  a copy 
of  Mr.  Harrifon’s,  conftrudted  by  Mr.  Kendall.  This  day,  at 
noon,  it  was  found  to  be  too  flow  for  mean  time  at  Green- 
wich, by  3^  31"^,  89;  and  by  its  rate  of  going,  it  loft,  on 
mean  time,  209  per  day. 

Another  time-keeper,  and  the  fame  number  and  fort  of 
inftruments  for  making  obfervations,  were  put  on  board  the 
Difcovery,  under  the  care  of  Mr.  William  Bayly ; who, 
having  already  given  fatisfa6tory  proofs  of  his  fkill  and  di- 
ligence as  an  obfervator,  while  employed  in  Captain  Fur- 
neaux’s  fliip,  during  the  late  voyage,  was  engaged  a fecond 
time,  in  that  capacity,  to  embark  with  Captain  Clerke. 

Mr.  Anderfon,  my  furgeon,  who,  to  fkill  in  his  immediate 
profeftion,  added  great  proficiency  in  natural  hiftory,  was 
as  willing  as  he  was  well  qualified,  to  defcribe  every  thing 
in  that  branch  of  fcience  which  fliould  occur  worthy  of  no- 
tice. As  he  had  already  vifited  the  South  Sea  iflands  in  the 
fame  ftiip,  and  been  of  fingular  fervice,  by- enabling  me  to 
enrich  my  relation  of  that  voyage  with  various  ufeful  re- 
marks 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


5 


marks  on  men  and  things '-iS  I reafonably  expelled  to  derive  1776. 
confiderable  affiftance  from  him,  in  recording  onr  new  pro-  ^ . 

ceedings. 

I had  feveral  young  men  amongft  my  fea-officers,  who, 
under  my  dire6i:ion,  could  be  ufefully  employed  in  conftru6l- 
ing  charts,  in  taking  views  of  the  coafts  and  headlands  near 
which  we  Iliould  pafs,  and  in  drawing  plans  of  the  bays  and 
harbours  in  which  we  fliould  anchor.  A conftant  attention 
to  this  I knew  to  be  highly  requilite,  if  we  would  render 
our  difcoveries  profitable  to  future  navigators. 

And,  that  we  might  go  out  with  every  help  that  could 
ferve  to  make  the  refult  of  our  voyage  entertaining  to  the 
generality  of  readers,  as  well  as  inftrudlive  to  the  failor  and 
fcholar,  Mr.  Webber  was  pitched  upon,  and  engaged  to  em- 
bark with  me,  for  the  exprefs  purpofe  of  fupplying  the  un- 
avoidable imperfe^Iions  of  written  accounts,  by  enabling  us 
to  preferve,  and  to  bring  home,  fuch  drawings  of  the  moft: 
memorable  fcenes  of  our  tranfadlions,  as  could  only  be  exe- 
cuted by  a profefled  and  fkilful  artift. 

Every  preparation  being  now  completed,  I received  an 
order  to  proceed  to  Plymouth,  and  to  take  the  Difcovery 
under  my  command.  I accordingly  gave  Captain  Clerke 
two  orders ; one  to  put  himfelf  under  my  command,  and 
the  other  to  carry  his  fliip  round  to  Plymouth. 

On  the  15th,  the  Refolution  failed  from  Long  Reach,  Saturday  15. 
with  the  Difcovery  in  company,  and  the  fame  evening  they 
anchored  at  the  Nore.  Next  day  the  Difcovery  proceeded, 
in  obedience  to  my  order ; but  the  Refolution  was  ordered 

* The  very  copious  Vocabulary  of  the  language  of  Ctaheite,  and  the  comparative 
fpecimen  of  the  languages  of  the  feveral  other  iflands  vifited  during  the  former  voyage, 
and  publiflied  in  Captain  Cook’s  account  of  it,  were  furnifhed  by  Mr.  Anderfon. 

to 


6 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  to  remain  at  the  Nore  till  I lliould  join  her,  being  at  this 
June.  time  in  J.ondon. 

As  we  were  to  touch  at  Otaheite  and  the  Society  Illands, 
in  onr  way  to  the  intended  fcene  of  our  frefli  operations,  it 
had  been  determined  not  to  omit  this  opportunity  (the 
only  one  ever  likely  to  happen)  of  carrying  Omai  back  to 
his  native  country.  Accordingly,  every  thing  being  ready 
for  our  departure,  he  and  I fet  out  together  from  London 
Monday  24.  011  the  24th,  at  lix  o’clock  ill  the  morning.  We  reached 
Chatham  between  ten  and  eleven  o’clock;  and,  after  dining 
with  Commiffioner  Proby,  he  very  obligingly  ordered  his 
yacht  to  carry  us  to  Sheernefs,  where  my  boat  was  waiting 
to  take  us  on  board. 

Omai  left  London  with  a mixture  of  regret  and  fatisfac- 
tion.  When  we  talked  about  England,  and  about  thofe 
who,  during  his  ft  ay,  had  honoured  him  with  their  protec- 
tion or  friendfliip,  I could  obferve  that  his  fpirits  were  fen- 
fibly  affe6led,  and  that  it  was  with  difficulty  he  could  refrain 
from  tears.  But,  the  inftant  the  converfation  turned  to  his 
own  illands,  his  eyes  began  to  fparkle  with  joy.  He  was 
deeply  impreffed  with  a fenfe  of  the  good  treatment  he  had 
met  with  in  England,  and  entertained  the  higheft  ideas  of 
the  country  and  of  the  people.  But  the  pleaffng  profpedl  he 
now  had  before  him  of  returning  home,  loaded  wdth  what, 
he  well  knew,  would  be  efteemed  invaluable  treafures  there, 
and  the  flattering  hope  which  the  pofleflion  of  thefe  gave 
him,  of  attaining  to  a diftinguiflied  fuperiority  amongft  his 
countrymen,  were  confiderations  which  operated,  by  de- 
grees, to  fupprefs  every  uneafy  fenfation ; and  he  feemed  to 
be  quite  happy  when  he  got  on  board  the  fliip. 

He  was  furniflied,  by  his  Majefty,  with  an  ample  provi- 
fion  of  every,  article  which,  during  oar  intercourfe  with  his 

country, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


7 


country,  we  had  obferved  to  be  in  any  eflimation  there,  1776. 
either  as  ufeful  or  as  ornamental.  He  had,  belides,  received  , . 

many  prefents  of  the  fame  nature  from  Lord  Sandwich, 

Mr.  Banks,  and  feveral  other  Gentlemen  and  Ladies  of  his 
acquaintance.  In  fliort,  every  method  had  been  employed, 
both  during  his  abode  in  England,  and  at  his  departure,  to 
make  him  the  inftrument  of  conveying  to  the  inhabitants 
of  the  illands  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  the  mofi:  exalted  opinion 
of  the  greatnefs  and  generofity  of  the  Britifh  nation. 

While  the  Refolution  lay  at  the  Nore,  Mr.  King  made 
feveral  obfervations  for  finding  the  longitude  by  the  watch. 

The  mean  of  them  all,  gave  0°  44^  for  the  longitude  of 
the  fliip.  This,  reduced  to  Sheernefs,  by  the  bearing  and 
eftimated  diftance,  will  make  that  place  to  be  0°  37^  d'  Eafl; 
of  Greenwich  ; which  is  more  by  feven  miles  than  Mr. 

Lyons  made  it,  by  the  watch  which  Lord  Mulgrave  had 
with  him,  on  his  voyage  toward  the  North  Pole.  Whoever 
knows  any  thing  of  the  diftance  between  Sheernefs  and 
Greenwich,  will  be  a judge  which  of  thefe  two  obferva- 
tions is  neareft  the  truth. 

The  variation  of  the  needle  here,  by  a mean  of  different 
fets,  taken  with  different  compaffes,  was  20°  37^  Weft. 

On  the  25th,  about  noon,  we  weighed  anchor,  and  made  Tuefday  25. 
fail  for  the  Downs,  through  the  Queen’s  Channel,  with  a 
gentle  breeze  at  North  Weft  by  Weft.  At  nine  in  the  even- 
ing we  anchored,  with  the  North  Foreland  bearing  South 
by  Eaft,  and  Margate  Point  South  Weft  by  South. 

Next  morning,  at  two  o’clock,  we  weighed  and  flood  Wednef.  26. 
round  the  Foreland  ; and  when  it  bore  North  by  the  com- 
pafs,  the  watch  gave  1°  24'  Eaft  longitude,  which,  reduced 


* Now  Sir  Jofeph. 


to 


8 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

June. 

^ ; 


Thurfday  27. 


Sunday  30. 


July. 

Monday  i. 
Tuefday  2. 


to  the  Foreland,  will  be  i°  11'  Eaft.  Lunar  obfervations 
made  the  preceding  evening,  fixed  it  at  1°  20'  Eaft.  At 
eight  o’clock  the  fame  morning,  we  anchored  in  the  Downs. 
Two  boats  had  been  built  for  us  at  Deal,  and  I immediately 
fent  on  fliore  for  them.  I was  told  that  many  people  had 
aflembled  there  to  fee  Omai ; but,  to  their  great  difappoint- 
ment,  he  did  not  land. 

Having  received  the  boats  on  board,  and  a light  breeze  at 
South  South  Eaft  fpringing  up,  we  got  under  fail  the  next 
day  at  two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  But  the  breeze  foon 
died  away,  and  we  were  obliged  to  anchor  again  till  ten 
o’clock  at  night.  We  then  weighed,  with  the  wind  at  Eaft, 
and  proceeded  down  the  Channel. 

On  the  30th,  at.  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  an- 
chored in  Plymouth  Sound,  where  the  Difcovery  had  arrived 
only  three  days  before.  I faluted  Admiral  Amherft,  whofe 
flag  was  flying  on  board  the  Ocean,  with  thirteen  guns,  and 
he  returned  the  compliment  with  eleven. 

It  was  the  firft  objecft  of  our  care,  on  arriving  at  Ply- 
mouth, to  replace  the  water  and  provifions  that  we  had 
expended,  and  to  receive  on  board  a fupply  of  Port  Wine. 
This  was  the  employment  which  occupied  us  on  the  ift  and 
2d  of  July. 

During  our  ftay  here,  the  crews  were  ferved  with  frefh 
beef  every  day.  And  I fliould  not  do  juftice  to  Mr.  Omman- 
ney,  the  Agent  Vidlualler,  if  I did  not  take  this  opportunity 
to  mention,  that  he  fiiewed  a very  obliging  readinels  to  fur- 
nifti  me  with  the  beft  of  every  thing  that  lay  within  his  de- 
partment. I had  been  under  the  like  obligations  to  him 
on  my  letting  out  upon  my  laft  voyage.  Commiflioner 
Ourry,  with  equal  zeal  for  the  fervice,  gave  us  every  af- 
fiftance  that  we  wanted  from  the  naval  yard. 


It 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


9 


It  could  not  but  occur  to  us  as  a lingular  and  affecting  1776. 
circumllance,  that  at  the  very  inftant  of  our  departure  up-  , 
on  a voyage,  the  object  of  which  was  to  benefit  Europe  by 
making  frefh  difcoveries  in  North  America,  there  fhould 
be  the  unhappy  neceflity  of  employing  others  of  his  Ma- 
jefiy’s  Ihips,  and  of  conveying  numerous  bodies  of  land 
forces,  to  fecure  the  obedience  of  thofe  parts  of  that  con- 
tinent which  had  been  difcovered  and  fettled  by  our  coun- 
trymen in  the  lafi:  century.  On  the  6th,  his  Majefty’s  fliips  Saturday  6. 
Diamond,  Ambufcade,  and  Unicorn,  with  a fleet  of  tranf- 
ports,  confifting  of  fixty-two  fail,  bound  to  America,  with 
the  lafi:  dlivifion  of  the  Heflian  troops,  and  fome  horfe,  were 
forced  into  the  Sound  by  a ftrong  North  Weft  Wind. 

On  the  8th,  I received,  by  exprefs,  my  inftrucftions  for  Monday  s. 
the  voyage,  and  an  order  to  proceed  to  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  with  the  Refolution.  I was  aifo  direcfted  to  leave  an 
order  for  Captain  Clerke  to  follow  us,  as  foon  as  he  fliouid 
join  his  fhip ; he  being,  at  this  time,  detained  in  London. 

Our  firft  difcoverers  of  the  New  World,  and  navigators 
of  the  Indian  and  Pacific  Oceans,  were  juftly  thought  to 
have  exerted  fuch  uncommon  abilities,  and  to  have  accom- 
plifhed  fuch  perilous  enterprizes,  that  their  names  have 
been  handed  down  to  pofterity  as  fo  many  Argonauts. 

Nay,  even  the  hulks  of  the  fliips  that  carried  them,  though 
not  converted  into  conftellations  in  the  Heavens,  ufed  to  be 
honoured  and  vifited  as  facred  reliques  upon  earth.  We, 
in  the  prefent  age  of  improved  navigation,  who  have  been 
inftrudted  by  their  labours,  and  have  followed  them  as  our 
guides,  have  no  fuch -claim  to  fame.  Some  merit,  however, 
being  ftill,  in  the  public  opinion,  confidered  as  due  to  thofe 

* See  the  inftrudions,  in  the  Introdudlion. 


VoL.  I. 


c 


who 


10 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 
July. 

U — 


Tuefday  9. 


who  fail  to  unexplored  quarters  of  the  globe,  in  conform  ity 
to  this  favourable  judgment,  I prefixed  to  the  account  of 
my  lafi:  voyage  the  names  of  the  officers  of  both  my  fliipSy 
and  a table  of  the  number  of  their  refpecStive  crews.  The 
like  information  will  be  expedled  from  me  at  prefent. 

The  Refolution  was  fitted  out  with  the  fame  complement 
of  officers  and  men  ffie  had  before ; and  the  Difcovery’s 
eftablifliment  varied  from  that  of  the  Adventure,  in  the 
fingle  inftance  of  her  having  no  marine  officer  on  board. 
This  arrangement  was  to  be  finally  completed  at  Plymouth  ; 
and,  on  the  9th,  we  received  the  party  of  marines  allotted 
for  our  voyage.  Colonel  Bell,  who  commanded  the  divi- 
fion  at  this  port,  gave  me  fuch  men  for  the  detachment  as 
I had  reafon  to  be  fatisfied  with.  And  the  fupernumerary 
feamen,  occafioned  by  this  reinforcement,  being  turned 
over  into  the  Ocean  man  of  war,  our  feveral  complements 
remained  fixed,  as  reprefented  in  the  following  table  : 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


II 


R E S O ] 

L U 

T I 

0 

\ 

DISCOVERY. 

Officers  and  Men. 

N» 

Offi 

cers  Names. 

N“ 

Officers  Names. 

Captain,  - — 

I 

James  Cook.  — — 

I 

Charles  Clerke. 

Lieutenants,  - - 

3 

John  Gore.  — — 

2-, 

James  Burney. 

James  King.  — — 

John  Rickman. 

John  Williamfon. 

Mafter,  — - 

I 

William  Bligh.  — 

I 

Thomas  Edgar. 

Boatfwain,  - — 

I 

William  Ewin.  — 

I 

Eneas  Atkins. 

Carpenter,  - - 

I 

James  Clevely.  - 

I 

Peter  Reynolds. 

Gunner,  — — 

I 

Robert  Anderfon.  - 

I 

William  Peckover. 

Surgeon,  — — 

I 

William  Anderfon. 

I 

John  Law. 

Mafter's  Mates,  - 

3 

m,  ... 

2 

Midfhipmen,  - 

6 

— 

« - 

4 

Surgeon’s  Mates,— 

2 

- 

^ - 

2 

Captain’s  Clerk,  — 

I 

— 

— — 

I 

Mafter  at  Arms,  - 

I 

— 

I 

Corporal,  - - 

I 

Armourer,  ~ - 

I 

— -. 

I 

Ditto  Mate,  — — 

I 

mm 

I 

Sail  Maker,  — — 

I 

— 

I 

Ditto  Mate,  — - 

I 

~ — 

I 

Boatfwain’s  Mates, 

3 

_ 

_ ... 

2 

Carpenter’s  Ditto, 

3 

- 

- - 

2 

Gunner’s  Ditto,  - 

2 

I 

Carpenter’s  Crew, 

4 

- 

_ — 

4 

Cook,  — — 

I 

— 

- . 

I 

Ditto  Mate,  — — 

I 

Quarter  Mafters,  - 

6 

4 

Able  Seamen,  - 

45 

- 

- 

33 

Marines. 

Lieutenant,  — - 

I 

Molefworth  Philips. 

Serjeant,  — - 

I 

- 

- - 

I 

Corporals,  - - 

2 

- 

- 

I 

Drummer,  - - 

I 

— 

Pi.  - 

I 

Private,  - - 

15 

- 

8 

Total  - - 

I 12 

- 

- 

80 

C 2 


12 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

July. 

V_— V f 

Wednef.  10. 


Thurfday  1 1. 


Friday  12. 


On  the  loth,  the  Commiffioner  and  Pay  Clerks  came  on 
board,  and  paid  the  officers  and  crew  np  to  the  30th  of  laft 
month.  The  petty  officers  and  feamen  had,  befides,  two 
months  wages  in  advance.  Such  indulgence  to  the  latter  is 
no  more  than  what  is  cuftomary  in  the  navy.  But  the  pay- 
ment of  what  was  due  to  the  fuperior  officers  was  humanely 
ordered  by  the  Admiralty,  in  confideration  of  our  peculiar 
lituation,  that  we  might  be  better  able  to  defray  the  very 
great  expence  of  furnilhing  ourfelves  with  a ftock  of  necef- 
faries  for  a voyage  which,  probably,  would  be  of  unufual 
duration,  and  to  regions  where  no  fupply  could  be  expected. 

Nothing  now  obftrudting  my  departure  but  a contrary 
wind,  which  blew  ftrong  at  South  Weft,  in  the  morning  of 
the  nth,  I delivered  into  the  hands  of  Mr.  Burney,  firft 
Lieutenant  of  theDifcovery,  Captain  Clerke’s  failing  orders ; 
a copy  of  which  I alfo  left  with  the  Officer  commanding 
his  Majefty’s  fliips  at  Plymouth,  to  be  delivered  to  the  Cap- 
tain immediately  on  his  arrival.  In’  the  afternoon,  the  wind 
moderating,  we  weighed  with  the  ebb,  and  got  farther  out, 
beyond  all  the  fliipping  in  the  Sound ; where,  after  making 
an  unfuccefsful  attempt  to  get  to  fea,  we  were  detained 
moft  of  the  following  day,  which  was  employed  in  receiving 
on  board  a fupply  of  water ; and,  by  the  fame  veflel  that 
brought  it,  all  the  empty  calks  were  returned. 

As  I did  not  imagine  my  ftay  at  Plymouth  would  have 
been  fo  long  as  it  proved,  we  did  not  get  our  inftruments  on 
ftiore  to  make  the  neceflary  obfervations  for  afcertaining 
the  longitude  by  the  watch.  For  the  fame  reafon,  Mr.  Bayly 
did  not  fet  about  this,  till  he  found  that  the  Difcovery  would 
probably  be  detained  fome  days  after  us.  He  then  placed 

♦ Captain  Le  Crafs,  Admiral  Amherft  having  ftruck  his  flag  fome  days  before. 

his 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


13 


his  quadrant  upon  Drake’s  Illand ; and  had  time,  before  1776. 
the  Refolution  failed,  to  make  obfervations  fufficient  for  . 

"k  ■■ 

the  purpofe  we  had  in  view.  Our  watch  made  the  ifland 
to  lie  4°  14",  and  his,  4°  Weft  of  Greenwich.  Its  lati- 
tude, as  found  by  Meflirs.  Wales  and  Bayly,  on  the  laft 
voyage,  is  50°  21'  30'^  North. 

We  weighed  again  at  eight  in  the  evening,  and  ftood 
out  of  the  Sound,  with  a gentle  breeze  at  North  Weft  by 
Weft. 


CHAP. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


C H A P.  II 


Pajfage  of  the  Refolution  to  ’Teneriffe. — Reception  there. — 
Defcription  of  Santa  Cruz  Road. — Refrejhments  to  be  met 
‘with. — Obfervations  for  fixing  the  Longitude  of  ’Lener  iff e. — 
Some  Account  of  the  IJland. — Botanical  Obfervations. — 
Cities  of  Santa  Cruz  and  Laguna.  — Agriculture. — Air 
and  Climate. — Commerce. — Inhabitants. 


Friday  i2. 
Sunday  14. 


Tuefday  16. 


Wednef.  17. 
Thurfday  1 8. 


WE  had  not  been  long  out  of  Plymouth  Sovind,  before 
the  wind  came  more  wefterly,  and  blew  frefli,  fo 
that  we  were  obliged  to  ply  down  the  Channel ; and  it  was 
not  till  the  14th,  at  eight  in  the  evening,  that  we  were  off 
the  Lizard. 

On  the  1 6th,  at  noon,  St.  Agnes’s  Light-houfe  on  the  Ifles 
of  Scilly  bore  North  Weft  by  Weft,  diftant  feven  or  eight 
miles.  Our  latitude  was  now  49°  53'  North,  and  our 
longitude,  by  the  watch,  6°  11'  Weft.  Hence,  I reckon  that 
St.  Agnes’s  Light-houfe  is  in  49°  57'  30^'  North  latitude,  and 
in  6°  20^  of  Weft  longitude. 

On  the  17th  "'i'-  and  i8th  we  were  olFUfliant,  and  found  the 
longitude  of  the  ifland  to  be,  by  the  watch,  5°  18'  37^^  Weft. 
The  variation  was  23°  o"  50"",  in  the  fame  dire<ftion. 


* It  appears  from  Captain  Cook’s  log-book,  that  he  began  bis  judicious  operations 
for  preferving  the  health  of  his  crew,  very  early  in  the  voyage.  On  the  17th,  the  fhip 
Was  fmoked  between  decks  with  gun-powder.  The  fpare  fails  alfo  were  then  well 
aired. 


With 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


15 


With  a ftrong  gale  at  South,  on  the  19th,  we  flood  to 
the  weftward,  till  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning ; when, 
the  wind  fhifting  to  the  Weft  and  North  Weft,  we  tacked 
and  ftretched  to  the  Southward.  At  this  time,  we  faw 
nine  fail  of  large  fhips,  which  we  judged  to  be  French 
men  of  war.  They  took  no  particular  notice  of  us,  nor  we 
of  them. 

At  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  aad,  we  faw  Cape 
Ortegal ; which  at  noon  bore  South  Eaft,  half  South,  about 
four  leagues  diftant.  At  this  time  we  were  in  the  latitude 
of  44°  6'  North;  and  our  longitude,  by  the  watch,  was 
8°  23^  Weft. 

After  two  days  of  calm  weather  we  pafled  Cape  Finif- 
terre,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  24th,  with  a fine  gale  at 
North  North  Eaft.  The  longitude  of  this  Cape,  by  the 
watch,  is  9°  29''  Weft;  and,  by  the  mean  of  forty-one  lunar 
obfervations,  made  before  and  after  we  pafled  it,  and  re- 
duced to  it  by  the  watch,  the  refult  was  9°  19'  12"^ 

On  the  30th,  at  fix  minutes  and  thirty-eight  feconds  paft 
ten  o’clock  at  night,  apparent  time,  I obferved,  with  a 
night  telefcope,  the  moon  totally  eclipfed.  By  the  epheme- 
ris,  the  fame  happened  at  Greenwich  at  nine  minutes 
paft  eleven  o’clock ; the  diflerence  being  one  hour,  two 
minutes,  and  twenty-two  feconds,  or  15°  35'  30""  of  longi- 
tude. The  watch,  for  the  fame  time,  gave  15°  26"  45''  lon- 
gitude Weft;  and  the  latitude  was  31°  10^  North.  No  other 
obfervation  could  be  made  on  this  eclipfe,  as  the  moon  was 
hid  behind  the  clouds  the  greater  part  of  the  time  ; and, 
in  particular,  when  the  beginning  and  end  of  total  dark- 
nefs,  and  the  end  of  the  eclipfe,  happened. 

Finding  that  we  had  not  hay  and  corn  fuflicient  for  the 
fubfiftence  of  the  flock  of  animals  on  board,  till  our  arrival 

at 


1776; 

July. 


Friday  19. 


Monday  22. 


Wednef.  24. 


Tuefday  30. 


* 


A VOYAGE  TO 


i6 


1776. 

July. 

V— 


Wednef.  31. 


Augufl. 
7'hurfday  i. 


at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  I determined  to  touch  at  Tene- 
riffe,  to  get  a fupply  of  thefe,  and  of  the  ufual  refrefhments 
for  ourfelves ; thinking  that  illand,  for  fuch  piirpofes,  bet- 
ter adapted  than  Madeira.  At  four  in  the  afternoon  of  the 
31ft,  we  faw  Teneriffe,  and  fleered  for  the  eailern  part.  At 
nine,  being  near  it,  we  hauled  up,  and  flood  off  and  on 
during  the  night. 

At  day -light,  on  the  morning  of  the  ifl  of  Augufl,  we 
failed  round  the  Eafl  Point  of  the  illand ; and,  about  eight 
o’clock,  anchored  on  the  South  Eall  fide  of  it,  in  the  Road 
of  Santa  Cruz,  in  twenty-three  fathoms  water  ; the  bottom, 
fand  and  ooze.  Punta  de  Nago,  the  Eafl  point  of  the  Road, 
bore  North  64°  Eafl ; St.  Francis’s  church,  remarkable  for 
its  high  fleeple,  Wefl  South  Weft ; the  Pic,  South  65°  Weft  ; 
and  the  South  Weft  point  of  the  Road,  on  which  Hands  a 
fort  or  caftle.  South  39°  Weft.  In  this  fituation,  we  moored 
North  Eafl  and  South  Weft,  with  a cable  each  way,  being 
near  half  a mile  from  the  fliore. 

We  found,  riding  in  this  Road,  LaBouffole,  aFrench  fri- 
gate, commanded  by  the  Chevalier  de  Borda ; two  brigan- 
tines of  the  fame  nation ; an  Englifh  brigantine  from  Lon- 
don, bound  to  Senegal ; and  fourteen  fail  of  Spanifli  velfels. 

No  fooner  had  we  anchored,,  than  we  were  vifited  by  the 
Mailer  of  the  Port,  who  fatisfied  himfelf  with  alking  the 
fliip’s  name.  Upon  his  leaving  us,  I fent  an  officer  afliore, 
to  prefent  my  refpecfts  to  the  Governor ; and  to  afk  his  leave 
to  take  in  water,  and  to  purchafe  fuch  articles  as  we  were  in 
want  of.  All  this  he  granted  with  the  greateft  politenefs  ; 
and,  foon  after,  fent  an  officer  on  board,  to  compliment  me 
on  my  arrival.  In  the  afternoon,  I waited  upon  him  in  per- 
fon,  accompanied  by  fome  of  my  officers  ; and,  before  I 
returned  to  my  fhip,  befpoke  fome  corn  and  fir  aw  for  the 

live 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


17 


live  flock ; ordered  a quantity  of  wine  from  Mr.  M^Carrick,  1776. 
the  contradlor,  and  made  an  agreement  with  the  mailer  of 
a Spanifli  boat  to  fupply  us  with  water,  as  I found  that  we 
could  not  do  it  ourfelves. 

The  road  of  Santa  Cruz  is  lituated  before  the  town  of  the 
fame  name,  on  the  South  Eall  lide  of  the  illand.  It  is,  as  I 
am  told,  the  principal  road  of  Teneriffe,  for  fhelter,  capa- 
city, and  the  goodnefs  of  its  bottom.  It  lies  entirely  open 
to  the  South  Eall:  and  South  winds.  But  thefe  winds  are 
never  of  long  continuance  ; and,  they  fay,  there  is  not  an 
inllance  of  a Ihip  driving  from  her  anchors  on  lliore. 

This  may,  in  part,  be  owing  to  the  great  care  they  take  in 
mooring  them ; for  I obferved,  that  all  the  Ihips  we  met 
with  there,  had  four  anchors  out ; two  to  the  North  Eall, 
and  two  to  the  South  Well;  and  their  cables  buoyed  up  with 
calks.  Ours  fuffered  a little  by  not  obferving  this  lalt  pre- 
caution. 

At  the  South  Well  part  of  the  road,  a Hone  pier  runs  out 
into  the  fea  from  the  town,  for  the  convenience  of  loading 
and  landing  of  goods.  To  this  pier,  the  water  that  fupplies 
the  Ihipping  is  conveyed.  This,  as  alfo  what  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Santa  Cruz  ufe,  is  derived  from  a rivulet  that  runs 
from  the  hills,  the  greatell  part  of  which  comes  into  the 
town  in  wooden  fpouts  or  troughs,  that  are  fupported  by 
Bender  polls,  and  the  remainder  doth  not  reach  the  fea ; 
though  it  is  evident,  from  the  lize  of  the  channel,  that 

* Though  no  fuch  inftance  was  known  to  thofe  from  whom  Captain  Cook  had 
this  information,  we  learn  from  Glas,  that  fame  years  before  he  was  at  Teneriffe,  al- 
mojl  all  the  Jhipping  in  the  road  were  driven  on  Jhore.  See  Glas's  Hijl.  of  the  Canary 
Ifands,  p.  235.  We  may  well  fuppofe  the  precautions  now  ufed,  have  prevented 
any  more  fuch  accidents  happening.  This  will  flifficiently  juftify  Captain  Cook’s  ac- 
count. ; ; 

VoL.  I.  D fometimes 


i8 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  fometimes  large  torrents  nilh  down.  At  this  time  tliefe 
. troughs  were  repairing,  fo  that  frelli  water,  which  is  very 
good  here,  was  fcarce. 

Were  we  to  judge  from  the  appearance  of  the  country  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Santa  Cruz,  it  might  be  concluded 
that  Teneriffe  is  a barren  fpot,  infufficient  to  maintain  even 
its  own  inhabitants.  The  ample  fuppliesy  however,  which 
we  received,  convinced  us  that  they  had  enough  to  fpare 
for  vihters.  Befides  wine,  which  is  the  chief  produce  of 
the  ifland,  beef  may  be  had  at  a moderate  price.  The  oxen 
are  fmall  and  honey,  and  weigh  about  ninety  pounds  a 
quarter.  The  meat  is  but  lean,  and  was,  at  prefent,  fold 
for  half  a bit  (three  pence  fterling)  a pound.  I,  unadvi- 
fedly,  bought  the  bullocks  alive,  and  paid  confiderably 
more.  Hogs,  flieep,  goats  and  poultry,  are  likewife  to  be 
bought  at  the  fame  moderate  rate ; and  fruits  are  in  great 
plenty.  At  this  time  we  had  grapes,  figs,  pears,  mulber- 
ries, plantains,  and  mufk  melons.  There  is  a variety  of 
other  fruits  produced  here,  though  not  in  feafon  at  this 
time.  Their  pumpkins,  onions,  and  potatoes,  are  exceed- 
ingly good  of  their  kind,  and  keep  better  at  fea  than  any  I 
ever  before  met  with. 

The  Indian  corn,  which  is  alfo  their  produce,  cofi:  me 
about  three  fliillings  and  fixpence  a bulhel ; and  the  fruits 
and  roots  were,  in  general,  very  cheap.  They  have  not  any 
])lentiful  fupply  of  fiflr  from  the  adjoining  fea ; but  a very 
confiderable  fifiiery  is  carried  on  by  their  veflTels  upon  the 
coafi;  of  Barbary ; and  the  produce  of  it  fells  at  a reafonable 
price.  Upon  the  whole,  I found  Teneriffe  to  be  a more 
eligible  place  than  Madeira,  for  fhips  bound  on  long  voyages 
to  touch  at;  though  the  wine  of  the  latter,  according  to  my 
tafte,  is  as  much  fuperior  to  that  of  the  former,  as  ftrong 

beer 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


^9 


beer  is  to  fmall.  To  compenfate  for  this,  the  difference  of  1776. 
prices  is  con fider able  ; for  the  beft  Tenerilfe  wine  was  now  . ^ 

fold  for  twelve  pounds  a pipe ; whereas  a pipe  of  the  beft 
Madeira  would  have  coft  conliderably  more  than  double 
that  fum 

The  Chevaher  de  Borda,  commander  of  the  French  fri- 
gate now  lying  in  Santa  Cruz  road,  was  employed,  in  con- 
juncftion  with  Mr.  Varila,  a Spanifli  Gentleman,  in  making 
aftronomical  obfervations  for  afcertaining  the  going  of  two 
time-keepers  which  they  had  on  board  their  fhip.  For  this 
purpofe,  they  had  a tent  pitched  on  the  pier  head,  where 
they  made  their  obfervations,  and  compared  their  watches, 
every  day  at  noon,  with  the  clock  on  fliore,  by  fignals. 

Thefe  fignals  the  Chevalier  very  obligingly  communicated 
to  us ; fo  that  we  could  compare  our  watch  at  the  fame 
time.  But  our  ftay  was  too  fliort,  to  profit  much  by  his 
kindnefs. 

The  three  days  comparifons  which  we  made,  alTured  us 
that  the  watch  had  not  materially,  if  at  all,  altered  her  rate 
of  going  ; and  gave  us  the  fame  longitude,  within  a very 
few  feconds,  that  was  obtained  by  finding  the  time  from 
obfervations  of  the  fun’s  altitude  from  the  horizon  of  the 
fea.  The  watch,  from  a mean  of  thefe  obfervations,  on 
the  ift,  2d,  and  3d  of  Auguft,  made  the  longitude  16°  31^ 

* Formerly,  there  was  made  at  Teneriffe  a great  quantity  of  Canary  fack,  which  the 
French  call  de  Malvefte\  and  we,  corruptly  after  them,  name  Malmfey  (from  Mal- 
vefia,  a town  in  the  Morea,  famous  for  fuch  lufcious  wine).  In  the  laft  century,  and 
ftill  later,  much  of  this  was  imported  into  England  j but  little  wine  is  now  made  there, 
but  of  the  fort  defcribed  by  Captain  Cook.  Not  more  than  fifty  pipes  of  the  rich  Canary 
were  annually  made  in  Glas’s  time ; and  he  fays,  they  now  gather  the  grapes  when 
green,  and  make  a dry  hard  wine  of  them,  fit  for  hot  climates,  p.  262. 

D 2 


Weft; 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  Weft;  and,  in  like  manner,  the  latitude  was  found  to  be 
Augdt.^^  North. 

Mr.  Varila  informed  us,  that  the  true  longitude  was  18° 
35'  30'",  from  Paris,  which  is  only  16°  16'  30''  from  Green- 
wich ; lefs  than  what  our  watch  gave  by  14'  30'^  But,  far 
from  looking  upon  this  as  an  error  in  the  watch,  I rather 
think  it  a confirmation  of  its  having  gone  well ; and  that 
the  longitude  by  it  may  be  nearer  the  truth  than  any  other. 
It  is  farther  confirmed  by  the  lunar  obfervations  that  we 
made  in  the  road,  which  gave  16°  37'  Thofe  made  be- 
fore we  arrived,  and  reduced  to  the  road  by  the  watch, 
gave  16°  33'  30'";  and  thofe  made  after  we  left  it,  and  redu- 
ced back  in  the  fame  manner,  gave  16°  28'.  The  mean  of 
the  three  is  16°  30'  40'^ 

To  reduce  thefe  feveral  longitudes,  and  the  latitude,  to 
the  Pic  of  TenerifFe,  one  of  the  moft  noted  points  of  land 
with  Geographers  (to  obtain  the  true  fituation  of  which,  I 
have  entered  into  this  particular  difcuflion),  I had  recourfe 
to  the  bearing,  and  a few  hours  of  the  fhip’s  run  after  leav- 
ing Santa  Cruz  road;  and  found  it  to  be  12'  ii"  South  of 
the  road,  and  29'  30^'  of  longitude  Weft  of  it.  As  the 
bafe,  which  helped  to  determine  this,  was  partly  eftimated, 
it  is  liable  to  fome  error ; but  I think  I cannot  be  much 
miftaken.  Dr.  Mafkelyne,  in  his  Britijh  Mariner's  Guide ^ 
places  the  Pic  in  the  latitude  of  28°  12"  54^^  This,  with  the 
bearing  from  the  road,  will  give  the  difference  of  longitude 
43",  which  confiderably  exceeds  the  diftance  they  reckon  the 
Pic  to  be  from  Santa  Cruz.  I made  the  latitude  of  the  Pic 
to  be  28^"  18^  North.  Upon  that  fuppolition,  its  longitude 
will  be  as  follows  : 


By 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN, 


21 


fThe  Time-keeper  - o'  30" 

By  < Lunar  obfervations  - 16°  30'  20' 


- 16°  46'  o' 


Weft. 


(^Mr.  Varila 

But  if  the  latitude  of  it  is  28^  12'  54",  as  in  the  Britijh  Ma- 
riner's Gutdey  its  longitude  will  be  13'  30"  more  wefterly. 

The  variation,  when  we  were  at  anchor  in  the  road,  by 
the  mean  of  all  our  compafles,  was  found  to  be  14°  41'  20'' 
Weft.  The  dip  of  the  North  end  of  the  needle  was  61°  52' 


30"- 

Some  of  Mr.  Anderfon’s  remarks  on  the  natural  appear- 
ances of  Teneriffe,  and  its  productions  ; and  what  he  ob- 
ferved  himfelf,  or  learnt  by  information,  about  the  general 
ftate  of  the  ifland,  will  be  of  ufe,  particularly  in  marking 
what  changes  may  have  happened  there  fince  Mr.  Glas  vi- 
fited  it.  They  here  follow  in  his  own  words  : 

“ While  we  were  ftanding  in  for  the  land,  the  weather 
being  perfectly  clear,  we  had  an  opportunity  of  feeing  the 
celebrated  Pic  of  Teneriffe.  But,  I own,  I was  much  dif- 
appointed  in  my  expectation -with  refpeCt  to  its  appearance. 
It  is,  certainly,  far  from  equalling  the  noble  figure  of  Pico, 
one  of  the  Weftern  Hies  which  I have  feen ; though  its  per- 
pendicular height  may  be  greater.  This  circumftance,  per- 
haps, arifes  from  its  being  furrounded  by  other  very  high 
hiUs ; whereas  Pico  ftands  without  a rival. 

Behind  the  city  of  Santa  Cruz,  the  country  rifes  gradu- 
ally, and  is  of  a moderate  height.  Beyond  this,  to  the 
South  Weftward,  it  becomes  higher,  and  continues  to  rife 
toward  the  Pic,  which,  from  the  road,  appears  but  little 
higher  than  the  furrounding  hills.  From  thence  it  feems  to 
decreafe,  though  not  fuddenly,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach. 
From  a fuppofition  that  we  Ihould  not  ftay  above  one  day, 
I was  obliged  to  contraCt  my  excurfions  into  the  country ; 

otherwife, 


1776. 

Auguft. 

^ ■ * 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  otheiwife,  I had  propofed  to  vilit  the  top  of  this  famous 
, , mountain 

To  the  eaftward  of  Santa  Cruz,  the  ifland  appears  per- 
fectly barren.  Ridges  of  hills  run  toward  the  fea  ; between 
which  ridges  are  deep  valleys,  terminating  at  mountains  or. 
hills  that  run  acrofs,  and  are  higher  than  the  former. 
Thofe  that  run  toward  the  fea,  are  marked  by  impreffions 
on  their  lides,  which  make  them  appear  as  a fucceflion  of 
conic  hills,  with  their  tops  very  rugged.  The  higher  ones 
that  run  acrofs,  are  more  uniform  in  their  appearance. 

In  the  forenoon  of  the  ill  of  Auguft,  after  we  had  an- 
chored in  the  road,  I went  on  fliore  to  one  of  thefe  valleys, 
with  an  intention  to  reach  the  top  of  the  remoter  hills, 
which  feemed  covered  with  wood ; but  time  would  not 
allow  me  to  get  farther  than  their  foot.  After  walking 
about  three  miles,  I found  no  alteration  in  the  appearance 
of  the  lower  hills  ; which  produce  great  quantities  of  the 
euphorbia  Canarienfis , It  is  furprifing  that  this  large  fuccu- 
lent  plant,  fliould  thrive  on  fo  burnt-up  a foil.  When  broken, 
which  is  eafily  done,  the  quantity  of  juice  is  very  great ; 
and  it  might  be  fuppofed  that,  when  dried,  it  would  flirivel 
to  nothing  ; yet  it  is  a pretty  tough,  though  foft  and  light 
wood.  The  people  here  believe  its  Juice  to  be  fo  cauftic  as 

* See  an  account  of  a journey  to  the  top  of  the  Pic  of  Teneriffe,  in  Sprat's  Hijlory 
of  the  B,oyal  Society^  p.  200,  &c.  G!as  alfo  went  to  the  top  of  it,  Hijlory  of  the  Canary 
Ifands^p,  252  to  259.  In  the  Philofophical  Tranfadlions,  vol.  xlvii.  p.  353 — 356,  we 
have  Ohfervations  made^  in  going  up  the  Pic  of  Tenerife^  by  Dr.  P.  Heberden.  The  Do£lor 
makes  its  height,  above  the  level  of  the  fea,  to  be  2566  fathoms,  or  15,39^  Englifh  feet^ 
and  fays,  that  this  was  confirmed  by  two  fubfequent  obferyations  by  himfelf,  and  another 
made  by  Mr.  Crofie,  the  Conful.  And  yet,  I find,  that  the  Chevalier  de  Borda,  who 
meafured  the  height  of  this  mountain  in  Auguft  1776,  makes  it  to  be  only  1931  French 
toifes,  or  12,340  Englifh  feet.  See  Dodlor  Forfter’s  Obfervations  during  a Voyage  round 
the  World.,  p.  32. 

to 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


23 


to  erode  the  iTcin  ; but  I convinced  them,  though  with 
much  difficulty,  to  the  contrary,  by  thrufting  my  finger 
into  the  plant  full  of  it,  without  afterward  wiping  it  off. 
They  break  down  the  buffies  of  euphorbia^  and  fuffering 
them  to  dry,  carry  them  home  for  fuel.  I met  with  nothing 
elfe  growing  there,  but  two  or  three  fmall  llirubs,  and  a 
few  fig-trees  near  the  bottom  of  the  valley. 

The  bafis  of  the  hills  is  a heavy,  compa6l,  blueifh  ftone, 
mixed  with  fome  fhining  particles  ; and,  on  the  furface, 
large  maffes  of  red  friable  earth,  or  ftone,  are  fcattered 
about.  I alfo  often  found  the  fame  fubftance  difpofed  in 
thick  Jirata ; and  the  little  earth,  ftrewed  here  and  there, 
was  a blackifh  mould.  There  were  likewife  fome  pieces  of 
flag ; one  of  which,  from  its  weight  and  fmooth  furface, 
feemed  almoft  wholly  metalline. 

The  mouldering  ftate  of  thefe  hills  is,  doubtlefs,  owing 
to  the  perpetual  adlion  of  the  fun,  which  calcines  their  fur- 
face. This  mouldered  part  being  afterward  wafhed  away 
by  the  heavy  rains,  perhaps  is  the  caufe  of  their  fides  be- 
ing fo  uneven.  FOr,  as  the  different  fubftances  of  which 
they  are  compofed,  are  more  or  lefs  eafily  affecfted  by  the 
fun’s  heat,  they  will  be  carried  away  in  the  like  propor- 
tions. Hence,  perhaps,  the  tops  of  the  hills,  being  of  the 
hardeft  rock,  have  flood,  while  the  other  parts  on  a decli- 
vity have  been  deftroyed.  As  I have  ufually  obferved,  that 
the  tops  of  moft  mountains  that  are  covered  with  trees 
have  a more  uniform  appearance,  I am  inclined  to  believe 
that  this  is  owing  to  their  being  fhaded. 

The  city  of  Santa  Cruz,  though  not  large,  is  tolerably 

* Glap^  p.  231,  fpeaking  of  this  plant,  fays,  that  he  cannot  imagine  why  the  natives 
^ the  Canaries  do  not  extract  the  juice^  and  ufe  it  injiead  of  pitchy  for  the  bottoms  of  their  boats. 
We  now  learn  from  Mr.  Anderfon  their  reafon  for  not  ufing  it. 

well 


1776. 

Auguft. 

. — > 


e 


24 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  well  built.  The  churches  are  not  magnificent  without ; but 

. . within  are  decent,  and  indifferently  ornamented.  They  are 

inferior  to  fome  of  the  churches  at  Madeira  ; but,  I ima- 
gine, this  rather  arifes  from  the  different  difpofition  of  the 
people,  than  from  their  inability  to  fupport  them  better. 
For  the  private  houfes,  and  drefs  of  the  Spanifh  inhabitants 
of  Santa  Cruz,  are  far  preferable  to  thofe  of  the  Portuguefe 
at  Madeira ; who,  perhaps,  are  willing  to  flrip  themfelves, 
that  they  may  adorn  their  churches. 

Almofl  facing  the  flone  pier  at  the  landing-place,  is  a 
handfome  marble  column  lately  put  up,  ornamented  with 
fome  human  figures,  that  do  no  difcredit  to  the  artift ; with 
an  infcription  in  Spanifh,  to  commemorate  the  occafion  of 
the  erection ; and  the  date. 

Friday  2.  In  the  aftemoon  of  the  2d,  four  of  us  hired  mules  to  ride 
to  the  city  of  Laguna fo  called  from  an  adjoining  lake, 
about  four  miles  from  Santa  Cruz.  We  arrived  there  be^ 
tween  five  and  fix  in  the  evening ; but  found  a fight  of  it 
very  unable  to  compenfate  for  our  trouble,  as  the  road  was 
very  bad,  and  the  mules  but  indifferent.  The  place  is,  in- 
deed, pretty  extenfive,  but  fcarcely  deferves  to  be  dignified 
with  the  name  of  city.  The  difpofition  of  its  ftreets  is  very 
irregular ; yet  fome  of  them  are  of  a tolerable  breadth,  and 
have  fome  good  houfes.  In  general,  however.  Laguna  is 
inferior  in  appearance  to  Santa  Cruz,  though  the  latter  is 
but  fmall,  if  compared  with  the  former.  We  were  inform- 
ed, likewife,  that  Laguna  is  declining  faff;  there  being, 
at  prefent,  fome  vineyards  where  houfes  formerly  flood  ; 
whereas  Santa  Cruz  is  increafing  daily. 

* Its  extended  nanie  Is  St.  Chriftobal  de  la  Laguna ; and  it  ufed  to  be  reckoned 
the  capital  of  the  ifland,  the  gentry  and  lawyers  living  there  ; though  the  Governor  Ge- 
neral of  the  Canary  Iflands  refides  at  Santa  Cruz,  as  being  the  centre  of  their  trade, 
both  with  Europe  and  America.  See  Glas's  Hi/},  p.  248. 


e 


The 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


25 


The  road  leading  from  Santa  Cruz  to  Laguna  runs  up 
a fteep  hill,  which  is  very  barren  ; but,  lower  down,  we 
faw  fome  fig-trees,  and  feveral  corn  fields.  Thefe  are  but 
fmall,  and  not  thrown  into  ridges,  as  is  pracStifed  in  Eng- 
land. Nor  does  it  appear  that  they  can  raife  any  corn  here 
without  great  labour,  as  the' ground  is  fo  encumbered  with 
hones,  that  they  are  obliged  to  colledf  and  lay  them  in 
broad  rows,  or  walls,  at  fmall  diftances.  The  large  hills 
that  run  to  the  South  Weft,  appeared  to  be  pretty  well  fur- 
niflied  with  trees!  Nothing  elfe  worth  noticing  prefented 
itfelf  during  this  excurfion,  except  a few  aloe  plants  in 
flower,  near  the  fide  of  the  road  ; and  the  cheerfulnefs  of 
our  guides,  who  amufed  us  with  fongs  by  the  way. 

Moft  of  the  laborious  work  in  this  illand  is  performed 
by  mules  ; horfes  being  to  appearance  fcarce,  and  chiefly 
referved  for  the  ufe  of  the  officers.  They  are  of  a fmall 
lize,  but  weU  fhaped  and  fpirited.  Oxen  are  alfo  employed 
to  drag  their  cafks  along  upon  a large  clumfy  piece  of  wood ; 
and  they  are  yoked  by  the  head,  though  it  doth  not  feem 
that  this  has  any  peculiar  advantage  over  our  method  of 
fixing  the  harnefs  on  the  flioulders.'  In  my  walks  and  ex- 
curfions  I faw  fome  hawks,  parrots,  which  are  natives  of 
the  illand,  the  fea  fwallow  or  tern,  fea  gulls,  partridges, 
wagtails,  fwallows,  martins,  blackbirds,  and  Canary-birds 
in  large  flocks.  There  are  alfo  lizards  of  the  common,  and 
another  fort ; fome  infedfs,  as  locufts ; and  three  or  four 
forts  of  dragon  flies. 

I had  an  opportunity  of  converling  with  a fenfible  and 
well-informed  gentleman  refiding  here,  and  whofe  veracity 
I have  not  the  leaft  reafon  to  doubt.  From  him  I learnt 
fome  particulars,  which,  during  the  fliort  flay  of  three 
days,  did  not  fall  within  my  own  obfervation.  He  in- 

VoL.  I.  E ' formed 


1776. 

Auguft. 


26 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776*  formed  me,  that  a Ihrub  is  common  here,  agreeing  exadlly 
. with  the  defcription  given  by  Tournefort  and  Linnaeus,  of 
the  tea  fhrub^  as  growing  in  China  and  Japan.  It  is  rec- 
koned a weed,  and  he  roots  out  thoufands  of  them  every 
year  from  his  vineyards.  The  Spaniards  however,  of  the 
ifland,  fometimes  ufe  it  as  tea,  and  afcribe  to  it  all  the  qua- 
lities of  that  imported  from  China.  They  alfo  give  it  the 
name  of  tea ; but  what  is  remarkable,  they  iky  it  was 
found  here  when  the  iflands  were  firll  difcovered. 

Another  botanical  curiolity,  mentioned  by  him,  is  what 
they  call  the  impregnated  lemon  It  is  a perfect  and  dif- 
tindt  lemon,  inclofed  within  another,  differing  from  the 
outer  one  only  in  being  a little  more  globular.  The  leaves 
of  the  tree  that  produces  this  fort,  are  much  longer  than 
thofe  of  the  common  one  ; and  it  was  reprefented  to  me  as 
being  crooked,  and  not  equal  in  beauty. 

From  him  I learnt  alfo,  that  a certain  fort  of  grape 
growing  here,  is  reckoned  an  excellent  remedy  in  phthili- 
cal  complaints  : and  the  air  and  chmate,  in  general,  are 
remarkably  healthful,  and  particularly  adapted  to  give  re- 
lief in  fuch  difeafes.  This  he  endeavoured  to  account  for, 
by  its  being  always  in  one’s  power  to  procure  a different 
temperature  of  the  air,  by  reliding  at  different  heights  in 
the  ifland  ; and  he  expreffed  his  furprize  that  the  Englifh 
phyficians  fhould  never  have  thought  of  fending  their  con- 
fumptive  patients  to  Teneriffe,  inflead  of  Nice  or  Lifbon. 
How  much  the  temperature  of  the  air  varies  here,  I myfelf 
' could  fenfibly  perceive,  only  in  riding  from  Santa  Cruz  up 
to  Laguna ; and  you  may  afcend  till  the  cold  becomes  in- 

* The  Writer  of  the  Relation  of  Teneriffe^  in  Sprat’s  Hijlory^  p.  207,  takes  notice 
of  this  lemon  as  produced  here,  and  calls  it  Pregnada,  Probably,  emprennaday  the  Spa- 
nilh  word  for  impregnated^  is  the  name  it  goes  by. 


tolerable. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


tolerable.  I was  affured  that  no  perfon  can  live  comfort- 
ably within  a mile  of  the  perpendicular  height  of  the  Pic, 
after  the  month  of  Auguft 

Although  fome  fmoke  conftantly  iffues  from  near  the  top 
of  the  Pic,  they  have  had  no  earthquake  or  eruption  of  a vol- 
cano lince  1704,  when  the  port  of  Garrachica,  where  much 
of  their  trade  was  formerly  carried  on,  was  deftroyed  t* 

Their  trade,  indeed,  muft  be  confidered  as  very  confider- 
able ; for  they  reckon  that  forty  thoufand  pipes  of  wine  are 
annually  made,  the  greateft  part  of  which  is  either  con- 
fumed  in  the  ifland,  or  made  into  brandy,  and  fent  to  the 
Spanifh  Weft  Indies  About  fix  thoufand  pipes  were  ex- 
ported every  year  to  North  America,  while  the  trade  with 
it  was  uninterrupted ; at  prefent,  they  think  not  above 
half  the  quantity.  The  corn  they  raife  is,  in  general,  in- 
fufficient  to  maintain  the  inhabitants ; but  the  deficiency 


* This  agrees  with  Dr.  T.  Heberden’s  account,  who  fays  that  the  fugar-loaf  part  of 
the  mountain,  or  la  pericofa  (as  it  is  called),  which  is  an  eighth  part  of  a league  (or  1980 
feet)  to  the  top^  is  covered  with  /now  the  greateji  part  of  the  year.  See  Philofophical  Tranfac- 
tionsy  as  quoted  above. 

t This  port  was  then  filled  up  by  the  rivers  of  burning  lava  that  flowed  into  it  from 
a volcano ; infomuch  that  houfes  are  now  built  where  (hips  formerly  lay  at  anchor.  See 
Glas's  Hijl.  p.  244. 

X Glasy  p.  342,  fays,  that  they  annually  export  no  lefs  than  fifteen  thoufand  pipes 
of  wine  and  brandy.  In  another  place,  p.  252,  he  tells  us,  that  the  number  of  the 
inhabitants  of  TenerifFe,  when  the  laft  account  was  taken,  was  no  lefs  than  96,000. 
VVe  may  reafonably  fuppofe  that  there  has  been  a confiderable  increafe  of  population 
fince  Glas  vifited  the  ifland,  which  is  above  thirty  years  ago.  7'he  quantity  of  wine 
annually  confumed,  as  the  common  beverage  of  at  leaft  one  hundred  thoufand  perfons, 
muft  amount  to  feveral  thoufand  pipes.  There  muft  be  a vaft  expenditure  of  it,  by 
oonverfion  into  brandy  ; to  produce  one  pipe  of  which,  five  or  fix  pipes  of  wine  muft  be 
diftilled.  An  attention  to  thefe  particulars  will  enable  every  one  to  judge,  that  the  ac- 
count given  to  Mr.  Anderfon,  of  an  annual  produce  of  40,000  pipes  of  wine,  has  a 
foundation  in  truth. 

E 2 


ufed 


28 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  •ufed  to  be  fupplied  by  importation  from  the  North  Amerl- 
, cans,  who  took  their  wines  in  return. 

— y— i ^ 

They  make  a little  lilk ; but  unlefs  we  reckon  the  filter- 
ing-ftones,  brought  in  great  numbers  from  Grand  Canary, 
the  wine  is  the  only  confiderable  article  of  the  foreign 
commerce  of  Teneriffe. 

None  of  the  race  of  inhabitants  found  here  when  the 
Spaniards  difcovered  the  Canaries,  now  remain  a dillindf 
people  -'i',  having  intermarried  with  the  Spanifh  fettlers  ; 
but  their  defcendants  are  known,  from  their  being  remark- 
ably tall,  large-boned,  and  llrong.  The  men  are,  in  gene- 
ral, of  a tawny  colour,  and  the  women  have  a pale  com- 
plexion, entirely  deftitute  of  that  bloom  which  diftin- 
guiflies  our  Northern  beauties.  The  Spanilli  cuftom  of 
wearing  black  clothes  continues  amongft  them ; but  the 
men  feem  more  indifferent  about  this,  and  in  fome  mea- 
fure  drefs  like  the  French.  In  other  refpedfs,  we  found 
the  inhabitants  of  Teneriffe  to  be  a decent  and  very  civil 
people,  retaining  that  grave  cafl  which  diftinguifhes  thofe 
of  their  country  from  other  European  nations.  Although 
we  do  not  think  that  there  is  a great  fimilarity  between  our 
manners  and  thofe  of  the  Spaniards,  it  is  worth  obferving, 
that  Omai  did  not  think  there  was  much  difference.  He 
only  faid,  “ that  they  feemed  not  fo  friendly  as  the  Eng- 
lifli ; and  that,  in  their  perfons,  they  approached  thofe  of 
his  countrymen.” 

* It  was  otherwife  in  Glas’s  time,  when  a few  families  of  the  Guanches  (as  they  are 
called)  remained  ftill  in  Teneriffe,  not  blended  with  the  Spaniards.  Glas^  p.  240. 


CHAP. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


29 


CHAP.  III. 

Departure  from  I’eneriffe. — Danger  of  the  Ship  near  Bona-- 
vijia, — IJle  of  Mayo. — Port  Praya. — Precautions  againji 
the  Rain  and  fultry  Weather  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  the 
Equator. — Pojition  of  the  Coaji  of  Brazil. — Arrival  at  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope. — T’ranfadiions  there. — Jundiion  of  the 
Difcovery. — Mr.  Anderfon's  Journey  up  the  Country. — Af- 
tronomical  Obfervations. — Nautical  Remarks  on  the  Paf- 
fage  from  England  to  the  Cape^  with  regard  to  the  Cur- 
rents and  the  Variation. 

Having  completed  our  water,  and  got  on  board  every  1776. 

other  thing  we  wanted  at  TenerifFe,  we  weighed  an-  , 
chor  on  the  4th  of  Augulf,  and  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  Sunday  4. 
with  a fine  gale  at  North  Eaft. 

At  nine  o’clock  in  the  evening  on  the  loth  we  faw  the  Saturday  10. 
ifland  of  Bonavifta  bearing  South,  difiant  little  more  than 
a league ; though,  at  this  time,  we  thought  ourfelves  much 
farther  off : but  this  proved  a miftake.  For,  after  hauling 
to  the  Eafiiward  till  twelve  o’clock,  to  clear  the  funken  rocks 
that  lie  about  a league  from  the  South  Eafl  point  of  the 
illand,  we  found  ourfelves,  at  that  time,  clofe  upon  them, 
and  did  but  juft  weather  the  breakers.  Our  fituation,  for  a 
few  minutes,  was  very  alarming.  I did  not  choofe  to  found, 

* As  a proof  of  Captain  Cook’s  attention,  both  to  the  difcipline  and  to  the  health  of 
his  {hip’s  company,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  obferve  here,  that  it  appears  from  his  log- 
book, he  exercifed  them  at  great  gum  and  fmall  armsy  and  cleaned  and  fmoked  the  Jhip  betwixt 
decksj  twice  in  the  interval  between  the  4th  and  the  loth  of  Augulf, 


as 


Sunday  1 1. 


Monday  12. 


A VOYAGE  TO 

as  that  might  have  heightened  the  danger,  without  any 
pofhbility  of  leffening  it.  I make  the  North  end  of  the 
illand  of  Bonavifla  to  lie  in  the  latitude  of  16*^  17''  North, 
and  in  the  longitude  of  22°  59'  Weft. 

As  foon  as  we  were  clear  of  the  rocks,  we  fteered  South 
South  Weft,  till  day-break  next  morning,  and  then  hauled 
to  the  Weftward,  to  go  between  Bonavifta  and  the  ifle  of 
Mayo,  intending  to  look  into  Port  Praya  for  the  Difcovery, 
as  I had  told  Captain  Clerke  that  I fhould  touch  there,  and 
did  not  know  how  foon  he  might  fail  after  me.  At  one  in 
the  afternoon,  we  faw  the  rocks  that  lie  on  the  South  Weft 
fide  of  Bonavifta,  bearing  South  Eaft,  diftant  three  or  four 
leagues. 

Next  morning,  at  fix  o’clock,  the  ifle  of  Mayo  bore  South 
South  Eaft,  diftant  about  five  leagues.  In  this  fituation  we 
founded,  and  found  ground  at  fixty  fathoms.  At  the  fame 
time  the  variation,  by  the  mean  of  feveral  azimuths  taken 
with  three  different  compaffes,  was  9°  32!''  Weft.  At  eleven 
o’clock,  one  extreme  of  Mayo  bore  Eaft  by  North,  and 
the  other  South  Eaft  by  South.  In  this  pofition,  two 
roundifli  hills  appeared  near  its  North  Eaft  part ; farther 
on,  a large  and  higher  hill ; and,  at  about  two-thirds  of 
its  length,  a fingle  one  that  is  peaked.  At  the  diftance  we 
now  faw  this  illand,  which  was  three  or  four  miles,  there 
Avas  not  the  leaft  appearance  of  vegetation,  nor  any  re- 
lief to  the  eye  from  that  lifelefs  brown  which  prevails  in 
countries  under  the  Torrid  Zone  that  are  unwooded. 

Here  I cannot  help  remarking  that  Mr.  Nichelfon,  in  his 
Preface  to  Sundry  Remarks  and  Obfervations  made  in  a Voy-^ 
age  to  the  Eaji  Indies  tells  us,  that  with  eight  degrees 

* On  board  his  Majefty’s  fhip  Elizabeth,  from  1758  to  17645  by  William  Nichel- 
fon, Mafter  of  the  faid  fliip.  London,  1773. 

» Weft 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


Weft  variation,  or  any  thing  above  that,  you  may  ven-  1776. 

“ ture  to  fail  by  the  Cape  de  Verde  Iflands  night  or  day,  ^ ^ 
“ being  well  allured,  with  that  variation,  that  you  are  to 
“ the  Eaftward  of  them.”  Such  an  affertion  might  prove 
of  dangerous  confequence,  were  there  any  that  would  im- 
phcitly  truft  to  it.  We  alfo  tried  the  current,  and  found 
one  fetting  South  Weft  by  Weft,  fomething  more  than  half 
a mile  an  hour.  We  had  reafon  to  expe6l  this,  from  the 
differences  between  the  longitude  given  by  the  watch  and 
dead  reckoning,  which,  lince  our  leaving  Teneriffe,  amount- 
ed to  one  degree. 

While  we  were  amongft  thefe  iflands,  we  had  light 
breezes  of  wind,  varying  from  the  South  Eaft  to  Eaft,  and 
fome  calms.  This  fhews  that  the  Cape  de  Verde  Illands  are 
either  extenlive  enough  to  break  the  current  of  the  trade 
wind,  or  that  they  are  fituated  juft  beyond  its  verge,  in  that 
fpace  where  the  variable  winds,  found  on  getting  near  the 
line,  begin.  The  firft  fuppolition,  however,  is  the  moft 
probable,  as  Dampier  'i*'  found  the  wind  wefterly  here  in  the 
month  of  February ; at  which  time  the  trade  wind  is  fup- 
pofed  to  extend  fartheft  toward  the  equinodfial.  The  wea- 
ther was  hot  and  fultry,  with  fome  rain ; and,  for  the  moft 
part,  a dull  whitenefs  prevailed  in  the  fky,  that  feems  a 
medium  between  fog  and  clouds.  In  general,  the  tropical 
regions  feldom  enjoy  that  clear  atmofphere  obfervable 
where  variable  winds  blow ; nor  does  the  fun  fliine  with 
fuch  brightnefs.  This  cuxumftance,  however,  feems  an 
advantage ; for  otherwife,  perhaps,  the  rays  of  the  fun, 
being  uninterrupted,  would  render  the  heat  quite  unfup- 
portable.  7'he  nights  are,  neverthelefs,  often  clear  and 
ferene. 


* Dampier’s  Voyages,  Vol.  iii.  p.  lo. 


At 


.7- 

17  7(9. 
AugulL 

v 1 

'J'uefday  13. 


Wednef.  14. 
Friday  30. 


A O Y A G E TO 

At  nine  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  13th,  w e arrived 
before  Port  Praya,  in  the  illand  of  St.  Jago,  Avhere  we  faw 
two  Dutch  Eaft  India  fhips,  and  a fmall  brigantine  at  an- 
chor. As  the  Difcovery  was  not  there,  and  we  had  ex- 
pended but  little  water  in  our  paflage  from  Teneriffe,  I did 
not  think  proper  to  go  in,  hut  flood  to  the  Southward, 
Some  altitudes  of  the  Sun  were  now  taken,  to  afcertain  the 
true  time.  The  longitude  by  the  watch,  deduced  there- 
from, was  23°  48'  Weft ; the  little  ifland  in  the  bay  bore 
Weft  North  Weft,  diftant  near  three  miles,  which  will  make 
its  longitude  23°  51'.  The  fame  watch,  on  my  late  voyage, 
made  the'  longitude  to  be  23°  30'  W eft ; and  we  obferved 
the  latitude  to  be  14°  53'  30^"  North. 

The  day  after  we  left  the  Cape  de  Verde  Illands,  we  loft 
the  North  Eaft  trade  wind ; but  did  not  get  that  which 
blows  from  the  South  Eaft  till  the  30th,  when  we  were  in 
the  latitude  of  2°  North,  and  in  the  twenty-fifth  degree  of 
Weft  longitude. 

During  this  interval  the  wind  was  moftly  in  the  South 
Weft  quarter.  Sometimes  it  blew  frefli,  and  in  fqualls  ; but 
for  the  moll  part  a gentle  breeze.  The  calms  were  few, 
and  of  fliort  duration.  Between  the  latitude  of  12°  and  of 
7°  North,  the  weather  was  generally  dark  and  gloomy, 
with  frequent  rains,  which  enabled  us  to  fave  as  much  wa- 
ter as  filled  moft  of  our  empty  calks. 

Thefe  rains,  and  the  clofe  fultry  Aveather  accompanying 

* On  the  1 8th,  I funk  a bucket  with  a thermometer  feventy  fathoms  below  the  fur- 
face  of  the  fea,  where  it  remained  two  minutes ; and  it  took  three  minutes  more  to  haul 
it  up.  The  mercury  in  the  thermometer  was  at  66,  which  before,  in  the  air,  flood  at 
78,  and  in  the  furface  of  the  fea  at  79.  The  water  which  came  up  in  the  bucket  con- 
tained, by  Mr.  Cavendifh’s  table,  7 part  fait ; and  that  at  the  furface  of  the  fea  4' 
As  this  laft  was  taken  up  after  a fmart  fhower  of  rain,  it  might  be  lighter  on  that  ac- 
count. Captain  Cook's  log-book, 

them, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


33 


them,  too  often  bring  on  ficknefs  in  this  paffage.  Every  1776- 
bad  confequence,  at  leaft,  is  to  be  apprehended  from  them  ; . 
and  commanders  of  lliips  cannot  be  too  much  upon  their 
guard,  by  purifying  the  air  between  decks  with  fires  and 
fmoke,  and  by  obliging  the  people  to  dry  their  clothes  at 
every  opportunity.  Thefe  precautions  were  conftantly  ob- 
ferved  on  board  the  Refolution  and  Difcovery  ; and  we 
certainly  profited  by  them,  for  we  had  now  fewer  fick  than 
on  either  of  my  former  voyages.  We  had,  however,  the 
mortification  to  find  our  fliip  exceedingly  leaky  in  all  her 
upper  works.  The  hot  and  fultry  weather  we  had  juft 
pafted  through,  had  opened  her  feams,  which  had  been 
badly  caulked  at  firft,  fo  wide,  that  they  admitted  the  rain 
w'ater  through  as  it  fell.  There  was  hardly  a man  that 
could  lie  dry  in  his  bed  ; and  the  officers  in  the  gun-room 
were  all  driven  out  of  their  cabins,  by  the  water  that  came 
through  the  fides.  The  fails  in  the  fail-room  got  wet ; and 
before  we  had  weather  to  dry  them,  many  of  them  were 
much  damaged,  and  a great  expence  of  canvas  and  of  time 
became  neceffary  to  make  them  in  fome  degree  ferviceable. 

Having  experienced  the  fame  defedt  in  our  fail-rooms  on 
my  late  voyage,  it  had  been  reprefented  to  the  yard  officers, 
who  undertook  to  remove  it.  But  it  did  not  appear  to  me 
that  any  thing  had  been  done  to  remedy  the  complaint. 

To  repair  thefe  defedls  the  caulkers  were  fet  to  work,  as 
foon  as  we  got  into  fair  fettled  weather,  to  caulk  the  decks 
and  infide  weather-works  of  the  fliip ; for  I would  not  truft 
them  over  the  fides  while  we  were  at  fea. 

* The  particulars  are  mentioned  in  his  log-book.  On  the  14th  of  Auguft,  a fire 
was  made  in  the  well,  to  air  the  fliip  below.  On  the  15th,  the  fpare  fails  were  aired 
upon  deck,  and  a fire  made  to  air  the  fail-room.  O.n  the  17th,  cleaned  and  fmoked 
betwixt  decks,  and  the  bread-room  aired  with  fires.  On  the  21ft,  cleaned  and  fmoked 
betwixt  decks  ; and  on  the  22d,  the  men’s  bedding  was  fpread  on  deck  to  air. 

VoL.  I.  F 


On 


34 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

September. 
' ' 

Sunday  i. 


Sunday  8. 


O 


, On  the  firfl:  of  September  we  crofled  the  Equator,  in  the 
longitude  of  27°  38''  Weft,  with  a fine  gale  at  South  Eaft  by 
South ; and  notwithftanding  my  apprehenfions  of  falling  in 
with  the  coaft  of  Brafil  in  ftretching  to  the  South  Weft,  I 
kept  the  fliip  a full  point  from  the  wind.  However,  I found 
my  fears  were  ill-grounded ; for  on  drawing  near  that  coaft, 
we  met  with  the  wind  more  and  more  eafterly ; fo  that,  by 
the  time  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  10°  South,  we  could 
make  a South  Eafterly  courfe  good. 

On  the  8th,  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  8°  57'  South ; which 
is  a little  to  the  Southward  of  Cape  St.  Auguftine,  on  the 
coaft  of  Brafil.  Our  longitude,  deduced  from  a very  great 
number  of  lunar  obfervations,  was  34°  16'  Weft;  and  by  the 
watch,  34°  47^  The  former  is  1°  43^,  and  the  latter  2°  14' 
more  Wefterly  than  the  ifland  of  Fernando  de  Noronha,  the 
fituation  of  which  was  pretty  well  determined  during  my 
late  voyage  t.  Hence  I concluded  that  we  could  not  now 

■*  The  afternoon,  as  appears  from  Mr.  Anderfon’s  Journal,  was  fpent  in  performing 
the  old  and  ridiculous  ceremony  of  ducking  thofe  who  had  not  crofled  the  Equator  before. 
Though  Captain  Cook  did  not  fupprefs  the  cuftom,  he  thought  it  too  trifling  to  deferve 
the  leaft  mention  of  it  in  his  Journal,  or  even  in  his  log-book.  Pernetty,  tlie  Writer  of 
Bougainville’s  Voyage  to  the  Falkland  Iflands,  in  1763  and  1764,  thought  difFerently ; 
for  his  account  of  the  celebration  of  this  childifh  feftival  on  board  his  fhip,  is  extended 
through  feventeen  pages,  and  makes  the  fubjedl  of  an  entire  chapter,  under  the  title  of 
Bapteme  de  la  Ligne. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  tranfcribe  his  introdudlion  to  the  defcription  of  it.  “ C’eft 
“ un  ufage  qui  ne  remonte  pas  plus  haut  que  ce  voyage  celebre  de  Gama,  qui  a fourni  au 
“ Camoens  le  fujet  de  la  Lufiade.  L’ldee  qu’on  ne  f^auroit  etre  un  bon  marin,  fans  avoir 
“ traverfe  I’Equateur,  I’ennui  infeparable  d’une  longue  navigation,  un  certain  efprit  repub- 
“ licain  qui  regne  dans  toutes  les  petites  focietes,  peut-etre  toutes  ces  caufes  reunies,  ont 
“ pu  donner  naiffance  a ces  efpeces  de  faturnales.  Quoiqu’il  en  foit,  elles  furent  adoptees, 
“ en  un  inftant,  dans  toutes  les  nations,  et  les  hommes  les  plus  eclaires  furent  obliges  de  fe 
“ foumettre  a une  coutume  dont  ils  reconnoiflbient  I’abfurdite.  Car,  partout,  des  que  le 
“ peuple  parle,  il  faut  que  le  fage  fe  mette  a I’unifon.”  Hijioire  d'un  Voyage  aux  IJles  Ma~ 
louines^  p.  107,  108. 

I See  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  II.  p.  278, 

be 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


35 


be  farther  from  the  continent  than  twenty  or  thirty  leagues 
at  moil ; and  perhaps  not  much  lefs,  as  we  neither  had 
foundings  nor  any  other  hgns  of  land.  Dr.  Halley,  how- 
ever, in  his  voyage,  publilhed  by  Mr.  Dalrymple,  tells  us  "'■•S 
that  he  made  no  more  than  one  hundred  and  two  miles^  meri- 
dian dijianceyjrom  the  ijland  [Fernando  de  Noronha]  to  the 
coajl  of  Brafl ; and  feems  to  think  that  currents  could  not 
be  the  whole  caufe  of  his  making  fo  little.  But  I rather  think 
that  he  was  miftaken,  and  that  the  currents  had  hurried 
him  far  to  the  Weftward  of  his  intended  courfe.  This  was, 
in  fome  meafure,  confirmed  by  our  own  obfervations ; for 
we  had  found,  during  three  or  four  days  preceding  the  8th, 
that  the  currents  fet  to  the  Weftward  ; and,  during  the  laft 
twenty- four  hours,  it  had  fet  ftrong  to  the  Northward,  as 
we  experienced  a difference  of  twenty-nine  miles  between 
our  obferved  latitude  and  that  by  dead  reckoning.  Upon 
the  whole,  till  fome  better  aftronomical  obfervations  are 
made  on  fhore  on  the  Eaftern  coaft  of  Brafil,  I fhall  con- 
clude that  its  longitude  is  thirty-five  degrees  and  a half,  or 
thirty-lix  degrees  Weft,  at  moft. 

We  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  without  meeting  with  any 
thing  of  note,  till  the  6th  of  Odtober.  Being  then  in  the 
latitude  of  if  South,  longitude  7°  45'  Weft,  we  met  with 
light  airs  and  calms  by  turns,  for  three  days  fucceflively. 
We  had,  for  fome  days  before,  feen  albatroffes,  pintadoes, 
and  other  petrels  ; and  here  we  faw  three  penguins,  which 
occafioned  us  to  found ; but  we  found  no  ground  with  a line 
of  one  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms.  We  put  a boat  in  the 
water,  and  fliot  a few  birds ; one  of  which  was  a black  pe- 
trel, about  the  fize  of  a crow,  and,  except  as  to  the  bill  and 
feet,  very  like  one.  It  had  a few  white  feathers  under  the 

* P.  n. 


1776. 

September. 

' » 


Oflober. 
Sunday  6. 


throat ; 


3^ 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

Odlober. 


Tuefday  8. 


throat ; and  the  nnder-fide  of  the  quill-feathers  were  of  an 
afh-colour.  All  the  other  feathers  were  jet  black,  as  alfo-the 
bill  and  legs. 

On  the  8th,  in  the  evening,  one  of  thofe  birds  which 
failors  call  noddies,  fettled  on  our  rigging,  and  was  caught. 
It  was  fomething  larger  than  an  Englilli  black-bird,  and 
nearly  as  black,  except  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  which 
was  white,  looking  as  if  it  were  powdered ; the  whitell  fea- 
thers growing  out  from  the  bafe  of  the  upper  bill,  from 
which  they  gradually  affumed  a darker  colour,  to  about  the 
middle  of  the  upper  part  of  the  neck,  where  the  white  fliade 
was  loft  in  the  black,  without  being  divided  by  any  line. 
It  was  web-footed ; had  black  legs  and  a black  bill,  which 
was  long,  and  not  unlike  that  of  a curlew.  It  is  faid  thefe 
birds  never  fly  far  from  land.  We  knew  of  none  nearer  the 
ftation  we  were  in,  than  Gough’s  or  Richmond  Illand,  from 
which  our  diftance  could  not  be  lefs  than  one  hundred 
leagues.  But  it  muft  be  obferved  that  the  Atlantic  Ocean, 
to  the  Southward  of  this  latitude,  has  been  but  little  fre- 
quented ; fo  that  there  may  be  more  iflands  there  than  we 
are  acquainted  with. 

We  frequently,  in  the  night,  faw  thofe  luminous  ma- 
rine animals  mentioned  and  defcribed  in  my  firft  voyage 
Some  of  them  feemed  to  be  conliderably  larger  than  any  I 
had  before  met  with ; and  fometimes  they  were  fo  mime- 
rous,  that  hundreds  were  vilible  at  the  fame  moment. 

This  calm  weather  was  fucceeded  by  a frelh  gale  from 
the  North  Weft,  which  lafted  two  days.  Then  we  had 
again  variable  light  airs  for  about  twenty-four  hours  ; when 
the  North  Weft  wind  returned,  and  blew  with  fuch  ftrength, 

f See  Hawkefworth’s  CoDedion  of  Voyages,  Vol.  II.  p.  15. 

that 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

that  on  the  17th  we  had  light  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ; 
and  the  next  day  anchored  in  Table  Bay,  in  four  fathoms 
water,  with  the  church  bearing  South  Weft  i South,  and 
Green  Point  North  Weft  I Weft. 

As  foon  as  we  had  received  the  ufual  viftt  from  the  Mafter 
Attendant  and  the  Surgeon,  I fent  an  officer  to  wait  on  Ba- 
ron Plettenherg,  the  Governor ; and,  on  his  return,  fainted 
the  garrifon  with  thirteen  guns,  which  compliment  was  re- 
turned with  the  fame  number. 

We  found  in  the  bay  two  French  Eaft  India  Ships ; the 
one  outward,  and  the  other  homeward  bound.  And  two  or 
three  days  before  our  arrival,  another  homeward  bound 
fhip  of  the  fame  nation  had  parted  from  her  cable,  and  been 
driven  on  fliore  at  the  head  of  the  bay,  where  flie  was  loft. 
The  crew  were  faved ; but  the  greateft  part  of  the  cargo 
fliared  the  fame  fate  with  the  fhip,  or  (which  amounted  to 
the  fame)  was  plundered  and  ftolen  by  the  inhabitants,  ei- 
ther out  of  the  fhip,  or  as  it  was  driven  or  carried  on  fhore. 
This  is  the  account  the  French  officers  gave  to  me ; and  the 
Dutch  themfelves  could  not  deny  the  fa6t.  But,  by  way  of 
excufing  themfelves  from  being  guilty  of  a crime  difgrace- 
ful  to  every  civilized  ftate,  they  endeavoured  to  lay  the 
whole  blame  on  the  French  Captain,  for  not  applying  in 
time  for  a guard. 

As  foon  as  we  had  faluted,  I went  on  fhore,  accompanied 
by  fome  of  my  officers,  and  waited  on  the  Governor,  the 
Lieutenant  Governor,  the  Fifcal,  and  the  Commander  of  the 
troops.  Thefe  gentlemen  received  me  with  the  greateft  ci- 
vility ; and  the  Governor,  in  particular,  promifed  me  every 
affiftance  that  the  place  afforded.  At  the  fame  time  I ob- 
tained his  leave  to  let  up  our  obfervatory  on  any  fpot  I 
fliould  think  moft  convenient ; to  pitch  tents  for  the  fail- 

makers 


37 

1776. 

Odiober. 

L 1 

Thurfday  ij, 
Friday  i8. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


Tuefday  22. 


Wednef.  23. 


Saturday  26. 
Sunday  27. 


Thurfday  31. 


makers  and  coopers ; and  to  bring  the  cattle  on  fliore,  to 
graze  near  our  encampment.  Before  I returned  on  board, 
I ordered  foft  bread,  frelh  meat,  and  greens,  to  be  provided, 
every  day,  for  the  Blip’s  company. 

On  the  22d,  we  fet  up  the  tents  and  obfervatory,  and  be- 
gan to  fend  the  feveral  articles  out  of  the  Blip  which  I 
wanted  on  Biore.  This  could  not  be  done  fooner,  as  the 
militia  of  the  place  were  exerciBng  on,  or  near,  the  ground 
which  we  were  to  occupy. 

The  next  day,  we  began  to  obferve  equal  altitudes  of  the 
Sun,  in  order  to  afcertain  the  rate  of  the  watch,  or,  which 
is  the  fame  thing,  to  find  whether  it  had  altered  its  rate. 
Thefe  obfervations  were  continued  every  day,  whenever  the 
weather  would  permit,  tiU  the  time  of  our  departure  drew 
near.  But  before  this,  the  caulkers  had  been  fet  to  work  to 
caulk  the  Blip ; and  I had  concerted  meafures  with  Mefifs. 
Brandt  and  Chiron,  for  fupplying  both  Blips  with  fuch 
provifions  as  I Biould  want.  Bakers,  likewife,  had  been  or- 
dered, immediately  after  our  arrival,  to  bake  fuch  a quantity 
of  bread  as  I thought  would  be  requifite.  As  fafi;  as  the  fe- 
veral articles  deftined  for  the  Refolution  were  got  ready, 
they  were  carried  on  board. 

On  the  26th,  the  French  Blip  failed  for  Europe,  and  by 
her  we  fent  letters  to  England.  The  next  day,  the  Hamp- 
Biire  Eaft  India  Blip,  from  Bencoolen,  anchored  in  the  bay, 
and  faluted  us  with  thirteen  guns,  which  we  returned  with 
eleven. 

Nothing  remarkable  happened  till  the  evening  of  the 
31  ft,  when  it  came  on  to  blow  exceflively  hard  at  South  Eaft, 
and  continued  for  three  days ; during  which  time  there 
was  no  communication  between  the  Blip  and  the  Biore. 
The  Refolution  was  the  only  Blip  in  the  bay  that  rode  out 

the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


39 


1776. 

November. 


the  gale  without  dragging  her  anchors.  We  felt  its  effecfls 
as  fenlibly  on  fliore.  Our  tents  and  obfervatory  were  torn 
to  pieces  ; and  our  aftronomical  quadrant  narrowly  efcaped 
irreparable  damage.  On  the  3d  of  November  the  ftorm  Sunday  3. 
ceafed,  and  the  next  day  we  refumed  our  different  employ- 
ments. 

On  the  6th,  the  Hampfliire  India  fliip  failed  for  England.  Wednef.  6, 
In  her  I fent  home  an  invalid,  whom  Captain  Trimble  was 
fo  obliging  as  to  receive  on  board.  I was  afterward  forry 
that  I had  not  availed  myfelf  of  this  opportunity  to  part 
with  two  or  three  more  of  my  crew,  who  were  troubled 
with  different  complaints ; but,  at  this  time,  there  was  fome 
hope  of  their  health  being  re-eftablifhed.  ‘ 

In  the  morning  of  the  loth,  the  Difcovery  arrived  in  the  Sunday  lo. 
bay.  Captain  Clerke  informed  me  that  he  had  failed  from 
Plymouth  on  the  iff  of  Auguft,  and  fhould  have  been  with 
us  here  a week  fooner,  if  the  late  gale  of  wind  had  not 
blo\vn  him  off  the  coaft.  Upon  the  whole,  he  was  feven 
days  longer  in  his  paffage  from  England  than  we  had  been. 

He  had  the  misfortune  to  lofe  one  of  his  marines,  by 
falling  over-board ; but  there  had  been  no  other  mor- 
tality amongft  his  people,  and  they  now  arrived  well  and 
healthy. 

Captain  Clerke  having  reprefented  to  me  that  his  fliip  was 
in  want  of  caulking  ; that  no  time  might  be  loft  in  repair- 
ing this  defedl,  next  day  I fent  all  my  workmen  on  board  Monday  n. 
her,  having  already  completed  this  fervice  on  board  the  Rer 
folution.  I lent  every  other  afliftance  to  the  Captain  to  ex- 
pedite his  fupply  of  provifions  and  water,  having  given  him 
an  order  to  receive  on  board  as  much  of  both  articles  as  he 
could  conveniently  flow.  I now  found  that  the  bakers  had 
failed  in  baking  the  bread  I had  ordered  for  the  Difcovery. 

They 


40 


A VOYAGE 


T O 


■ r’ 


1776.  They  pretended  a want  of  flour  ; but  the  truth  was,  they 
Xo^ei^ei^  doubtful  of  her  coming,  and  did  not  care  to  begin 

till  they  faw  her  at  anchor  in  the  bay. 

I have  before  made  mention  of  our  getting  our  cattle  on 
flaore.  The  bull  and  two  cows,  with  their  calves,  were  fent 
to  graze  along  with  fome  other  cattle ; but  I was  advifed  to 
keep  our  flieep,  flxteen  in  number,  clofe  to  our  tents,  where 
they  were  penned  up  every  night.  During  the  night  pre- 
Thurfdayi4.  ceding  the  14th,  fome  dogs  having  got  in  amongft  them, 
forced  them  out  of  the  pen,  killing  four,  and  difperfing  the 
reft.  Six  of  them  were  recovered  the  next  day  ; but  the  two 
rams,  and  two  of  the  fineft  ewes  in  the  whole  flock,  were 
amongft  thofe  miffing.  Baron  Plettenberg  being  now  in  the 
country,  I apphed  to  the  Lieutenant  Governor,  Mr.  Hemmy, 
and  to  the  Fifcal.  Both  thefe  Gentlemen  promifed  to  ufe 
^ their  endeavoiirs  for  the  recovery  of  the  loft  ffieep.  The 
Dutch,  we  know,  boaft  that  the  police  at  the  Cape  is  fo 
carefully  executed,  that  it  is  hardly  poffible  for  a flave,  with 
all  his  cunning  and  knowledge  of  the  country,  to  effe6tuate 
his  efcape.  Yet  my  flieep  evaded  all  the  vigilance  of  the 
Fifcal’s  officers  and  people.  However,  after  much  trouble 
and  expence,  by  employing  fome  of  the  meaneft  and  loweft 
fcoundrels  in  the  place  (who,  to  ufe  the  phrafe  of  the  per- 
fon  who  recommended  this  method  to  me,  would,  for  a 
ducatoon,  cut  their  mafter’s  throat,  burn  the  houfe  over  his 
head,  and  bury  him  and  the  whole  family  in  the  allies),  I 
recovered  them  all  but  the  two  ewes.  Of  thefe  I never 
could  hear  the  leaft  tidings ; and  I gave  over  all  inquiry  af- 
ter them,  when  I was  told  that,  fince  I had  got  the  two 
rams,  I might  think  myfelf  very  well  off.  One  of  thefe, 
however,  was  fo  much  hurt  by  the  dogs,  that  there  was 
reafon  to  believe  he  would  never  recover. 


Mr, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

Mr.  Hemmy  very  obligingly  offered  to  make  up  this  lofs, 
by  giving  me  a Spanifli  ram,  out  of  fome  that  he  had  fent 
for  from  Lifbon.  But  I declined  the  offer,  under  a perfua- 
lion  that  it  would  anfwer  my  purpofe  full  as  well,  to  take 
with  me  fome  of  the  Cape  rams  : the  event  proved,  that  I 
was  under  a miifake.  This  Gentleman  has  taken  fome 
pains  to  introduce  European  flieep  at  the  Cape  ; but  his  en- 
deavours, as  he  told  me,  have  been  fruftrated  by  the  obfti- 
nacy  of  the  country  people,  who  hold  their  own  breed  in 
greater  eftimation,  on  account  of  their  large  tails,  of  the  fat 
of  which  they  fometimes  make  more  money  tlian  of  the 
whole  carcafs  befides  - ; and  think  that  the  wool  of  Euro- 
pean flieep  will,  by  no  means,  made  up  for  their  deficiency 
in  this  refpecSt.  Indeed,  I have  heard  fome  fenfible  men 
here  make  the  fame  obfervation.  And  there  feems  to  be 
foundation  for  it.  For,  admitting  that  European  flieep  were 
to  produce  wool  of  the  fame  quality  here  as  in  Europe, 
which  experience  has  fhewn  not  to  be  the  cafe,  the  Dutch 
have  not  hands,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  to  fpare  for  the 
manufacSturiiig  even  their  own  clothing.  It  is  certain  that, 
were  it  not  for  the  continual  importation  of  flaves,  this  fet- 
tlement  would  be  thinner  of  people  than  any  other  inha- 
bited part  of  the  world. 

While  the  fliips  were  getting  ready  for  the  profecution 
of  our  voy  age,  fome  of  our  officers  made  an  excurlion  to 

* “ The  mofl:  remarkable  thing  in  the  Cape  flieep,  is  the  length  and  thicknefs  of  their 
tails,  which  weigh  from  fifteen  to  twenty  pounds.  The  fat  is  not  fo  tallowifli  as  that 
of  European  mutton,  and  the  poorer  fort  ufe  it  for  butter.”  Kolben's  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  [Englifli  tranflation],  Vol.  II.  p.  65.  De  la  Caille,  who  finds  every  thing 
wrong  in  Kolben,  fays,  the  weight  of  the  tails  of  the  Cape  flieep  is  not  above  five  or  fix 
pounds.  Voyage  de  la  Caille^  p.  343.  If  the  information  given  to  Captain  Cook  may 
be  depended  upon,  it  will  prove  that,  in  this  inftance  at  leaft,  Kolben  is  unjuftly  accufed 
of  exaggeration. 

VoL.  I. 


41 

1776. 

November. 

V » 


G 


take 


A VOYAGE  TO 


42, 

1776.  take  a view  of  the  neighbouring  country.  Mr.  Anderfon, 
my  Surgeon,  who  was  one  of  the  party,  gave  me  the  fol- 
lowing relation  of  their  proceedings  : 

Saturday  16.  “ On  the  i6th,  ill  the  forenoon,  I fet  out  in  a waggon,, 

with  five  more,  to  take  a view  of  fome  part  of  the  country. 
We  crofled  the  large  plain  that  lies  to  the  Eaftward  of  the 
town,  which  is  entirely  a white  fand,  like  that  commonly 
found  on  beaches,  and  produces  only  heath,  and  other  fmall 
plants  of  various  forts.  At  five  in  the  afternoon  we  paflTed 
a large  farm-houfe,  with  fome  corn-fields,  and  pretty  con- 
fiderable  vineyards,  fituated  beyond  the  plain,  near  the  foot 
of  fome  low  hills,  where  the  foil  becomes  worth  cultivating. 
Between  fix  and  feven  we  arrived  at  Stellenbofh,  the  colony 
next  to  that  of  the  Cape  for  its  importance. 

The  village  does  not  confifi:  of  more  than  thirty  houfes, 
and  fiands  at  the  foot  of  the  range  of  lofty  mountains^ 
above  twenty  miles  to  the  Eaftward  of  the  Cape  Town. 
The  houfes  are  neat ; and,  with  the  advantage  of  a rivulet 
which  runs  near,  and  the  fhelter  of  fome  large  oaks,  planted 
at  its  firft  fettling,  forms  what  may  be  called  a rural  pro- 
lpe6l  in  this  defert  country.  There  are  fome  vineyards  and 
orchards  about  the  place,  which,  from  their  thriving  ap- 
pearance, feem  to  indicate  an  excellent  foil ; though,  per- 
haps, they  owe  much  to  climate,  as  the  air  here  has  an  un- 
common ferenity. 

* In  the  Philofophicai  Tranfadlions,  Vol.  Ixvi.  p.  268  to  319,  is  Account  of  Three 
fourmes from  the  Cape  Town  into  the  Southern  Parts  of  Africa^  in  177^5  ^773’  *774 » 

by  Mr.  Francis  Maflbn,  who  had  been  fent  from  England  for  the  difcovery  of  new  plants, 
towards  the  improvetnent  of  the  Royal  Botanical  Garden  at  Kew.  Much  curious 
information  is  contained  in  Mr.  Maflbn’s  account  of  thefe  journies.  M.  de  Pages,  who 
was  at  the  Cape  in  1773,  gives  fome  remarks  on  the  ftate  of  that  fettlement,  and  alfo  tho 
particulars  of  his  journey  from  Falfe  Bay  to  tlie  Cape  Town.  Voyage  vers  le  Pole 
du  Sud,  p.  17  to  32.  I 


I employed 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


43 


I employed  the  next  day  in  fearching  for  plants  and  in-  1776. 
fe6ls  about  Stellenbolli,  but  bad  little  fuccefs.  Few  plants  ^ Noveniber. 
are  in  flower  here  at  this  feafon,  and  infecfls  but  fcarce.  I Sunday  17. 
examined  the  foil  in  feveral  places,  and  found  it  to  confill; 
of  yellowilb  clay,  mixed  with  a good  deal  of  fand.  The 
fides  of  the  low  hills,  which  appear  brown,  feem  to  be  con- 
flituted  of  a fort  of  Hone  marie. 

We  left  Stellenbofli  next  morning,  and  foon  arrived  at  Monday  is. 
the  houfe  we  had  pafled  on  Saturday  ; the  owner  of  which, 

Mr.  Cloeder,  had  fent  us  an  invitation,  the  evening  before, 
to  viflt  him.  This  Gentleman  entertained  us  with  the 
greateft  hofpitality,  and  in  a manner  very  different  from 
what  we  expelled.  He  received  us  with  muffc ; and  a band 
alfo  played  while  we  were  at  dinner;  which,  conffdering 
the  fltuation  of  the  place,  might  be  reckoned  elegant.  He 
fhewed  us  his  wine-cellars,  his  orchards,  and  vineyards  ; all 
which,  I muff  own,  infpired  me  with  a wifli  to  know  in 
what  manner  thefe  induftrious  people  could  create  fuch 
plenty,  in  a fpot  where,  I believe,  no  other  European  nation 
would  have  attempted  to  fettle. 

In  the  afternoon  we  croflTed  the  country,  and  pafled  a few 
plantations,  one  of  which  feemed  very  conflderable,  and  was 
laid  out  in  a tafte  fomewhat  different  from  any  other  we 
faw.  In  the  evening  we  arrived  at  a farm-houfe,  which  is 
the  fir  ft:  in  the  cultivated  tracft  called  the  Pearl.  We  had,  at 
the  fame  time,  a view  of  Drakenftein,  the  third  colony  of 
this  country,  which  lies  along  by  the  foot  of  the  lofty  hills 
already  mentioned,  and  contains  feveral  farms  or  planta- 
tions, not  very  extenfive. 

I went,  on  the  19th  in  the  forenoon,  in  queft  of  plants  Tuefday  19. 
and  infecfts,  which  I found  almoft  as  fcarce  as  at  Stellen- 
bofli ; but  I met  with  more  flirubs  or  fmall  trees,  naturally 

G 2 produced, 


44 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

November, 


produced,  in  the  valleys,  than  in  any  part  of  the  country  I 
had  hitherto  feen. 

In  the  afternoon,  we  went  to  fee  a ftone  of  a remarkable 
lize,  called  by  the  inhabitants  the  Tower  of  Babylon,  or 
the  Pearl  Diamond ''b  It  lies,  or  Hands,  upon  the  top  of 
fome  low  hiUs,  at  the  foot  of  which  our  farm-houfe  was 
lituated  ; and  though  the  road  to  it  is  neither  very  fteep  nor 
rugged,  we  were  above  an  hour  and  a half  in  walking  to  it. 
It  is  of  an  oblong  fliape,  rounded  on  the  top,  and  lies  nearly 
South  and  North.  The  Eaft  and  Weft  ftdes  are  fteep,  and 
almoft  perpendicular.  The  South  end  is  likewife  fteep,  and 
its  greateft  height  is  there;  from  whence  it  declines  gently 
to  the  North  part,  by  which  we  afcended  to  its  top,  and 
had  an  extenftve  view  of  the  whole  country. 

Its  circumference,  I think,  muft  be  at  leaft  half  a mile ; 
as  it  took  us  above  half  an  hour  to  walk  round  it,  includ- 
ing every  allowance  for  the  bad  road,  and  ftopping  a little. 
At  its  higheft  part,  which  is  the  South  end,  comparing  it 
with  a known  objecft,  it  feems  to  equal  the  dome  of  St.  Paul’s 


* In  the  Philofophical  Tranfa£Iions,  Vol.  Ixviii.  Part  I.  p.  102.  we  have  a Letter 
from  Mr.  Anderfon  to  Sir  John  Pringle,  defcribing  this  remarkable  ftone.  The  account 
fent  home  from  the  Cape,  and  read  before  the  Royal  Society,  is  much  the  fame  with  that 
now  publiftied,  but  rather  fuller.  In  particular,  he  tells  Sir  John,  that  he  went  to  fee  it 
at  Mr.  Majfon's  defire.^  who,  probably,  had  not  had  an  opportunity  of  fufficiently  examin- 
ing it  himfelf.  In  the  account  of  his  journies,  above  referred  to,  p.  270,  he  only  fays, 
“ there  are  two  large  foUd  rocks  on  the  Per  el  Berg-,  each  of  which  (he  believes)  is  more  than  a 
mile  in  circumference  at  the  hafe.,  and  upwards  of  two  hundred  feet  high.  Their  furfaces  are 
nearly  fmooth^  without  chink  or  fjfures  j and  they  are  found  to  be  a fpecies  of  granite.,  different 
from  that  which  compofes  the  neighbouring  mountains.” 

Mr.  Anderfon  having,  with  his  Letter  to  Sir  John  Pringle,  alfo  lent  home  a fpecimen 
of  the  rock,  it  was  examined  by  Sir  William  Hamilton,  whofe  opinion  is,  that  “ this  fin- 
gular,  imrnenfe  fragment  of  granite,  moji  probably  has  been  raifed  by  a volcanic  explofon,  or  fome 
fuch  caufe.”  See  his  Letter  to  Sir  John  Pringle,  annexed  to  Mr.  Anderfon’s,  in  the  Phf- 
lofophical  Tranfa6lions. 


church. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

church.  It  is  one  uninterrupted  mafs  or  ftone,  if  we  except 
fome  filTures,  or  rather  impreflions,  not  above  three  or  four 
feet  deep,  and  a vein  which  runs  acrofs  near  its  North  end. 
It  is  of  that  fort  of  ftone  called,  by  Mineralogifts,  Saxum  con- 
glutinatum,  and  confilfs  chiefly  of  pieces  of  coarfe  quartz 
and  glimmer,  held  together  by  a clayey  cement.  But  the 
vein  which  crofles  it,  though  of  the  fame  materials,  is  much 
compaefler.  This  vein  is  not  above  a foot  broad  or  thick ; 
and  its  furface  is  cut  into  little  fquares  or  oblongs,  difpofed 
obliquely,  which  makes  it  look  hke  the  remains  of  fome 
artificial  work.  But  I could  not  obferve  whether  it  pene- 
trated far  into  the  large  rock,  or  was  only  fuperficial.  In 
defeending,  w'e  found  at  its  foot  a very  rich  black  mould ; 
and  on  the  fides  of  the  hills,  fome  trees  of  a confiderable 
fize,  natives  of  the  place,  which  are  a fpecies  of  olea^^. 

In  the  morning  on  the  20th,  we  fet  out  from  the  Pearl’, 
and  going  a different  road  from  that  by  which  we  came, 
pafled  through  a country  wholly  uncultivated,  till  we  got 
to  the  Tyger  hills,  when  fome  tolerable  corn-fields  appeared. 
At  noon,  we  flopped  in  a hollow  for  refrefliment ; but,  in 
walking  about  here,  were  plagued  with  a vafl  number  of 

* It  is  ftrange  that  neither  Kolben  nor  de  la  Caille  fhould  have  thought  the  Tower  af 
Babylon  worthy  of  a particular  defeription.  The  former  [Vol.  II.  p.  52,  53,  Englifli 
Tranflation]  only  mentions  it  as  a high  mountain.  The  latter  contents  himfelf  with  tell- 
ing us,  that  it  is  a very  low  hillock,  un  tres  has  monticule.  Voyage  de  la  Caille,  p.  341.  We 
are  much  obliged  to  Mr.  Anderfon  for  his'  very  accurate  account  of  this  remarkable  rock, 
which  agrees  with  Mr.  Sonnerat’s,  who  was  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  fo  late  as  1781. 
His  words  are,  “ La  Montagne  de  la  Perle,  merite  d’etre  obfervee.  C’eft  un  des  plus 
“ hautes  des  environs  du  Cap.  Elle  n’eft  compofee  que  d’un  feul  bloc  de  granit  crevafle 
“ dans  plufieurs  endroits.”  Voyage  aux  Indes,  Tom.  II.  p.  91. 

Mr.  Sonnerat  tells  us,  that  Mr.  Gordon,  Commander  of  the  troops  at  the  Cape,  had 
lately  made  three  journies  up  the  country,  from  which,  when  he  publilhes  his  journal,  we 
may  expedl  much  curious  information. 


45' 

1776. 

November;. 




Wednef.  20. 


mufquitoes 


46 


A VOYAGE  1'  O 


1776. 

iN'oveinber. 


Saturday  23- 


m\il(iuitoe5  or  Eiiid  flies,  which  were  the  firft  I faw  in  the 
country.  In  the  afternoon  we  fet  out  again,  and  in  the 
evening  arrived  at  the  Cape  Town,  tired  with  the  jolting 
waggon.” 

On  the  23d,  we  got  on  board  the  ohfervatory,  clock.  See. 
By  a mean  of  the  feveral  refults  of  the  equal  altitudes  of  the 
Sun,  taken  with  the  aftronomical  quadrant,  the  agronomi- 
cal clock  was  found  to  lofe  on  fidereal  time,  i'  8 ",368  each 
day.  The  pendulum  was  kept  at  the  fame  length  as  at 
Greenwich,  where  the  daily  lofs  of  the  clock  on  fidereal 
time,  was 

The  watch,  by  the  mean  of  the  refults  of  fifteen  days 
obfervations,  was  found  to  be  lofing  2'^,26i,  on  mean  time, 
each  day ; which  is  i^",052  more  than  at  Greenwich ; and 
on  the  2 1 ft,  at  noon,  flie  was  too  flow  for  mean  time  by 
i”'  20'  57'^,66.  From  this,  6'  48  ,956,  is  to  be  fubftra(5ted, 
for  w’hat  file  was  too  How  on  the  nth  of  June  at  Green- 
wich, and  her  daily  rate  fince ; and  the  remainder,  viz. 
i"'  14'.  08'^, 704,  or  18°  32''  10'",  will  he  the  longitude  of  the 
Cape  Town  by  the  watch.  Its  true  longitude,  as  found  by 
Meflfs.  Mafon  and  Dixon,  is  18°  23'  15^'.  As  our  obferva- 
tions were  made  about  half  a mile  to  the  Eaft  of  theirs,  the 
error  of  the  watch,  in  longitude,  is  no  more  than  8"  25'''. 
Hence  we  have  reafon  to  conclude,  that  flie  had  gone  well 
all  the  way  from  England,  and  that  the  longitude,  thus 
given,  may  be  nearer  the  truth  than  any  other. 

If  this  be  admitted,  it  will,  in  a great  meafure,  enable  me 
to  find  the  dire6tion  and  ftrength  of  the  currents  we  met 
with  on  this  paftage  from  England.  For,  by  comparing  the 
latitude  and  longitude  by  dead  reckoning,  with  thofe  by 
obfervation  and  the  watch,  we  fliall,  from  time  to  time, 
have,  very  accurately,  the  error  of  the  fliip’s  reckoning,  be 

the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


47 


the  Caule  what  it  will.  But  as  all  imaginable  care  was  taken  1776. 
in  heaving  and  keeping  the  log,  and  every  neceffary  allow- 
ance  made  for  lee-way,  heave  of  the  fea,  and  other  fuch 
circumftances,  I cannot  attribute  thofe  errors  that  did  hap- 
pen, to  any  other  caufe  but  currents ; but  more  particularly 
when  the  error  was  conftantly  the  fame  way,  for  feveral 
days  fucceflively. 

On  the  contrary,  if  we  find  the  fhip  a-head  of  the  rec- 
koning on  one  day,  and  a-llern  of  it  on  another,  we  have 
reafon  to  believe  that  Inch  errors  are  owing  to  accidental 
caufes,  and  not  to  currents.  This  feems  to  have  been  the 
cafe  in  our  paffage  between  England  and  Teneriffe.  But, 
from  the  time  of  our  leaving  that  ifland,  till  the  15th  of 
Auguft,  being  then  in  the  latitude  of  12°  North,  and  longi- 
tude 24°  Weft,  the  fliip  was  carried  1°  20'  of  longitude  to  the 
Weftward  of  her  reckoning.  At  this  ftation,  the  currents 
took  a contrary  direction,  and  fet  to  Eaft  South  Eaft,  at  the 
rate  of  twelve  or  fourteen  miles  a day,  or  twenty-four  hours, 
till  we  arrived  into  the  latitude  of  5°  North,  and  longitude  of 
10°  Weft;  which  was  our  moft  Eafterly  lituation  after  leav- 
ing the  Cape  de  Verde  Iftands,  till  we  got  to  the  Southv/ard. 

For  in  this  lituation  the  wind  came  Southerly,  and  we  tacked 
and  ftretched  to  the  Weftward ; and,  for  two  or  three  days, 
could  not  find  that  our  reckoning  was  affecfted  by  any  cur- 
rent. So  that,  I judged,  we  were  between  the  current  that 
generally,  if  not  conftantly,  fets  to  the  Eaft  upon  the  coaft 
of  Guinea,  and  that  which  fets  to  the  Weft  toward  the 
coaft  of  Brafil. 

This  Wefterly  current  was  not  confiderable  till  we  got 
into  2°  North,  and  25°  Weft.  From  this  ftation,  to  3°  South 
and  30°  Weft,  the  Ihip,  in  the  fpace  of  four  days,  was  car- 
ried one  hundred  and  fifteen  miles  in  the  direction  of  Soutli 

Weft 


A VOYAGE  TO 


4^ 

^ 1776. 

November. 


Welt  by  Weft,  beyond  her  reckoning ; an  error  by  far  too 
great  to  have  any  other  caufe  but  a ftrong  current  running 
in  the  fame  diredtion.  Nor  did  its  ftrength  abate  here ; but 
its  courfe  was,  afterward,  more  Wefterly,  and  to  the  North 
of  Weft ; and  off  Cape  Auguftine,  North,  as  I have  already 
mentioned.  But  this  Northerly  current  did  not  exift  at 
twenty  or  thirty  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  that  Cape ; 
nor  any  other,  that  I could  perceive,  in  the  remaining  part 
of  the  paftage.  The  little  difference  we  afterward  found 
between  the  reckoning  and  obfervations,  might  very  well 
happen  without  the  affiftance  of  currents ; as  will  appear 
by  the  Table  of  Days  Works. 

In  the  account  of  my  laft  voyage  I remarked,  that  the 
currents  one  meets  with  in  this  paffage  generally  balance 
each  other.  It  happened  fo  then ; becaufe  we  croffed  the 
line  about  20°  more  to  the  Eaftward  than  we  did  now ; fo 
that  we  were,  of  confequence,  longer  under  the  influence 
of  the  Eafterly  current,  which  made  up  for  the  Wefterly 
one.  And  this,  I apprehend,  will  generally  be  the  cafe,  if 
you  crofs  the  line  lo*"  or  15°  to  the  Eaft  of  the  meridian  of 
St.  Jago. 

From  thefe  remarks  I fliall  draw  the  following  conclu- 
fion.  That,  after  palling  the  Cape  de  Verde  lllands,  if  you 
do  not  make  above  4°  or  5°  Eafting,  and  crofs  the  line  in,  or 
to  the  Weftward  of,  the  meridian  of  St.  Jago,  you  may  ex- 
pert to  find  your  fliip  3°  or  4°  to  the  Weftward  of  her  reck- 
oning, by  the  time  you  get  into  the  latitude  of  10°  South. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  keep  well  to  the  Eaft,  and  crofs 
the  line  15°  or  20°  to  the  Eaft  of  St.  Jago,  you  will  be  then 
as  much  to  the  Eaft  of  your  reckoning  ; and  the  more  you 
keep  to  the  Eaftward,  the  greater  will  be  your  error ; as  has 


■*  Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  I.  p.  14. 


been 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


49 


been  experienced  by  fome  India  fliips,  whofe  people  have  1776. 
found  themfelves  clofe  upon  the  coaft  of  Angola,  when  . 
they  thought  its  diftance  was  above  two  hundred  leagues. 

During  the  whole  of  our  palTage  from  England,  no  op- 
portunity was  omitted  of  obferving,  with  all  the  attention 
and  accuracy  that  circumftances  would  permit,  the  variation 
of  the  compafs,  which  I have  inferted  in  a Table,  with  the 
latitude  and  longitude  of  the  fhip  at  the  time  of  obfervation. 

As  the  longitude  may  be  depended  upon,  to  a quarter  or 
half  a degree  at  moft,  this  Table  will  be  of  ufe  to  thofe  na- 
vigators who  correal  their  reckoning  by  the  variation.  It 
will  alfo  enable  Mr.  Dun  to  correct  his  new  Variation  Chart, 
a thing  very  much  wanted. 

It  feems  ftrange  to  me,  that  the  advocates  for  the  varia- 
tion fliould  not  agree  amongft  themfelves.  We  find  one  of 
them  telling  us,  as  I have  already  obferved,  that  with  S'’ 

IVeJl  variation^  or  any  thing  above  that,  you  may  venture  to 
Jail  by  the  Cape  de  Verde  IJlands,  by  night  or  day,  being  well 
ajpured,  with  that  variation,  that  you  are  to  the  Vaftward  of 
them.  Another,  in  his  Chart  t,  lays  down  this  variation 
ninety  leagues  to  the  Weftward  of  them.  Such  a difagree- 
ment  as  this,  is  a ftrong  proof  of  the  uncertainty  of  both. 
However,  I have  no  doubt,  the  former  found  here,  as  well 
as  in  other  places,  the  variation  he  mentions.  But  he  fliould 
have  confidered,  that  at  fea,  nay  even  on  land,  the  refults 
of  the  mofl:  accurate  obfervations  will  not  always  be  the 
fame.  Dilferent  compalTes  will  give  different  variations ; 
and  even  the  fame  compafs  will  differ  from  itfelf  two  de- 
grees, without  our  being  able  to  difcover,  much  lefs  to  re- 
move, the  caufe. 


VoL.  I. 


* Nichelfon. 


t Mr.  Dun. 

H 


Whoever 


50 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

November# 


Whoever  imagines  he  can  find  the  variation  within  a 
degree,  will  very  often  fee  himfelf  much  deceived.  For, 
befides  the  imperfection  which  may  be  in  the  conltmCtion 
of  the  inftrument,  or  in  the  power  of  the  needle,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  the  motion  of  the  fhip,  or  attraction  of  the  iron- 
work, or  fome  other  caufe  not  yet  difcovered,  will  frequent- 
ly occafion  far  greater  errors  than  this.  That  the  variation 
may  be  found,  with  a fhare  of  accuracy  more  than  fuffi- 
cient  to  determine  the  fliip’s  courfe,  is  allowed  ; but  that  it 
can  be  found  fo  exaCtly  as  to  fix  the  longitude  within  a de- 
gree, or  fixty  miles,  I abfolutely  deny. 


CHAP. 


fl'ifrJY/irnnir 


■Royfil  Soujul 


'^L'jipDnupliui 


M.  K<“ 


umups 


^I.  Alt>ii:\m 


■RaN*-' 


KElUJtiEIiKN’S  Ii.VN15 


r/iUfd  /tv  ('.(hn/‘ 


lA'j  ',AJSr/J  !'/  'JJJEt  VOJtATJO/!Sr. 


///!■  ustfliatlptl 


ailiHl  Ooan 


//»'///  f//<  rtxMU'h  IMilVrva lions  w /W»'  ■'//' 


1 a Tn\i-1i  «/■///-  llpfoliilion 


o 5 I 


I*  i*  oyno  K . 
^O’  I?Bi»iunlcl A. 


^ I.KoiuU* 

(Sc? 


Baye  lJAUmKKI<!K 


l.cli'  la  Tovlum- 

(;:;;::;^Vv*j  Liuul/w 


Tap  'L<*uis 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


51 


CHAP.  IV. 


'i'he  two  Ships  leave  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. — fwo  Iflands^ 
named  Prince  Edward'^s^  Jeen.,  and  their  Appearance  de^ 
fcribed. — Kerguelen’s  Land  vifted. — Arrival  in  Chrifimas 
Harbour. — Occurrences  there. — Defer ipt ion  of  it. 

FTER  the  difafter  which  happened  to  onr  Iheep,  it 


f~\.  may  be  well  fuppofed  I did  not  truft  thofe  that  re- 
mained, long  on  Ihore ; but  got  them,  and  the  other  cattle, 
on  board  as  fall  as  poffible.  I alfo  added  to  my  original 
flock,  by  purchafing  two  young  buUs,  two  heifers,  two 
young  ftone-horfes,  two  mares,  two  rams,  feveral  ewes  and 
goats,  and  fome  rabbits  and  poultry.  All  of  them  were  in- 
tended for  New  Zealand,  Otaheite,  and  the  neighbouring 
iflands,  or  any  other  places,  in  the  courfe  of  our  voyage, 
where  there  might  be  a profpedf  that  the  leaving  any  of 
them  would  be  ufeful  to  poflerity. 

Toward  the  latter  end  of  November,  the  caulkers  had 
finiflied  their  work  on  board  the  Difeovery,  and  fhe  had  re- 
ceived all  her  provifions  and  water.  Of  the  former,  both 
flrips  had  a fupply  fufficient  for  two  years  and  upward. 
And  every  other  article  we  could  think  of,  neceffary  for  fuch 
a voyage,  that  could  be  had  at  the  Gape,  was  procured; 
neither  knowing  when,  nor  where,  we  might  come  to  a 
place  where  we  could  furnifli  ourfelves  fo  well. 


1776. 

November. 

V 


H 2 


Having 


52 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

November. 


Saturday  30. 


December. 
Sunday  1. 


Tuefday  3. 


Thurfday  5. 


Friday  6. 


Thurfday  12. 


Having  given  Captain  Clerke  a copy  of  my  inftru6lions, 
and  an  order  directing  him  how  to  proceed  in  cafe  of  fepa- 
ration ; in  the  morning  of  the  30th,  we  repaired  on  board. 
At  five  in  the  afternoon  a breeze  fprung  np  at  South  Eaft, 
with  which  we  weighed,  and  flood  out  of  the  bay.  At  nine 
it  fell  calm,  and  we  anchored  between  Penguin  Ifland  and 
the  Eafl  flrore,  where  v/e  lay  till  three  o’clock  next  morn- 
ing. We  then  weighed  and  put  to  fea,  with  a light  breeze 
at  South  ; but  did  not  get  clear  of  the  land  till  the  morning 
of  the  3d,  when,  with  a frefh  gale  at  Weft  North  Wefl,  we 
flood  to  the  South  Eafl,  to  get  more  into  the  way  of  thefe 
winds. 

On  the  5th,  a hidden  fquaU  of  wind  carried  away  the 
Refolution’s  mizen  top-mafl.  Having  another  to  replace  it, 
the  lofs  was  not  felt ; efpecially  as  it  was  a bad  flick,  and 
had  often  complained.  On  the  6th,  in  the  evening,  being 
then  in  the  latitude  of  39°  14'  South,  and  in  the  longitude  of 
23°  56^  Eafl,  we  pafled  through  feveral  fmall  fpots  of  water 
of  a reddifh  colour.  Some  of  this  was  taken  up ; and  it  was 
found  to  abound  with  a fmall  animal,  which  the  micro- 
fcope  difcovered  to  be  like  a cray-fifli,  of  a reddifh  hue. 

We  continued  our  courfe  to  the  South  Eafl,  with  a very 
flrong  gale  from  the  Weflward,  followed  by  a mountainous 
fea ; which  made  the  flrip  roll  and  tumble  exceedingly,  and 
gave  us  a great  deal  of  trouble  to  preferve  the  cattle  we  had 
on  board.  Notwithflanding  all  our  care,  feveral  goats,  efpe- 
cially the  males,  died ; and  fome  fheep.  This  misfortune 
was,  in  a great  meafure,  owing  to  the  cold,  which  we  now 
began  moil  fenfibly  to  feel. 

On  the  1 2th,  at  noon,  we  faw  land  extending  from  South 
Eafl  by  South,  to  South  Eaft  by  Eafl.  Upon  a nearer  ap- 
proach, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


53 


proach,  we  found  it  to  be  two  illands.  That  which  lies  moft  iTje. 
to  the  South,  and  is  alfo  the  largeft,  I judged  to  be  about 
fifteen  leagues  in  circuit ; and  to  be  in  the  latitude  of  46°  53' 

South,  and  in  the  longitude  of  37°  46"  Eaft.  The  moft  Nor- 
therly one  is  about  nine  leagues  in  circuit ; and  lies  in  the 
latitude  of  46°  40"  South,  and  in  38°  8'  Eaft  longitude.  The 
diftance  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  about  five  leagues. 

We  pafled  through  this  channel,  at  equal  diftance  from 
both  illands ; and  could  not  difcover,  with  the  afliftance  of 
our  beft  glaftes,  either  tree  or  fhrub  on  either  of  them. 

They  feemed  to  have  a rocky  and  bold  fhore ; and,  except- 
ing the  South  Eaft  parts,  where  the  land  is  rather  low  and 
flat,  a furface  compofed  of  barren  mountains,  which  rife  to 
a confiderable  height,  and  whofe  fummits  and  fides  were 
covered  with  fnow,  which  in  many  places  feemed  to  be  of  a 
confiderable  depth.  The  South  Eaft  parts  had  a much 
greater  quantity  on  them  than  the  reft ; owing,  probably, 
to  the  Sun  acting  for  a lefs  fpace  of  time  on  thefe  than  on 
the  North  and  North  Weft  parts.  The  ground,  where  it 
was  not  hid  by  the  fnow,  from  the  various  fhades  it  exhi- 
bited, may  be  fuppofed  to  be  covered  with  mofs,  or,  per- 
haps, fuch  a coarfe  grafs  as  is  found  in  fome  parts  of  Falk- 
land’s Illands.  On  the  North  fide  of  each  of  the  iflands  is  a 
detached  rock : that  near  the  South  ifland  is  fliaped  like  a 
tower,  and  feemed  to  be  at  fome  diftance  from  the  fliore.  ^ 

As  we  paired  along,  a quantity  of  fea-weed  was  feen,  and 
the  colour  of  the  water  indicated  foundings.  But  there  was 
no  appearance  of  an  inlet,  unlefs  near  the  rock  juft  men- 
tioned ; and  that,  from  its  fmallnefs,  did  not  promife  a good 
anchoring-place . 

Thefe  two  iflands,  as  alfo  four  others  which  lie  from 
nine  to  twelve  degrees  of  longitude  more  to  the  Eaft,  and 

nearly 


54 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  nearly  in  the  fame  latitude,  were  difcovered,  as  I have  men- 

j)ecember.^  tioned  ill  my  late  voyage  by  Captains  Marion  du  Frefne, 
and  Crozet,  French  Navigators,  in  January  1772,  on  their 
palTage  in  two  lliips  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the 
Philippine  Illands.  As  they  have  no  names  in  the  French 
chart  of  the  Southern  hemifphere,  which  Captain  Crozet 
communicated  to  me  in  1775  t,  I Ihall  diftinguifh  the  two 
we  now  faw,  by  calling  them  Prince  Edward’s  Illands,  after 
his  Majefty’s  fourth  fon ; and  the  other  four,  by  the  name 
of  Marion’s  and  Crozet’s  Illands,  to  commemorate  their  dif- 
coverers. 

We  had  now,  for  the  moft  part,  llrong  gales  between 
the  North  and  Weft,  and  but  very  indifferent  weather;  not 
better,  indeed,  than  we  generally  have  in  England  in  the 
very  depth  of  Winter,  though  it  was  now  the  middle  of 
Summer  in  this  hemifphere.  Not  difcouraged,  however, 
by  this,  after  leaving  Prince  Edward’s  Illands,  I lhaped  our 
courfe  to  pafs  to  the  Southward  of  the  others,  that  I might 
get  into  the  latitude  of  the  land  difcovered  by  Monfteur  de 
Kerguelen. 

I had  applied  to  the  Chevalier  de  Borda,  whom,  as  I have 
mentioned,  I found  at  Teneriffe,  requefting,  that  if  he  knew 
any  thing  of  the  illand  difcovered  by  Monfteur  de  Kergue- 
len, between  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  New  Holland,  he 
would  be  fo  obliging  as  to  communicate  it  to  me.  Accord- 
ingly, juft  before  we  failed  from  Santa  Cruz  bay,  he  fent 

* Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  266.  Thefe  iflands  are  there  faid  to  be  in  the  la- 
titude of  48°  South ; that  is,  two  degrees  farther  South,  than  what  here  appears  to  be 
their  real  pofition. 

t See  Cook’s  Voyage,  as  above.  Dr.  Forfter,  in  his  Obfervations  made  during  that 
•voyage,  p.  30,  gives  us  this  defcription  of  the  Chart  then  communicated  by  Monfieur  Cro- 
zet : that  it  was  publijhed  under  the  patronage  of  the  Duke  de  Croye,  by  Robert  de  Vaugondy. 
Captain  Cook  tells  us,  lower  in  this  Chapter,  that  it  was  publifhed  in  1773. 


me 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


55 


me  the  following  account  of  it,  viz.  “ That  the  Pilot  of  the  1776. 
“ Bouflble,  who  was  in  the  voyage  with  Monfieur  de  Ker- 
“ guelen,  had  given  him  the  latitude  and  longitude  of  a 
“ little  illand,  which  Monfieur  de  Kerguelen  called  the 
“ Ifle  of  Rendezvous,  and  which  lies  not  far  from  the 
“ great  illand  which  he  faw.  Latitude  of  the  little  ifle,  by 
“ feven  obfervations,  48°  26'  South ; longitude,  by  feven  ob- 
“ fervations  of  the  diftance  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  64°  57' 

“ Eaft  from  Paris.”  I was  very  forry  I had  not  fooner  known 
that  there  was  on  board  the  frigate  at  Teneriffe,  an  officer 
who  had  been  with  Monfieur  de  Kerguelen,  efpecially  the 
Pilot ; becaufe  from  him  I might  have  obtained  more  in- 
terefting  information  about  this  land  than  the  fituation 
alone,  of  which  I was  not  before  entirely  ignorant 

My 

* Captain  Cook’s  proceedings,  as  related  in  the  remaining  part  of  this  Chapter, 
and  in  the  next,  being  upon’ a coaft  newly  difcovered  by  the  French,  it  could  not  but 
be  an  objedt  of  his  attention  to  trace  the  footfteps  of  the  original  explorers.  But  no 
fuperiority  of  profeffional  flcill,  nor  diligence  in  exerting  it,  could  poffibly  qualify  him 
to  do  this  fuccefsfully,  without  pofleffing,  at  the  fame  time,  full  and  authentic  intelli- 
gence of  all  that  had  been  performed  here  by  his  predecellbrs  in  the  difcovery.  But  that 
he  was  not  fo  fortunate  as  to  be  thus  fufficiently  inftrudted,  will  appear  from  the  following 
fedls,  which  the  Reader  is  requefted  to  attend  to,  before  he  proceeds  to  the  perufal  of 
this  part  of  the  Journal. 

How  very  little  was  known,  with  any  precifion,  about  the  operations  of  Kerguelen, 
when  Captain  Cook  failed  in  1776,  may  be  inferred  from  the  following  paragraph  of  his 
Inftrudlions : “ Y ou  are  to  proceed  in  fearch  of  fome  iflands  faid  to  have  been  lately  feen 

by  the  French  in  the  latitude  of  48“  South,  and  in  the  meridian  of  Mauritius  (a).^' 

This  was,  barely,  the  amount  of  the  very  indefinite  and  imperfedl  information,  which 
Captain  Cook  himfelf  had  received  from  Baron  Plettenberg  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
in  November  1772  (b)  ■,  in  the  beginning  of  which  year  Kerguelen’s  firji  voyage  had 
taken  place. 

The  Captain,  on  his  return  homeward,  in  March  1775,  heard,  a fecond  time,  fome- 
ihing  about  this  French  difcovery  at  the  Cape,  where  he  met  with  Monfieur  Crozet, 


(a)  See  the  Inftruftions  in  the  Introdudtion. 

(4)  See  Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  i6. 

who 


56 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  My  inftrudlions  directing  me  to  examine  it,  with  a view 
. to  difcover  a good  harbour,  I proceeded  in  the  learch ; and 

on 

V'ho  vt;ry  obligingly  communicated  to  him  a Chart  of  the  Southern  Hemifphere,  wherein  were 
delineated  not  only  his  own  dijcoveries^  but  alfo  that  of  Captain  Kerguelen  (a).  Eut  what  little 
information  that  Chart  could  convey,  was  ftill  neceflarily  confined  to  the  operations  of 
the  firft  voyage  ; the  Chart  here  referred  to,  having  been  publilhed  in  France  in  1773  ; 
that  is,  before  any  intelligence  could  poffibly  be  conveyed  from  the  Southern  Hemifphere 
of  the  refult  of  Kerguelen’s  fecond  vifit  to  this  new  land ; which,  we  now  know,  hap- 
pened towards  die  clofe  of  the  fame  year. 

Of  thefe  latter  operations,  the  only  account  (if  that  can  be  called  an  account,  which 
conveys  no  particular  information)  received  by  Captain  Cook  from  Monfieur  Crozet, 
was,  that  a later  Voyage  had  been  undertaken  by  the  French.,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Kerguelen,  which  had  ended  much  to  the  difgrace  of  that  commander  (b). 

What  Crozet  had  not  communicated  to  our  Author,  and  what  we  are  fure,  from  a 
I'ariety  of  circumftances,  he  had  never  heard  of  from  any  other  quarter,  he  miffed  an 
' opportunity  of  learning  at  Teneriffe.  He  exprefles  his  being  forry,  as  we  have  juft 
read,  that  he  did  not  know  fooner  that  there  was  on  board  the  frigate  an  ojfficer  who  had  been 
with  Kerguelen,  as  he  might  have  obtained  from  him  more  interejling  information  about  this 
land,  than  its  fituation.  And,  indeed,  if  he  had  converfed  with  that  officer,  he  might 
have  obtained  information  more  interejling  than  he  was  aware  of ; he  might  have  learnt 
that  Kerguelen  had  adfually  vifited  this  Southern  land  a fecond  time,  and  that  the  litde 
ifle  of  which  he  then  received  the.  name  and  pofition  from  the  Chevalier  de  Borda,  was 
a difcovery  of  this  later  voyage.  But  the  account  conveyed  to  him  being,  as  the  Rea- 
der will  obferve,  unaccompanied  with  any  date,  or  other  diftinguifhing  circumftance,  he 
left  Teneriffe,  and  arrived  on  the  coafts  of  Kerguelen’s  Land,  under  a full  perfuafion  that 
it  had  been  vifited  only  once  before.  And  even,  with  regard  to  the  operations  of  that 
firft  voyage,  he  had  nothing  to  guide  him,  but  the  very  fcanty  materials  afforded  to  him 
by  Baron  Plettenberg  and  Monfieur  Crozet. 

The  truth  is,  the  French  feem,  for  fome  reafon  or  other,  not  furely  founded  on  the 
importance  of  Kerguelen’s  difcovery,  to  have  been  very  fhy  of  publifhing  a full  and 
diftinfl  account  of  it.  No  fuch  account  had  been  publifhed  while  Captain  Cook 
lived.  Nay,  even  after  the  return  of  his  fhips  in  1780,  the  Gentleman  who  obligingly 
lent  his  affiftance  to  give  a view  of  the  prior  obfervations  of  the  French,  and  to  con- 
nect them  on  the  fame  Chart  with  thofe  of  our  Author,  though  his  affidulty  in  procur- 
ing geographical  information  can  be  equalled  only  by  his  leadinefs  in  communicating 
it,  had  not,  it  fhould  feem,  been  able  to  procure  any  materials  for  that  purpofe,  but 


(a)  Sec  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  266. 


(i)  Ibid.  p.  268, 


fucb 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


57 


on  the  i6th,  being  then  in  the  latitude  of  48°  45",  and  in  the  1776. 
longitude  of  52°  Eaft,  we  faw  penguins  and  divers,  and  . 
rock- weed  floating  in  the  fea.  We  continued  to  meet  with  Monday  16. 
more  or  lefs  of  thefe  every  day,  as  we  proceeded  to  the  Eaft- 
ward ; and  on  the  2ifl:,  in  the  latitude  of  48°  27'  South,  and  Saturday  21. 
in  the  longitude  of  65°  Eaft,  a very  large  feal  was  feen. 

We  had  now  much  foggy  weather,  and,  as  we  expelled  to 
fall  in  with  the  land  every  hour,  our  navigation  became 
both  tedious  and  dangerous. 

At  length,  on  the  24th,  at  ftx  o’clock  in  the  morning,  as  Tuefday  24. 
we  were  fteering  to  the  Eaftward,  the  fog  clearing  away  a 
little,  we  faw  land  bearing  South  South  Eaft,  which, 

upon 


fuch  as  mark  the  operations  of  the  firft  French  voyage  j and  even  for  thefe,  he  was  in- 
debted to  a MS.  drawing. 

But  this  veil  of  unneceflary  fecrecy  is  at  length  drawn  afide.  Kerguelen  himfelf  has, 
very  lately,  publifhed  the  Journal  of  his  proceedings  in  two  fucceffive  voyages,  in  the 
years  1772  and  1773  ; and  has  annexed  to  his  Narrative  a Chart  of  the  coafts  of  this 
land,  as  far  as  he  had  explored  them  in  both  voyages.  Monfieur  de  Pages,  alfo,  much 
about  the  fame  time,  favoured  us  with  another  account  of  the  fecond  voyage,  in  fome  re- 
ipe£ls  fuller  than  Kerguelen’s  own,  on  board  whofe  fliip  he  was  then  an  officer. 

From  thefe  fources  of  authentic  information,  we  are  enabled  to  drav/  every  necellary 
material  to  corredf  what  is  erroneous,  and  to  illuftrate  what,  otherwife,  w’^ould  have  re- 
mained obfcure,  in  this  part  of  Captain  Cook’s  Journal.  We  fhall  take  occafion  to  do 
this  in  feparate  Notes  on  the  paflages  as  they  occur,  and  conclude  this  tedious,  but,  it  is 
hoped,  not  unneceflary,  detail  of  facts,  with  one  general  remark,  fully  expreffive  of  the 
difadvantages  our  Author  laboured  under.  He  never  faw  that  part  of  the  coaft  upon 
which  the  French  had  been  in  1772  ; and  he  never  knew  that  they  had  been  upon  ano- 
ther part  of  it  in  1773,  which  was  the  very  fcene  of  his  own  operations.  Confequently, 
what  he  knew  of  the  former  voyage,  as  delineated  upon  Crozet’s  Chart,  only  ferved  to 
perplex  and  miflead  his  judgment ; and  his  total  ignorance  of  the  latter.^  put  it  out  of  his 
power  to  compare  his  own  obfervations  with  thofe  then  made  by  Kerguelen  ; ihough  v/e, 
who  are  better  inftru6led,  can  do  this,  by  tracing  the  plaineft  marks  of  coincidence  and 
agreement. 

* Captain  Cook  was  not  the  original  difcoverer  of  thefe  fmall  iflands  which  he  now 
fell  in  with.  It  is  certain  that  they  had  been  feen  and  named  by  Kerguelen,  on  his  fecond 
voyage,  in  December  1773’  Their  pofition,  relatively  to  each  other,  and  to  the  adjoin- 

V 0 L.  I.  I ing 


S8 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

December. 


upon  a nearer  approach,  we  found  to  be  an  ifland  of  con- 
fiderable  height,  and  about  three  leagues  in  circuit  Soon 
after,  we  faw  another  of  the  fame  magnitude,  one  league 
to  the  Eaftward  t ; and  between  thefe  two,  in  the  dire6tion 
of  South  Eaft,  fome  fmaller  ones  J.  In  the  diredtion  of 
South  by  Eaft  f Eaft,  from  the  Eaft  end  of  the  firft  illand, 
a third  § high  ifland  was  feen.  At  times,  as  the  fog  broke 
away,  we  had  the  appearance  of  land  over  the  fmall  iflands  ; 
and  I had  thoughts  of  fleering  for  it,  by  running  in  be- 
tween them.  But,  on  drawing  nearer,  I found  this  would 
be  a dangerous  attempt,  while  the  weather  continued  foggy. 
For  if  there  fliould  be  no  paflage,  or  if  we  Ihould  meet  with 
any  fudden  danger,  it  would  have  been  impoflible  for  us  to 
get  off ; the  wind  being  right  a-flern,  and  a prodigious  fea 
running,  that  broke  on  all  the  fhores  in  a frightful  furf. 
At  the  fame  time,  feeing  another  ifland  in  the  North  Eafl 
diredtion,  and  not  knowing  but  that  there  might  be  more, 
I judged  it  prudent  to  haul  off,  and  wait  for  clearer  weather, 
left  we  fhould  get  int  angled  amongfl  unknown  lands  in  a 
thick  fog. 

We  did  but  jufl  weather  the  ifland  lafl  mentioned.  It  is  a 
high  round  rock,  which  was  named  Bligh’s  Cap.  Perhaps 


ing  coafts  of  the  greater  land,  as  reprefented  on  the  annexed  Chart,  bears  a ftriking  re- 
femblance  to  Kerguelen’s  delineation  of  them  ; whofe  Chart,  however,  the  Public  may  be 
aflured,  was  unknown  in  England  till  after  ours  had  been  engraved. 

* This  is  the  ifle  to  which  Kerguelen  gave  the  name  of  Cray  or  Crouy.  Befides  deli- 
neating it  upon  his  Chart,  he  has  added  a particular  view  of  it,  exadlly  correfponding  with 
Captain  Cook’s  account  of  its  being  of  conftderable  height. 

t Kerguelen  called  this  JJle  Rolland^  after  the  name  of  his  own  ftiip.  There  is  alfo  a 
particular  view  of  it  on  the  F rench  Chart. 

The  obfervations  of  the  French  and  Englifti  navigators  agree  exadlly,  as  to  the 
pofition  of  thefe  fmaller  ifles. 

§ The  fituation  of  Kerguelen’s  JJle  de  Qugny^  as  marked  on  this  Chart,  fhews  it  to 
be  the  third  high  ifland  feen  by  Captain  Cook. 


this 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


59 


this  is  the  fame  that  Monlieur  de  Kerguelen  called  the  Ifle  1776. 
of  Rendezvous  ; but  I know  nothing  that  can  rendezvous  , 
at  it,  but  fowls  of  the  air ; for  it  is  certainly  inacceflible  to 
every  other  animal. 

At  eleven  o’clock  the  weather  began  to  clear  up,  and  we 
immediately  tacked,  and  fleered  in  for  the  land.  At  noon, 
we  had  a pretty  good  obfervation,  which  enabled  us  to  de- 
termine the  latitude  of  Bligh’s  Gap,  which  is  the  northern- 
mofl  ifland,  to  be  48°  29'  South,  and  its  longitude  68°  40' 

Eaft  f.  We  paffed  it  at  three  o’clock,  handing  to  the  South 
South  Eaft,  with  a frefh  gale  at  Weft. 

Soon  after  we  faw  the  land,  of  which  we  had  a faint  view 
in  the  morning ; and  at  four  o’clock  it  extended  from  South 
Eaft  k Eaft,  to  South  Weft  by  South,  diftant  about  four 
miles.  The  left  extreme,  which  I judged  to  be  the  North- 
ern point  of  this  land,  called,  in  the  French  Chart  of  the 

* This  ifle,  or  rocky  was  the  Angle  point  about  which  Captain  Cook  had  received  the 
leaft  information  at  Teneriffe ; and  we  may  obferve  how  fagacious  he  was  in  tracing 
It.  What  he  could  only  fpeak  of  as  probabUy  a comparifon  of  his  Chart  with  that  lately 
publifhed  by  Kerguelen,  proves  to  be  certain ; and  if  he  had  even  read  and  copied  what 
his  predeceflbr  in  the  difcovery  fays  of  it,  he  could  fcarcely  have  varied  his  account  of 
its  ftiape.  Kerguelen’s  words  are,  “ IJle  de  Reuniony  qui  n’eft  qu’une  Rochcy  nous  fervoit 
^ de  Rendezvousy  ou  de  point  de  ralliement;  & reflemble  a un  coin  de  mire” 

t The  French  and  Englilh  agree  very  nearly  (as  might  be  expedled)  in  their  accounts 
of  the  latitude  of  this  ifland  j but  the  obfervations  by  which  they  fix  its  longitude,  vary 
confiderably. 

The  Pilot  at  TenerifFe  made  it  only  64°  57'  Eafl:  from  Paris,  which  is  about 
67“  16' Eaft  from  London;  or  1°  24' more  Wefterly  than  Captain  Cook’s  obferva- 
tions fix  it. 

Monfieur  de  Pages  fays  it  Is  66“  47'  Eaft  from  Paris,  that  is  69°  6''  Eaft  from  Lon- 
don, or  twenty-fix  miles  more  Eafterly  than  it  is  placed  by  Captain  Cook. 

Kerguelen  himfelf  only  fays  that  it  is  about  68°  of  Eaft  longitude,  par  68°  de  lon- 
gitude. 

I 2 


Southern 


6o 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  Southern  Hemifphere,  Cape  St.  Louis terminated  in  a 
perpendicular  rock  of  a confiderable  height ; and  the  right 
one  (near  which  is  a detached  rock)  in  a high  indented 
point  t.  From  this  point  the  coaft  feemed  to  turn  fliort 
round  to  the  Southward ; for  we  could  fee  no  land  to  the 
Weft  ward  of  the  diredfion  in  which  it  now  bore  to  us,  but 
the  iflands  we  had  obferved  in  the  morning;  the  moft 
Southerly  X of  them  lying  nearly  Weft  from  the  point, 
about  two  or  three  leagues  diftant. 

About  the  middle  of  the  land  there  appeared  to  be  an 
inlet,  for  which  we  fteered ; but,  on  approaching,  found  it 
was  only  a bending  in  the  coaft,  and  therefore  bore  up,  to 
go  round  Cape  St.  Louis  §.  Soon  after,  land  opened  off  the 


* Hitherto,  we  have  only  had  occafion  to  fupply  defeats,  owing  to  Captain  Cook’s 
entire  ignorance  of  Kerguelen’s  fecond  voyage  in  1773;  we  muft  now  corre(9:  errors, 
owing  to  his  very  limited  knowledge  of  the  operations  of  the  firft  voyage  in  1772.  The 
Chart  of  the  Southern  Hemifphere,  his  only  guide,  having  given  him,  as  he  tells  us,  the 
name  of  Cape  St.  Louis  (or  Cape  Louis)  as  the  moft  Northerly  promontory  then  feen 
by  the  French;  and  his  own  obfervations  now  fatisfying  him  that  no  part  of  the  main 
land  ftretched  farther  North  than  the  left  extreme  now  before  him ; from  this  fuppofed 
fimilarity  of  fituation,  he  judged  that  his  own  perpendicular  rock  muft  be  the  Cape  Louis 
of  the  firft  difcoverers.  By  looking  upon  our  Chart,  we  ftiall  find  Cape  Louis  lying 
upon  a very  different  part  of  the  coaft ; and  by  comparing  this  Chart  with  that  lately 
publiftied  by  Kerguelen,  it  will  appear,  in  the  cleareft  manner,  that  the  Northern  point 
now  defcribed  by  Captain  Cook,  is  the  very  fame  to  which  the  French  have  given  the 
name  of  Cape  F ran^ois. 

t This  right  extreme  of  the  coaft,  as  it  now  fliewed  itfelf  to  Captain  Cook,  feems  to 
be  what  is  reprefented  on  Kerguelen’s  Chart  under  the  name  of  Cape  Aubert.  It  may 
be  proper  to  obferve  here,  that  all  that  extent  of  coaft  lying  between  Cape  Louis  and 
Cape  Francois,  of  which  the  French  faw  very  little  during  their  firft  vifit  in  1772,  and 
may  be  called  the  North  Weft  fide  of  this  land,  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  trace  the 
pofition  of  in  1773,  and  have  alfigned  names  to  fome  of  its  bays,  rivers,  and  promon- 
tories, upon  their  Chart. 

t Kerguelen’s  Ifle  de  Clugny. 

§ Cape  Francois,  as  already  obferved. 

Cape, 


1 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

Cape,  in  the  dire(5lion  of  South  53°  Eaft,  and  appeared  to  be 
a point  at  a confiderable  did: ance ; for  the  trending  of  the 
coaft  from  the  Cape  was  more  Southerly.  We  alfo  faw 
feveral  rocks  and  iflands  to  the  Eaftward  of  the  above  di- 
rections, the  moll  diftant  of  which  was  about  feven  leagues 
from  the  Cape,  bearing  South  88°  Ea^l■'i^ 

We  had  no  fooner  got  off  the  Cape,  than  we  obferved  the 
coaft,  to  the  Southward,  to  be  much  indented  by  projecting 
points  and  bays ; fo  that  we  now  made  fure  of  foon  finding 
a good  harbour.  Accordingly,  we  had  not  run  a mile  far- 
ther, before  we  difcovered  one  behind  the  Cape,  into  which 
we  began  to  ply ; but  after  making  one  board,  it  fell  calm, 
and  we  anchored  at  the  entrance  in  forty-five  fathoms  wa- 
ter, the  bottom  black  fand ; as  did  the  Difcovery  foon  after. 
I immediately  difpatched  Mr.  Bligh,  the  Mailer,  in  a boat  to 
found  the  harbour;  who,  on  his  return,  reported  it  to  be 
fafe  and  commodious,  with  good  anchorage  in  every  part ; 
and  great  plenty  of  frefh  water,  feals,  penguins,  and  other 
birds  on  the  fliore ; but  not  a flick  of  wood.  While  we  lay 
at  anchor,  w'e  obferved  that  the  flood  tide  came  from  the 
South  Eaft,  running  two  knots,  at  leaft,  in  an  hour. 

At  day-break,  in  the  morning  of  the  25th,  we  weighed 
with  a gentle  breeze  at  Weft;  and  having  wrought  into  the 
harbour,  to  within  a quarter  of  a mile  of  the  fandy  beach 
at  its  head,  we  anchored  in  eight  fathoms  water,  the  bottom 
a fine  dark  fand.  The  Difcovery  did  not  get  in  till  two 
o’clock  in  the  afternoon;  when  Captain  Clerke  informed 
me,  that  he  had  narrowly  efcaped  being  driven  on  the  South 


* The  obfervations  of  the  French,  round  Cape  Francois,  remarkably  coincide  with 
Captain  Cook’s  in  this  paragraph  j and  the  rocks  and  iflands  here  mentioned  by  him,  alfo 
appear  upon  their  Chart. 


6t  ' 

1776. 

December. 

V ./ 


Wednef.  25. 


point 


62 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  point  of  the  harbour,  his  anchor  having  ftarted  before  they 
December.^  time  to  fliorten  in  the  cable.  This  obliged  them  to  fet 
fail,  and  drag  the  anchor  after  them,  till  they  had  room  -to 
heave  it  up ; and  then  they  found  one  of  its  palms  was 
broken  off. 

As  foon  as  we  had  anchored,  I ordered  all  the  boats  to 
be  hoifted  out ; the  Ihip  to  be  moored  with  a hedge  anchor ; 
and  the  water-cafks  to  be  got  ready  to  fend  on  Ihore.  In 
the  mean  time  I landed,  to  look  for  the  moft  convenient  fpot 
where  they  might  be  filled,  and  to  fee  what  elfe  the  place 
afforded. 

I found  the  fliore,  in  a manner,  covered  with  penguins 
and  other  birds,  and  feals.  Thefe  latter  were  not  nume- 
rous, but  fo  infenfible  of  fear  (which  plainly  indicated  that 
they  were  unaccuftomed  to  fuch  vifiters),  that  we  killed  as 
many  as  we  chofe,  for  the  fake  of  their  fat  or  blubber,  to 
make  oil  for  our  lamps,  and  other  ufes.  Frefh  water  was 
in  no  lefs  plenty  than  were  birds ; for  every  gully  afforded 
a large  fiream.  But  not  a fingle  tree  or  fhrub,  nor  the  leaft 
fign  of  any,  was  to  be  difcovered,  and  but  very  little  herb- 
age of  any  fort.  The  appearances,  as  we  failed  into  the 
harbour,  had  flattered  us  with  the  hope  of  meeting  with 
fomething  confiderable  growing  here,  as  we  obferved  the 
fides  of  many  of  the  hills  to  be  of  a lively  green.  But  I now 
found  that  this  was  occafioned  by  a fingle  plant,  which, 
with  the  other  natural  productions,  fliall  be  defcribed  in 
another  place.  Before  I returned  to  my  fhip,  I afcended 
the  firfl  ridge  of  rocks,  which  rife  in  a kind  of  amphithe- 
atre above  one  another.  I was  in  hopes,  by  this  means,  of 
obtaining  a view  of  the  country ; but  before  I reached  the 
top,  there  came  on  fo  thick  a fog,  that  I could  hardly  find 
my  way  down  again.  In  the  evening,  we  hauled  the  feine 

at 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


63 


at  the  head  of  the  harbour,  but  caught  only  half  a dozen 
fmall  fifli.  We  had  no  better  fuccefs  next  day,  when  we 
tried  with  hook  and  line.  So  that  our  only  refource  here, 
for  frefli  provihons,  were  birds,  of  which  there  was  an  in- 
exhauftible  ftore. 

The  morning  of  the  26th  proved  foggy,  with  rain.  How- 
ever, we  went  to  work  to  fill  water,  and  to  cut  grafs  for  our 
cattle,  which  we  found  in  finall  fpots  near  the  head  of  the 
harbour.  The  rain  which  fell,  fwelled  all  the  rivulets  to 
fuch  a degree,  that  the  fides  of  the  hills,  bounding  the  har- 
bour, feemed  to  be  covered  with  a fheet  of  water.  For  the 
rain,  as  it  fell,  run  into  the  fiffures  and  crags  of  the  rocks 
that  compofed  the  interior  parts  of  the  hills,  and  was  pre- 
cipitated down  their  fides  in  prodigious  torrents. 

The  people  having  wrought  hard  the  two  preceding  days, 
and  nearly  completed  our  water,  which  we  filled  from  a 
brook  at  the  left  corner  of  the  beach,  I allowed  them  the 
27th  as  a day  of  reft,  to  celebrate  Chriftmas.  Upon  this 
indulgence,  many  of  them  went  on  fhore,  and  made  excur- 
lions,  in  different  directions,  into  the  country,  which  they 
found  barren  and  defolate  in  the  higheft  degree.  In  the 
evening,  one  of  them  brought  to  me  a quart  bottle  which 
he  had  found,  faftened  with  fome  wire  to  a projecling  rock 
on  the  North  fide  of  the  harbour.  This  bottle  contained  a 
piece  of  parchment,  on  which  was  written  the  following 
infcription  ; 


1776. 

December. 

I f 


Thurfday  26. 


Friday  27. 


Liulovico 


64 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

December, 


Ludovico  XF  Galliarwii 
rege,  et  d.  -'i'*  de  Boynes 
regi  a Secretis  ad  res 
maritimas  annis  1772 
1773- 

From  this  infcription,  it  is  clear,  that  we  were  not  the 
firft  Europeans  who  had  been  in  this  harbour.  I fuppofed  it 
to  be  left  by  Monlieur  de  Boifguehenneu,  who  went  on 
diore  in  a boat  on  the  13th  of  February  1772,  the  fame  day 
that  Monlieur  de  Kerguelen  difcovered  this  land;  as  ap- 
pears by  a Note  in  the  French  Chart  of  the  Southern  He- 
mifphere,  publiflied  the  following  year  t. 

As 


* The  (d)^  no  doubt  is  a contraftlon  of  the  word  Domino.  The  French  Secretary  of 
the  Marine  was  then  Monfieur  de  Boynes. 

f On  perufing  this  paragraph  of  the  Journal,  it  will  be  natural  to  alk,  How  could  Mon- 
fieur de  Boifguehenneu,  in  the  beginning  of  1772,  leave  an  infcription,  which,. upon  the  very 
face  of  it,  commemorates  a tranfadlion  of  the  following  year  ? Captain  Cook’s  manner  of 
expreffing  himfelf  here,  ftrongly  marks,  that  he  made  this  fuppofition,  only  for  want  of 
information  to  enable  him  to  make  any  other.  He  had  no  idea  that  the  French  had  vi- 
fited  this  land  a fecond  time ; and,  reduced  to  the  neceflity  of  trying  to  accommodate 
what  he  faw  himfelf,  to  what  little  he  had  heard  of  their  proceedings,  he  confounds  a 
tranfadlion  which  we,  who  have  been  better  inftrudled,  know,  for  a certainty,  belongs  to 
the  fecond  Voyage,  with  a fimilar  one,  vi^hich  his  Chart  of  the  Southern  Hemifphere  has 
recorded,  and  which  happened  in  a different  year,  and  at  a different  place. 

The  bay,  indeed,  in  which  Monfieur  de  Boifguehenneu  landed,  is  upon  the  Weft 
fide  of  this  land,  confiderably  to  the  South  of  Cape  Louis,  and  not  far  from  another 
more  Southerly  promontory,  called  Cape  Bourbon ; a part  of  the  coaft  which  our  (hips 
were  not  upon.  Its  fituation  is  marked  upon  our  Chart;  and  a particular  view  of  the 
bay  du  Lion  Marin  (for  fo  Boifguehenneu  called  it),  with  the  foundings,  is  preferved  by 
Kerguelen. 

But  if  the  bottle  and  infcription  found  by  Captain  Cook’s  people  were  not  left  ^here  by 
Boifguehenneu,  by  whom  and  when  were  they  left  ? This  we  learn  moft  fatisfacftorily, 
from  the  accounts  of  Kerguelen’s  fecond  Voyage,  as  publifhed  by  himfelf  and  Monfieur 
de  Pages,  which  prefent  us  with  the  following  particulars  : That  they  arrived  on  the 
Weft  fide  of  this  land  on  the  14th  of  December  1773  ; that,  fleering  to  the  North  Eaft, 
; they 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


65 


As  a memorial  of  our  having  been  in  this  harbour,  I 
wrote  on  the  other  fide  of  the  parchment, 

Naves  Refolution 
et  Difcovery 

de  Rege  Magna  Britannia', 

T>ecembris  1776. 

I then  put  it  again  into  a bottle,  together  with  a lilver  two- 
penny piece  of  1772  ; and  having  covered  the  mouth  of  the 
bottle  with  a leaden  cap,  I placed  it,  the  next  morning,  in 
a pile  of  hones  erecSled  for  the  purpofe,  upon  a little  emi- 
nence on  the  North  Ihore  of  the  harbour,  and  near  to  the 

place 

they  difcovered,  on  the  i6th,  the  IJle  de  Reunion^  and  the  other  fmall  iflands  as  mentioned 
above  ; that,  on  the  17th,  they  had  before  them  the  principal  land  (which  they  were  fure 
was  connedled  with  that  feen  by  them  on  the  14th),  and  a high  point  of  that  land,  named 
by  them  Cape  Francois  ; that  beyond  this  Cape,  the  coaft  took  a South  Eafterly  direc- 
tion, and  behind  it  they  found  a bay,  called  by  them  Bate  de  I’Oifeau^  from  the  name  of 
their  frigate ; that  they  then  endeavoured  to  enter  it,  but  were  prevented  by  contrary 
winds  and  blowing  weather,  which  drove  them  ofF  the  coaft  Eaftward ; but  that,  at  laft, 
on  the  6th  of  January,  Monfieur  de  Rofnevet,  Captain  of  the  Oifeau,  was  able  to  fend  his 
boat  on  (hore  into  this  bay,  under  the  command  of  Monfieur  de  Rochegude,  one  of  his 
officers,  who  took  pojfejfion  of  that  ba)\  and  of  all  the  country^  in  the  name  of  the  King  of 
France^  with  all  the  requifite  formalities  ” 

Here  then  we  trace,  by  the  moft  unexceptionable  evidence,  the  hiftory  of  the  bottle 
and  infcription  ; the  leaving  of  which  was,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  requifite  formalities  ob- 
ferved  by  Monfieur  de  Rochegude  on  this  occafion.  And  though  he  did  not  land  till  the 
6th  of  January  1774,  yet,  as  Kerguelen’s  ftiips  arrived  upon  the  coaft  on  the  14th  of 
December  1773^  had  difcovered  and  looked  into  this  very  bay  on  the  17th  of  that 
month,  it  was  with  the  ftrifteft  propriety  and  truth  that  1773,  and  not  1774,  was  men- 
tioned as  the  date  of  the  difcovery. 

We  need  only  look  at  Kerguelen’s  and  Cook’s  Charts,  to  judge  that  the  Bale  de 
V Oifeau^  and  the  harbour  where  the  French  infcription  was  found,  is  one  and  the  fame 
place.  But  befides  this  agreement  as  to  the  general  pofition,  the  fame  conclufion  refults 
more  decifively  rtill,  from  another  circumftance  worth  mentioning  : The  F rench,  as  well 

VoL.  I.  K as 


1776. 

December. 

V- — ) 


Saturday  z% 


66 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  place  where  it  was  firft  found  ; in  which  polition  it  cannot 
December,  noticc  of  any  European,  whom  chance  or  defign 

may  bring  into  this  port.  Here  I difplayed  the  Britifh  flag, 
and  named  the  place  Chrijimas  Harbour^  from  our  having 
arrived  in  it  on  that  feftival. 

It  is  the  firft , or  northernmoft  inlet  that  we  meet  with  on 
the  South  Eaft  flde  of  Cape  St.  Louis  "!•',  which  forms  the 
North  fide  of  the  harbour,  and  is  alfo  the  Northern  point  of 
this  land.  The  fltuation  alone  is  fufficient  to  diftinguilh  it 
from  any  of  the  other  inlets ; and,  to  make  it  more  remark- 
able, its  South  point  terminates  in  a high  rock,  which  is 
perforated  quite  through,  fo  as  to  appear  like  the  arch  of  a 
bridge.  We  faw  none  like  this  upon  the  whole  coaft  t.  The 

harbour 

as  the  Englifli  vifiters  of  this  bay  and  harbour,  have  given  us  a particular  Plan  of  it ; and 
whoever  compares  ours,  publilhed  in  this  V olume,  with  that  to  be  met  with  in  Kergue- 
len’s and  de  Pages’s  Voyages,  muft  be  ftruck  with  a refemblance  that  could  only  be  pro- 
duced by  copying  one  common  original  with  fidelity.  Nay,  even  the  foundings  are  the 
fame  upon  the  fame  fpots  in  both  Plans,  being  forty-five  fathoms  between  the  two  Capes, 
before  the  entrance  of  the  bay ; fixteen  fathoms  farther  in,  where  the  fhores  begin  to  con- 
trail: ; and  eight  fathoms  up,  near  the  bottom  of  the  harbour. 

To  thefe  particulars,  which  throw  abundant  light  on  this  part  of  our  Author’s  Journal, 
I fliall  only  add,  that  the  diftance  of  our  harbour  from  that  where  Boifguehenneu  landed 
in  1772,  is  forty  leagues.  For  this  we  have  the  authority  of  Kerguelen,  in  the  following 
palTage  : “ Monfieur  de  Boifguehenneu  defcendit  le  13  de  Fevrier  1772,  dans  un  baie, 
“ qu’il  nomme  Baie  du  Lion  Marin,  & prit  poflellion  de  cette  terre  au  nom  de  Roi ; il 
“ n’y  vit  aucune  trace  d’habitants.  Monfieur  de  Rochegude,  en  1774,  a defcendu  dans 
“ un  autre  baie,  que  nous  avons  nomme  Baie  de  I’Oifeau,  & cette  feconde  rade  eft  a qua- 
“ rantes  lieues  de  la  premiere.  II  en  a egalement  pris  pofleffion,  & il  n’y  trouva  egale- 
“ ment  aucune  trace  d’habitants.”  Kerguelen^  p.  92. 

* Cape  Francois,  for  reafons  already  affigned. 

t If  there  could  be  the  leaft  doubt  remaining  of  the  identity  of  the  Baie  de  I’Oifeau, 
and  Chriftmas  harbour,  the  circumftance  of  the  perforated  rock,  which  divides  it  from 
another  bay  to  the  South,  would  amount  to  a ftridl  demonftration.  For  Monfieur  de 
Pages  had  obferved  this  difcriminating  mark  before  Captain  Cook.  His  words  are  as 
follows:  “ L’on  vit  que  la  cote  de  I’Fft,  voifine  du  Cap  Francois,  avoit  deux  bales; 

“ elles 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


67 


harbour  has  another  diftinguifhing  mark  within,  from  a 1776. 
fingle  flone  or  rock,  of  a vaft  lize,  which  lies  on  the  top  of 
a hill  on  the  South  lide,  near  its  bottom ; and  oppolite  this, 
on  the  North  lide,  there  is  another  hill,  much  like  it,  but 
fmaller.  There  is  a fmall  beach  at  its  bottom,  where  we 
commonly  landed ; and,  behind  it,  fome  gently  riling 
ground  ; on  the  top  of  which  is  a large  pool  of  frelh  water. 

The  land  on  both  lides  of  the  inlet  is  high,  and  it  runs  in 
Weft,  and  Weft  North  Weft,  about  two  miles.  Its  breadth 
is  one  mile  and  a quarter,  for  more  than  half  its  length ; 
above  which  it  is  only  half  a milq.  The  depth  of  water, 
which  is  forty-live  fathoms  at  the  entrance,  varies,  as  we 
proceed  farther  in,  from  thirty,  to  live  and  four  fathoms, 
as  marked  upon  the  Plan.  The  Ihores  are  fteep  ; and  the 
bottom  is  every  where  a fine  dark  fand,  except  in  fome 
places  clofe  to  the  lliore,  where  there  are  beds  of  fea-weed, 
which  always  grows  on  rocky  ground.  The  head  of  the 
harbour  lies  open  only  to  two  points  of  the  compafs ; and 
even  thefe  are  covered  by  illands  in  the  offing,  fo  that  no 
fea  can  fall  in  to  hurt  a lliip.  The  appearances  on  Ihore 
confirmed  this  ; for  we  found  grafs  growing  clofe  to  high- 
water  mark,  which  is  a fure  fign  of  a pacific  harbour 

It 

“ dies  etolent  feparees  par  une  pointe  tres  reconnolflable  par  fa  forme,  qut  reprefentoit  unt 

porte  cochere^  au  trovers  de  laquelle  I’ on  voyoit  lejourd’’  Voyages  du  M.  de  Pages,  Vol.  ii. 
p.  67.  Every  one  knows  how  exadly  the  form  of  a porte  cochere^  or  arched  gateway, 
correfponds  with  that  of  the  arch  of  a bridge.  It  is  very  fatisfadory  to  find  the  two  navi- 
gators, neither  of  whom  knew  any  thing  of  the  other’s  defcription,  adopting  the  fame 
idea ; which  both  proves  that  they  had  the  fame  uncommon  objed  before  their  eyes,  and 
tliat  they  made  an  accurate  report. 

* In  the  laft  Note,  we  faw  how  remarkably  Monfieur  de  Pages  and  Captain  Cook 
agree  about  the  appearance  of  the  South  Point  of  the  harbour ; I fhall  here  fubjoin  ano- 
ther quotation  from  the  former,  containing  his  account  of  the  harbour  itfelf,  in  which  the 

K 2 Reader 


68 

A VOYAGE  TO 

1776. 

December, 

' / 

It  is  high-water  here,  at  the  full  and  change  days,  about  ten 
o’clock ; and  the  tide  rifes  and  falls  about  four  feet. 

After  I had  finifhed  this  bulinefs  of  the  infcription,  I 
went  in  my  boat  round  the  harbour,  and  landed  in  feveral 
places,  to  examine  what  the  Ihore  afforded ; and,  particu- 
larly, to  look  for  drift  wood.  For,  although  the  land  here 
was  totally  deftitute  of  trees,  this  might  not  be  the  cafe  in 
other  parts  ; and  if  there  were  any,  the  torrents  would  force 
fome,  or,  at  leaft,  fome  branches,  into  the  fea,  which  would 
afterward  throw  them  upon  the  Ihores  ; as  in  all  other 
countries  where  there  is  wood,  and  in  many  where  there 
is  none  : but  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  harbour, 
I found  not  a fingle  piece. 

In  the  afternoon,  I went  upon  Cape  St.  Louis  accompa- 
nied by  Mr.  King,  my  Second  Lieutenant.  I was  in  hopes, 
from  this  elevation,  to  have  had  a view  of  the  fea-coaft,  and 

\ 

Reader  may  trace  the  fame  diftinguiftiing  features  obferved  by  Captain  Cook  in  the  fore- 
going paragraph. 

“ Le  6,  I’on  mit  a terre  dans  la  premiere  baie  a I’Eft  du  Cap  Francois,  & Ton  prit 
“ pofleffion  de  ces  contrees.  Ce  mouHlage  confifte  en  une  petite  rade,  qui  a environs 
“ quatres  encablures,  ou  quatre  cents  toifes  de  profondeur,  fur  un  tiers  en  fus  de  largeur. 
“ En  dedans  de  cette  rade  eft  un  petit  port,  dont  I’entree,  de  quatres  encablures  de  lar- 
“ geur,  prefente  an  Sud-Eft.  La  fonde  de  la  petite  rade  eft  depuis  quarante-cinq 
jufqu’a  trente  brafles  j et  celle  du  port  depuis  feize  jufqu’a  huit.  Le  fond  des  deux  eft 
“ de  fable  noir  et  vafeux.  La  cote  des  deux  bords  eft  haute,  & par  une  pente  tres  rude  ; 
“ elle  eft  couverte  de  verdure,  & il  y a une  quantite  prodigieufe  d’Outardes.  Le  fond  du 
“ port  eft  occupe  par  un  monticule  qui  laille  entre  lui,  et  la  mer  une  plage  de  fable. 
“ Une  petite  riviere,  de  tres  borme  eau,  coule  a la  mer  dans  cet  endroit ; & elle  eft 
“ fournie  par  un  lac  qui  eft  un  peu  au  loin,  au  defius  du  monticule.  11  y avoit  fur  le 
“ plage  beaucoup  de  pinguoins  & de  lions  marins.  Ces  deux  efpeces  d’animaux  ne 
“ fuyoient  pas,  & Ton  augura  que  le  pays  n’etoit  point  habite ; la  terre  rapportoit  de 
“ I’herbe  large,  noire,  & bien  nourrie,  qui  n’avoit  cependant  que  cinque  pouces  ou  plus 
“ de  hauteur.  L’on  ne  vit  aucun  arbre,  ni  figne  d’habitation.”  Voyage  du  Monfieur  dt 
“ PageSy  Tom.  ii.  p.  69,  70. 

* Cape  Fran9ois. 

of 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


69 


of  the  iflands  lying  off  it.  But,  when  I got  up,  I found  1776. 
every  diftant  obje6l  below  me  hid  in  a thick  fog.  The 
land  on  the  fame  plain,  or  of  a greater  height,  was  vifible 
enough,  and  appeared  naked  and  defolate  in  the  higheft 
degree ; except  fome  hills,  to  the  Southward,  which  were 
covered  with  fnow. 

When  I got  on  board,  I found  the  launch  hoifted  in,  the 
fhips  unmoored,  and  ready  to  put  to  fea;  but  our  failing 
was  deferred  till  five  o’clock  the  next  morning,  when  we  Sunday  z9, 
weighed  anchor. 


CHAP, 


70 


A VOYAGE  TO 


CHAP.  V. 

Departure  from  Chrtjlmas  Harbour. — Range  along  the  CoajJ, 
to  difcover  its  Pojition  and  Extent. — Several  Promontories 
and  Bays,  and  a Peninjula^  defer ibed  and  named. — Danger 
from  Shoals. — Another  Harbour  and  a Sound. — Mr.  An- 
derfon^s  Obfervations  on  the  natural  Produ&ions^  AnimalSj 
Soily  &c.  of  Kerguelen's  Land. 


1776, 

December. 


Sunday  29. 


AS  foon  as  the  fhips  were  out  of  Chriftmas  Harbour,  we 
fteered  South  Eaft  \ South,  along  the  coaft,  with  a 
fine  breeze  at  North  North  Weft,  and  clear  weather.  This 
we  thought  the  more  fortunate,  as,  for  fome  time  pall,  fogs 
had  prevailed,  more  or  lefs,  every  day ; and  the  continu- 
ance of  them  would  have  defeated  our  plan  of  extending 
Kerguelen’s  difeovery.  We  kept  the  lead  conftantly  go- 
ing ; but  feldom  ftruck  ground  with  a line  of  fifty  or  fixty 
fathoms. 

About  feven  or  eight  o’clock,  we  were  off  a promontory, 
which  I called  Cape  Cumberland.  It  lies  a league  and  a 
half  from  the  South  point  of  Chriftmas  Harbour,  in  the 
diredfion  of  South  Eaft  \ South.  Between  them  is  a bay 
with  two  arms,  both  of  which  feemed  to  afford  good  fhelter 
for  fliipping.  Off  Cape  Cumberland  is  a fmall  but  pretty 
high  ifland,  on  the  fummit  of  which  is  a rock  like  a fen- 
try-box,  which  occafioned  our  giving  that  name  to  the 
ifland.  Two  miles  farther  to  the  Eaftward,  lies  a group  of 

fmall 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

fmaU  iflands  and  rocks,  with  broken  ground  about  them  : 
we  failed  between  thefe  and  Sentry-Box  llland,  the  channel 
being  a full  mile  broad,  and  more  than  forty  fathoms  deep  ; 
for  we  found  no  bottom  with  that  length  of  line. 

Being  through  this  channel,  we  difcovered,  on  the  South 
fide  of  Cape  Cumberland,  a bay,  running  in  three  leagues 
to  the  Weftward.  It  is  formed  by  this  Cape  to  the  North, 
and  by  a promontory  to  the  South,  which  I named  Point 
Pringlcy  after  my  good  friend  Sir  John  Pringle,  Prefident 
of  the  Royal  Society.  The  bottom  of  this  bay  was  called 
Cumberland  Bay ; and  it  feemed  to  be  disjoined  from  the  fea, 
which  wafhes  the  North  Weft  coaft  of  this  country,  by  a 
narrow  neck  of  land.  Appearances,  at  leaft,  favoured  fuch 
a conjecture. 

To  the  Southward  of  Point  Pringle,  the  coaft  is  formed 
into  a fifth  bay ; of  which  this  point  is  the  Northern  ex- 
treme ; and  from  it,  to  the  Southern  extreme,  is  about  four 
miles  in  the  dire61:ion  of  South  South  Eaft  \ Eaft.  In  this 
bay,  wdiich  obtained  the  Name  of  White  Bay,  on  account  of 
fome  w hite  fpots  of  land  or  rocks  in  the  bottom  of  it,  are 
feveral  lefler  bays  or  coves,  which  feemed  to  be  flieltered 
from  all  winds.  Off  the  South  point,  are  feveral  rocks 
which  raife  their  heads  above  water ; and,  probably,  many 
more  that  do  not. 

Thus  far  our  courfe  was  in  a direction  parallel  to  the 
coaft,  and  not  more  than  two  miles  from  it.  Thither  our 
glaffes  were  continually  pointed ; and  we  could  eafily  fee 
that,  except  the  bottoms  of  the  bays  and  coves,  which,  for 
the  moft  part,  terminated  in  fandy  beaches,  the  ftiores  were 
rocky,  and,  in  many  places,  fwarmed  with  birds  ; but  the 
country  had  the  fame  barren  and  naked  appearance  as  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Chriftmas  Harbour.. 


71 

1776. 

December. 


We 


72 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  We  had  kept,  on  our  larboard  bow,  the  land  which  firft 
December.^  Opened  ofF  Cape  St.  Louisa’s  in  the  direction  of  South  53°  Eaft, 
thinking  that  it  was  an  illand,  and  that  we  fliould  find  a 
palfage  between  it  and  the  main.  We  now  difcovered  this 
to  be  a miftake ; and  found  that  it  was  a peninfula,  joined 
to  the  reft  of  the  coaft  by  a low  ifthmus.  I called  the  bay, 
formed  by  this  peninfula,  Repulje  Bay ; and  a branch  of  it 
feemed  to  run  a good  way  inland  towards  the  South  South 
Weft.  Leaving  this,  we  fteered  for  the  Northern  point  of 
the  peninfula,  which  we  named  Howe's  Foreland-,  in  honour 
of  Admiral  Lord  Howe. 

As  we  drew  near  it,  we  perceived  fome  rocks  and  break- 
ers near  the  North  Weft  part;  and  two  illands  a league 
and  a half  to  the  Eaftward  of  it,  which,  at  firft,  appeared 
as  one.  I fteered  between  them  and  the  Foreland  f,  and 
was  in  the  middle  of  the  channel  by  noon.  At  that  time 
our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  48°  51'  South;  and  we 
had  made  twenty-fix  miles  of  Eaft  longitude  from  Cape 
St.  Louis 

From  this  fituation,  the  moft  advanced  land  to  the  South- 
ward bore  South  Eaft  ; but  the  trending  of  the  coaft  from 
the  Foreland  was  more  Southerly.  The  iflands  which  lie 
off  Chriftmas  Harbour  bore  North  ; and  the  North  point  of 
the  Foreland,  North  60°  Weft,  diftant  three  miles.  The  land 

* Cape  Francois. 

f Though  Kerguelen’s  ftilps,  in  1773,  did  not  venture  to  explore  this  part  of  the 
coaft,  Monfieur  de  Pages’s  account  of  it  anfwers  well  to  Captain  Cook’s.  “ Du  17 
“ au  23,  Ton  ne  prit  d’autre  connoiftance  que  celle  de  la  figure  de  la  cote,  qui,  courant 
“ d’abord  au  Sud-Eft,  & revenant  enfuite  au  Nord-Eft,  formoit  un  grand  golfe.  II  etoit 
“ occupe  par  des  brifans  & des  rochers ; il  avoit  auffi  une  ifle  balle,  & allez  etendue,  & 
“ I’on  ufa  d’une  bien  foigneufe  precaution,  pour  ne  pas  s’aftaler  d^ns  ce  golfe.”  Voyage 
du  M.  de  Pages,  Tom.  ii.  p.  67. 

t Cape  Francois. 


of 


THE 


PACIFIC 


OCEAN. 


73 


of  this  Peninfula,  or  Foreland,  is  of  a moderate  height, 
and  of  a hilly  and  rocky  fubftance.  The  coaft  is  low,  with  ^ 
rocky  points  Iliooting  out  from  it ; between  which  points 
are  little  coves,  with  fandy  beaches  ; and  thefe,  at  this  time, 
were  moftly  covered  with  fea  birds.  We  alfo  faw  upon 
them  fome  feals. 

As  foon  as  we  were  clear  of  the  rocks  and  iflands  before 
mentioned,  I gave  orders  to  fleer  South  Eafl  by  South,  along 
the  coafl.  But  before  thefe  orders  could  be  carried  into  ex- 
ecution, we  difcovered  the  whole  fea  before  us  to  be  che- 
quered with  large  beds  of  rock-weed,  which  we  knew  to  be 
fall  to  the  bottom,  and  to  grow  on  rocky  flioals.  I had 
often  found  a great  depth  of  water  on  fuch  fhoals ; and  I 
had,  as  often,  found  rocks  that  have  raifed  their  heads 
nearly  to  the  furface  of  the  water.  It  is  always  dangerous, 
therefore,  to  fail  over  them  before  they  are  well  examined ; 
but  more  efpecially,  when  there  is  no  furge  of  the  fea  to 
difcover  the  danger.  This  was  the  cafe  at  prefent,  for  the 
fea  was  as  fmooth  as  a mill-pond.  Confequently  we  endea- 
voured to  avoid  them,  by  fleering  through  the  winding 
channels  by  which  they  were  feparated.  We  kept  the  lead 
continually  going ; but  never  flruck  ground  with  a line  of 
fixty  fathoms.  This  circumflance  increafed  the  danger,  as 
we  could  not  anchor,  whatever  neceflity  there  might  be  for 
it.  After  running  in  this  manner  above  an  hour,  we  difco- 
vered a lurking  rock,  jufl  even  with  the  furface  of  the  fea. 

It  bore  North  Eafl  i Eafl,  diflant  three  or  four  miles,  and 
lay  in  the  middle  of  one  of  thefe  large  beds  of  weeds.  This 
was  a fuflicient  warning  to  make  us  ufe  every  precaution 
to  prevent  our  coming  upon  them. 

We  were  now  crofs  the  mouth  of  a large  bay,  that  lies 
about  eight  miles  to  the  Southward  of  Howe’s  Foreland.  In 

VoL.  I.  L and 


1776. 

December. 


74 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

December. 


and  before  the  entrance  of  this  bay  are  feveral  low  iflands, 
rocks,  and  thofe  beds  of  fea-weed.  But  there  feemed  to  be 
winding  channels  between  them.  After  continuing  our 
courfe  half  an  hour  longer,  we  were  fo  much  embarraffed 
with  thefe  fhoals,  that  1 refolved  to  haul  off  to  the  Eaft- 
ward,  as  the  likelieft  means  of  extricating  ourfelves  from 
the  danger  that  threatened  us.  But  fo  far  was  this  from 
anfwering  the  intended  purpofe,  that  it  brought  us  into 
more.  I therefore  found  it  abfolutely  necelTary  to  fecure 
the  Blips,  if  poffible,  in  fome  place  before  night ; efpecially 
as  the  weather  had  now  become  hazy,  and  a fog  was  ap- 
prehended. And  feeing  fome  inlets  to  the  South  Weft  of  us, 
I ordered  Captain  Clerke,  as  the  Difcovery  drew  lefs  water 
than  the  Refolution,  to  lead  in  for  the  fliore ; which  was 
accordingly  done. 

In  ftanding  in,  it  was  not  poffible  to  avoid  running  over 
the  edges  of  fome  of  the  flioals,  on  which  we  found  from 
ten  to  twenty  fathoms  water ; and  the  moment  we  were 
over,  had  no  ground  at  the  depth  of  fifty  fathoms.  After 
making  a few  boards  to  weather  a fpit  that  run  out  from 
an  ifiand  on  our  lee.  Captain  Clerke  made  the  fignal  for 
having  difcovered  an  harbour ; in  which,  about  five  o’clock, 
we  anchored  in  fifteen  fathoms  water,  over  a bottom  of 
fine  dark  fand,  about  three  quarters  of  a mile  from  the 
ffiore ; the  North  point  of  the  harbour  bearing  North  by 
Eaft  i Eaft,  one  mile  diftant ; and  the  fmall  ifiands  in  the 
entrance,  within  which  we  anchored,  extending  from  Eaft 
to  South  Eaft. 

Scarcely  were  the  fliips  fecured,  when  it  began  to  blow 
very  ftrong ; fo  that  we  thought  it  prudent  to  ftrike  top- 
gallant yards.  The  weather,  however,  continued  fair  ; and 
the  wind  difperfing  the  fog  that  had  fettled  on  the  hills,  it 

was 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


75 


was  tolerably  clear  alfo.  The  moment,  therefore,  we  had 
anchored,  I hohled  out  two  boats  ; in  one  of  which  I fent 
Mr.  Bligh,  the  Matter,  to  furvey  the  upper-part  of  the  har- 
bour, and  look  for  wood ; for  not  a flirub  was  to  be  feen 
from  the  fhip.  I alfo  delired  Captain  Clerke  to  fend  his 
Matter  to  found  the  channel  that  is  on  the  South  ttde  of  the 
fmall  ifles,  between  them  and  a pretty  large  illand  which 
lies  near  the  South  point  of  the  harbour.  Having  given 
thefe  diredfions,  I went  myfelf,  in  my  other  boat,  accompa- 
nied by  Mr.  Gore,  my  firtt  Lieutenant,  and  Mr.  Bayly,  and 
landed  on  the  North  point,  to  fee  what  I could  difcover 
from  thence. 

From  the  highett  hill  over  the  point,  we  had  a pretty 
good  view  of  the  fea-coatt,  as  far  as  Howe’s  Foreland.  It  is 
much  indented,  and  feveral  rocky  points  feemed  to  fhoot 
out  from  it,  with  coves  and  inlets  of  unequal  extent.  One 
of  the  latter,  the  end  of  which  I could  not  fee,  was  dif- 
joined  from  that  in  which  the  fliips  were  at  anchor,  by  the 
point  we  then  ttood  upon.  A great  many  fmall  ittands, 
rocks,  and  breakers  appeared  fcattered  along  the  coatt,  as 
well  to  the  Southward  as  Northward ; and  I faw  no  better 
channel  to  get  out  of  the  harbour,  than  by  the  one  through 
which  we  had  entered  it. 

While  Mr.  Bayly  and  I were  making  the  obfervations,  Mr. 
Gore  encompatted  the  hill ; and  joined  us  by  a different 
route,  at  the  place  where  I had  ordered  the  boat  to  wait  for 
us.  Except  the  craggy  precipices,  we  met  with  nothing  to 
obttru(tt  our  walk.  For  the  country  was,  if  poffible,  more 
barren  and  defolate  than  about  Chrittmas  Harbour.  And 
yet,  if  there  be  the  leatt  fertility  in  any  part  of  this  land, 
Ave  ought  to  have  found  it  in  this,  which  is  completely 
fheltered  from  the  predominating  bleak  Southerly  and 

L 2 Wetterly 


1776. 

December. 


76 


A 


VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

December. 

' > 


Monday  30. 


Weflerly  winds.  I obferved,  with  regret,  that  there  was 
neither  food  nor  covering  for  cattle  of  any  fort ; and  that, 
if  I left  any,  they  mult  inevitably  perilli.  In  the  little  cove 
where  the  boat  waited  for  ns  (which  I called  Penguin  Cove, 
as  the  beach  was  covered  with  thefe  birds),  is  a fine  rivulet 
of  frefii  water,  that  may  be  eafily  come  at.  Here  were  alfo 
fome  large  feals,  fliags,  and  a few  ducks ; and  Mr.  Bayly 
had  a tranfient  fight  of  a very  fmall  land  bird;  but  it  flew 
amongft  the  rocks,  and  we  loft  it.  About  nine  o’clock  we 
got  on  board. 

Soon  after,  Mr.  Bligh  returned,  and  reported,  that  he  had 
been  four  miles  up  the  harbour,  and,  as  he  judged,  not  far 
from  the  head  of  it.  He  found  that  its  direction  was  Weft 
South  Weft  ; and  that  its  breadth,  a little  above  the  fliips, 
did  not  exceed  a mile ; but  grew  narrower  toward  the  head. 
The  foundings  were  very  irregular,  being  from  thirty-feven 
to  ten  fathoms  ; and,  except  under  the  beds  of  fea-weed, 
which  in  many  places  extended  from  the  fliore  near  half 
channel  over,  the  bottom  was  a fine  fand.  He  landed  on 
both  Ihores,  which  he  found  barren  and  rocky,  without  the 
leaft  figns  of  tree  or  flirub,  and  with  very  little  verdure  of 
any  kind.  Penguins,  and  other  oceanic  birds  and  feals,  oc- 
cupied part  of  the  coaft ; but  not  in  fuch  numbers  as  at 
Chriftmas  Harbour. 

ffinding  no  encouragement  to  continue  our  refearches, 
and,  the  next  morning,  both  wind  and  weather  being  fa- 
vourable, I weighed  anchor  and  put  to  fea.  To  this  harbour 
I gave  the  name  of  Port  Pallifer^  in  honour  of  my  worthy 
friend  Admiral  Sir  Hugh  Pallifer.  It  is  fituated  in  the  lati- 
tude of  49°  3'  South,  in  the  longitude  of  69°  37'  Eaft,  and 
five  leagues  from  Howe’s  Foreland,  in  the  direction  of  South 
25°  Eaft.  There  are  feveral  iflands,  rocks,  and  breakers 

lying 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

lying  in  and  without  the  entrance,  for  which  the  annexed 
Chart  of  the  coaft,  and  fhetch  of  the  harbour,  may  be  con- 
fulted.  We  went  in  and  out  between  them  and  the  North 
head ; but  I have  no  doubt  that  there  are  other  channels. 

As  we  were  handing  out  of  Port  Pallifer,  we  difcovered  a 
round  hill,  like  a fugar-loaf,  in  the  direction  of  South  72° 
Eaft,  about  nine  leagues  diftant.  It  had  the  appearance  of 
an  illand  lying  at  fome  diftance  from  the  coaft ; but  we  af- 
terward found  it  was  upon  the  main  land.  In  getting  out 
to  fea,  we  had  to  fteer  through  the  winding  channels 
amongft  the  flioals.  However,  we  ventured  to  run  over 
fome  of  them,  on  which  we  never  found  lefs  than  eighteen 
fathoms,  and  often  did  not  ftrike  ground  with  twenty-four ; 
fo  that,  had  it  not  been  for  the  fea-weed  growing  upon  all 
of  them,  they  would  not  have  been  difcovered. 

After  we  had  got  about  three  or  four  leagues  from  the 
coaft,  we  found  a clear  fea,  and  then  fteered  Eaft  till  nine 
o’clock,  when  the  Sugar  Loaf  hill,  above  mentioned,  which 
I named  Mount  Campbell^  bore  South  Eaft,  and  a fmall 
ifland  that  lies  to  the  Northward  of  it.  South  South  Eaft, 
diftant  four  leagues.  I now  fteered  more  Southerly,  in  or- 
der to  get  in  with  the  land.  At  noon,  the  latitude  by  dodble 
altitudes  was  ^.9°  8'  South  ; and  we  had  made  eighty  miles 
of  Eaft  longitude  from  Cape  St.  Louis  Mount  Campbell 
bore  South  47°  Weft,  diftant  about  four  leagues ; a low 
point,  beyond  which  no  land  was  to  be  feen,  bore  South 
South  Eaft,  at  the  diftance  of  about  twenty  miles ; and  we 
were  about  two  leagues  from  the  fhore. 

The  land  here  is  low  and  level  t.  The  mountains  ending 

about 

* Cape  Francois. 

t This  part  of  the  coaft  feems  to  be  what  the  French  faw  on  the  5th  of  January  1774. 
Monfieur  de  Pages  fpeaks  of  it  thus : “ Nous  reconnumes  une  nouvelle  cote  etendue  de 

“ toute 


77 

1776. 

December, 
t 


78 


December. 

— V ^ 


A VOYAGE  TO 

about  five  leagues  from  the  low  point,  a great  extent  of  low 
land  is  left,  on  which  Mount  Campbell  is  lituated,  about 
four  miles  from  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  and  one  from 
the  fea  coaft.  Thefe  mountains  have  a confiderable  eleva- 
tion, as  alfo  moft  of  the  inland  ones.  They  feemed  to  be 
compofed  of  naked  rocks,  whofe  fummits  were  capt  with 
fnow.  Nor  did  the  valleys  appear  to  greater  advantage. 
To  whatever  quarter  we  directed  our  gialTes,  nothing  but 
fterility  was  to  be  feen. 

We  had  fcarcely  finiflied  taking  the  bearings  at  noon, 
before  we  obferved  low  land  opening  off  the  low  point  juft 
mentioned,  in  the  direction  of  South  South  Eaft,  and  eight 
miles  beyond  it.  This  new  point  proved  to  be  the  very 
Eaftern  extremity  of  this  land,  and  it  was  named  Cape  Dig- 
by.  It  is  fituated  in  the  latitude  of  49°  23'  South,  and  in  the 
longitude  of  70°  34'  Eaft. 

Between  Howe’s  Foreland  and  Cape  Digby,  the  fliore 
forms  (belides  the  feveral  leffer  bays  and  harbours)  one 
great  bay  that  extends  feveral  leagues  to  the  South  Weft, 
where  it  feemed  to  lofe  itfelf  in  various  arms  running  in 
between  the  mountains.  A prodigious  quantity  of  fea- 
weed  grows  all  over  it,  which  feemed  to  be  the  fame  fort  of 
weed  that  Mr.  Banks  diftinguiflied  by  the  name  of  fucus 
giganteus^'K  Some  of  this  weed  is  of  a moft  enormous  length, 
though  the  ftem  is  not  much  thicker  than  a man’s  thumb. 
I have  mentioned,  that  on  fome  of  the  fhoals  upon  which  it 
grows,  we  did  not  ftrike  ground  with  a line  of  twenty-four 
fathoms.  The  depth  of  water,  therefore,  muft  have  been 

“ toute  veu  dans  I’Eft,  & dans  le  Oueft.  Les  terres  de  cette  cote  etoient  moins  elevees 
“ que  celles  que  nous  avions  veues  jufques  ici ; elles  etoient  aufli  d’un  afpedt  moins  rude.” 
De  PageSy  Tom.  ii.  p.  68. 

* See  Hawkefworth’s  Collection  of  Voyages,  Vol.  ii.  p.  42. 


greater. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


79 


greater.  And  as  this  weed  does  not  grow  in  a perpendicu-  1776. 
lar  direction,  but  makes  a very  acute  angle  with  the  hot- 
tom,  and  much  of  it  afterward  fpreads  many  fathoms  on 
the  furface  of  the  fea,  I am  well  warranted  to  fay,  that 
fome  of  it  grows  to  the  length  of  fixty  fathoms  and  up- 
ward. 

At  one  o’clock  (having  run  two  leagues  upon  a South 
Eaft  I Eaft  courfe,  from  noon)  we  founded,  and  found 
eighteen  fathoms  water,  and  a bottom  of  fine  fand.  Seeing 
a fmall  bending  in  the  coaft,  on  the  North  fide  of  Cape 
Digby,  I fleered  for  it.  It  was  my  intention  to  anchor  there, 
if  I fhould  find  it  might  be  done  with  fafety,  and  to  land 
on  the  Cape,  to  examine  what  the  low  land  within  it  pro- 
duced. After  running  in  one  league,  we  founded  again, 
and  found  thirteen  fathoms  ; and  immediately  after,  faw  a 
ftioal  right  before  us,  that  feemed  to  extend  off  from  the 
Ihore,  from  which  we  were  diflant  about  two  miles.  This 
difcovery  obliged  us  to  haul  off,  Eafl  by  South,  one  league, 
where  our  depth  of  water  increafed  to  twenty-five  fathoms. 

We  then  fleered  along  Ihore,  and  continued  in  the  fame 
depth,  over  a bottom  of  fine  fand,  till  Cape  Digby  bore 
Well,  two  leagues  diflant,  when  we  found  twenty-fix  fa- 
thoms. 

After  this  we  did  not  flrike  ground,  though  we  tried 
feveral  times ; but  the  fhip  having  a good  deal  of  way,  ran 
the  line  out  before  the  lead  could  reach  the  bottom ; and 
being  difappointed  in  my  view*^  both  of  anchoring  and  of 
landing,  I would  not  fliorten  fail,  but  puflied  forward,  in 
order  to  fee  as  much  of  the  coafl  as  polfible  before  night. 

From  Cape  Digby,  it  trends  nearly  South  Wefl  by  South 
for  about  four  or  five  leagues,  or  to  a low  point,  to  which, 

in 


A VOYAGE  TO 


bo 

1776.  in  honour  of  her  Majefty,  I gave  the  name  of  Point  Char- 
Decemben  j|.  jg  Southemmoft  Oil  the  low  coaft. 

Six  leagues  from  Cape  Digby,  in  the  dire6tion  of  South 
South  Weft  I Weft,  is  a pretty  high  proje(fting  point,  which 
was  called  Prince  of  Wales’s  Foreland ; and  ftx  leagues  be- 
yond that,  in  the  fame  direction,  and  in  the  latitude  of  49° 
54'  South,  and  the  longitude  of  70°  13^  Eaft,  is  the  moft 
Southerly  point  of  the  whole  coaft,  which  I diftinguiflied  by 
the  name  of  Cape  George.,  in  honour  of  his  Majefty. 

Between  Point  Charlotte  and  Prince  of  Wales’s  Foreland, 
where  the'  country  to  the  South  Weft  began  again  to  be 
hilly,  is  a deep  inlet,  which  was  called  Royal  Sound.  It 
runs  in  Weft,  quite  to  the  foot  of  the  mountains  which 
bound  it  on  the  South  Weft,  as  the  low  land  before-men- 
tioned does  on  the  North.  There  are  illands  lying  in  the 
entrance,  and  others  higher  up,  as  far  as  we  could  diftin- 
guifti.  As  we  advanced  to  the  South,  we  obferved,  on  the 
South  Weft  ftde  of  Prince  of  Wales’s  Foreland,  another 
inlet  into  Royal  Sound ; and  it  then  appeared,  that  the 
Foreland  was  the  Eaft  point  of  a large  ifland  lying  in  the 
mouth  of  it.  There  are  feveral  fmaU  iflands  in  this  inlet ; 
and  one  about  a league  to  the  Southward  of  Prmce  of  Wales’s 
Foreland. 

All  the  land  on  the  South  Weft  ftde  of  Royal  Sound,  quite 
to  Cape  George,  is  compofed  of  elevated  hills,  that  rife  di- 
recftly  from  the  fea,  one  behind  another,  to  a conftderable 
height.  Moft  of  the  fummits  were  capt  with  fnow,  and 
they  appeared  as  naked  and  barren  as  any  we  had  feen. 
The  fmalleft  veftige  of  a tree  or  flirub  was  not  difcoverable, 
either  inland  or  on  the  coaft ; and,  I think,  I may  venture 
to  pronounce  that  the  country  produces  none.  The  low 

land 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


8i 


land  about  Cape  Digby,  when  examined  through  our  glaffes,  1776. 
refembled  the  reft  of  the  low  land  we  had  before  met  with ; 
that  is,  it  appeared  to  be  partly  naked  and  partly  covered 
with  a green  turf ; a defcription  of  which  fliall  be  given  in 
its  proper  place.  The  fliore  is  compofed  of  fandy  beaches, 
on  which  were  many  penguins,  and  other  oceanic  birds ; 
and  an  immenfe  number  of  fliags  kept  perpetually  flying 
about  the  fhips  as  we  failed  along. 

Being  defirous  of  getting  the  length  of  Cape  George,  to 
be  afllired  whether  or  no  it  was  the  moft  Southerly  point  of 
the  whole  land,  I continued  to  ftretch  to  the  South,  under 
all  the  fail  we  could  carry,  till  half  an  hour  paft  feven 
o’clock ; when,  feeing  no  likelihood  of  accomplifliing  my 
defign,  as  the  wind  had,  by  this  time,  flaifted  to  Weft  South 
Weft,  the  very  diredtion  in  which  we  wanted  to  go,  I took 
the  advantage  of  the  fliifting  of  the  wind,  and  ftood  away 
from  the  coaft. 

At  this  time  Cape  George  bore  South  53°  Weft,  diftant 
about  feven  leagues.  A fmall  ifland  that  lies  off  the  pitch 
of  the  Cape,  was  the  only  land  we  could  fee  to  the  South 
of  it ; and  we  were  farther  confirmed  that  there  was  no 
more  in  that  quarter,  by  a South  Weft  fwell  which  we 
met  as  foon  as  we  brought  the  Cape  to  bear  in  this  direc- 
tion. 

But  we  have  ftill  a ftronger  proof  that  no  part  of  this  land 
can  extend  much,  if  at  all,  to  the  Southward  of  Cape 
George  ; and  that  is.  Captain  Furneaux’s  track  in  February 
1773,  ^fter  his  feparation  from  me  during  my  late  voyage. 

His  log-book  is  now  lying  before  me  ; and  I find  from  it, 
that  he  crofiTed  the  meridian  of  this  land  only  about  feven- 
teen  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Cape  George  ; a diftance 
at  which  it  may  very  well  be  feen  in  clear  weather.  This 

VoL.  I.  M feems 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  feems  to  have  been  the  cafe  when  Captain  Fnrneanx  paffed 
\ it.  For  his  log-book  makes  no  mention  of  fogs  or  hazy 
weather ; on  the  contrary,  it  exprefsly  tells  us,  that,  when 
in  this  lituation,  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  make  obfer- 
vations,  both  for  latitude  and  longitude,  on  board  his  fhip  ; 
fo  that,  if  this  land  extends  farther  South  than  Cape  George, 
it  would  have  been  fcarcely  poffible  that  he  fhould  have 
pafled  without  feeing  it. 

From  thefe  circumftances  we  are  able  to  determine, 
within  a very  few  miles,  the  quantity  of  latitude  that  this 
land  occupies  ; which  does  not  much  exceed  one  degree 
and  a quarter.  As  to  its  extent  from  Eaft  to  Weft,  that 
ftill  remains  undecided.  We  only  know,  that  no  part 
of  it  can  reach  fo  far  to  the  Weft  as  the  meridian  of  65®;^ 
becaufe,  in  1773,  under  that  meridian,  I fearched  for  it  in 
vain 

The  French  difcoverers,  with  fome  reafon,  imagined  Cape 
St.  Louis  t to  be  the  projedling  point  of  the  Southern  conti- 
nent. 


* If  the  French  obfervations,  as  marked  upon  Captain  Cook’s  Chart,  and  ftill  more 
authentically  upon  that  publiftied  by  their  own  difcoverers,  may  be  depended  upon,  this 
land  doth  not  reach  fo  far  to  the  Weft  as  the  meridian  of  68°;  Cape  Louis,  which 
is  reprefented  as  its  moft  Wefterly  point,  being  laid  down  by  them  to  the  Eaft  of  that 
meridian. 

t The  idea  of  Cape  Louis  being  this  proje£ling  point  of  a Southern  continent,  muft 
have  foon  vaniftied,  as  Cape  Francois,  within  a year  after,  was  found,  by  the  fame  difco- 
verer,  to  lie  above  one  third  of  a degree  farther  North  upon  the  fame  land.  But  if  Ker- 
guelen entertained  any  fuch  imagination  at  firft,  we  are  fure  that,  at  prefent,  he  thinks 
very  differently.  This  appears  from  the  following  explicit  declaration  of  his  fentiments, 
which  deferves  to  be  tranfcribed  from  his  late  publication,  as  it  does  equal  honour  to  his 
candour,  and  to  Captain  Cook’s  abilities.  “ La  terre  que  j’ai  decouverte  eft  certaine- 
“ ment  une  Ijle ; puifque  le  celebre  Capitaine  Cook  a paffe  au  Sud,  lors  de  fon  premiere 
“ voyage,  fans  rien  rencontrer.  Je  juge  meme,  que  cette  ifle  n'eji  pas  bien  grande.  II  y 
“ a aufli  apparence,  d’apres  le  Voyage  de  Monfieur  Cook,  que  toute  cette  etendue  de 

“ Mers 


.Jk 


I 

r „■ 

•'M  . 


9 


► 


82 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

nent.  The  Englifli  have  lince  proved  that  no  fuch  continent 
exifts ; and  that  the  land  in  queftion  is  an  ifland  of  no  great 
extent’:'-;  which,  from  its  fterility,  I fliould,  with  great  pro- 
priety, call  the  Ifland  of  Defolation^  but  that  I would  not 
rob  Monfieur  de  Kerguelen  of  the  honour  of  its  bearing  his 
name  +. 

Mr.  Anderfon,  my  Surgeon,  who,  as  I have  already  men- 


Mers  Meridionales,  eft  femee  d’lfles  ou  de  rochers  j mais  qu’il  n’y  a ni  co?iUnent  ni 
“ grande  ter  re."  Kerguelen,  p.  92. 

* Kerguelen,  as  we  fee  in  the  laft  Note,  concurs  with  Captain  Cook  as  to  this. 
However,  he  tells  us,  that  he  has  reafon  to  believe  that  it  is  about  two  hundred  leagues  in 
circuit ; and  that  he  was  acquainted  with  about  fourfcore  leagues  of  its  coaft.  “ J’en 
“ connois  environs  quatre-vingt  lieues  des  cotes ; et  j’ai  lieu  de  croire,  qu’elle  a environ 

deux  cents  lieues  de  circuit.”  Kerguelen.,  ibid. 

f Some  of  Monfieur  de  Kerguelen’s  own  countrymen  feem  more  defirous  than  we 
are,  to  rob  him  of  this  honour.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  Monfieur  de  Pages  never  once 
mentions  the  name  of  his  commander.  And,  though  he  takes  occafion  to  enumerate  the 
feveral  French  explorers  of  the  Southern  Hemifphere,  from  Gonneville  down  to  Crozet, 
he  afFe<51:s  to  preferve  an  entire  filence  about  Kerguelen,  whole  firft  voyage,  in  which  the 
difcovery  of  this  confiderable  trad!  of  land  was  made,  is  kept  as  much  out  of  fight,  as  if  it 
never  had  taken  place.  Nay,  not  fatisfied  with  refufing  to  acknowledge  the  right  of  an- 
other, he  almoft  alTumes  it  to  himfelf.  For  upon  a Map  of  the  World,  annexed  to  his 
book,  at  the  fpot  where  the  new  land  is  delineated,  we  read  this  infcription : IJles  nouvelles 
Aujirales  vuees  par  Monfieur  de  Pages.,  en  \ ’j  74.  He  could  fcarcely  have  exprelfed  himfelf  in 
ftronger  terms,  if  he  had  meant  to  convey  an  idea  that  he  was  the  conduilor  of  the  difco- 
very. And  yet  we  know,  that  he  was  only  a Lieutenant  [Enfeigne  de  vaifleau]  on  board 
one  of  the  three  Ihips  commanded  by  Kerguelen ; and  that  the  difcovery  had  been  already 
made  in  a former  voyage,  undertaken  while  he  was  a£l;ually  engaged  in  his  fmgular  jour- 
ney round  the  world. 

After  all,  it  cannot  ^but  be  remarked,  that  Kerguelen  was  peculiarly  imfortunate,  in 
having  done  fo  little  to  complete  what  he  had  begun.  He  difcovered  a new  land  indeed; 
but,  in  two  expeditions  to  it,  he  could  not  once  bring  his  fhips  to  an  anchor  upon  any 
part  of  its  coafts.  Captain  Cook,  as  we  have  feen  in  this,  and  in  the  foregoing  Chapter, 
had  either  fewer  difficulties  to  ftruggle  with,  or  was  more  fuccefsful  in  furmounting 
them. 

M 2 tioned, 


83 

1776. 

December. 


84 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  tioned,  had  made  Natural  Hiftory  a part  of  his  ftudies,  loft 
no  opportunity,  during  the  fliort  time  we  lay  in  Chriftmas 
Harbour,  of  fearching  the  country  in  every  diredlion.  He 
afterward  communicated  to  me  the  obfervations  he  made 
on  its  natural  produdfions  ; and  I lliall  infert  them  here  in 
his  own  words. 

“ Perhaps  no  place,  hitherto  difcovered  in  either  hemi- 
fphere,  under  the  fame  parallel  of  latitude,  affords  fo  fcanty 
a field  for  the  naturalift  as  this  barren  fpot.  The  verdure 
which  appears,  when  at  a little  diftance  from  the  fliore, 
would  flatter  one  with  the  expedlation  of  meeting  with 
fome  herbage  ; but  in  this  we  were  much  deceived.  For 
on  landing,  we  faw  that  this  lively  colour  was  occafioned 
only  by  one  fmall  plant,  not  much  unlike  fome  forts  of 
faxifrage^  which  grows  in  large  fpreading  tufts,  to  a con- 
fiderable  way  up  the  hills.  It  forms  a furface  of  a pretty 
large  texture,  and  grows  on  a kind  of  rotten  turf,  into 
which  one  finks  a foot  or  two  at  every  ftep.  This  turf, 
dried,  might,  in  cafes  of  neceflity,  ferve  for  fuel,  and  is  the 
only  thing  we  met  with  here  that  could  polfibly  be  applied 
to  this  ufe. 

There  is  another  plant,  plentifully  enough  fcattered  about 
the  boggy  declivities,  M^hich  grows  to  near  the  height  of 
two  feet,  and  not  much  unlike  a fmall  cabbage,  when  it 
has  fliot  into  feeds.  The  leaves  about  the  root  are  nume- 
rous, large,  and  rounded ; narrower  at  the  bafe,  and  ending 
in  a fmall  point.  Thofe  on  the  ftalks  are  much  fmaller, 
oblong,  and  pointed.  The  ftalks,  which  are  often  three 
or  four,  all  rife  feparately  from  the  root,  and  run  into  long 
cylindrical  heads,  compofed  of  fmall  flowers.  It  has  not 
only  the  appearance,  but  the  watery  acrid  tafte  of  the  anti- 

fcorbutic 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN* 


85 


fcorbutic  plants,  and  yet  differs  materially  from  the  whole  1776. 
tribe ; fo  that  we  looked  upon  it  as  a production  entirely 
peculiar  to  the  place.  We  eat  it  frequently  raw,  and 
found  it  almofl  like  the  New  Zealand  fcurvy-grafs.  But  it 
feemed  to  acquire  a rank  flavour  by  being  boiled  ; which, 
however,  fome  of  our  people  did  not  perceive,  and  efleemed 
it  good.  If  it  could  be  introduced  into  our  kitchen  gardens^ 
it  would,  in  aU  probability,  improve  fo  far  by  cultivation, 
as  to  be  an  excellent  pot-herb.  At  this  time,  none  of  its 
feeds  were  ripe  enough  to  be  preferved,  and  brought  home, 
to  try  the  experiment. 

Two  other  fmall  plants  were  found  near  the  brooks  and 
boggy  places,  which  were  eaten  as  fallad ; the  one  almofl: 
like  garden  creffes,  and  very  fiery  ; and  the  other  very  mild. 

This  lafl,  though  but  fmall,  is  in  itfelf  a curiofity ; having 
not  only  male  and  female,  but  what  the  botanifls  call  an- 
drogynous plants. 

A coarfe  grafs,  which  we  cut  down  for  the  cattle,  grows 
pretty  plentifully  in  a few  fmall  fpots  about  the  fides  of  the 
harbour,  with  a fmaller  fort  which  is  rarer ; and,  upon 
the  flat  ground,  a fort  of  goofe-grafs,  and  another  fmall 
plant  much  like  it.  In  fliort,  the  whole  catalogue  of  plants 
does  not  exceed  fixteen  or  eighteen,  including  fome  forts  of 
mofs,  and  a beautiful  fpecies  of  licheny  which  grows  upon 
the  rocks,  higher  up  than  the  reft  of  the  vegetable  produc- 
tions. Nor  is  there  even  the  leaft  appearance  of  a fhrub  in 
the  whole  country. 

Nature  has  rather  been  more  bountiful  in  furnifhing  it 
with  animals ; though,  ftricftly  fpeaking,  they  are  not  inha- 
bitants of  the  place,  being  all  of  the  marine  kind  ; and,  in 
general,  only  ufing  the  land  for  breeding,  and  for  a refting- 

place. 


86 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

December. 


place.  The  moft  conliderable  are  feals,  or  (as  we  ufed  to 
call  them)  fea  bears  ; being  that  fort  called  the  tirline  feal. 
Thefe  come  alhore  to  reft  or  breed ; but  they  were  not  very 
numerous,  which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  as  it  is  known 
that  thefe  animals  rather  frequent  out-rocks,  and  little 
iflands  lying  off  coafts,  than  bays  or  inlets.  They  were,  at 
this  time,  fliedding  their  hair,  and  fo  tame,  that  we  killed 
what  number  we  chofe. 

No  other  quadruped,  either  of  the  fea  or  of  the  land 
kind,  was  feen  ; but  a great  number  of  birds,  viz.  ducks, 
petrels,  albatroftes,  fliags,  gulls,  and  fea-fwallows. 

The  ducks  are  about  the  ftze  of  a teal  or  widgeon ; 
but  fomewhat  different  in  colour  from  either.  They  were 
in  tolerable  plenty  about  the  fides  of  the  hills,  or  even 
lower  ; and  we  killed  a conftderable  number,  which  were 
good,  and  without  the  leaft  fifliy  tafte.  We  met  with 
fome  of  the  fame  fort  at  the  iftand  of  Georgia,  in  our  late 
voyage. 

The  Cape  petrel,  or  Pintado  bird ; the  fmall  blue  one, 
which  is  always  feen  at  fea ; and  the  fmall  black  one,  or 
Mother  Carey’s  Chicken,  are  not  here  in  great  numbers. 
But  we  found  a neft  of  the  firft  with  an  egg  in  it,  about  the 
ftze  of  a pullet’s  ; and  the  fecond,  though  fcarce,  was  met 
with  in  fome  holes  like  rabbit-burrows. 

Another  fort,  which  is  the  largeft  of  all  the  petrels,  and 
called  by  the  feamen  Mother  Carey’s  Goofe,  is  in  greater 
numbers ; and  fo  tame,  that  at  ftrft  we  could  kill  them 
with  a ftick  iTpon  the  beach.  They  are  not  inferior  in  ftze 
to  an  albatrofs,  and  are  carnivorous,  feeding  on  the  dead 
carcafles  of  feals  or  birds,  that  were  thrown  into  the  fea. 
Their  coloiTr  is  a footy  brown,  with  a greenifli  bill  and 

feet ; 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


87 


feet ; and,  donbtlefs,  they  are  the  fame  that  the  Spaniards  1776. 
call  quebrantahueJ}os>i  whofe  head  is  figured  in  Pernetty’s  , ' 

Voyage  to  Falkland  Iflands 

Of  the  albatroffes,  none  were  found  on  fhore  except  the 
grey  one,  which  is  commonly  met  with  at  fea  in  the  higher 
Southern  latitudes.  Once  I faw  one  of  thefe  fitting  in  the 
cliff  of  a rock,  but  they  were  frequently  flying  about  the 
harbour ; and  the  common  large  fort,  as  well  as  the  fmaller 
with  a black  face,  were  feen  farther  out. 

Penguins  form,  by  far,  the  greateft  number  of  birds 
here  ; and  are  of  three  forts  : The  firft,  or  largeft,  I have 
feen  formerly  at  the  ifland  of  Georgia  t.  It  is  alfo  men- 
tioned by  Bougainville  J ; but  it  does  not  feem  to  be  fo  fo- 
litary  as  he  reprefents  it,  for  we  found  confiderable  num- 
bers flocking  together.  The  head  is  black,  the  upper  part 
of  the  body  a leaden  grey,  and  the  under  part  white,  with 
black  feet.  It  has  two  broad  ftripes  of  fine  yellow,  that 
begin  on  the  fides  of  the  head,  and  defcending  by  each 
fide  of  the  neck,  meet  above  its  breaft.  The  bill  is  partly 
reddifh,  and  longer  than  in  the  other  forts. 

The  fecond  fort  of  penguin  fcarcely  exceeds  half  the  fize 
of  the  former.  The  upper  part  of  the  body  is  a blackifh 
grey,  with  a white  fpot  on  the  upper  part  of  the  head, 
growing  broader  at  each  flde.  The  biU  and  feet  are  yel- 
lowifli.  A very  accurate  figure  and  defcription,  both  of 
this  and  of  the  preceding,  is  given  by  Mr.  Sonnerat  §. 

The  third  fort  of  penguin  met  with  here,  had  never  been 
feen  by  any  of  us  before.  Its  length  is  twenty-four  inches, 


* Fig.  3.  Plate  VIII. 

t Pennant’s  Patagonian  penguin.  See  his  Genera  of  Birds.  Tab.  14.  p,  66. 
J Voyage  autour  du  Monde^  p.  6g. 

§ Voyage  d la  Nouvelk  Guinee^  p.  181,  182.  Tab.  113.  115. 


and 


88 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776. 

December. 

V- 1 


and  its  breadth  twenty.  The  upper  part  of  the  body  and 
throat  are  black ; the  reft  white,  except  the  upper  part  of 
the  head,  which  has  a fine  yellow  arch,  looking  backward, 
and  ending  on  each  fide  in  long  foft  feathers,  which  it  can 
ere6l  as  two  crefts. 

The  two  firft  forts  were  found  together  on  the  beach ; the 
large  ones  keeping  by  themfelves,  and  walking  in  fmall 
flocks  amongft  the  others,  which  were  more  numerous,  and 
were  fometimes  feen  a confiderable  way  up  the  fides  of  the 
hills.  The  third  fort  were  only  found  by  themfelves,  but 
in  great  numbers,  on  the  outer  fliores  of  the  harbour. 
They  were  breeding  at  this  time  ; and  they  lay,  on  the 
bare  ftones,  only  one  white  egg,  larger  than  that  of  a duck. 
All  the  three  forts  of  penguins  were  fo  tame,  that  we  took 
as  many  as  we  pleafed  with  oiir  hands. 

The  fliags  of  this  place  are  of  two  forts ; the  lefler  cor- 
vorant  or  water  crow,  and  another,  which  is  black  above, 
with  a white  belly ; the  fame  that  is  found  in  New  Zealand, 
Terra  del  Fuego,  and  the  ifland  of  Georgia. 

We  alfo  met  with  here  the  common  fea-gull,  fea-fw allow, 
tern,  and  Port  Egmont  hen  ; the  laft  of  which  were  tame 
and  numerous. 

Another  fort  of  white  bird,  flocks  of  which  flew  about 
the  bay,  is  very  Angular ; having  the  bafe  of  the  bill  co- 
vered with  a horny  cruft  -'is  It  is  larger  than  a pigeon,  with 
the  bill  black  and  the  feet  white,  made  like  thofe  of  a cur- 
lew. Some  of  our  people  put  it  in  competition  with  the 
duck,  as  food. 

The  feine  was  hauled  once ; but  we  found  only  a few  fifli 
about  the  fize  of  a fmall  haddock ; though  quite  different 

* The  (heath-bill.  See  Pennant’s  Genera  of  Birds^  p.  43. 

from 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


89 


from  any  we  knew.  The  fnout  is  lengthened ; the  head 
armed  with  fome  ftrong  fpines ; the  rays  of  the  back-  ^ 
fin  long,  and  very  firong  ; the  belly  is  large ; and  the  body 
without  fcales.  The  only  fhell  filh  are  a few  limpets  and 
mufcles  ; and,  amongfi;  the  ftones,  a few  fmall  ftar-fifh  and 
fea-anemonies  were  found. 

The  hills  are  of  a moderate  height ; yet  many  of  their 
tops  were  covered  with  fnow  at  this  time,  though  anfwer- 
ing  to  our  June.  Some  of  them  have  large  quantities  of 
ftones,  irregularly  heaped  together  at  their  foot,  or  on  their 
fides.  The  fides  of  others,  which  form  fteep  cliffs  toward 
the  fea,  are  rent  from  the  top  downward,  and  feem  ready 
to  fall  off,  having  ftones  of  a confiderable  fize  lying  in  the 
fiffures.  Some  were  of  opinion  that  froft  might  be  the  caufe 
of  thefe  fiffures,  which  I fhall  not  difpute ; but  how  others 
of  the  appearances  could  be  effedled,  but  by  earthquakes, 
or  fome  fuch  fevere  fhocks,  I cannot  fay. 

It  appears  that  rain  muft  be  almoft  conftant  here,  not 
only  from  the  marks  of  large  torrents  having  ruflied  down, 
but  from  the  difpofition  of  the  country,  which,  even  on  the 
hills,  is  almoft  an  entire  bog  or  fwamp,  the  ground  finking 
at  every  ftep. 

The  rocks,  or  foundations  of  the  hiUs,  are  compofed 
chiefly  of  a dark  blue,  and  very  hard,  ftone,  intermixed 
with  fmall  particles  of  glimmer  or  quartz.  This  feems  to 
be  one  of  the  moft  univerfal  produ(ftions  of  Nature,  as  it 
conftitutes  whole  mountains  in  Sweden,  in  Scotland,  at  the 
Canary  Iflands,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  at  this  place. 
Another  brownifh  brittle  ftone  forms  here  fome  confider- 
able rocks  ; and  one  which  is  blacker,  and  found  in  de- 
tached pieces,  inclofes  bits  of  coarfe  quartz.  A red,  a dull 
yellow,  and  a purplifli  fand-ftone,  are  alfo  found  in  fmall 

VoL.  I.  N pieces ; 


1776. 

December. 


90 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1776.  pieces ; and  pretty  large  lumps  of  femi-tranfparent  quartz, 
December  (^jjfpofed  irregularly  in  polyedral  pyramidal  cryftals  of  long 
fliining  fibres.  Some  fmall  pieces  of  the  common  fort  are 
met  with  in  the  brooks,  made  round  by  attrition  ; but 
none  hard  enough  to  refill  a file.  Nor  were  any  of  the 
other  Hones  a6led  on  by  aqua  fortis,  or  attracted  by  the 
magnet. 

Nothing,  that  had  the  lead;  appearance  of  an  ore  or  me* 
tal,  was  feen.” 


C H A P. 


Makia’S 


South  cKpp 


^ ’ y .yy.v.V  7.^yi>  fluted  Cape,  whru  SouQi  Capo  htatxt  2^2:7Eifj  tii/linif  J nn'(i\ 


' C'  aj>c  )*Vc  tlcrtck  1 1 t'l  ivv 


JTctifpiiii  XO  aud 


fluted  Cape  nJirii  Peuguiu  Illiuul  fno/w  ^vn7*Jr  / •<  /m'/’r  ili/Kint 


View  f/'  rhf  LAyj> 


AjIvcuIuiv 


View  of'  V.1V  DZEMEy’S  JjAyji  when  thr  >IewIloue  JiaiiM  yiE  ilifhnit  .i  mih. 


■'-Tctdicajli]! 


Ta-unanpUead 


Soillll  C. 


^iFw/toilC 


Itildvltonc 


J*edrii  lilauco 


rfy//f<7  Swillv  u>  //(rAdvciiliiiv 


J/,iT7ni'r/"7'- 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


91 


CHAP.  VI. 


PaJJage  from  Kerguelen's  to  Van  Diemen's  Land. — Arrival 
in  Adventure  Bay. — Incidents  there. — Interviews  with  the 
Natives. — T'heir  Perfons  and  Drefs  dejcribed. — Account  of 
their  Behaviour. — Lable  of  the  Longitude^  Latitude.^  and 
Variation. — Mr.  Anderfon's  Obfervations  on  the  natural 
ProduBions  of  the  Country^  on  the  Inhabitants-,  and  their 
Language. 

After  leaving  Kerguelen’s  Land,  I fleered  Eafl  by- 
North,  intending,  in  obedience  to  my  inflru6lions,  to 
touch  next  at  New  Zealand ; to  recruit  our  water,  to  take 
in  wood,  and  to  make  hay  for  the  cattle.  Their  number, 
by  this  time,  had  been  confiderably  diminiflied ; two  young 
bulls,  one  of  the  heifers,  two  rams,  and  feveral  of  the  goats 
having  of  late  died,  while  we  were  employed  in  exploring 
this  defolate  coalt. 

The  31ft  in  the  morning,  being  the  day  after  we  flood 
out  to  fea,  we  had  feveral  obfervations  of  the  fun  and 
moon.  Their  refults  gave  the  longitude  72°  33'  36^''  Eafl. 
The  time-keeper,  in  this  fituation,  gave  72°  38'  15^'.  Thefe 
obfervations  were  the  more  ufeful,  as  we  had  not  been 
able  to  get  any  for  fome  time  before,  and  they  now  ferved 
to  affure  us  that  no  material  error  had  crept  into  the  time- 
keeper. 

On  the  ifl  of  January,  being  then  in  the  latitude  of  48°  41' 

N 2 South, 


1776. 

December. 

' * 


Tuefday  31. 


1777- 

January. 
Wednef.  i. 


92 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777- 

January. 

Thurfday  2. 
Friday  3. 


Tuefday  7. 


Sunday  12, 


Sunday  19. 


South,  longitude  76°  50^  Eaft,  the  variation  was  30°  39^  Weft ; 
and  the  next  day,  in  the  latitude  of  48°  22"  South,  longitude 
80°  22'  Eaft,  it  was  30°  47'  18'' Weft.  This  was  the  greateft 
variation  we  found  in  this  paffage ; for  afterward  it  began 
to  decreafe,  but  fo  flowly,  that  on  the  3d,  in  the  evening, 
being  then  in  the  latitude  of  48°  16'  South,  longitude  85° 
Eaft,  it  was  29°  38"  Weft. 

Thus  far  we  had  frefti  gales  from  the  Weft  and  South 
Weft,  and  tolerably  clear  weather.  But  now'  the  wind  veered 
to  the  North,  where  it  continued  eight  days,  and  was  at- 
tended with  a thick  fog.  During  this  time,  we  ran  above 
three  hundred  leagues  in  the  dark.  Now  and  then  the  wea- 
ther would  clear  up,  and  give  us  a fight  of  the  fun  ; hut 
this  happened  very  feldom,  and  was  always  of  fliort  conti- 
nuance. On  the  7th,  I hoifted  out  a boat,  and  fent  an  or- 
der to  Captain  Clerke,  appointing  Adventure  Bay,  in  Van 
Diemen’s  Land,  as  our  place  of  rendezvous,  in  cafe  of  fepa- 
ration  before  we  arrived  in  the  meridian  of  that  land.  But 
we  were  fortunate  enough,  amidft  all  this  foggy  weather, 
by  frequently  firing  guns  as  fignals,  though  we  feldom  faw 
each  other,  not  to  lofe  company. 

On  the  1 2th,  being  in  the  latitude  of  48°  40'  South,  lon- 
gitude 110°  26'  Eaft,  the  Northerly  winds  ended  in  a calm ; 
which,  after  a few  hours,  was  fucceeded  by  a wind  from 
the  Southward.  This,  with  rain,  continued  for  twenty-four 
hours ; when  it  frefliened,  and  veered  to  the  Weft  and  North 
Weft,  and  brought  on  fair  and  clear  weather. 

We  continued  our  courfe  to  the  Eaftward,  without  meet- 
ing with  any  thing  worthy  of  notice,  till  four  o’clock  in  the 
morning  of  the  19th ; when,  in  a hidden  fquall  of  wind, 
though  the  Difcovery  received  no  damage,  our  fore-top-maft 
went  by  the  board,  and  carried  the  main-top-gallant-maft 

with 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


93 


with  it.  This  occalioned  fome  delay,  as  it  took  us  up  the  1777. 
whole  day  to  clear  the  wreck,  and  to  fit  another  top-maft.  , 

The  former  was  accompliflred  without  lofing  any  part  of 
it,  except  a few  fathoms  of  fmall  rope.  Not  having  a fpare 
main-top-gallant-mafl:  on  board,  the  fore-top-gallant-mafi: 
was  converted  into  one  for  our  immediate  ufe. 

The  wind  continued  W efterly,  blew  a frefli  gale,  and  was 
attended  with  clear  weather ; fo  that  fcarcely  a day  paflTed 
without  being  able  to  get  obfervations  for  fixing  the  longi- 
tude, and  the  variation  of  the  compafs.  The  latter  de- 
creafed  in  fuch  a manner,  that  in  the  latitude  of  44°  18“' 

South,  longitude  132°  2"  Eaft,  it  was  no  more  than  5°  34'  18"^ 

Weft;  and  on  the  22d,  being  then  in  the  latitude  of  43°  27'  wednef.  22, 
South,  longitude  141°  50'  Eaft,  it  was  1°  24'  15^^  Eaft.  So 
that  we  had  crolTed  the  line  where  the  compafs  has  no  va- 
riation. 

On  the  24th,  at  three  o’clock  in  the  morning,  we  difco-  Friday  24. 
vered  the  coaft  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land,  bearing  North  | 

Weft.  At  four  o’clock,  the  South  Weft  Cape  bore  North 
North  Weft  | Weft ; and  the  Mewftone,  North  Eaft  by  Eaft, 
three  leagues  diftant.  There  are  feveral  illands  and  high 
rocks  lying  fcattered  along  this  part  of  the  coaft,  the  South- 
ernmoft  of  which  is  the  Mewftone.  It  is  a round  elevated 
rock,  five  or  fix  leagues  diftant  from  the  South  Weft  Cape, 
in  the  direction  of  South  55°  Eaft. 

At  noon,  our  latitude  was  43°  47''  South,  longitude  147'^ 

Eaft ; and  the  fituation  of  the  lands  round  us  as  follows : 

An  elevated  round-topped  hill  bore  North  17°  Weft;  the 
South  Weft  Cape  North  74°  Weft;  the  Mewftone  Weft  f- 
North  ; S willy  Hie  or  Rock  South  49°  Eaft ; and  the  South 
Eaft  or  South  Cape  North  40°  Eaft,  diftant  near  three  leagues. 

The  land  between  the  South  Weft  and  the  South  Capes  is 

broken 


94 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  broken  and  hilly,  the  coaft  winding,  with  points  fliooting 
January.  ^ from  it ; but  wc  Were  too  far  off,  to  be  able  to  judge 
whether  the  bays  formed  by  thefe  points  were  fheltered 
from  the  fea-winds.  The  bay  which  appeared  to  be  the 
largefl  and  deepelf,  lies  to  the  Weffward  of  the  peaked  hill 
above-mentioned.  The  variation  of  the  compafs  here,  was 
5*^  15'  Eaft. 

At  fix  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  we  founded,  and  found 
lixty  fathoms  water,  over  a bottom  of  broken  coral  and 
lliells.  The  South  Cape  then  bore  North  75°  Weft,  two  or 
three  leagues  diftant ; Tafman’s  Head  North  Eaft;  and 
Swilly  Rock  South  by  Weft  f Weft.  About  a league  to  the 
Eaftward  of  Swilly,  is  another  elevated  rock,  that  is  not 
taken  notice  of  by  Captain  Furneaux.  I called  it  the  Eddy- 
Jlone^  from  its  very  great  refemblance  to  that  light-houfe. 
Nature  feems  to  have  left  thefe  two  rocks  here,  for  the  fame 
purpofe  that  the  Eddyftone  light-houfe  was  built  by  man, 
viz,  to  give  navigators  notice  of  the  dangers  around  them. 
For  they  are  the  confpicuous  fummits  of  a ledge  of  rocks 
under  water,  on  which  the  fea,  in  many  places,  breaks  very 
high.  Their  furface  is  white  with  the  dung  of  fea  fowls  ; 
fo  that  they  may  be  feen  at  fome  diftance,  even  in  the  night. 
On  the  North  Eaft  fide  of  Storm  Bay,  which  lies  between 
the  South  Cape  and  Tafman’s  Head,  there  are  fome  coves 
or  creeks,  that  feemed  to  be  flieltered  from  the  fea-winds ; 
and  I am  of  opinion  that,  were  this  coaft  examined,  there 
would  be  found  fome  good  harbours. 

Soon  after  we  had  fight  of  land  the  Wefterly  winds  left 
us,  and  were  fucceeded  by  variable  light  airs  and  alternate 
Sunday  26.  calms,  till  the  26th  at  noon.  At  that  time  a breeze  fprung 
up  and  frefliened  at  South  Eaft,  which  put  it  in  my  power 
to  carry  into  execution  the  defign  I had,  upon  due  confi- 

dcration. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


95 


deration,  formed,  of  carrying  the  lliips  into  Adventure  1777- 
Bay,  where  I might  expert  to  get  a fupply  of  wood  and  of  ■ 
grafs  for  the  cattle ; of  both  which  articles  we  fliould,  as 
I now  found,  have  been  in  great  want,  if  I had  waited  till 
our  arrival  in  New  Zealand.  We  therefore  flood  for  the 
bay,  and  anchored  in  it  at  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon, 
in  twelve  fathoms  water,  over  a bottom  of  fand  and  ooze. 

Penguin  Illand,  which  lies  clofe  to  the  Eaft  point  of  the 
bay,  bore  North  84°  Eaft;  the  Southernmoft  point  of 
Maria’s  Illands  bore  North  76°  I Eaft;  and  Cape  Frederic 
Henry,  or  the  North  point  of  the  bay,  bore  North  33°  Eaft. 

Our  diftance  from  the  neareft  fliore  was  about  three  quar- 
ters of  a mile. 

As  foon  as  we  had  anchored,  I ordered  the  boats  to  be 
hoifted  out.  In  one  of  them  1 went  myfelf,  to  look  for  the 
moft  commodious  place  for  furnifliing  ourfelves  with  the 
neceflary  fupplies ; and  Captain  Clerke  went  in  his  boat 
upon  the  fame  fervice.  Wood  and  water  we  found  in 
plenty,  and  in  lituations  convenient  enough,  efpeciaUy  the 
firft.  But  grafs,  of  which  we  flood  moft  in  need,  was  fcarce, 
and  allb  very  coarfe.  Necellity,  however,  obliged  us  to 
take  fuch  as  we  could  get. 

Next  morning  early,  I fent  Lieutenant  King  to  the  Eaft  Monday  27. 
fide  of  the  bay  with  two  parties  ; one  to  cut  wood,  and  the 
other  to  cut  grafs,  under  the  protedlion  of  the  marines, 
whom  I judged  it  prudent  to  land  as  a guard.  For  although, 
as  yet,  none  of  the  natives  had  appeared,  there  could  be  no 
doubt  that  fome  were  in  our  neighbourhood,  as  we  had 
feen  columns  of  fmoke,  from  the  time  of  our  approaching 
the  coaft ; and  fome  now  was  obferved,  at  no  great  diftance 
up  in  the  woods.  I alfo  fent  the  launch  for  water;  and 

afterward 


96 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  afterward  vifited  all  the  parties  myfelf.  In  the  evening,  we 
drew  the  feine  at  the  head  of  the  bay,  and,  at  one  haul, 
caught  a great  quantity  of  fifli.  We  flrould  have  got  many 
more,  had  not  the  net  broken  in  drawing  it  afliore.  Moft 
of  them  were  of  that  fort  known  to  feamen  by  the  name  of 
elephant  fhli.  After  this,  every  one  repaired  on  board  with 
what  wood  and  grafs  we  had  cut,  that  we  might  be  ready 
to  fail  whenever  the  wind  flrould  ferve. 

Tuefday  28.  This  iiot  happening  next  morning,  the  people  were  fent 
on  flrore  again,  on  the  fame  duty  as  the  day  before.  I alfo 
employed  the  carpenter,  with  part  of  his  crew,  to  cut  fome 
fpars  for  the  ufe  of  the  fhip ; and  difpatched  Mr.  Roberts, 
one  of  the  mates,  in  a fmall  boat  to  furvey  the  bay. 

In  the  afternoon,  we  were  agreeably  furprifed,  at  the 
place  where  we  were  cutting  wood,  with  a vifit  from 
fome  of  the  natives ; eight  men  and  a boy.  They  ap- 
proached us  from  the  woods,  without  betraying  any  marks 
of  fear,  or  rather  with  the  greateft  confidence  imaginable  ; 
for  none  of  them  had  any  weapons,  except  one,  who  held 
in  his  hand  a flick  about  two  feet  long,  and  pointed  at 
one  end. 

They  were  quite  naked,  and  wore  no  ornaments ; un- 
lefs  we  confider  as  fuch,  and  as  a proof  of  their  love  of 
finery,  fome  large  punctures  or  ridges  raifed  on  different 
parts  of  their  bodies,  fome  in  flraight,  and  others  in  curved 
lines. 

They  were  of  the  common  flature,  but  rather  flender. 
Their  fkin  was  black,  and  alfo  their  hair,  which  was  as 
woolly  as  that  of  any  native  of  Guinea  ; but  they  were  not 
diflinguiflied  by  remarkably  thick  lips,  nor  flat  nofes.  On 
the  contrary,  their  features  were  far  from  being  difagree- 

able. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


97 


able.  They  had  pretty  good  eyes  ; and  their  teeth  were  1777. 
tolerably  even,  but  very  dirty.  Moft  of  them  had  their  . 

hair  and  beards  fmeared  with  a red  ointment ; and  fome 
had  their  faces  alfo  painted  with  the  fame  compofition. 

They  received  every  prefent  we  made  to  them,  without 
the  lead:  appearance  of  fatisfa6lion.  When  fome  bread  was 
given,  as  foon  as  they  underftood  that  it  was  to  be  eaten, 
they  either  returned  it,  or  threw  it  away,  without  even 
tailing  it.  They  alfo  refufed  fome  elephant  fifh,  both  raw 
and  drelTed,  which  we  offered  to  them.  But  upon  giving 
fome  birds  to  them,  they  did  not  return  thefe,  and  ealily 
made  us  comprehend  that  they  were  fond  of  fuch  food.  I 
had  brought  two  pigs  alliore,  with  a view  to  leave  them  in 
the  woods.  The  inllant  thefe  came  within  their  reach,  they 
feized  them,  as  a dog  would  have  done,  by  the  ears,  and 
were  for  carrying  them  off  immediately  ; with  no  other  in- 
tention, as  we  could  perceive,  but  to  kill  them. 

Being  dehrous  of  knowing  the  ufe  of  the  flick  which  one 
of  ourVifiters  carried  in  his  hand,  I made  figns  to  them  to 
fliew  me ; and  fo  far  fucceeded,  that  one  of  them  fet  up  a 
piece  of  wood  as  a mark,  and  threw  at  it,  at  the  diflance  of 
about  twenty  yards.  But  we  had  little  reafon  to  commend 
his  dexterity ; for,  after  repeated  trials,  he  was  flill  very 
wide  from  the  obje6l.  Omai,  to  fhew  them  how  much  fu- 
perior  our  weapons  were  to  theirs,  then  fired  his  mufquet 
at  it ; which  alarmed  them  fo  much,  that  notwithflanding 
all  we  could  do  or  fay,  they  ran  inflantly  into  the  woods. 

One  of  them  was  fo  frightened,  that  he  let  drop  an  axe  and 
two  knives,  that  had  been  given  to  him.  From  us,  how- 
ever, they  went  to  the  place  where  fome  of  the  Difcovery’s 
people  were  employed  in  taking  water  into  their  boat.  The 
officer  of  that  party,  not  knov/ing  that  they  had  paid  us  fo 

Vgl.  I.  O friendly 


98 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777. 

January'. 

» > 


Wednef.  29. 


friendly  a vilit,  nor  what  their  intent  might  be,  fired  a muf- 
qnet  in  the  air,  which  fent  them  off  with  the  greateft  pre- 
cipitation. 

Thus  ended  our  firft  interview  wifli  the  natives.  Imme^ 
diately  after  their  final  retreat,  judging  that  their  fears 
would  prevent  their  remaining  near  enough  to  obferve  what 
was  pafiing,  I ordered  the  two  pigs,  being  a boar  and  fow, 
to  be  carried  about  a mile  within  the  woods,  at  the  head  of 
the  bay.  I faw  them  left  there,  by  the  fide  of  a freih-water 
brook.  A young  bull  and  a cow,  and  fome  fheep  and  goats, 
were  alfo,  at  firft,  intended  to  have  been  left  by  me,  as  an 
additional  prefent  to  Van  Diemen’s  Land.  But  I foon  laid 
afide  all  thought  of  this,  from  a perfuafion  that  the  natives, 
incapable  of  entering  into  my  views  of  improving  their 
country,  would  deftroy  them.  If  ever  they  fhould  meet 
with  the  pigs,  I have  no  doubt  this  will  be  their  fate.  But 
as  that  race  of  animals  foon  becomes  wild,  and  is  fond  of 
the  thickeft  cover  of  the  woods,  there  is  great  probability 
of  their  being  preferred.  An  open  place  muft  have  been 
chofen  for  the  accommodation  of  the  other  cattle  ; and  in 
fuch  a fituation,  they  could  not  poflibly  have  remained 
concealed  many  days. 

The  morning  of  the  29th  was  ufhered  in  with  a dead 
calm,  which  continued  all  day,  and  effectually  prevented 
our  failing.  I therefore  fent  a party  over  to  the  Eaft  point 
of  the  bay  to  cut  grafs ; having  been  informed  that  fome  of 
a fuperior  quality  grew  there.  Another  party,  to  cut  wood, 
was  ordered  to  go  to  the  ufual  place,  and  I accompanied  them 
myfelf.  We  had  obferved  feveral  of  the  natives,  this  morn- 
ing, fauntering  along  the  Ihore,  which  aflured  us,  that 
though  their  confternation  had  made  them  leave  us  fo 
abruptly  the  day  before,  they  were  convinced  that  we  in- 
tended 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

tended  them  no  mifchief,  and  were  defirous  of  renewing 
the  intercourfe.  It  was  natural  that  I iliould  wifh  to  be 
prefent  on  the  occalion. 

We  had  not  been  long  landed,  before  about  twenty  of 
them,  men  and  boys,  joined  us,  without  expreffing  the 
leafl  lign  of  fear  or  diftruft.  There  was  one  of  this  com- 
pany confpicuoully  deformed  ; and  who  was  not  more  dif- 
tinguifliable  by  the  hump  upon  his  back,  than  by  the  drol- 
lery of  his  geftures,  and  the  feeming  humour  of  his 
fpeeches  ; which  he  was  very  fond  of  exhibiting,  as  we 
fuppofed,  for  our  entertainment.  But,  unfortunately,  we 
could  not  underhand  him ; the  language  fpoken  here  being 
wholly  unintelligible  to  us.  It  appeared  to  me,  to  be  dif- 
ferent from  that  fpoken  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  more 
northern  parts  of  this  country,  whom  I met  with  in  my 
firft  voyage ; which  is  not  extraordinary,  lince  thofe  we 
now  faw,  and  thofe  we  then  vilited,  differ  in  many  other 
refpedls  Nor  did  they  feem  to  be  fuch  miferable 


* The  moft  ftrilcing  difference  feetns  to  be  with  regard  to  the  texture  of  the  hair. 
The  natives  whom  Captain  Cook  met  with  at  Endeavour  River  in  1769,  are  faid,  by 
him,  to  have  naturally  long  and  black  haivy  though  tt  be  univerfally  cropped Jhort.  In  general 
it  is  Jlraity  but  fometimes  it  has  a flight  curl.  JVe  faw  none  that  was  not  matted  and  filthy. 
Tloeir  beards  were  of  the  fame  colour  with  the  hair^  and  bufhy  and  thick.  See  Hawkefworth’s 
Colleftion,  Vol.  iii.  chap.  8.  p.  632. 

It  may  be  neceffary  to  mention  here,  on  the  authority  of  Captain  King,  that  Captain 
Cook  was  very  unwilling  to  allow  that  the  hair  of  the  natives  now  met  with  in  Adventure 
Bay  was  woolly^  fancying  that  his  people,  who  firft  obferved  this,  had  beeai  deceived,  from 
its  being  clotted  with  greafe  and  red  ochre.  But  Captain  King  prevailed  upon  him  after- 
ward, to  examine  carefully  the  hair  of  the  boys,  which  was  generally,  as  well  as  that  of 
the  women,  free  from  this  dirt ; and  then  he  owned  himfelf  fatisfied  that  it  was  naturally- 
woolly.  Perhaps  we  may  fuppofe  it  poffible,  that  he  himfelf  had  been  deceived  when  he 
was  in  Endeavour  River,  from  this  very  circumftance  3 as  he  exprefsly  fays,  that  they  faw 
none  that  was  not  matted  and  filthy. 


99 


^in- 

January. 


O 2 


wretches 


A VO  Y A G E TO 


lob 


1777.  wretches  as  the  natives  whom  Dampier  mentions  to  have 
^anu^.^  weftern  coaft 

Some  of  onr  prefent  group  wore,  loofe,  round  their 
necks,  three  or  four  folds  of  fmall  cord,  made  of  the  fur  of 
fome  animal ; and  others  of  them  had  a narrow  flip  of  the 
kangooroo  Ikin  tied  round  their  ankles.  I gave  to  each  of 
them  a firing  of  beads,  and  a medal ; which  I thought  they 
received  with  fome  fatisfacSlion.  They  feemed  to  fet  no 
value  on  iron,  or  on  iron  tools.  They  were  even  ignorant 
of  the  ufe  of  fifli -hooks,  if  we  might  judge  from  their 
manner  of  looking  at  fome  of  ours  which  we  fliewed  to 
them. 

We  cannot,  however,  fuppofe  it  to  be  poffible  that  a peo- 
ple who  inhabit  a fea-coaft,  and  who  feem  to  derive  no  part 
of  their  fuflenance  from  the  produdlions  of  the  ground, 
lliould  not  be  acquainted  with  fome  mode  of  catching  fifli, 
though  we  did  not  happen  to  fee  any  of  them  thus  employ- 
ed ; nor  obferve  any  canoe  or  velTel,  in  which  they  could  go 
upon  the  water.  Though  they  abfolutely  reje6ted  the  fort 
of  fifli  that  we  offered  to  them,  it  was  evident  that  fliell- 

* And  yet  Dampier’s  New  Hollanders,  on  the  Weftern  coaft,  bear  a ftriking  refem- 
blance  to  Captain  Cook’s  at  Van  Diemen’s  Land,  in  many  remarkable  inftances  ; 

I ft,  As  to  their  becoming  familiar  with  the  ftrangers. 

2dly,  As  to  their  perfons  ; being  ftraight-bodied,  and  thin ; their  Ikin  black  j and  black, 
fhort,  curled  hair,  like  the  Negroes  of  Guinea ; with  wide  mouths. 

3dly,  As  to  their  wretched  condition ; having  no  houfes,  no  garment,  no  canoes,  no 
inftrument  to  catch  large  fifli  j feeding  on  broiled  mufcles,  cockles,  and  periwinkles ; 
having  no  fruits  of  the  earth  ; their  weapons  a ftraight  pole,  fliarpened  and  hardened  at 
the  end,  &c.  &c. 

The  chief  peculiarities  of  Dampier’s  miferable  wretches  are,  ift.  Their  eye-lids  being 
always  half  clofed,  to  keep  the  flies  out,  which  were  exceflively  troublefome  there  : and, 
adly.  Their  wanting  the  two  fore-teeth  of  the  upper  jaw,  and  their  having  no  beards. 
See  Dampier’’ s Voyages^  Vol.  i.  p.  464,  &c.  There  feems  to  be  no  reafon  for  fuppofing 
that  Dampier  was  miftaken  in  the  above  account  of  what  he  faw. 

fiHi, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


lOI 


fifli,  at  leaft,  made  a part  of  their  food,  from  the  many  1777. 
heaps  of  mufcle-fliells  we  faw  in  different  parts  near  the  ^ 

fliore,  and  about  fome  deferted  habitations  near  the  head  of 
the  bay.  Thefe  were  little  flieds  or  hovels  built  of  flicks, 
and  covered  with  bark.  We  could  alfo  perceive  evident 
figns  of  their  fometimes  taking  up  their  abode  in  the  trunks 
of  large  trees,  which  had  been  hollowed  out  by  fire,  mofl 
probably  for  this  very  purpofe.  In  or  near  all  thefe  habi- 
tations, and  wherever  there  was  a heap  of  fliells,  there  re- 
mained the  marks  of  fire  ; an  indubitable  proof  that  they 
do  not  eat  their  food  raw. 

After  flaying  about  an  hour  with  the  wooding  party  and 
the  natives,  as  I could  now  be  pretty  confident  that  the  lat- 
ter were  not  likely  to  give  the  former  any  diflurbance,  I left 
them,  and  went  over  to  the  grafs-cutters  on  the  Eafl  point 
of  the  bay,  and  found  that  they  had  met  with  a fine  patch. 

Having  feen  the  boats  loaded,  I left  that  party,  and  returned 
on  board  to  dinner ; where,  fome  time  after.  Lieutenant 
King  arrived. 

From  him  I learnt,  that  I had  but  jufl  left  the  fliore,  when 
feveral  women  and  children  made  their  appearance,  and 
were  introduced  to  him  by  fome  of  the  men  who  attended 
them.  He  gave  prefents  to  all  of  them,  of  fuch  trifles  as  he 
had  about  him.  Thefe  females  w^ore  a kangooroo  fkin  (in 
the  fame  fliape  as  it  came  from  the  animal)  tied  over  the 
flioulders,  and  round  the  waifl.  But  its  only  ufe  feemed  to 
be,  to  fupport  their  children  when  carried  on  their  backs  ; 
for  it  did  not  cover  thofe  parts  which  moll:  nations  conceal ; 
being,  in  all  other  refpe£ls,  as  naked  as  the  men,  and  as 
black,  and  their  bodies  marked  with  fears  in  the  fame  man- 
ner. But  in  this  they  differed  from  the  men,  that  though 
their  hair  was  of  the  fame  colour  and  texture,  fome  of  them 

had 


102 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  had  their  heads  completely  diorn  or  fliaved ; in  others  this 
operation  had  been  performed  only  on  one  fide,  while  the 
reft  of  them  had  all  the  upper  part  of  the  head  fliorn  clofe, 
leaving  a circle  of  hair  all  round,  fomewhat  like  the  tonfure 
of  the  Romifli  Eccleftaftics  Many  of  the  children  had  fine 
features,  and  were  thought  pretty ; but  of  the  perfons  of 
the  women,  efpecially  thofe  advanced  in  years,  a lefs  fa- 
vourable report  \vas  made.  However,  fome  of  the  Gentle- 
men belonging  to  the  Difcovery,  I was  told,  paid  their  ad- 
drefies,  and  made  liberal  offers  of  prefents,  which  were  re- 
jected with  great  difdain ; whether  from  a fenfe  of  virtue, 
or  the  fear  of  difpleafing  their  men,  I fliall  not  pretend  to 
determine.  That  this  gallantry  was  not  very  agreeable  to 
the  latter,  is  certain : for  an  elderly  man,  as  foon  as  he  ob- 
ferved  it,  ordered  all  the  women  and  children  to  retire, 
which  they  obeyed,  though  fome  of  them  fliewed  a little 
relu61ance. 

This  condu6l  of  Europeans  amongft  Savages,  to  their  wo- 
men, is  highly  blameable ; as  it  creates  a jealoufy  in  their 
men,  that  may  be  attended  with  confequences  fatal  to  the 
fuccefs  of  the  common  enterprize,  and  to  the  whole  body 
of  adventurers,  without  advancing  the  private  purpofe  of 

* Captain  Cook’s  account  of  the  natives  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land,  in  this  Chapter,  no 
^oubt  proves  that  they  differ,  in  many  refpeils^  as  he  fays,  from  the  Inhabitants  of  the  more 
northerly  parts  of  the  Eaft  coaft  of  New  Holland,  whom  he  met  with  in  his  firft  voyage. 
It  feems  very  remarkable,  however,  that  the  only  woman  any  of  his  people  came  clofe  to, 
in  Botarjy  Bay,  fhould  have  her  hair  cropped  Jloort ; while  the  man  who  was  with  her,  is 
faid  to  have  had  the  hair  of  his  head  bujl%  and  his  beard  long  and  rough.  Hawkefworth’s  Col- 
leftion,  Vol.  ili.  p.  502.  Could  the  natives  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land  be  more  accurately 
defcribed,  than  by  faying  that  the  hair  of  the  men’s  heads  is  bujhy.,  and  their  beards  long  and 
rough.,  and  that  the  women^s  hair  is  cropped  Jhort  ? So  far  North,  therefore,  as  Botany  Bay, 
the  natives  of  the  Eaft  coaft  of  New  Holland  feem  to  refemble  thofe  of  Van  Diemen’s 
Land,  in  this  circumftance. 

the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

the  individual,  or  enabling  him  to  gain  the  obje6l  of  his 
wifhes.  I believe  it  has  been  generally  found  amongft  un- 
civilized people,  that  where  the  wonien  are  eafy  of  accefs, 
the  men  are  the  firft  to  offer  them  to  flrangers  ; and  that, 
where  this  is  not  tine  cafe,  neither  the  allurement  of  pre- 
fents,  nor  the  opportunity  of  privacy,  will  be  likely  to  have 
the  delired  effect.  This  obfervation,  I am  fure,  will  hold 
good,  throughout  aU  the  parts  of  the  South  Sea  where  I have 
been.  Why  then  fliould  men  acSl  fo  abfurd  a part,  as  to  rifle 
their  own  fafety,  and  that  of  all  their  companions,  in  pur- 
fuit  of  a gratification  which  they  have  no  probability  of 
obtaining  ? 

In  the  afternoon  I went  again  to  the  grafs -cutters,  to  for- 
ward their  work.  I found  them  then  upon  Penguin  Illand, 
where  they  had  met  with  a plentiful  crop  of  excellent  grafs. 
We  laboured  hard  till  fun-fet,  and  then  repaired  on  board, 
fatisfied  with  the  quantity  we  had  colledted,  and  which  I 
judged  fufficient  to  lafl  till  our  arrival  in  New  Zealand. 

During  our  whole  Ifay,  we  had  either  calms  or  light  airs 
from  the  Eaftward.  Little  or  no  time,  therefore,  was  lofl 
by  my  putting  in  at  this  place.  For  if  I had  kept  the  fea, 
we  fliould  not  have  been  twenty  leagues  advanced  farther 
on  our  voyage.  And,  fliort  as  our  continuance  was  here, 
it  has  enabled  me  to  add  fomewhat  to  the  imperfect  ac- 
quaintance that  hath  hitherto  been  acquired,  with  this  part 
of  the  globe. 

V an  Diemen’s  Land  has  been  twice  vifited  before.  It  was 
fo  named  by  Tafman,  who  difeovered  it  in  November  1642. 
From  that  time  it  had  efcaped  aU  farther  notice  by  Euro- 
pean navigators,  till  Captain  Furneaux  touched  at  it  in 
March  1773.  I hardly  need  fay,  that  it  is  the  Southern 
point  of  New  Holland,  which,  if  it  doth  not  deferve  the 

name 


103 


1777.. 

January. 

'—tv f 


104 


A VOYAGE  TO 


>777- 

January, 


name  of  a continent,  is  by  far  the  largeft  ifland  in  the 
world. 

The  land  is,  for  the  moft  part,  of  a good  height,  diveiTified 
with  hills  and  valleys,  and  every  where  of  a greenifli  hue. 
It  is  well  wooded ; and,  if  one  may  judge  from  appearances, 
and  from  what  we  met  with  in  Adventure  Bay,  is  not  ill 
fupplied  with  water.  We  found  plenty  of  it  in  three  or 
four  places  in  this  bay.  The  beft,  or  what  is  moft  conve- 
nient for  fliips  that  touch  here,  is  a rivulet,  which  is  one  of 
feveral  that  fall  into  a pond,  that  lies  behind  the  beach  at 
the  head  of  the  bay.  It  there  mixes  with  the  fea-water ; fo 
that  it  muft  be  taken  up  above  this  pond,  which  may  be 
done  without  any  great  trouble.  Fire- wood  is  to  be  got, 
with  great  eafe,  in  feveral  places. 

The  only  wind  to  which  this  bay  is  expofed,  is  the  North 
Eaft.  But  as  this  wind  blows  from  Maria’s  lllands,  it  can 
bring  no  very  great  fea  along  with  it ; and  therefore,  upon 
the  whole,  this  may  be  accounted  a very  fafe  road.  The 
bottom  is  clean,  good  holding  ground;  and  the  depth  of 
water  from  twelve,  to  five  and  four  fathoms.  But  the 
annexed  Chart  will  convey  a better  idea  of  every  thing 
neceflary  to  be  known  about  Adventure  Bay,  than  any  de- 
fcription. 

Captain  Furneaux’s  fketch  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land,  pub- 
iifhed  with  the  Narrative  of  my  laft  Voyage appears  to  me 
to  be  without  any  material  error,  except  with  regard  to  Ma- 
ria’s Iflands,  which  have  a different  fituation  from  what  is 
there  reprefented.  What  my  idea  of  them  is,  will  be  feen 
in  the  fketch  of  that  coaft  here  inferted ; and  I infert  it,  not 
as  the  refult  of  a more  faithful,  but  merely  of  a fecond 


* Vol.  i.  p.  1 15, 


examination. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


105 


examination.  The  longitude  was  determined  by  a great 
number  of  lunar  obfervations,  which  we  had  before  we 
made  the  land,  while  we  were  in  fight  of  it,  and  after  we 
had  left  it ; and  reduced  to  Adventure  Bay,  and  the  feve- 
ral  principal  points,  by  the  time-keeper.  The  following 
Table  will  exhibit  both  the  longitude  and  latitude  at  one 
view : 


Latitude  South. 

Longitude  Eaft. 

Adventure  Bay, 

43" 

11' 

20'"— 

-147°  29^ 

0" 

Tafman’s  Head, 

43 

33 

0 — 

—147  28 

0 

South  Cape, 

43 

42 

0 — 

—146  56 

0 

South  Weft  Cape, 

43 

37 

0 — 

—146  7 

0 

Swilly  Ifle,  - - - 

43 

55 

0 — 

-147  6 

0 

Adventure 


Variation  of  the  compafs  5°  15'  Eaft. 

Dip  of  the  South  End  of  the  Needle  70°  15 


1777- 
J anuary. 


We  had  high-water  on  the  29th,  being  two  days  before 
the  laft  quarter  of  the  moon,  at  nine  in  the  morning.  The 
perpendicular  rife  then  was  eighteen  inches ; and  there 
was  no  appearance  of  its  having  ever  exceeded  two  feet  and 
a half.  Thefe  are  all  the  memorials  ufeful  to  navigation, 
which  my  fliort  ftay  has  enabled  me  to  preferve,  with  re- 
fpe(5l  to  Van  Diemen’s  Land. 

Mr.  Anderfon,  my  Surgeon,  with  his  ufual  diligence, 
fpent  the  few  days  we  remained  in  Adventure  Bay,  in  exa- 
mining the  country.  His  account  of  its  natural  i:)roduc- 
tions,  with  which  he  favoured  me,  will  more  than  com- 
penfate  for  my  filence  about  them  : fome  of  his  remarks  on 
the  inhabitants  will  fupply  what  I may  have  omitted  or  re- 
prefented  imperfectly ; and  his  fpecimen  of  their  language, 
however  fliort,  will  be  thought  worth  attending  to,  by  thofe 
who  wifli  to  collect  materials  for  tracing  the  origin  of  na- 

VoL.  I.  P tions. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  tions.  I ihall  only  premife,  that  the  tall  ftraight  foreft 
January.  ^ trccs,  which  Mr.  Anclerfon  defcribes  in  the  following  ac- 
count, are  of  a different  fort  from  thofe  which  are  found  in 
the  more  Northern  parts  of  this  coaft.  The  wood  is  very 
long  and  clofe-grained ; extremely  tough;  fit  for  fpars, 
oars,  and  many  other  ufes  ; and  would,  on  occafion,  make 
good  mails  (perhaps  none  better),  if  a method  could  be 
found  to  lighten  it. 

“ At  the  bottom  of  Adventure  Bay  is  a beautiful  fandy 
beach,  which  feems  to  be  wholly  formed  by  the  particles 
waflied  by  the  fea  from  a very  fine  white  fand-ftone,  that 
in  many  places  bounds  the  fliore,  and  of  which  Fluted 
Cape,  in  the  neighbourhood,  from  its  appearance,  feems 
to  be  compofed.  This  beach  is  about  two  miles  long,  and 
is  excellently  adapted  for  hauling  a feine,  which  both  fliips 
did  repeatedly  with  fuccefs.  Behind  this,  is  a plain  or  flat, 
with  a fait,  or  rather  brackifli  lake  ,(rrinning  in  length 
parallel  with  the  beach),  out  of  which  we  caught,  with 
angling  rods,  many  whitifh  bream,  and  fome  fmall  trout. 
The  other  parts  of  the  country  adjoining  the  bay  are  quite 
hilly ; and  both  thofe  and  the  flat  are  an  entire  foreft  of 
very  tall  trees,  rendered  almoft  impaffable  by  fhrubs, 
brakes  of  fern,  and  fallen  trees ; except  on  the  fides  of 
fome  of  the  hills,  where  the  trees  are  but  thin,  and  a coarfe 
grafs  is  the  only  interruption. 

To  the  Northward  of  the  bay  there  is  low  land,  ftretching 
farther  than  the  eye  can  reach,  which  is  only  covered  with 
wood  in  certain  fpots ; but  we  had  no  opportunity  to  exa- 
mine in  what  refpecSls  it  differed  from  the  hilly  country. 
The  foil  on  the  flat  land  is  either  fandy,  or  confifts  of  a 
yellowilli  mould,  and,  in  fome  places,  of  a reddifli  clay. 
The  fame  is  found  on  the  lower  part  of  the  hills ; but 

farther 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


107 


farther  up,  efpecially  where  there  are  few  trees,  it  is  of  a 
grey  tough  calf,  to  appearance  very  poor. 

In  the  valleys  between  the  hills,  the  water  drains  down 
from  their  fides ; and  at  laft,  in  fome  places,  forms  fmall 
brooks ; fuch  indeed  as  were  fufficient  to  fupply  us  with 
water,  but  by  no  means  of  that  lize  we  might  expedt  in  fo 
extenlive  a country,  efpeciaUy  as  it  is  both  hiUy  and  well 
wooded.  Upon  the  whole,  it  has  many  marks  of  being 
naturally  a very  dry  country ; and  perhaps  might  (inde- 
pendent of  its  wood)  be  compared  to  Africa,  about  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  though  that  lies  ten  degrees  farther  North- 
ward, rather  than  to  New  Zealand,  on  its  other  lide,  in  the 
fame  latitude,  where  we  find  every  valley,  however  fmaU, 
furniflied  with  a confiderable  ftream  of  water.  The  heat 
too  appears  to  be  great,  as  the  thermometer  flood  at  64,  70, 
and  once  at  74.  And  it  was  remarked,  that  birds  were 
feldom  killed  an  hour  or  two,  before  they  were  almofi:  co- 
vered with  fmall  maggots,  which  I would  rather  attribute 
merely  to  the  heat ; as  we  had  not  any  reafon  to  fuppofe 
there  is  a peculiar  difpofition  in  the  climate  to  render  fub- 
ftances  foon  putrid. 

No  mineral  bodies,  nor  indeed  Hones  of  any  other  fort,  but 
the  white  fand  one  already  mentioned,  were  obferved. 

Amongft;  the  vegetable  produdlions,  there  is  not  one,  that 
we  could  find,  which  afforded  the  fmalleft  fubfiftence  for 
man. 

The  foreft  trees  are  all  of  one  fort,  growing  to  a great 
height,  and  in  general  quite  ftraight,  branching  but  little, 
tiU  toward  the  top.  The  bark  is  white,  which  makes  them 
appear,  at  a diftance,  as  if  they  had  been  peeled ; it  is  alfo 
thick;  and  within  it  are  fometimes  collected,  pieces  of  a 

P 2 reddifli 


1777. 

January. 

- — > 


io8 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  reddifh  tranfparent  gum  or  refin,  which  has  an  aftringent 
. , tafte.  The  leaves  of  this  tree  are  long,  narrow,  and  pointed; 

and  it  bears  clufters  of  fmall  white  flowers,  whofe  cups 
were,  at  this  time,  plentifully  fcattered  about  the  ground, 
with  another  fort  refembling  them  fomewhat  in  fhape,  but 
much  larger ; which  makes  it  probable  that  there  are  two 
fpecies  of  this  tree.  The  bark  of  the  fmaller  branches, 
fruit,  and  leaves,  have  an  agreeable  pungent  tafte,  and 
aromatic  fmell,  not  unlike  peppermint ; and  in  its  nature, 
it  has  fome  affinity  to  the  myrtus  of  botanifts. 

The  moft  common  tree,  next  to  this,  is  a fmall  one  about 
ten  feet  high,  branching  pretty  much,  with  narrow  leaves, 
and  a large,  yellow,  cylindrical  flower,  confifting  only  of  a 
vafl  number  of  filaments  ; which,  being  ffied,  leave  a fruit 
like  a pine-top.  Both  the  above-mentioned  trees  are  un- 
known  in  Europe. 

The  underwood  conlifls  chiefly  of  a ffirttb  fomewhat  re- 
fembling a myrtle,  and  which  feems  to  be  the  leptojpermuin 
fcoparium^  mentioned  in  Dr.  Forfter’s  Char.  Gen.  Plant. ; 
and,  in  fome  places,  of  another,  rather  fmaller,  which  is  a 
new  fpecies  of  the  melaleuca  of  Linnaeus. 

Of  other  plants,  which  are  by  no  means  numerous,  there 
is  a fpecies  of  gladiolus^  ruffi,  bell-flower,  famphire,  a fmall 
fort  of  wood-forrel,  milk- wort,  cudweed,  and  Job’s  tears  ; 
with  a few  others,  peculiar  to  the  place.  There  are  feveral 
kinds  of  fern,  as  polypody,  fpleenwort,  female  fern,  and  fome 
moffes ; but  the  fpecies  are  either  common,  or  at  leafl  found 
in  fome  other  countries,  efpecially  New  Zealand. 

The  only  animal  of  the  quadruped  kind  we  got,  was  a 
fort  of  opojfum,  about  twice  the  fize  of  a large  rat ; and  is, 
moft  probably,  the  male  of  that  fpecies  found  at  Endea- 
vour 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


109 


voiir  River,  as  mentioned  in  Hawkefworth’s  Colle6lion  of  1777. 
Voyages  It  is  of  a dufky  colour  above,  tinged  with  a 
brown  or  rufty  caft,  and  whitifli  below.  About  a third  of 
the  tail,  towards  its  tip,  is  white,  and  bare  underneath  ; by 
which  it  probably  hangs  on  the  branches  of  trees,  as  it 
climbs  thefe,  and  lives  on  berries.  Mr.  Webber’s  drawing 
w'ill  give  a better  idea  of  it  than  any  defcription.  The  kan- 
gooroo,  another  animal  found  farther  Northward  in  New 
Holland,  as  defcribed  in  the  fame  Voyage  t,  without  all 
doubt  alfo  inhabits  here,  as  the  natives  we  met  with  had 
fome  pieces  of  their  Ikins  ; and  we  feveral  times  faw'  ani- 
mals, though  indiftindtly,  run  from  the  thickets  when  we 
walked  in  the  woods,  which,  from  the  hze,  could  be  no 
other.  It  fliould  feem  alfo,  that  they  are  in  conliderable 
numbers,  from  the  dung  we  faw  almoft  every  where,  and 
from  the  narrow  tracks  or  paths  they  have  made  amongft 
the  flirubbery. 

There  are  feveral  Ibrts  of  birds,  but  all  fo  fcarce  and  fliy, 
that  they  are  evidently  harraffed  by  the  natives,  who,  per- 
haps, draw  much  of  their  fubliftence  from  them.  In  the 
woods,  the  principal  forts  are  large  brown  hawks  or  eagles  ; 
crows,  nearly  the  fame  as  ours  in  England ; yellowifli  pa- 
roquets ; and  large  pigeons.  There  are  alfo  three  or  four 
fmall  birds,  one  of  which  is  of  the  thrufli  kind  ; and  ano- 
ther fmall  one,  with  a pretty  long  tail,  has  part  of  the  head 
and  neck  of  a mod:  beautiful  azure  colour  ; from  whence  we 
named  it  motacilla  cyanea.  On  the  fliore  were  feveral 
common  and  fea  guUs  ; a few  black  oyfter  catchers,  or  fea- 
pies ; and  a pretty  plover  of  a ftone  colour,  with  a black 
hood.  About  the  pond  or  lake  behind  the  beach,  a few 


* Vol.  iii.  p.  586. 


t Ibid,  p.  577. 


wild 


no 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  wiki  ducks  were  feen  ; and  fome  fliags  ufed  to  perch  upon 
January.  ^ high  leaflefs  trees  near  the  fliore. 

Some  pretty  large  blackilli  fnakes  were  feen  in  the 
woods  ; and  we  killed  a large,  hitherto  unknown,  lizard, 
fifteen  inches  long  and  fix  round,  elegantly  clouded  with 
black  and  yellow ; befides  a fmall  fort,  of  a brown  gilded 
colour  above,  and  rufty  below. 

The  fea  affords  a much  greater  plenty,  and  at  leaf!:  as 
great  a variety  as  the  land.  Of  thefe  the  elephant  fifli,  or 
pejegalloy  mentioned  in  Frezier’s  Voyage  are  the  moft 
numerous  ; and  though  inferior  to  many  other  fifli,  were 
very  palatable  food.  Several  large  rays,  nurfes,  and  fmall 
leather-jackets  were  caught;  with  fome  fmaU  white  bream, 
which  were  firmer  and  better  than  thofe  caught  in  the 
lake.  We  like  wife  got  a few  foies  and  flounders  ; two 
forts  of  gurnards,  one  of  them  a new  fpecies ; fome  fmaU 
fpotted  mullet ; and,  very  unexpedfedly,  the  fmall  fifli 
with  a filver  band  on  its  fide,  called  atherina  hepfetus  by 
Haffelquift  t. 

But  that  next  in  number,  and  fuperior  in  goodnefs,  to  the 
elephant  fifli,  was  a fort  none  of  us  recollected  to  have  feen 
before.  It  partakes  of  the  nature  both  of  a round  and  of  a 
flat  fifli,  having  the  eyes  placed  very  near  each  other  ; the 
fore-part  of  the  body  much  flattened  or  depreffed,  and  the 
reft  rounded.  It  is  of  a brownifli  fandy  colour,  with  rufty 
fpots  on  the  upper  part,  and  whitifli  below.  From  the 
quantity  of  flime  it  was  always  covered  with,  it  feems  to 
live  after  the  manner  of  flat  fifli,  at  the  bottom. 

Upon  the  rocks  are  plenty  of  mufcles,  and  fome  other 
fmall  fliell-fifli.  There  are  alfo  great  numbers  of  fea-ftars ; 

* Tom.  ii.  p.  21 1.  i2mo.  Planche  XVII.  f Iter  Paleejlinum. 

fome 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


Ill 


fome  fmall  limpets  ; and  large  quantities  of  fponge  ; one  1777- 
fort  of  which,  that  is  thrown  on  fliore  by  the  fea,  but  not  . 
very  common,  has  a moft  delicate  texture ; and  another,  is 
the  fpongia  dichotoma. 

Many  pretty  Medufd’s  heads  were  found  upon  the  beach ; 
and  the  ftinking  laplyfia  or  fea-hare,  which,  as  mentioned 
by  fome  authors,  has  the  property  of  taking  off  the  hair  by 
the  acrimony  of  its  juice  ; but  this  fort  was  deficient  in  this 
refpecfi. 

Infedls,  though  not  numerous,  are  here  in  confiderable 
variety.  Amongfi:  them  are  grafshoppers,  butterflies,  and 
fever al  forts  of  fmall  moths,  finely  variegated.  There  are 
two  forts  of  dragon-flies,  gad-flies,  camel-flies  ; feveral  forts 
of  fpiders ; and  fome  fcorpions  ; but  the  lafi:  are  rather  rare. 

The*  moft  troublefome,  though  not  very  numerous  tribe  of 
,infe(fts,  are  the  mufquitoes  ; and  a large  black  ant,  the 
pain  of  whofe  bite  is  almoft  intolerable,  during  the  fliort 
time  it  lafts.  The  mufquitoes,  alfo,  make  up  the  defici- 
ency of  their  number,  by  the  feverity  of  their  venomous 
probofcis. 

The  inhabitants  whom  we  met  with  here,  had  little  of 
that  fierce  or  wild  appearance  common  to  people  in  their 
fituation  ; but,  on  the  contrary,  feemed  mild  and  cheerful, 
without  referve  or  jealoufy  of  ftrangers.  This,  however, 
may  arife  from  their  having  little  to  lofe  or  care  for. 

With  refpe(ft  to  perfonal  activity  or  genius,  we  can  fay 
but  little  of  either.  They  do  not  feem  to  poflefs  the  firft  in 
any  remarkable  degree ; and  as  for  the  laft,  they  have,  to 
appearance,  lefs  than  even  the  half-animated  inhabitants 
of  Terra  del  Fuego,  who  have  not  invention  fuflicient  to 
make  clothing  for  defending  themfelves  from  the  rigor  of 

their 


112 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  their  climate,  though  furnifhed  with  the  materials.  The 
. fmall  hick,  rudely  pointed,  which  one  of  them  carried  in 
his  hand,  was  the  only  thing  we  faw  that  required  any  me- 
chanical exertion,  if  we  except  the  fixing  on  the  feet  of 
fome  of  them  pieces  of  kangooroo  fkin,  tied  with  thongs  ; 
though  it  could  not  be  learnt  whether  thefe  were  in  ufe  as 
flioes,  or  only  to  defend  fome  fore.  It  mufl  be  owned,  how- 
ever, they  are  mailers  of  fome  contrivance  in  the  manner 
of  cutting  their  arms  and  bodies  in  lines  of  different  lengths 
and  diredlions,  which  are  raifed  confiderably  above  the  fur- 
face  of  the  fkin,  fo  that  it  is  difficult  to  guefs  the  method 
they  ufe  in  executing  this  embroidery  of  their  perfons. 
Their  not  expreffing  that  furprize  which  one  might  have 
expelled  from  their  feeing  men  fo  much  unlike  themfelves, 
and  things,  to  which,  we  were  well  affured,  they  had  been 
hitherto  utter  flrangers  ; their  indifference  for  our  prefents  ; 
and  their  general  inattention  ; were  fufficient  proofs  of  their 
not  poffeffing  any  acutenefs  of  underftanding. 

Their  colour  is  a dull  black,  and  not  quite  fo  deep  as 
that  of  the  African  Negroes.  It  fliould  feem  alfo,  that  they 
fometimes  heightened  their  black  colour,  by  fmutting  their 
bodies ; as  a mark  was  left  behind  on  any  clean  fubllance, 
fuch  as  white  paper,  when  they  handled  it.  Their  hair, 
however,  is  perfecSlly  woolly,  and  it  is  clotted  or  divided 
into  fmall  parcels,  like  that  of  the  Hottentots,  with  the  ufe 
of  fome  fort  of  greafe,  mixed  with  a red  paint  or  ochre, 
which  they  fmear  in  great  abundance  over  their  heads. 
This  practice,  as  fome  might  imagine,  has  not  the  effedl  of 
changing  their  hair  into  the  frizzling  texture  we  obferved  ; 
for,  on  examining  the  head  of  a boy,  which  appeared  never 
to  have  been  fmeared,  I found  the  hair  to  be  of  the  fame 

kind. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


kind.  Their  nofes,  though  not  flat,  are  broad  and  full.  1777. 
The  lower  part  of  the  face  projects  a good  deal,  as  is  the  . 
cafe  of  moft  Indians  I have  feen ; fo  that  a line  let  fall  from 
the  forehead,  would  cut  off  a much  larger  portion  than  it 
would  in  Europeans.  Their  eyes  are  of  a middling  fize, 
with  the  white  lefs  clear  than  in  us ; and  though  not  re- 
markably quick  or  piercing,  fuch  as  give  a frank  cheerful 
call  to  the  whole  countenance.  Their  teeth  are  broad,  but 
not  equal,  nor  well  fet ; and,  either  from  nature  or  from 
dirt,  not  of  fo  true  a white  as  is  ufual  among  people  of  a 
black  colour.  Their  mouths  are  rather  wide  ; but  this  ap- 
pearance feems  heightened  by  wearing  their  beards  long, 
and  clotted  with  paint,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  hair  on 
their  heads.  In  other  refpecSls,  they  are  well-proportioned; 
though  the  belly  feems  rather  projedling.  This  may  be 
owing  to  the  want  of  compreflion  there,  which  few  nations 
do  not  life,  more  or  lefs.  The  pofture  of  which  they  feem 
fondeft,  is  to  Hand  with  one  fide  forward,  or  the  upper  part 
of  the  body  gently  reclined,  and  one  hand  grafping  (acrofs 
the  back)  the  oppofite  arm,  which  hangs  down  by  the  pro- 
je61ing  fide. 

What  the  ancient  Poets  tell  us  of  Fauns  and  Satyrs  living 
in  hollow  trees,  is  here  realized.  Some  wretched  conflruc- 
tions  of  flicks,  covered  with  bark,  which  do  not  even  deferve 
the  name  of  huts,  were  indeed  found  near  the  fliore  in  the 
bay ; but  thefe  feemed  only  to  have  been  ere6led  for  tem- 
porary purpofes  ; and  many  of  their  largeft  trees  were  con- 
verted into  more  comfortable  habitations.  Thefe  had  their 
trunks  hollowed  out  by  fire,  to  the  height  of  fix  or  feven 
feet ; and  that  they  take  up  their  abode  in  them  fometimes, 
was  evident  from  the  hearths,  made  of  clay,  to  contain  the 
VoL.  I,  Q fire 


A VOYAGE  TO 


114 

1777.  fire  in  the  middle,  leaving  room  for  fonr  or  five  perfbns  to 
January.  ^ ^ fame  time,  thefe  places  of  flielter  are 

durable ; for  they  take  care  to  leave  one  fide  of  the  tree 
found,  which  is  fufficient  to  keep  it  growing  as  luxuriantly 
as  thofe  which  remain  untouched. 

The  inhabitants  of  this  place  are,  doubtlefs,  from  the 
■fame  ftock  with  thofe  of  the  Northern  parts  of  New  HoU 
land.  Though  fome  of  the  circumftances  mentioned  by 
Dampier,  relative  to  thofe  he  met  with  on  the  Weftern  coaft 
of  this  country,  fuch  as  their  defective  light,  and  want  of 
fore  teeth,  are  not  found  here ; and  though  Hawkefworth’s 
account  of  thofe  met  with  by  Captain  Cook  on  the  Eaft  fide,, 
lliews  alfo  that  they  differ  in  many  refpedfs ; yet  ftill,  upon 
the  whole,  I am  perfuaded  that  diflance  of  place,  entire  fe- 
paration,  diverlity  of  climate,  and  length  of  time,  all  concur- 
ring to  operate,  will  account  for  greater  differences,  both 
as  to  their  perfons  and  as  to  their  cuftoms,  than  really  exift 
between  our  Van  Diemen’s  Land  natives,  and  thofe  defcribed 
by  Dampier,  and  in  Captain  Cook’s  firft  voyage.  This  is 
certain,  that  the  figure  of  one  of  thofe  feen  in  Endeavour 
River,  and  reprefented  in  Sidney  Parkinfon’s  Journal  of  that 
voyage,  very  much  refembles  our  viliters  in  Adventure  Bay. 
That  there  is  not  the  like  refemblance  in  their  language,  is 
a circumftance  that  need  not  create  any  difficulty.  For 
though  the  agreement  of  the  languages  of  people  living 
diifant  from  each  other,  may  be  affumed  as  a ftrong  argu- 
ment for  their  having  fprung  from  one  common  fource; 

* Tafman,  when  in  the  bay  of  Frederick  Henry,  adjoining  to  Adventure  Bay,  found 
two  trees,  one  of  which  was  two  fathoms,  and  the  other  two  fathoms  and  a half  in  girth, 
and  fixty  or  fixty-five  feet  high,  from  the  root  to  the  branches.  See  his  Voyage^  in  Har^ 
ris's  Colkliion^  Campbell’s  Edition^  Vol.  i.  p.  326. 


difagreement 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


115 


clifagreement  of  language  is  by  no  means  a proof  of  the 
contrary 

However,  we  muft  have  a far  more  intimate  acquaintance 
Avith  the  languages  fpoken  here  and  in  the  more  Northern 
parts  of  New  Holland,  before  we  can  be  warranted  to  pro- 
nounce that  they  are  totally  different.  Nay,  we  have  good 
grounds  for  the  oppofite  opinion ; for  we  found  that  the 
animal  called  kangooroo  at  Endeavour  river,  was  known  un- 
der the  fame  name  here  ; and  I need  not  obferve,  that  it  is 
fcarcely  pollible  to  fuppofe  that  this  was  not  tranfmitted 
from  one  another,  but  accidentally  adopted  by  two  nations, 
differing  in  language  and  extradlion.  Belides,  as  it  feems 
very  improbable  that  the  Van  Diemen’s  Land  inhabitants 
lliould  have  ever  loft  the  ufe  of  canoes  or  failing  veffels,  if 
they  had  been  originally  conveyed  thither  by  fea,  we  muft 
neceffarily  admit  that  they,  as  well  as  the  kangooroo  itfelf, 
have  been  ftragglers  by  land  from  the  more  Northern  parts 
of  the  country.  And  if  there  be  any  force  in  this  obferva- 
tion,  while  it  traces  the  origin  of  the  people,  it  will,  at  the 


1777. 

J anuary. 


* The  ingenious  Author  of  Rkherches  fur  les  yfmericains,  illuftrates  the  grounds  of  this 
aflertion  in  the  following  fatisfadlory  manner : “ C’eft  quelque  chofe  de  furprenant,  que 
la  foule  des  idiomes,  tous  varies  entr’eux,  que  parlent  les  naturels  de  I’Amerique  Sep- 
“ tentrionale.  Qu’on  reduife  ces  idiomes  a des  racines,  qu’on  les  fimplifie,  qu’on  en 
“ fepare  les  dialedtes  et  les  jargons  derives,  il  en  refulte  toujours  cinq  ou  fix  langues-meres, 
“ refpedlivement  incomprehenfibles.  On  a obferve  la  meme  fingularlte  dans  la  Siberie  et 
“ la  Tartaric,  ou  le  nombre  des  idiomes,  et  des  dialedfes,  eft  egalement  multiplie ; et  rien 
“ n’eft  plus  commun,  que  d’y  voir  deux  hordes  voifmes  qui  ne  fe  comprennent  point.  On 
retrouve  cette  meme  multiplicite  de  jargons  dans  toutes  les  Provinces  de  I’Amerique 
“ Meridionale.”  [He  might  alfo  have  included  Africa.]  “ II  y abeaucoup  d’apparence 
“ que  la  vie  fauva^e,  en  difperfant  les  homines  par  petites  troupes  ifolees  dans  des  hois  cpais^  occa~ 
“ fione  necrffairement  cette  grande  diverjite  des  langues^  dont  le  nombre  diminue  a mefure  que 
“ la  fociete,  en  raflemblant  les  barbares  vagabonds,  en  forme  un  corps  de  nation.  Alors 
I’idiome  le  plus  riche,  ou  le  moins  pauvre  en  mots,  devient  dominant,  et  abforbe  les 
“ autres.”  Tom.  i.  p.  159,  160. 

Q2 


fame 


ii6 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  fame  time,  ferve  to  fix  another  point,  if  Captain  Cook  and 
January.  ^ Captain  Fumeaux  have  not  already  decided  it,  that  New 
Holland  is  no  where  totally  divided  by  the  fea  into  iflands, 
as  fome  have  imagined 

As  the  New  Hollanders  feem  all  to  be  of  the  fame  extrac- 
tion, fo  neither  do  I think  there  is  any  thing  peculiar  in 
them.  On  the  contrary,  they  much  refemble  many  of  the 
inhabitants  whom  I have  feen  at  the  iflands  Tanna  and 
Mallicolla.  Nay,  there  is  even  fome  foundation  for  hazard- 
ing a fuppofition,  that  they  may  have  originally  come  from 
the  fame  place  with  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  South  Sea. 
For,  of  only  about  ten  words  which  we  could  get  from  them, 
that  which  exprelTes  cold^  differs  little  from  that  of  New 
Zealand  and  Otaheite ; the  firfl  being  Mallareede^  the  fecond 
Makkareede^  and  the  third  Mareede.  The  refl:  of  our  very 
fcanty  Van  Diemen’s  Land  Vocabulary  is  as  follows  : 


Quadne, 

A woman. 

Everai, 

T^he  eye. 

Muidje, 

"The  nofe. 

Kamy, 

I’he  teeth^  mouthy  or  tongue. 

Laerenne, 

A fmall  bird^  a native  of  the  woods  here. 

Koygee, 

I’he  ear. 

Noonga, 

Elevated  fears  on  the  body. 

Teegera, 

7b  eat. 

Togarago, 

I muft  be  gone^  or,  I will  go. 

Their  pronunciation  is  not  difagreeable,  but  rather  quick ; 
though  not  more  fo  than  is  that  of  other  nations  of  the 
South  Sea ; and,  if  we  may  depend  upon  the  affinity  of  lan- 

* Dampier  feetns  to  be  of  this  opinion.  Vol.  iii.  p.  104.  125. 


guages 


».  * ' 1 


• -V  ^ ^ Tfc '.W  • 


7 ■ *■ 


— • • m(|i  »i  I .^■..■.i..M«-./^ 


■ ■'■  ••  '>■■■■•■'> ''Wi* 


<•■,  '4'  •; 


(tt- 


' 'is 

r -‘V  S';’-’’ 


I"  ■-  / * ■'  ’;!'’  ^ 

' V-/ . • ' '‘^.•'  .^...  • ■ •fiv:>'; 


■;V' 


■,l^. 


V” 

■■  .'ItjJR 


.K.m.  ^ 

*n.  •'  * 


m ; • .^-  r>.., 


-i,.V  ■ 

• ■#■ 

t « 


M -l-  T ' 


i 

I 

■-i'" 


r • 


*’  V -'.Tt  ■ ' ^ '■  ' , -^V’  ■;■•:,  . ■ ' . 4 : 


'^'7 


' fj^  - : 


■;•>;  » ' ; V-'-'V; 


:i  ■ ■•>> 

j;'.’  -. 


^ ■ 

a>-' 


> *:  ■ «Ji  i-  - " 


1^' 


■ir  i... 


VJ  . 

f ■' ' 


h V 


: , 

■' 


is 


.A.. 


v '\/.  ■’tv'i' <\'.  'w  A -j 


' >•  ■*  . 


y.  ' - **’ 


'•''if •'  .■ 


: i^- 


l^i 


ytiy:,:,.; 

'^PW.  . 


■':  is:..  ' . r . -^ 


A 1 


' !S‘ 


. Tv  I 


■ 


:i  . '■•iVv  •"  .-.  '1^ 

'."  ’ . /■' ivy' iVy ■■■■'■' '-’W^--. 'iV'.;,  ' s ' ■ 7 ■ 


(1  '■' 


hA- 


] 


,S  1 '■^:>rkx  ' '■ 

■■■  -I 


'»•> 

■■•'-  y,'  ■ ■■  ■ ' 

\ ■ y- 

J/  .'  V‘^y- 


■ . 


.;A.' 


.■:^.  • -t  :;..7r:t-M. 

*.«■  -t:yy 


■ . • .; y ,.^  'ty.  » ■ i>’-'^ 


StJ 


•<<i4f 


hi  ]:  * 

■-.  .j  .j^R.  ( ^ 


.J 


VlE}y'  !>/'  //if  South  Side  o/'AjJI'EXTrXE  li.iy 


J'EAX or  AnrEXTi'KE  Hay 

o/i 


0 • m O . O - 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

guages  as  a clue  to  guide  us  in  difcovering  the  origin  of 
nations,  I have  no  doubt  but  we  fliall  find,  on  a diligent 
inquiry,  and  when  opportunities  offer  to  collect  accurately 
a fufhcient  number  of  thefe  words,  and  to  compare  them, 
that  all  the  people  from  New  Holland,  Eaflward  to  Eafter 
Illand,  have  been  derived  from  the  fame  common  root 

* We  find  Mr.  Anderfon’s  notions  on  this  fubje£l  conformable  to  thofe  of  Mr. 
Marfden,  who  has  remarked,  “ that  one  general  language  prevailed  (however  mutilated 
“ and  changed  in  the  courfe  of  time)  throughout  all  this  portion  of  the  world,  from 
“ Madagafcar  to  the  moft  diftant  difcoveries  Eaftward  ; of  which  the  Malay  is  a dialedl, 
“ much  corrupted  or  refined  by  a mixture  of  other  tongues.  This  very  extenfive  fimi- 
“ larity  of  language  indicates  a common  origin  of  the  inhabitants  ; but  the  circumftances 
“ and  progrefs  of  their  feparation  are  wrapped  in  the  darkeft  veil  of  obfcurity.”  Hi/iory 
of  Sumatra^  p.  35. 

See  alfo  his  very  curious  paper,  read  before  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  and  publiflied 
in  their  Archaologia^  Vol.  vi.  p.  155  ; where  his  fentiments  on  this  fubjedl  are  explained 
more  at  large,  and  illuftrated  by  two  Tables  of  correfponding  Words. 


II7 

1777* 

January. 


C 11  A P. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


ii8 


CHAP.  VII. 

^he  Pajfage  from  Van  T>iemerCs  Land  to  New  Zealand. — 
Employments  in  ^een  Charlotte's  Sound. — L'ranfaBions 
with  the  Natives  there. — Intelligence  about  the  Mafacre 
of  the  Adventure'’s  Boat's  Crew. — Account  of  the  Chief  who 
headed  the  Party  on  that  Occafion. — Of  the  tzvo  young 
Men  who  embark  to  attend  Omai. — Various  Remarks 
on  the  Inhabitants. — Afronomical  and  Nautical  Obfer- 
vations. 

1777-  A T eight  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  30th  of  January, 
1 - — jTjL  a light  breeze  fpringing  up  at  Weft,  we  weighed  an- 

Thurfday  30.  chor,  and  put  to  fea  from  Adventure  Bay.  Soon  after,  the 
wind  veered  to  the  Southward,  and  increafed  to  a perfedt 
ftorm.  Its  fury  abated  in  the  evening,  when  it  veered  to 
the  Eaft  and  North  Eaft. 

This  gale  was  indicated  by  the  barometer,  for  the  wind 
no  fooner  began  to  blow,  than  the  mercury  in  the  tube 
began  to  fall.  Another  remarkable  thing  attended  the 
coming  on  of  this  wind,  which  was  very  faint  at  firft.  It 
brought  with  it  a degree  of  heat  that  was  almoft  intolerable. 
The  mercury  in  the  thermometer  rofe,  as  it  were  inftanta- 
neoully,  from  about  70°  to  near  90°.  This  heat  was  of  fo 
fliort  a continuance,  that  it  feemed  to  be  wafted  away  be- 
fore the  breeze  that  brought  it ; fo  that  fome  on  board  did 
not  perceive  it. 


We 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN.  119 

We  purfued  our  courfe  to  the  Eaftward,  without  meeting  1777. 
with  any  thing  worthy  of  note,  till  the  night  between  the  . 

6th  and  7th  of  February,  when  a marine  belonging  to  the  Friday  7. 
Difcovery  fell  over-board,  and  was  never  feen  afterward. 

This  was  the  fecond  misfortune  of  the  kind  that  had  hap- 
pened to  Captain  Clerke  fince  he  left  England. 

On  the  loth,  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  we  difcovered  the  Monday  10. 
land  of  New  Zealand.  The  part  we  faw  proved  to  be  Rock’s 
Point,  and  bore  South  Eaft  by  South,  about  eight  or  nine 
leagues  diftant.  During  this  run  from  Van  Diemen’s  Land, 
the  wind,  for  the  firft  four  or  five  days,  was  at  North  Eaft, 

North,  and  North  North  Weft,  and  blew,  for  the  moft  part, 
a gentle  breeze.  It  afterward  veered  to  South  Eaft,  where 
it  remained  twenty-four  hours.  It  then  came  to  Weft  and 
South  Weft  ; in  which  points  it  continued,  with  very  little  - 
deviation,  till  we  reached  New  Zealand. 

After  making  the  land,  I fleered  for  Cape  Farewell,  which 
at  day -break,  the  next  morning,  bore  South  by  W eft,  diftant  Tuefday  1 1 
about  four  leagues.  At  eight  o’clock,  it  bore  South  Weft 
by  South,  about  five  leagues  diftant ; and,  in  this  fituation, 
we  had  forty-five  fathoms  water  over  a fandy  bottom.  In 
rounding  the  Cape  we  had  fifty  fathoms,  and  the  fame  fort 
of  bottom. 

I now  fleered  for  Stephens’s  Ifland,  which  w'e  came  up 
with  at  nine  o’clock  at  night;  and  at  ten,  next  morning,  wednef.  iz 
anchored  in  our  old  ftation,  in  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound 
Unwilling  to  lofe  any  time,  our  operations  commenced  that 
very  afternoon,  when  we  landed  a number  of  empty  water- 
cafks,  and  began  to  clear  a place  where  we  might  fet  up 

* See  the  Chart  of  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound,  in  Hawkefworth’s  Colledlion,  Vol.  ii. 

P-  385- 


the 


£20 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777- 

February. 

V ; 


Thurfday  13. 


the  two  obfervatories,  and  tents  for  the  reception  of  a guard, 
and  of  fuch  of  our  people  whofe  bulinefs  might  make  it  ne- 
celTary  for  them  to  remain  on  lliore. 

We  had  not  been  long  at  anchor  before  feveral  canoes, 
filled  with  natives,  came  along-fide  of  the  Ihips ; but  very 
few  of  them  would  venture  on  board  ; which  appeared  the 
more  extraordinary,  as  I was  well  known  to  them  all.  There 
was  one  man  in  particular  amongft  them,  whom  I had 
treated  with  remarkable  kindnefs,  during  the  whole  of  my 
flay  when  I was  laft  here.  Yet  now,  neither  profelfions  of 
friendfliip,  nor  prefents,  could  prevail  upon  him  to  come 
into  the  fliip.  This  fliynefs  was  to  be  accounted  for  only 
upon  this  fuppofition,  that  they  were  apprehenfive  we  had 
revifited  their  country,  in  order  to  revenge  the  death  of 
Captain  Furneaux’s  people.  Seeing  Omai  on  board  my  fliip 
now,  whom  they  muft  have  remembered  to  have  feen  on 
board  the  Adventure  when  the  melancholy  affair  hap- 
pened, and  whofe  firlf  converfation  with  them,  as  they 
approached,  generally  turned  on  that  fubjedl,  they  muft 
be  well  affured  that  I was  no  longer  a ftranger  to  it.  I 
thought  it  neceffary,  therefore,  to  ufe  every  endeavour  to 
alfure  them  of  the  continuance  of  my  friendfliip,  and  that 
I fliould  not  difturb  them  on  that  account.  I do  not  know 
whether  this  had  any  weight  with  them  ; but  certain  it  is, 
that  they  very  foon  laid  afide  aU  manner  of  reftraint  and 
diftruft. 

On  the  13th  we  fet  up  two  tents,  one  from  each  fliip ; on 
the  fame  fpot  where  we  had  pitched  them  formerly.  The 
obfervatories  were  at  the  fame  time  ere61:ed ; and  Meflfs. 
King  and  Bayly  began  their  operations  immediately,  to  find 
the  rate  of  the  time-keeper,  and  to  make  other  obfervations. 
The  remainder  of  the  empty  water-cafks  were  alfo  fent  on 

fliore, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


I2I 


Iliore,  with  the  cooper  to  trim,  and  a fufficient  number  of  ,777. 
failors  to  fill  them.  Two  men  were  appointed  to  brew  . 
fpruce  beer ; and  the  carpenter  and  his  crew  were  ordered 
to  cut  wood.  A boat,  with  a party  of  men,  under  the  di- 
rection of  one  of  the  mates,  was  fent  to  coUeCl  grafs  for  our 
cattle ; and  the  people  that  remained  on  board  were  em- 
ployed in  refitting  the  Ihip,  and  arranging  the  provifions. 

In  this  manner  we  were  all  profitably  bufied  during  our 
ftay.  For  the  protection  of  the  party  on  fliore,  I appointed 
a guard  of  ten  marines,  and  ordered  arms  for  all  the  work- 
men ; and  Mr.  King,  and  two  or  three  petty  officers,  con- 
ftantly  remained  with  them.  A boat  was  never  fent  to  any 
confiderable  diftance  from  the  fhips  without  being  armed, 
and  under  the  direction  of  fuch  officers  as  I could  depend 
upon,  and  who  were  well  acquainted  with  the  natives. 

During  my  former  vifits  to  this  country,  I had  never  taken 
fome  of  thefe  precautions ; nor  were  they,  I firmly  believe, 
more  necelfary  now  than  they  had  been  formerly.  But  after 
the  tragical  fate  of  the  Adventure’s  boat’s  crew  in  this 
found,  and  of  Captain  Marion  du  Frefne,  and  of  fome  of 
his  people,  in  the  Bay  of  Iffands  it  was  impoffible  totally 
to  diveft  ourfelves  of  all  apprehenfion  of  experiencing  a 
fimilar  calamity. 

If  the  natives  entertained  any  fufpicion  of  our  reveng- 
ing thefe  aCls  of  barbarity,  they  very  foon  laid  it  afide. 

For,  during  the  courfe  of  this  day,  a great  number  of  fa- 
milies came  from  different  parts  of  the  coaft,  and  took  up 
their  refidence  clofe  to  us  ; fo  that  there  was  not  a fpot 
in  the  cove  where  a hut  could  be  put  up,  that  was  not 
occupied  by  them,  except  the  place  where  we  had  fixed 


* In  1772. 


VoL.  I. 


R 


our 


122 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  our  little  encampment.  This  they  left  us  in  quiet  poffef- 
^ February.  ^ they  camc  and  took  away  the  ruins  of  fome 

old  huts  that  were  there,  as  materials  for  their  new  erec- 
tions. 

It  is  curious  to  obferve  with  what  facility  they  build  thefe 
occahonal  places  of  abode.  I have  feen  above  twenty  of 
them  ere6led  on  a fpot  of  ground,  that,  not  an  hour  before, 
was  covered  with  flirubs  and  plants.  They  generally  bring 
fome  part  of  the  materials  with  them ; the  reft  they  find 
upon  the  premifes.  I was  prefent  when  a number  of  people 
landed,  and  built  one  of  thefe  villages.  The  moment  the 
canoes  reached  the  fhore,  the  men  leaped  out,  and  at  once 
took  poflelfion  of  a piece  of  ground,  by  tearing  up  the  plants 
and  Ihrubs,  or  fticking  up  fome  part  of  the  framing  of  a 
hut.  They  then  returned  to  their  canoes,  and  fecured  their 
weapons,  by  fetting  them  up  againft  a tree,  or  placing  them 
in  fuch  a pofition,  that  they  could  be  laid  hold  of  in  an  in- 
ftant.  I took  particular  notice  that  no  one  negle(5ted  this 
precaution.  While  the  men  were  employed  in  raifing  the 
huts,  the  women  were  not  idle.  Some  were  ftationed  to 
take  care  of  the  canoes ; others  to  fecure  the  provifions, 
and  the  few  utenfils  in  their  poflTelfion  ; and  the  reft  went 
to  gather  dry  fticks,  that  a fire  might  be  prepared  for  dref- 
fing  their  victuals.  As  to  the  children,  I kept  them,  as 
alfo  fome  of  the  more  aged,  fufficiently  occupied  in  fcramb- 
ling  for  beads,  tiU  I had  emptied  my  pockets,  and  then  I 
left  them. 

Thefe  temporary  habitations  are  abundantly  fufficient  to 
afford  fhelter  from  the  wind  and  rain,  which  is  the  only 
purpofe  they  are  meant  to  anfwer.  I obferved  that,  gene- 
rally, if  not  always,  the  fame  tribe  or  family,  though  it 
were  ever  fo  large,  aflbciated  and  built  together ; fo  that 

we 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

we  frequently  faw  a village,  as  well  as  their  larger  towns, 
divided  into  different  diftri6ts,  by  low  pallifades,  or  fome 
fimilar  mode  of  reparation. 

The  advantage  we  received  from  the  natives  coming  to 
live  with  us,  was  not  inconfiderable.  For,  every  day,  when 
the  weather  would  permit,  fome  of  them  went  out  to 
catch  fifli ; and  we  generally  got,  by  exchanges,  a good 
diare  of  the  prodiTce  of  their  labours.  This  fupply,  and 
what  our  own  nets  and  lines  afforded  us,  was  fo  ample, 
that  we  feldom  were  in  want  of  fifli.  Nor  was  there  any 
deficiency  of  other  refrefliments.  Celery,  fcurvy-grafs, 
and  portable  foup  were  boiled  with  the  peafe  and  wheat, 
for  both  fhips  companies,  every  day  during  our  whole 
ftay ; and  they  had  fpruce-beer  for  their  drink.  So  that, 
if  any  of  our  people  had  contradfed  the  feeds  of  the  fcurvy, 
fuch  a regimen  foon  removed  them.  But  the  truth  is, 
when  we  arrived  here,  there  were  only  two  invalids  (and 
thefe  on  board  the  Refolution)  upon  the  lick  lifts  in  both 
Blips. 

Belides  the  natives  who  took  up  their  abode  clofe  to  us, 
we  were  occafionally  vifited  by  others  of  them,  whofe  refi- 
dence  was  not  far  off ; and  by  fome  who  lived  more  remote. 
Their  articles  of  commerce  were,  curiofities,  fiBi,  and  wo- 
men. The  two  firfl  always  came  to  a good  market ; which 
the  latter  did  not.  The  feamen  had  taken  a kind  of  dillike 
to  thefe  people ; and  were  either  unwilling,  or  afraid,  to 
alfociate  with  them ; which  produced  this  good  effedf,  that 
I knew  no  inlfance  of  a man’s  quitting  his  Ration,  to  go  to 
their  habitations. 

A conne6lion  with  women  I allow,  becaufe  I cannot  pre- 
vent it ; but  never  encourage,  becaufe  I always  dread  its 
confequences.  I know,  indeed,  that  many  men  are  of  opi- 

R 2 nion, 


123 


1777- 

February. 

— .y 


124 


A VOYAGE  TO 


T777.  nion,  that  fuch  an  intercourfe  is  one  of  our  great efl  fecurities 
^ February.^  amongft  favages  ; and  perhaps  they  who,  either  from  ne- 
ceffity  or  choice,  are  to  remain  and  fettle  with  them,  may 
find  it  fo.  But  with  travellers  and  tranfient  vifiters,  fuch  as 
we  were,  it  is  generally  otherwife  ; and,  in  our  fituation,  a 
connection  with  their  women  betrays  more  men  than  it 
faves.  What  elfe  can  be  reafonably  expeCted,  fince  all  their 
views  are  felfifli,  without  the  leaft  mixture  of  regard  or  at- 
tachment ? My  own  experience,  at  leaft,  which  hath  been 
pretty  extenfive,  hath  not  pointed  out  to  me  one  inftance  to 
the  contrary. 

Amongft  our  occafional  vifiters,  was  a chief  named  Ka- 
hoora,  who,  as  I was  informed,  headed  the  party  that  cut 
off  Captain  Furneaux’s  people,  and  himfelf  killed  Mr.  Rowe, 
the  officer  who  commanded.  To  judge  of  the  character  of 
Kahoora,  by  what  I heard  from  many  of  his  countrymen, 
he  feemed  to  be  more  feared  than  beloved  amongft  them. 
Not  fatisfied  with  telling  me  that  he  was  a very  bad  man, 
fome  of  them  even  importuned  me  to  kiU  him  : and,  I be- 
lieve, they  were  not  a little  furprifed  that  I did  not  liften  to 
them ; for,  according  to  their  ideas  of  equity,  this  ought  to 
have  been  done.  But  if  I had  followed  the  advice  of  all 
our  pretended  friends,  I might  have  extirpated  the  whole 
race  ; for  the  people  of  each  hamlet  or  village,  by  turns, 
applied  to  me  to  deftroy  the  other.  One  would  have  al- 
moft  thought  it  impoffible,  that  fo  flriking  a proof  of  the 
divided  Rate  in  which  this  miferable  people  live,  could 
have  been  affigned.  And  yet  I was  fure  that  1 did  not 
mifconceive  the  meaning  of  thofe  who  made  thefe  firange 
applications  to  me ; for  Omai,  whofe  language  was  a dialed 
of  their  own,  and  perfectly  underftood  all  that  they  faid, 
was  our  interpreter. 


On 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


125 


On  the  15th,  I made  an  excurfion  in  my  boat  to  look  for 
grafs,  and  vilited  the  Hippah,  or  fortified  village  at  the 
South  Weft  point  of  Motuara,  and  the  places  where  our 
gardens  had  been  planted  on  that  illand.  There  were  no 
people  at  the  former ; but  the  houfes  and  pallifades  had 
been  rebuilt,  and  were  now  in  a ftate  of  good  repair ; and 
there  were  other  evident  marks  of  its  having  been  inha- 
bited not  long  before.  It  would  be  unneceflTary,  at  prefent, 
to  give  a particular  account  of  this  Hippah,  fufficient  notice 
having  been  taken  of  it  in  the  Account  of  my  firft  Voyage, 
to  which  I refer  '-i'' ; and  to  the  annexed  drawing,  which  re- 
prefents  part  of  the  infide  of  the  village,  and  will  convey  a 
better  idea  of  it,  than  any  written  defcription. 

When  the  Adventure  arrived  firft  at  Queen  Charlotte’s 
Sound,  in  1773  t,  Mr.  Bayly  fixed  upon  this  place  for  mak- 
ing his  obfervations  ; and  he,  and  the  people  with  him,  at 
their  leifure  hours,  planted  feveral  fpots  with  Englifh  gar- 
den feeds.  Not  the  leaft  veftige  of  thefe  now  remained.  It 
is  probable  that  they  had  been  all  rooted  out  to  make  room 
for  buildings,  when  the  village  was  reinhabited  : for,  at  all 
the  other  gardens  then  planted  by  Captain  Furneaux,  al- 
though now  wholly  over-run  with  the  weeds  of  the  coun- 
try, we  found  cabbages,  onions,  leeks,  purflain,  radifhes, 
muftard.  See.  and  a few  potatoes.  Thefe  potatoes,  which 
were  firft  brought  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  had  been 
greatly  improved  by  change  of  foil ; and,  with  proper  cul- 
tivation, would  be  fuperior  to  thofe  produced  in  moft  other 
countries.  Though  the  New  Zealanders  are  fond  of  this 
root,  it  was  evident  that  they  had  not  taken  the  trouble  to 
plant  a fingle  one  (much  lefs  any  other  of  the  articles  which 

* Hawkefworth’s  CollecTtion,  Vol.  ii.  p.  395,  &c. 

t Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  120. 

we 


1777- 

February. 

' f 

Saturday  15. 


126 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777. 

February. 

\ mJ 


Sunday  16. 


we  had  introduced)  ; and  if  it  were  not  for  the  difficulty  of 
clearing  ground  where  potatoes  had  been  once  planted, 
there  would  not  have  been  any  now  remaining. 

On  the  1 6th,  at  day-break,  I fet  out  with  a party  of  men, 
in  five  boats,  to  coUeft  food  for  our  cattle.  Captain  Clerke, 
and  feveral  of  the  officers,  Omai,  and  two  of  the  natives, 
accompanied  me.  We  proceeded  about  three  leagues  up 
the  found,  and  then  landed  on  the  Eafi:  fide,  at  a place 
where  I had  formerly  been.  Here  we  cut  as  much  grafs  as 
loaded  the  two  launches. 

As  we  returned  down  the  found,  we  vifited  Grafs  Cove, 
the  memorable  fcene  of  the  Malfacre  of  Captain  Furneaux’s 
people.  Here  I met  with  my  old  friend  Pedro,  who  was 
almoft  continually  with  me  the  lafi:  time  I was  in  this  found, 
and  is  mentioned  in  my  Hiftory  of  that  Voyage  He,  and 
another  of  his  countrymen,  received  us  on  the  beach, 
armed  with  the  pa-too  and  fpear.  Whether  this  form  of 
reception  was  a mark  of  their  courtefy  or  of  their  fear,  I 
cannot  fay ; but  1 thought  they  betrayed  manifeft  figns  of 
the  latter.  However,  if  they  had  any  apprehenfions,  a few 
prefents  foon  removed  them,  and  brought  down  to  the 
beach  two  or  three  more  of  the  family ; but  the  greatefl: 
part  of  them  remained  out  of  fight. 

Whilft  we  were  at  this  place,  our  curiofity  prompted  us  to 
inquire  into  the  circumftances  attending  the  melancholy 
fate  of  our  countrymen ; and  Omai  was  made  ufe  of  as  our 
interpreter  for  this  purpofe.  Pedro,  and  the  reft  of  the  na- 
tives prefent,  anfwered  all  the  queftions  that  were  put  to 
them  on  the  fubjecft,  without  referve,  and  like  men  who 
are  under  no  dread  of  puniffiment  for  a crime  of  which 
they  are  not  guilty.  For  we  already  knew  that  none  of 

* Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  158,  159. 

them 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

them  had  been  concerned  in  the  unhappy  tranfa6Iion.  They 
told  us,  that  while  our  people  were  fitting  at  dinner,  fur- 
rounded  by  feveral  of  the  natives,  fome  of  the  latter  ftole,  or 
fnatched  from  them,  fome  bread  and  fifli,  for  which  they 
were  beat.  This  being  refented,  a quarrel  enfued,  and  two 
New  Zealanders  were  fliot  dead,  by  the  only  two  mufquets 
that  w^ere  fired.  For  before  our  people  had  time  to  dif- 
charge  a third,  or  to  load  again  thofe  that  had  been  fired, 
the  natives  ruflied  in  upon  them,  overpow^ered  them  with 
their  numbers,  and  put  them  all  to  death.  Pedro  and  his 
companions,  befides  relating  the  hiftory  of  the  maflacre, 
made  us  acquainted  with  the  very  fpot  that  was  the  fcene  of 
it.  It  is  at  the  corner  of  the  cove  on  the  right-hand.  They 
pointed  to  the  place  of  the  fun,  to  mark  to  us  at  what  hour 
of  the  day  it  happened ; .and,  according  to  this,  it  mufi:  have 
been  late  in  the  afternoon.  They  alfo  fliewed  us  the  place 
where  the  boat  lay ; and  it  appeared  to  be  about  two  hun- 
dred yards  diftant  from  that  where  the  crew  were  feated. 
One  of  their  number,  a black  fervant  of  Captain  Furneaux, 
was  left  in  the  boat  to  take  care  of  her. 

We  were  afterward  told  that  this  black  was  the  caufe  of 
the  quarrel,  which  was  faid  to  have  happened  thus  : One  of 
the  natives  healing  fomething  out  of  the  boat,  the  Negro 
gave  him  a fevere  blow  with  a ftick.  The  cries  of  the  fel- 
low being  heard  by  his  countrymen  at  a difiance,  they 
imagined  he  was  killed,  and  immediately  began  the  attack 
on  our  people ; who,  before  they  had  time  to  reach  the 
boat,  or  to  arm  themfelves  againfi  the  unexpedfed  im- 
pending danger,  fell  a facrifice  to  the  fury  of  their  favage 
aflTailants. 

The  firfi  of  thefe  accounts,  was  confirmed  by  the  tefii- 
mony  of  many  of  the  natives,  whom  we  converfed  with,  at 

different 


127 

1777- 

February. 

’ ' 


128 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777- 

February. 

< 


different  times,  and  who,  I think,  could  have  no  intereft 
j in  deceiving  us.  The  fecond  manner  of  relating  the  tranf- 
adlion,  refts  upon  the  authority  of  the  young  New  Zealan- 
der, who  chofe  to  abandon  his  country  and  go  away  with 
us,  and  who,  confequently,  could  have  no  poflible  view  in 
difguiling  the  truth.  All  agreeing  that  the  quarrel  hap- 
pened when  the  boat’s  crew  were  fitting  at  their  meal,  it  is 
highly  probable  that  both  accounts  are  true,  as  they  per- 
fedlly  coincide.  For  we  may  very  naturally  fuppofe,  that 
while  fome  of  the  natives  were  healing  from  the  man  who 
had  been  left  in  the  boat,  others  of  them  might  take  the 
fame  liberties  with  the  property  of  our  people  who  were 
on  fliore. 

Be  this  as  it  will,  all  agree,  that  the  quarrel  firft  took  its 
rife  from  fome  thefts,  in  the  commiffion  of  which  the  na- 
tives were  dete6f:ed.  All  agree,  alfo,  that  there  was  no  pre- 
meditated plan  of  bloodflied,  and  that,  if  thefe  thefts  had 
not  been,  unfortunately,  too  haflily  refented,  no  mifchief 
would  have  happened.  For  Kahoora’s  greateft  enemies, 
thofe  who  folicited  his  deftrudfion  mod:  earneftly,  at  the 
fame  time  confeffed  that  he  had  no  intention  to  quarrel, 
much  lefs  to  kill,  till  the  fray  had  actually  commenced.  It 
allb  appears  that  the  unhappy  victims  were  under  no  fort  of 
apprehenfion  of  their  fate ; otherwife  they  never  would 
have  ventured  to  fit  down  to  a repaft  at  fo  confiderable  a 
diflance  from  their  boat,  amongft  people  who  were  the 
next  moment  to  be  their  murderers.  What  became  of  the 
boat  I never  could  learn.  Some  faid  flie  was  pulled  to 
pieces  and  burnt ; others  told  us  that  fhe  was  carried,  they 
knew  not  whither,  by  a party  of  ftrangers. 

We  flayed  here  till  the  evening,  when,  having  loaded 
the  reft  of  the  boats  with  grafs,  celery,  fcurvy-grafs,  &:c. 

we 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


129 


■\ve  embarked  to  return  to  the  fliips.  We  had  prevailed 
upon  Pedro  to  launch  his  canoe,  and  accompany  us  ; but 
we  had  fcarcely  put  off  from  the  fliore,  when  the  wind 
began  to  blow  very  hard  at  North  Weft,  which  obliged 
him  to  put  back.  We  proceeded  ourfelves,  but  it  was  with 
a good  deal  of  difficulty  that  we  could  reach  the  fliips ; 
where  fome  of  the  boats  did  not  arrive  till  one  o’clock 
the  next  morning ; and  it  was  fortunate  that  they  got  on 
board  then,  for  it  afterward  blew  a perfect  ftorm,  with 
abundance  of  rain,  fo  that  no  manner  of  work  could  go 
forward  that  day.  In  the  evening  the  gale  ceafed,  and 
the  wind  having  veered  to  the  Eaft,  brought  with  it  fair 
w’eather. 

The  next  day  we  refumed  our  works  ; the  natives  ven- 
tured out  to  catch  fifh ; and  Pedro,  with  all  his  family,  came 
and  took  up  his  abode  near  us.  This  Chief’s  proper  name 
is  Matahouah  ; the  other  being  given  him  by  fome  of  my 
people  during  my  laft  Voyage,  which  I did  not  know  till 
now.  He  was,  however,  equally  well  known  amongft  his 
countrymen  by  both  names. 

On  the  20th,  in  the  forenoon,  we  had  another  ftorm  from 
the  North  Weft.  Though  this  was  not  of  fo  long  continu- 
ance as  the  former,  the  gufts  of  wind  from  the  hills  were 
far  more  violent,  infomuch  that  we  were  obliged  to  ftrike 
the  yards  and  top-mafts  to  the  very  utmoft ; and,  even  with 
all  this  precaution,  it  was  with  difficulty  that  we  rode  it 
out.  Thefe  ftorms  are  very  frequent  here,  and  fometimes 
violent  and  troublefome.  The  neighbouring  mountains, 
which  at  thefe  times  are  always  loaded  with  vapours,  not 
only  increafe  the  force  of  the  wind,  but  alter  its  direction  in 
fuch  a manner,  that  no  two  blafts  follow  each  other  from 
the  fame  quarter ; and  the  nearer  the  fliore,  the  more  their 
effecfts  are  felt. 

VoL.  I.  S ' The 


1777- 

February. 


Monday  17. 


Tuefday  18. 


Thurfday  zo. 


130 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  The  next  day  we  were  vifited  by  a tribe  or  family,  con- 
. lifting  of  about  thirty  perfons,  men,  women,  and  children, 

who  came  from  the  upper  part  of  the  Sound.  I had  never 
feen  them  before.  The  name  of  their  Chief  was  Toma- 
tongeauooranuc ; a man  of  about  forty-five  years  of  age, 
with  a cheerful  open  countenance.  And,  indeed,  the  reft 
of  his  tribe  were,  in  general,  the  handfomeft  of  the  New 
Zealand  race  I had  ever  met  with. 

By  this  time  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Sound  had  fettled  themfelves  about  us.  Great  num- 
bers of  them  daily  frequented  the  fhips,  and  the  encamp- 
ment on  111  ore  : but  the  latter  became,  by  far,  the  moft 
favourite  place  of  refort,  while  our  people  there  were 
melting  fome  feal  blubber.  No  Greenlander  was  ever 
fonder  of  train-oil,  than  our  friends  here  feemed  to  be. 
They  reliflied  the  very  ikimmings  of  the  kettle,  and  dregs 
of  the  cafks ; but  a little  of  the  pure  ftinking  oil  was  a 
delicious  feaft,  fo  eagerly  defired,  that  I fuppofe  it  is  fel- 
dom  enjoyed. 

Having  got  on  board  as  much  hay  and  grafts  as  we 
judged  fufficient  to  ferve  the  cattle  till  our  arrival  at  Ota- 
heite,  and  having  completed  the  wood  and  water  of  both 
Sunday  23.  ftlips,  on  the  23d  we  ftruck  our  tents,  and  carried  every 
Monday  24.  thing  off  from  the  fhore ; and  next  morning  we  weighed 
anchor,  and  ftood  out  of  the  Cove.  But  the  wind  not  being 
very  fair,  and  finding  that  the  tide  of  ebb  would  be  fpent 
before  we  could  get  out  of  the  Sound,  we  caft  anchor  again 
a little  without  the  ifland  Motuara,  to  wait  for  a more  fa- 
vourable opportunity  of  putting  into  the  ftrait. 

While  we  were  unmooring  and  getting  under  fail,  To- 
matongeauooranuc,  Matahouah,  and  many  more  of  the 
natives,  came  to  take  their  leave  of  us,  or  rather  to  obtain, 
if  they  could,  fome  additional  prefents  from  us  before  we 

left 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

' left  them.  Thefe  two  Chiefs  became  fuitors  to  me  for  fome 
goats  and  hogs.  Accordingly,  I gave  to  Matahouah  two 
goats,  a male  and  female  with  kid ; and  to  Tomaton- 
geauooranuc  two  pigs,  a boar  and  a fow.  They  made  me 
a promife  not  to  kill  them ; though  I muft  own  I put  no 
great  faith  in  this.  The  animals  which  Captain  Furneaux 
fent  on  fliore  here,  and  which  foon  after  feU  into  the  hands 
of  the  natives,  I was  now  told  were  all  dead ; but  I could 
get  no  intelligence  about  the  fate  of  thofe  I had  left  in 
Weft  Bay,  and  in  Cannibal  Cove,  when  I w^as  here  in  the 
courfe  of  my  laft  Voyage.  However,  all  the  natives,  whom 
I converfed  with,  agreed,  that  poultry  are  now  to  be  met 
with  wild  in  the  woods  behind  Ship  Cove ; and  I was  after- 
ward informed,  by  the  two  youths  who  went  away  with  us, 
that  Tiratou,  a popular  Chief  amongft  them,  had  a great 
many  cocks  and  hens  in  his  feparate  pofleflion,  and  one  of 
the  fows. 

On  my  prefent  arrival  at  this  place,  I fuUy  intended  to 
have  left  not  only  goats  and  hogs,  but  flieep,  and  a young- 
bull,  wnth  two  heifers,  if  I could  have  found  either  a Chief 
powerful  enough  to  protect  and  keep  them,  or  a place 
where  there  might  be  a probability  of  their  being  concealed 
from  thofe  who  would  ignorantly  attempt  to  deftroy  them. 
But  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  prefented  itfelf  to  me. 
Tiratou  was  now  abfent ; and  Tringoboohee,  whom  I had 
met  wdth  during  my  laft  Voyage  and  who  feemed  to  be  a 
perfon  of  much  confequence  at  that  time,  had  been  killed 
five  months  ago,  with  about  feventy  perfons  of  his  tribe ; 
and  I could  not  learn  that  there  now  remained  in  our 
neighbourhood  any  tribe,  whofe  numbers  could  fecure  to 


131 

1777* 

February. 


* See  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  il.  p.  157. 

S 2 


them 


132 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777- 
F ebruary, 

' ' 


Tuefday  25. 


them  a fuperiority  of  power  over  the  reft  of  their  country- 
men. To  have  given  the  animals  to  any  of  the  natives  who 
poflefled  no  fuch  power,  would  not  have  anfwered  the  in- 
tention. For  in  a country  like  this,  where  no  man’s  pro- 
perty is  fecure,  they  would  foon  have  fallen  a prey  to  dif- 
ferent parties,  and  been  either  feparated  or  killed ; but  moft 
likely  both.  This  was  fo  evident,  from  what  we  had  ob- 
ferved  ftnce  our  arrival,  that  I had  refolved  to  leave  no  kind 
of  animal,  till  Matahouah  and  the  other  Chief  folicited  me 
for  the  hogs  and  goats.  As  I could  fpare  them,  I let  them 
go,  to  take  their  chance.  I have,  at  different  times,  left  in 
New  Zealand,  not  lefs  than  ten  or  a dozen  hogs,  befides 
thofe  put  on  fhore  by  Captain  Furneaux.  It  will  be  a 
little  extraordinary,  therefore,  if  this  race  Ihould  not  in- 
creafe  and  be  preferved  here,  either  in  a wild  or  in  a do- 
meftic  ftate,  or  in  both. 

We  had  not  been  long  at  anchor  near  Motuara,  before 
three  or  four  canoes,  fiUed  with  natives,  came  off  to  us  from 
the  South  Eaft  fide  of  the  Sound  ; and  a brifk  trade  was  car- 
ried on  with  them  for  the  curiofities  of  this  place.  In  one 
of  thefe  canoes  was  Kahoora,  whom  I have  already  men- 
tioned as  the  leader  of  the  party  who  cut  off  the  crew  of  the 
Adventure’s  boat.  This  was  the  third  time  he  had  vifited 
us,  without  betraying  the  fmalleft  appearance  of  fear.  I 
was  afhore  when  he  now  arrived,  but  had  got  on  board  juft 
as  he  was  going  away.  Omai,  who  had  returned  with  me, 
prefently  pointed  him  out,  and  folicited  me  to  fhoot  him. 
Not  fatisfied  with  this,  he  addreffed  himfelf  to  Kahoora, 
threatening  to  be  his  executioner,  if  ever  he  prefumed  to 
viftt  us  again. 

The  New  Zealander  paid  fo  little  regard  to  thefe  threats, 
that  he  returned,  the  next  morning,  with  his  whole  family, 

men, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


133 


men,  women,  and  children,  to  the  number  of  twenty  and  1777. 
upward.  Omai  was  the  firft  who  acquainted  me  with  his 
being  along-fide  the  fliip,  and  defired  to  know  if  he  fhould 
alk  him  to  come  on  board.  I told  him  he  might ; and  ac- 
cordingly he  introduced  the  Chief  into  the  cabin,  faying, 

“ There  is  Kahoora,  kill  him  !”  But,  as  if  he  had  forgot 
his  former  threats,  or  were  afraid  that  I fhould  call  upon 
him  to  perform  them,  he  immediately  retired.  In  a fliort 
time,  however,  he  returned  ; and  feeing  the  Chief  unhurt, 
he  expoftulated  with  me  very  earneftly,  faying,  “ Why  do 
“ you  not  kill  him  ? Y ou  tell  me,  if  a man  kills  another  in 
“ England,  that  he  is  hanged  for  it.  This  man  has  killed 
“ ten,  and  yet  you  will  not  kill  him  ; though  many  of  his 
‘‘  countrymen  dehre  it,  and  it  would  be  very  good.”  Omai’s 
arguments,  though  fpecious  enough,  having  no  weight 
with  me,  I delired  him  to  aflc  the  Chief,  why  he  had  killed 
Captain  Furneaux’s  people  ? At  this  queftion,  Kahoora  fold- 
ed his  arms,  hung  down  his  head,  and  looked  like  one 
caught  in  a trap  : And,  I firmly  believe,  he  expected  inftant 
death.  But  no  fooner  was  he  alTured  of  his  fafety,  than  he 
became  cheerful.  He  did  not,  however,  feem  willing  to 
give  me  an  anfwer  to  the  queftion  that  had  been  put  to 
him,  till  I had,  again  and  again,  repeated  my  promife  tha.t 
he  fliould  not  be  hurt.  Then  he  ventured  to  tell  us.  That 
one  of  his  countrymen  having  brought  a ftone  hatchet  to 
barter,  the  man,  to  whom  it  was  offered,  took  it,  and  would 
neither  return  it,  nor  give  any  thing  for  it ; on  which  the 
owner  of  it  fnatched  up  the  bread  as  an  equivalent;  and 
then  the  quarrel  began. 

The  remainder  of  Kahoora^s  account  of  this  unhappy  af- 
fair, differed  very  little  from  what  we  had  before  learnt, 
from  the  reft  of  his  countrymen.  He  mentioned  the  nar- 


row 


T34 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  row  efcape  he  had,  during  the  fray;  a mufquet  being  le- 
february.^  Veiled  at  him,  which  he  avoided  by  Ikulking  behind  the 
boat ; and  another  man,  who  ftood  clofe  to  him,  was  fliot 
dead.  As  foon  as  the  mufquet  was  difcharged,  he  inftantly 
feized  the  opportunity  to  attack  Mr.  Rowe,  who  command- 
ed the  party,  and  who  defended  himfelf  with  his  hanger 
(with  which  he  wounded  Kahoora  in  the  arm),  till  he  was 
overpowered  by  numbers. 

Mr.  Burney,  who  was  fent  by  Captain  Furneaux  the  next 
day  -iq  with  an  armed  party,  to  look  for  his  miffing  people, 
upon  difcovering  the  horrid  proofs  of  their  ffiocking  fate, 
had  fired  feveral  vollies  amongft  the  crowds  of  natives 
who  ftill  remained  affembled  on  the  fpot,  and  were,  pro- 
bably, partaking  of  the  deteftable  banquet.  It  was  na- 
tural to  fuppofe  that  he  had  not  fired  in  vain ; and  that, 
therefore,  fome  of  the  murderers  and  devourers  of  our 
unhappy  countrymen  had  fuffered  under  our  juft  refent- 
ment.  Upon  inquiry,  however,  into  this  matter,  not 
only  from  Kahoora,  but  from  others  who  had  opportuni- 
ties of  knowing,  it  appeared  that  our  fuppofition  was 
groundlefs,  and  that  not  one  of  the  ffiot  fired  by  Mr.  Bur- 
ney’s people  had  taken  efte<ft,  fo  as  to  kill,  or  even  to  hurt, 
a fingle  perfon. 

It  was  evident,  that  moft  of  the  natives  we  had  met  with 
fince  our  arrival,  as  they  knew  I was  fully  acquainted  with 
the  hiftory  of  the  malfacre,  expe6led  I ffiould  avenge  it 
with  the  death  of  Kahoora.  And  many  of  them  feemed 
not  only  to  wiffi  it,  but  exprefled  their  furprize  at  my  for- 
bearance. As  he  could  not  be  ignorant  of  this,  it  was  a 
matter  of  wonder  to  me,  that  he  put  himfelf  fo  often  in  my 

* See  his  Narrative.  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  255 — 259. 

power. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


135 


power.  When  he  vifited  ns  while  the  fhips  lay  in  the 
Cove,  confiding  in  the  number  of  his  friends  that  accom- 
panied him,  he  might  think  himfelf  fafe.  But  his  two 
lafi;  vifits  had  been  made  under  fuch  circumftances,  that 
he  could  no  longer  rely  upon  this.  We  were  then  at  an- 
chor in  the  entrance  of  the  Sound,  and  at  fome  diftance 
from  any  fhore ; fo  that  he  could  not  have  any  afliftance 
from  thence,  nor  flatter  himfelf  he  could  have  the  means 
of  making  his  efcape,  had  I determined  to  detain  him. 
And  yet,  after  his  firfl:  fears,  on  being  interrogated,  were 
over,  he  was  fo  far  from  entertaining  any  uneafy  fenfations, 
that,  on  feeing  a portrait  of  one  of  his  countrymen  hang- 
ing up  in  the  cabbin,  he  defired  to  have  his  own  portrait 
drawn;  and  fat  till  Mr.  Webber  had  finiflied  it,  without 
marking  the  leafl  impatience.  I muft  confefs,  I admired 
his  courage,  and  was  not  a little  pleafed  to  obferve  the  ex- 
tent of  the  confidence  he  put  in  me.  For  he  placed  his 
whole  fafety  in  the  declarations  I had  uniformly  made  to 
thofe  who  folicited  his  death.  That  I had  always  been  a 
friend  to  them  all,  and  would  continue  fo,  unlefs  they  gave 
me  caufe  to  adt  otherwife  : that  as  to  their  inhuman  treat- 
ment of  our  people,  I fhould  think  no  more  of  it,  the  tranf- 
adtion  having  happened  long  ago,  and  when  I was  not 
prefent;  but  that,  if  ever  they  made  a fecond  attempt  of 
that  kind,  they  might  reft  aflured  of  feeling  the  weight  of 
my  refentment. 

For  fome  time  before  we  arrived  at  New  Zealand,  Omai 
had  exprelfed  a defire  to  take  one  of  the  natives  with  him 
to  his  own  country.  We  had  not  been  there  many  days, 
before  he  had  an  opportunity  of  being  gratified  in  this ; 
for  a youth  about  feventeen  or  eighteen  years  of  age, 
named  Taweiharooa,  offered  to  accompany  him  ; and  took 

up 


1777. 

February. 


136 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  up  his  refidence  on  board.  I paid  little  attention  to  this 
February.  ^ firll,  imagining  that  he  would  leave  us  when  we  were 
about  to  depart,  and  after  he  had  got  what  he  could  from 
Omai.  At  length,  finding  that  he  was  fixed  in  his  refolu- 
tion  to  go  with  us,  and  having  learnt  that  he  was  the  only 
foil  of  a deceafed  Chief,  and  that  his  mother,  flill  living, 
was  a woman  much  refpedted  here,  I was  apprehenfive  that 
Omai  had  deceived  him  and  his  friends,  by  giving  them 
hopes  and  affurances  of  his  being  fent  back.  I therefore 
caufed  it  to  be  made  known  to  them  all,  that  if  the  young 
man  went  away  with  us,  he  would  never  return.  But  this 
declaration  feemed  to  make  no  fort  of  impreffion.  The  af- 
ternoon before  we  left  the  Cove,  Tiratoutou,  his  mother, 
came  on  board,  to  receive  her  laft  prefent  from  Omai.  The 
fame  evening,  flie  and  Taweiharooa  parted,  with  all  the 
marks  of  tender  affedtion  that  might  be  expected  between  a 
parent  and  a child,  who  were  never  to  meet  again.  But 
file  faid  flie  would  cry  no  more ; and,  fure  enough,  flie  kept 
her  word.  For  when  die  returned  the  next  morning,  to 
take  her  laft  farewell  of  him,  all  the  time  flie  was  on  board 
file  remained  quite  cheerful,  and  went  away  wholly  un- 
concerned. 

That  Taweiharooa  might  be  fent  away  in  a manner  be- 
coming his  birth,  another  youth  was  to  have  gone  with  him 
as  his  fervant ; and,  with  this  view,  as  we  fuppofed,  he 
remained  on  board  till  we  were  about  to  fail,  when  his 
friends  took  him  afliore.  However,  his  place  was  fupplied, 
next  morning,  by  another,  a boy  of  about  nine  or  ten 
years  of  age,  named  Kokoa.  He  was  prefented  to  me  by 
his  own  father,  who,  I believe,  would  have  parted  with  his 
dog  with  far  lefs  indifference.  The  very  little  clothing  the 
boy  had,  he  ftript  him  of,  and  left  him  as  naked  as  he  was 

born. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


137 


born.  It  was  to  no  purpofe  that  I endeavoured  to  con-  1777. 
vince  thefe  people  of  the  improbability,  or  rather  of  the 
impoflibiUty,  of  thefe  youths  ever  returning  home.  Not 
one,  not  even  their  neareft  relations,  feemed  to  trouble 
themfelves  about  their  future  fate.  Since  this  was  the  cafe, 
and  I was  well  fatisfied  that  the  boys  would  be  no  lofers 
by  exchange  of  place,  I the  more  readily  gave  my  confent 
to  their  going. 

From  my  own  obfervations,  and  from  the  information 
of  Taweiharooa  and  others,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  New 
Zealanders  muft  live  under  perpetual  apprehenlions  of  be- 
ing deftroyed  by  each  other;  there  being  few  of  their  tribes 
that  have  not,  as  they  think,  fuftained  wrongs  from  fome 
other  tribe,  which  they  are  continually  upon  the  watch  to 
revenge.  And,  perhaps,  the  delire  of  a good  meal  may  be 
no  fmall  incitement.  I am  told  that  many  years  will  fome- 
times  elapfe,  before  a favourable  opportunity  happens,  and 
that  the  fon  never  lofes  light  of  an  injury  that  has  been 
done  to  his  father.  Their  method  of  executing  their  hor- 
rible deligns,  is  by  Healing  upon  the  adverfe  party  in  the 
night ; and  if  they  find  them  unguarded  (which,  however, 

I believe,  is  very  feldom  the  cafe),  they  kill  every  one  indif- 
criminately ; not  even  fparing  the  women  and  children. 

When  the  maflacre  is  completed,  they  either  feaft  and  gorge 
themfelves  on  the  fpot,  or  carry  olF  as  many  of  the  dead 
bodies  as  they  can,  and  devour  them  at  home,  with  adls  of 
brutality  too  fhocking  to  be  defcribed.  If  they  are  difco- 
vered  before  they  can  execute  their  bloody  purpofe,  they 
generally  fteal  olF  again ; and  fometimes  are  purfued  and 
attacked  by  the  other  party,  in  their  turn.  To  give  quarter, 
or  to  take  prifoners,  makes  no  part  of  their  military  law ; 
fo  that  the  vanquillied  can  only  fave  their  lives  by  flight. 

VoL.  I.  T This 


A VOYAGE  TO 


138 

1777.  This  perpetual  ftate  of  war,  and  deftru6tive  method  of  con- 
February,^  duding  it,  Operates  fo  hrongly  in  producing  habitual  cir- 
cumfpeflion,  that  one  hardly  ever  finds  a New  Zealander 
off  his  guard,  either  by  night  or  by  day.  Indeed,  no  other 
man  can  have  fuch  powerful  motives  to  be  vigilant,  as  the 
prefervation  both  of  body  and  of  foul  depends  upon  it. 
For,  according  to  their  fyftem  of  belief,  the  foul  of  the  man 
whole  flefli  is  devoured  by  the  enemy,  is  doomed  to  a per- 
petual fire,  while  the  foul  of  the  man  whofe  body  has  been 
refcued  from  thofe  who  killed  him,  as  well  as  the  fouls  of 
all  who  die  a natural  death,  afcend  to  the  habitations  of  the 
Gods.  I afked.  Whether  they  eat  the  flefli  of  fuch  of  their 
friends  as  had  been  killed  in -war,  but  whofe  bodies  were 
faved  from  falling  into  the  enemy’s  hands  ? They  feemed 
furprized  at  the  queftion,  which  they  anfwered  in  the  ne- 
gative, exprefling  fome  abhorrence  at  the  very  idea.  Their 
common  method  of  difpofing  of  their  dead,  is  by  depoflt- 
ing  their  bodies  in  the  earth ; but  if  they  have  more  of 
their  flaughtered  enemies  than  they  can  eat,  they  throw 
them  into  the  fea. 

They  have  no  fuch  thing  as  morais,  or  other  places  of 
public  worfliip;  nor  do  they  ever  alTemble  together  with 
this  view.  But  they  have  Priefts,  who  alone  addrefs  the 
Gods  in  prayers,  for  the  profperity  of  their  temporal  af- 
fairs ; fuch  as  an  enterprife  againfl;  a hoflile  tribe,  a filhing 
party,  or  the  like. 

Whatever  the  principles  of  their  religion  may  be,  of 
which  we  remain  very  ignorant,  its  infl;ru6tions  are  very 
ftrongly  inculcated  into  them  from  their  very  infancy. 
Of  this  I faw  a remarkable  inftance,  in  the  youth  who 
was  firfl:  deftined  to  accompany  Taweiharooa.  He  re- 
frained from  eating  the  greatefl  part  of  the  day,  on  ac- 
count 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

count  of  his  hair  being  cut ; though  every  method  was 
tried  to  induce  him  to  break  his  refolution;  and  he  was 
tempted  with  the  offer  of  fuch  victuals  as  he  was  known  to 
efteem  the  moft.  He  faid,  if  he  eat  any  thing  that  day,  the 
Eatooa  would  kill  him.  However,  toward  evening,  the 
cravings  of  nature  got  the  better  of  the  precepts  of  his 
religion,  and  he  eat,  though  but  fparingly.  I had  often 
conjectured,  before  this,  that  they  had  fome  fuperflitious 
notions  about  their  hair,  having  frequently  obferved  quan- 
tities of  it  tied  to  the  branches  of  trees  near  fome  of  their 
habitations ; but  what  thefe  notions  are,  I never  could 
learn. 

Notwithftanding  the  divided  and  hoflile  flate  in  which 
the  New  Zealanders  live,  travelling  ftrangers,  who  come 
with  no  ill  delign,  are  well  received  and  entertained  during 
their  flay ; which,  however,  it  is  expeCted,  wiU  be  no 
longer  than  is  requifite  to  tranfaCl  the  bulinefs  they  come 
upon.  Thus  it  is  that  a trade  for  poenammoo^  or  green 
talc,  is  carried  on  throughout  the  whole  northern  illand. 
For  they  tell  us,  that  there  is  none  of  this  ftone  to  be 
found,  but  at  a place  which  bears  its  name,  fomewhere  about 
the  head  of  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound,  and  not  above  one 
or  two  days  journey,  at  moft,  from  the  ftation  of  our  fhips. 
I regretted  much  that  I could  not  fpare  time  fufficient  for 
paying  a vifit  to  the  place ; as  we  were  told  a hundred  fa- 
bulous ftories  about  this  ftone,  not  one  of  which  carried 
with  it  the  leaft  probability  of  truth,  though  fome  of 
their  moft  fenlible  men  would  have  us  believe  them.  One 
of  thefe  ftories  is,  that  this  ftone  is  originally  a fifli,  which 
they  ftrike  with  a gig  in  the  water,  tie  a rope  to  it,  and 
drag  it  to  the  fhore,  to  which  they  faften  it,  and  it  after- 
ward becomes  ftone.  As  they  aU  agree,  that  it  is  fiflied 

T z out 


139 

1777- 

February. 


140 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777. 

February. 


out  of  a large  lake,  or  colle(51:ion  of  waters,  the  moft  pro- 
bable conjecture  is,  that  it  is  brought  from  the  mountains, 
and  depofited  in  the  water,  by  the  torrents.  This  lake  is 
called  by  the  natives  ‘Tavai  Poenammoo  ; that  is,  the  water  of 
Green  Talc;  and  it  is  only  the  adjoining  part  of  the  coun- 
try, and  not  the  whole  Southern  illand  of  New  Zealand, 
that  is  known  to  them  by  the  name  which  hath  been  given 
to  it  on  my  chart 

Polygamy  is  allowed  amongft  thefe  people  ; and  it  is  not 
uncommon  for  a man  to  have  two  or  three  wives.  The 
women  are  marriageable  at  a very  early  age ; and  it  fliould 
feem,  that  one  who  is  unmarried,  is  but  in  a forlorn  hate. 
She  can  with  difficulty  get  a fubffitence ; at  lead:,  ffie  is,  in 
a great  meafure,  without  a proteCtor,  though  in  conftant 
want  of  a powerful  one. 

The  New  Zealanders  feem  to  be  a people  perfectly  fatif- 
fied  with  the  little  knowledge  they  are  mailers  of,  without 
attempting,  in  the  lead,  to  improve  it.  Nor  are  they  re- 
markably curious,  either  in  their  obfervations,  or  their  in- 
quiries. New  objects  do  not  itrike  them  with  fuch  a degree 
of  furprize  as  one  would  naturally  expeCt;  nor  do  they 
even  fix  their  attention  for  a moment.  Omai,  indeed,  who 
was  a great  favourite  with  them,  would  fometimes  attraCl 
a circle  about  him ; but  they  feemed  to  liilen  to  his  fpeeches, 
like  perfons  who  neither  underilood,  nor  wiflied  to  under- 
hand, what  they  heard. 

One  day,  on  our  enquiring  of  Taweiharooa,  how  many 
lliips,  fuch  as  ours,  had  ever  arrived  in  Queen  Charlotte’s 
Sound,  or  in  any  part  of  its  neighbourhood.?  he  began  with 
giving  an  account  of  one  abfolutely  unknown  to  us.  This,  he 

* See  Captain  Cook’s  chart  of  New  Zealand,  in  Hawkef.  Coll.  vol.  ii.  p.  281. 

faid, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

faid,  had  put  into  a port  on  the  North  Weft  coaft  of  Teera- 
witte,  but  a very  few  years  before  I arrived  in  the  Sound  in 
the  Endeavour,  which  the  New  Zealanders  diftinguifli,  by 
calling  it  Tupia’s  fliip.  At  firft,  I thought  he  might  have 
been  miftaken  as  to  the  time  and  place ; and  that  the  lliip  in 
queftion  might  be  either  Monfteur  Surville’s,  who  is  faid  to 
have  touched  upon  the  North  Eaft  coaft  of  Eaheinomauwe, 
the  fame  year  I was  there  in  the  Endeavour;  or  elfe  Monfteur 
Marion  du  Frefne’s,  who  was  in  the  Bay  of  Iflands,  on  the 
lame  coaft,  a few  years  after.  But  he  alfured  us,  that  he 
was  not  miftaken,  either  as  to  the  time,  or  as  to  the  place 
of  this  fhip’s  arrival ; and  that  it  was  well  known  to  every 
body  about  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound  and  Teerawitte.  He 
faid,  that  the  Captain  of  her,  during  his  ftay  here,  coha- 
bited with  a woman  of  the  country ; and  that  fhe  had  a fon 
by  him  ftill  living,  and  about  the  age  of  Kokoa;  who, 
though  not  born  then,  feemed  to  be  equally  well  acquaint- 
ed with  the  ftory.  We  were  alfo  informed  by  Taweiharooa, 
that  this  ftiip  firft  introduced  the  venereal  difeafe  amongft 
the  New  Zealanders.  I wifli  that  fubfequent  viftters  from 
Europe  may  not  have  their  fliare  of  guilt,  in  leaving  fo 
dreadful  a remembrance  of  them  amongft  this  unhappy 
race.  The  diforder  now  is  but  too  common  here;  though 
they  do  not  feem  to  regard  it ; faying,  that  its  effedls  are 
not  near  fo  pernicious  at  prefent,  as  they  were  at  its  firft 
appearance.  The  only  method,  as  far  as  I ever  heard,  that 
they  make  ufe  of  as  a remedy,  is  by  giving  the  patient  the 
life  of  a fort  of  hot  bath,  which  they  produce  by  the  fleam 
of  certain  green  plants  laid  over  hot  ftones. 

I regretted  much  that  we  did  not  hear  of  this  fliip  while 
we  were  in  the  Sound ; as,  by  means  of  Omai,  we  might 
have  had  full  and  corre<ft  information  about  her  from  eye- 

witneffes. 


141 

1777- 

February. 

^ I — t**  1.^ 


J42 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  witnefles.  For  Taweiharooa’s  account  was  only  from  wliat 
tebru^y.  ^ bccn  told,  and  therefore  liable  to  many  milfakes. 

I have  not  the  lead;  doubt,  however,  that  his  teftimony  may 
fo  far  be  depended  upon,  as  to  induce  us  to  believe,  that 
a fliip  really  had  been  at  Teerawitte  prior  to  my  arrival  in 
the  Endeavour,  as  it  correfponds  with  what  I had  formerly 
heard.  For  in  the  latter  end  of  1773,  the  fecond  time  I 
vidted  New  Zealand,  during  my  late  voyage,  when  we  were 
continually  making  inquiries  about  the  Adventure,  after 
our  feparation,  fome  of  the  natives  informed  its  of  a fliip’s 
having  heen  in  a port  on  the  coaft  of  Teerawitte,  But,  at 
that  time,  we  thought  we  mulf  have  mifunderftood  them, 
and  took  no  notice  of  the  intelligence. 

The  arrival  of  this  unknown  fhip  has  been  marked  by 
the  New  Zealanders  with  more  caufes  of  remembrance 
than  the  unhappy  one  juft  mentioned.  Taweiharooa  told 
us,  their  country  was  indebted  to  her  people  for  the  prefent 
of  an  animal,  which  they  left  behind  them.  But  as  he  had 
not  feen  it  himfelf,  no  fort  of  judgment  could  be  form^ 
ed  from  his  defcription,  of  what  kind  it  was. 

We  had  another  piece  of  intelligence  from  him,  more 
corre(ftly  given,  though  not  confirmed  by  our  own  obferva- 
tions,  that  there  are  fnakes  and  lizards  there  of  an  enor- 
mous fize.  He  defcribed  the  latter  as  being  eight  feet  in 
length,  and  as  big  round  as  a man’s  body.  He  faid,  they 
fometimes  feize  and  devour  men ; that  they  burrow  in  the 
ground ; and  that  they  are  killed  by  making  fires  at  the 
mouths  of  the  holes.  We  could  not  be  miftaken  as  to  the 
animal ; for,  with  his  own  hand,  he  drew  a very  good  re- 
prefentation  of  a lizard  on  a piece  of  paper ; as  alfo  of  a 
fnake,  in  order  to  fliew  what  he  meant. 

Though  much  has  been  faid,  in  the  Narratives  of  my 

Two 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

Two  former  Voyages,  about  this  country  and  its  inhabi- 
tants, Mr.  Anderfon’s  Remarks,  as  ferving  either  to  confirm 
or  to  corre(5l  our  former  accounts,  may  not  be  fuperfluous. 
He  had  been  three  times  with  me  in  Queen  Charlotte’s 
Sound,  during  my  laft  Voyage ; and,  after  this  fourth  vifit, 
what  he  thought  proper  to  record,  may  be  confidered  as  the 
refult  of  fufficient  obfervation.  The  Reader  will  find  it  in 
the  next  Chapter ; and  I have  nothing  farther  to  add,^  be- 
fore I quit  New  Zealand,  but  to  give  fome  account  of  the 
aftronomical  and  nautical  obfervations  made  during  our 
ftay  there. 

The  Longitude  of  the  Obfervatory  in  Ship 
Cove,  by  a mean  of  103  fets  of  obferva- 
tions, each  fet  confifting  of  fix  or  more 
obferv^ed  diftances,  was  - - - 174°  25^5^'' Eaft. 

By  the  time-keeper,  at  Greenwich  rate,  it 
was  _ _ - _ _ _ 26  30 

By  ditto,  at  the  Cape  rate,  it  was  - - 174  56  12 

Variation  of  the  compafs,  being  the  mean 
of  fix  needles,  obferved  on  board  the 
fliip  - - - - - -12400  Eaft. 

By  the  fame  needles  on  fliore,  it  was  - 13  53  o 
The  dip  of  the  South  end,  obferved  on 

fliore,  was  - - - - 63  42  o 

By  a mean  of  the  refults  of  eleven  days  obfervations,  the 
time-keeper  was  too  flow  for  mean  time,  on  February  22  at 
noon,  by  ii"'  50'  37^', 396;  and  flie  was  found  to  be  lofing 
on  mean  time,  at  the  rate  of  2"^,9i3  per  day.  From  this  rate 
the  longitude  will  be  computed,  till  fome  other  opportunity 
offers  to  afcertain  her  rate  anew.  The  aftronomical  clock, 

with 


143 

1777. 

February, 


144 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  with  the  fame  length  of  pendulum  as  at  Greenwich,  was 
February.^  fouiid  to  be  lofing  on  lidereal  time  per  day/ 

It  will  not  be  amifs  to  mention,  that  the  longitude,  by 
lunar  obfervations,  as  above,  differs  only  6'  45^^  from  what 
Mr.  Wales  made  it  during  my  laft  Voyage ; his  being  fo 
much  more  to  the  Weft,  or  174°  18'  30''. 

The  latitude  of  Ship  Cove  is  41°  6'  as  found  by  Mr. 
Wales. 


CHAP. 


CHAP.  VIII. 


Mr.  AnderforCs  Remarks  on  the  Country  near  ^een  Char- 
lotte's Sound. — ’The  Soil.  — Climate.  — Weather. — Winds. — 
Trees. — Plants.  — Birds. — Fijh. — Other  Anbnals. — Of  the 
Inhabitants. — Defcription  of  their  Perfons. — Their  Drefs.— 
Ornaments. — Habitations. — Boats. — Food  and  Cookery. — 
Arts. — Weapons. — Cruelty  to  Prifoners. — Various  Cujioms. 
— Specimen  of  their  Languag  e. 


HE  land  every  where  about  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound 


A is  uncommonly  mountainous,  riling  immediately 
from  the  fea  into  large  hills  with  blunted  tops.  At  conli- 
derable  diftances  are  valleys,  or  rather  impreffions  on  the 
lides  of  the  hills,  which  are  not  deep ; each  terminating 
toward  the  fea  in  a fmall  cove,  with  a pebbly  or  fandy 
beach ; behind  which  are  fmall  flats,  where  the  natives 
generally  build  their  huts,  at  the  fame  time  hauling  their 
canoes  upon  the  beaches.  This  lituation  is  the  more 
convenient,  as  in  every  cove  a brook  of  very  fine  water 
(in  which  are  fome  fmall  trout)  empties  itfelf  into  the 


fea. 


The  bafes  of  thefe  mountains,  at  leaft  toward  the  fliore, 
are  conftituted  of  a brittle,  yellowiflr  fand-flone,  which  ac- 
quires a bluifli  call,  where  the  fea  waflies  it.  It  runs,  at 
fome  places,  in  horizontal,  and,  at  other  places,  in  oblique 
Jlrata  ; being  frequently  divided,  at  fmall  diftances,  by  thin 
VoL.  I.  U veins 


146 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777. 

February. 


veins  of  coarfe  quartz^  which  commonly  follow  the  direc- 
tion of  the  other ; though  they  fometimes  interfeff  it. 
The  mould,  or  foil,  which  covers  this,  is  alfo  of  a yellowilh 
caft,  not  unlike  marl ; and  is  commonly  from  a foot  to  two, 
or  more,  in  thicknefs. 

The  quality  of  this  foil  is  heft  indicated  by  the  luxu- 
riant growth  of  its  producftions.  For  the  hills  (except 
a few  toward  the  fea,  which  are  covered  with  fmaller 
bullies)  are  one  continued  foreft  of  lofty  trees,  flourilhing 
with  a vigour  almoft  fuperior  to  any  thing  that  imagina- 
tion can  conceive,  and  affording  an  augufl  profpecSl  to  thofe 
who  are  delighted  with  the  grand  and  beautiful  works  of 
nature. 

• The  agreeable  temperature  of  the  climate,  no  doubt, 
contributes  much  to  this  uncommon  ftrength  in  vegetation. 
For,  at  this  time,  though  anfwering  to  our  month  of  Au- 
gufl, the  weather  was  never  difagreeably  warm ; nor  did 
it  raife  the  thermometer  higher  than  66°.  The  winter, 
alfo,  feems  equally  mild  with  refpedl  to  cold : for  in  June 
1773?  which  correfponds  to  our  December,  the  mercury 
never  fell  lower  than  48° ; and  the  trees,  at  that  time,  re- 
tained their  verdure,  as  if  in  the  Summer  feafon  ; fo  that, 
I believe,  their  foliage  is  never  fhed,  till  pufhed  off  by  the 
fucceeding  leaves  in  fpring. 

The  weather,  in  general,  is  good  ; but  fometimes  windy, 
with  heavy  rain  ; which,  however,  never  lafls  above  a day ; 
nor  does  it  appear  that  it  is  ever  exceffive.  For  there  are 
no  marks  of  torrents  rufliing  down  the  hills,  as  in  many 
countries ; and  the  brooks,  if  we  may  judge  from  their 
channels,  feem  never  to  be  greatly  increafed.  I have  ob- 
ferved,  in  the  four  different  times  of  my  being  here,  that 
the  winds  from  the  South  Eaftward  are  commonly  mode- 
rate. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


147 


rate,  but  attended  with  cloudy  weather,  or  rain.  The  South 
Weft  winds  blow  very  ftrong,  and  are  allb  attended  with 
rain  ; but  they  feldom  laft  long.  The  North  Weft  winds  are 
the  moft  prevailing ; and  though  often  pretty  ftrong,  are 
almoft  conftantly  connecSted  with  fine  weather.  In  fliort, 
the  only  obftacle  to  this  being  one  of  the  fineft  coun- 
tries upon  earth,  is  its  great  hillinefs ; which,  allowing 
the  woods  to  be  cleared  away,  would  leave  it  lefs  proper 
for  pafturage  than  flat  land  ; and  ftill  more  improper  for 
cultivation,  which  could  never  be  effedfed  here  by  the 
plough. 

The  large  trees  which  cover  the  hills  are  chiefly  of  two 
forts.  One  of  them,  of  the  fize  of  our  largeft  firs,  grows 
much  after  their  manner;  but  the  leaves,  and  fmall  ber- 
ries on  their  points,  are  mtich  liker  the  yew.  It  was 
this  which  fupplied  the  place  of  fpruce  in  making  beer ; 
which  we  did  with  a ftrong  decodlion  of  its  leaves,  fer- 
mented with  treacle  or  fugar.  And  this  liquor,  when  well 
prepared,  was  acknowledged  to  be  little  inferior  to  the 
American  fpruce  beer,  by  thofe  who  had  experience  of 
both.  The  other  fort  of  tree  is  not  unlike  a maple  ; and 
grows  often  to  a great  fize  ; but  it  only  ferved  for  fuel,  as 
the  wood,  both  of  .this  and  of  the  preceding,  was  found  to 
be  rather  too  heavy  for  mafts,  yards,  and  other  fimilar  re- 
pairs. 

There  is  a greater  variety  of  trees  on  the  fmall  flat  fpots 
behind  the  beaches.  Amongft  thefe  are  two  that  bear  a 
kind  of  plum  of  the  fize  of  prunes ; the  one  yellow,  called 
karraca ; and  the  other  black,  called  maitao  ; but  neither  of 
them  of  a very  agreeable  tafte ; though  the  natives  eat 
both,  and  our  people  did  the  fame.  Thofe  of  the  firft  fort 
grow  on  fmall  trees,  always  facing  the  fea  ; but  the  others 

U 2 belong 


1777. 

February. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


148 

1777-  belong  to  larger  trees  that  hand  farther  within  the  w'ood, 
^February.  ^ whicli  wc  frequently  cut  down  for  fuel. 

A fpecies  of  Philadelphus  grows  on  the  eminences  which 
jut  out  into  the  fea ; and  alfo  a tree  bearing  flowers  almoft 
like  myrtle,  with  roundidi  fpotted  leaves  of  a difagreeable 
fmell.  We  drank  the  leaves  of  the  Philadelphus  as  tea  ; and 
found  that  they  had  a pleafant  tafte  and  fmell,  and  might 
make  an  excellent  fubftitute  for  the  oriental  fort 

Among  other  plants  that  were  ufeful  to  us,  may  be 
reckoned  wild  celery,  which  grows  plentifully  in  almoft 
every  cove  ; efpecially  if  the  natives  have  ever  refided  there 
before  ; and  one  that  we  ufed  to  call  fcurvy-grafs,  though 
entirely  different  from  the  plant  to  which  we  give  that 
name.  This,  however,  is  far  preferable  to  ours  for  com- 
mon ufe ; and  may  be  known  by  its  jagged  leaves,  and 
fmall  clufters  of  white  flowers  on  the  top.  Both  forts  were 
boiled  every  morning,  with  wheat  ground  in  a mill,  and 
with  portable  foup,  for  the  people’s  breakfaft ; and  alfo 
amongft  their  peafe-foup,  for  dinner.  Sometimes  they 
were  ufed  as  fallad,  or  drefled  as  greens.  In  all  which  ways 
they  are  good  ; and,  together  with  the  fifli,  with  which  we 
were  conftantly  fupplied,  they  formed  a fort  of  refrefliment, 
perhaps  little  inferior  to  what  is  to  be  met  with  in  places 
moft  noted  by  navigators  for  plentiful  fupplies  of  animal 
and  vegetable  food. 

Amongft  the  known  kinds  of  plants  met  with  here,  are 
common  and  rough  bindweed ; night-fliade  and  nettles,  both 
which  grow  to  the  fize  of  fmall  trees ; a flirubby  fpeedwell, 
found  near  all  the  beaches  ; fow-thiftles,  virgin’s  bower, 

* See  a reprefentation  of  this,  Plate  N°  XXII.  in  Captain  Cook'i  Account  of  his  Second 
Voyage^  Vol.  i.  p.  lOO. 


vanelloe, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


149 


vanelloe,  French  willow,  euphorbia,  and  crane’s-bill : alfo  1777. 
cudweed,  ruflies,  bull-ruflies,  flax,  aU-heal,  American  , 
nightfliade,  knot-grafs,  brambles,  eye-bright,  and  ground- 
fel ; but  the  fpecies  of  each  are  different  from  any  we  have 
in  Europe.  There  is  alfo  polypody,  fpleenwort,  and  about 
twenty  other  different  fort  of  ferns,  entirely  peculiar  to  the 
place  ; with  feveral  forts  of  mofles,  either  rare,  or  produced 
only  here ; befldes  a great  number  of  other  plants,  whofe 
ufes  are  not  yet  known,  and  fubjecfls  fit  only  for  botanical 
books. 

Of  thefe,  however,  there  is  one  which  deferves  particu- 
lar notice  here,  as  the  natives  make  their  garments  of  it, 
and  it  produces  a fine  filky  flax,  fuperior  in  appearance  to 
any  thing  we  have ; and  probably,  at  leaft,  as  ftrong.  It 
grows  every  where  near  the  fea,  and  in  fome  places  a 
confiderable  way  up  the  hills,  in  bunches  or  tufts,  with 
fedge-like  leaves,  bearing,  on  a long  ffalk,  yeUowifli 
flowers,  which  are  fucceeded  by  a long  roundifli  pod,  fill- 
ed with  very  thin  fhining  black  feeds.  A fpecies  of  long 
pepper  is  found  in  great  plenty  ; but  it  has  little  of  the 
aromatic  flavour  that  makes  fpices  valuable ; and  a tree 
much  like  a palm  at  a diftance,  is  pretty  frequent  in  the 
woods,  though  the  deceit  appears  as  you  come  near  it.  It 
is  remarkable  that,  as  the  greateft  part  of  the  trees  and 
plants  had,  at  this  time,  loft  their  flowers,  we  perceived 
they  were  generally  of  the  berry-bearing  kind  ; of  which, 
and  other  feeds,  I brought  away  about  thirty  different  forts. 

Of  thefe,  one  in  particular,  which  bears  a red  berry,  is 
much  like  the  fupple-jack,  and  grows  about  the  trees, 
ftretching  from  one  to  another,  in  fuch  a manner  as  to  ren- 
der the  woods  almoft  wholly  impaflable. 

The  birds,  of  which  there  is  a tolerable  flock,  as  well  as 

the 


• 150 


A VOYAGE  TO. 


^117- 

February. 

» 


the  vegetable  produ6lions,  are  almoft  entirely  peculiar  to 
the  place.  And  though  it  be  difficult  to  follow  them,  on 
account  of  the  quantity  of  underwood,  and  the  climbing 
plants,  that  render  travelling,  for  pleafure  alone,  uncom- 
monly fatiguing,  yet  a perfon,  by  remaining  in  one  place, 
may  ffioot  as  many  in  a day  as  would  ferve  fix  or  eight 
others.  The  principal  forts  are,  large  brown  parrots,  with 
white  or  greyiffi  heads ; green  parroquets,  with  red  fore- 
heads ; large  wood  pigeons,  brown  above,  with  white  bel- 
lies, the  relf  green,  and  the  bill  and  feet  red.  Two  forts  of 
cuckoos,  one  as  large  as  our  common  fort,  of  a brown  co- 
lour, variegated  with  black ; the  other  not  larger  than  a 
fparrow,  of  a fplendid  green  call  above,  and  elegantly  va- 
ried with  waves  of  golden,  green,  brown,  and  white  colours 
below.  Both  thefe  are  fcarce ; but  feveral  others  are  in 
greater  plenty  ; one  of  which,  of  a black  colour,  with  a 
greeniffi  caft,  is  remarkable  for  having  a tuft  of  white 
curled  feathers  hanging  under  the  throat,  and  was  called 
the  Poy  bird by  our  people.  Another  fort,  rather  fmaller, 
is  black,  with  a brown  back  and  wings,  and  two  fmall  gills 
under  the  root  of  the  bill.  This  we  called  the  fmall  wattle 
bird,  to  diflinguiffi  it  from  another,  which  we  called  the 
large  one,  of  the  lize  of  a common  pigeon,  with  two  large 
yellow  and  purple  membranes  alfo,  at  the  root  of  the  bill. 
It  is  black,  or  rather  blue,  and  has  no  refemblance  of  the 
other  but  in  name  ; for  the  bill  is  thick,  ffiort,  and  crooked, 
and  has  all  together  an  uncommon  appearance.  A grofs- 
beak,  about  the  lize  of  a thruffi,  of  a brown  colour,  with  a 
reddilli  tail,  is  frequent ; as  is  alfo  a fmall  greeniffi  bird, 

* See  a drawing  of  this  bird,  Plate  N°  LII.  m Captain  Cook's  Account  of  his  Second 
Voyage^  Vol.  i.  p.  gy.  It  had  this  name  from  its  tuft  of  feathers,  refembling  the  white 
flowers  iifed  as  ornaments  in  the  ears  at  Otaheite,  and  called  there  Poowa. 


which 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

which  is  almoft  the  only  mufical  one  here,  but  is  fuflicient 
by  itfelf  to  fill  the  woods  with  a melody,  that  is  not  only 
fweet,  but  fo  varied,  that  one  would  imagine  he  was  fur- 
rounded  by  a hundred  different  forts  of  birds,  when  the  lit- 
tle warbler  is  near.  From  this  circumftance  we  named  it 
the  mocking  bird.  There  are  likewife  three  or  four  forts 
of  fmaller  birds  ; one  of  which,  in  figure  and  tamenefs,  ex- 
a6tly  refembles  our  robin,  but  is  black  where  that  is  brown, 
and  white  where  that  is  red.  Another  differs  but  little  from 
this,  except  in  being  fmaller ; and  a third  fort  has  a long 
tail,  which  it  expands  as  a fan  on  coming  near,  and  makes 
a chirping  noife  when  it  perches.  King-fifhers  are  feen, 
though  rare,  and  are  about  the  fize  of  our  Englifh  ones, 
but  with  an  inferior  plumage. 

About  the  rocks  are  feen  black  fea-pies  with  red  bills ; 
and  crefted  fhags  of  a leaden  colour,  with  fmall  black  fpots 
on  the  wings  and  flioulders,  and  the  reft  of  the  upper  part 
of  a velvet  black  tinged  with  green.  We  frequently  fliot 
both  thefe,  and  alfo  a more  common  fort  of  fhags,  black 
above  and  white  underneath,  that  build  their  nefts  upon 
trees,  on  which  fometimes  a dozen  or  more  fit  at  once. 
There  are  alfo,  about  the  fliore,  a few  fea-gulls  ; fome  blue 
herons  ; and  fometimes,  though  very  rarely,  wild  ducks ; 
a fmaU  fandy-coloured  plover,  and  fome  fand  larks.  And 
fmall  penguins  black  above,  with  a white  belly,  as  well 
as  numbers  of  little  black  divers,  fwim  often  about  the 
Sound.  We  likewife  killed  two  or  three  rails  of  a brown 
or  yellowifli  colour,  variegated  with  black,  which  feed 
about  the  fmall  brooks,  and  are  nearly  as  large  as  a com- 
mon fowl.  No  other  fort  of  game  was  feen,  except  a lingle 
fnipe,  which  was  fliot,  and  differs  but  little  from  that  of 
Europe. 


151 

1777. 

February. 

i— V— — ^ 


The 


A VOYAGE  TO 


15^ 

1777.  The  principal  filli  we  caught  by  the  feine  were  mullets 
I and  elephant  fifla,  with  a few  foies  and  flounders  ; but  thofe 

that  the  natives  moftly  fupplied  us  with,  were  a fort  of  fea- 
bream  of  a filver  colour  with  a black  fpot  on  the  neck, 
large  conger  eels,  and  a fifli  in  fliape  much  like  the  bream, 
but  fo  large  as  to  weigh  five,  fix,  or  feven  pounds.  It  is 
blackifli  with  thick  lips,  and  called  Mogge  by  the  natives. 
With  hook  and  line  we  caught  chiefly  a blackifli  fifli  of  the 
fize  of  a haddock,  called  cole-fifli  by  the  feamen,  but  dif- 
fering much  from  that  known  by  the  fame  name  in  Eu- 
rope ; and  another  of  the  fame  fize,  of  a reddifli  colour  with 
a little  beard,  which  we  called  night  walkers,  from  the 
greatefl:  number  being  caught  in  the  night.  Sometimes  wc 
got  a fort  of  fmall  falmon,  gurnards,  fixate,  and  nurfes  ; and 
the  natives,  now  and  then,  brought  hake,  paracutas,  a fmall 
fort  of  mackerel,  parrot-fifli,  and  leather-jackets ; befides 
another  fifli  which  is  very  rare,  fliaped  almoft  like  a dol- 
phin, of  a black  colour,  with  ftrong  bony  jaws,  and  the 
back-fill,  as  well  as  thofe  oppofite  to  it,  much  lengthened 
at  the  end.  All  thefe  forts,  except  the  lafl,  which  we  did 
not  try,  are  excellent  to  eat ; but  the  Mogge,  fmall  falmon, 
and  cole-fifli  are  fuperior  to  the  reft. 

The  rocks  are  abundantly  furniflied  with  great  quanti- 
ties of  excellent  mufcles  ; one  fort  of  which,  that  is  not  very 
common,  meafures  above  a foot  in  length.  There  are  alfo 
cockles  buried  in  the  faiid  of  the  fmall  beaches ; and  in 
foiiie  places  oyfters,  which,  though  very  fmall,  are  well 
tafted.  Of  other  fliell-fifli  there  are  ten  or  twelve  forts, 
fuch  as  periwiiickles,  wilks,  limpets,  and  fome  very  beau- 
tiful fea-ears  ; alfo  another  fort  which  ftick  to  the  weeds ; 
with  fome  other  things,  as  fea-eggs,  ftar-fifli.  Sec.  feveral  of 
which  are  peculiar  to  the  place.  The  natives  likewife  fome- 

times 


• THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

times  brought  us  very  fine  cray-fifli,  equal  to  our  largefl; 
lobfters,  and  cuttle  fifli,  which  they  eat  themfelves. 

Infects  are  very  rare.  Of  thefe,  we  only  faw  two  forts 
of  dragon-flies,  fome  butterflies,  fmall  graflioppers,  feveral 
forts  of  fpiders,  fome  fmall  black  ants,  and  vaft  numbers 
of  fcorpion  flies,  with  whofe  chirping  the  woods  refound. 
The  only  noxious  one  is  the  fand-fly,  very  numerous  here, 
and  almort  as  troublefome  as  the  mufquitoe  ; for  we  found 
no  reptile  here,  except  two  or  three  forts  of  fmall  harmlefs 
lizards 

It  is  remarkable,  that,  in  this  extenfive  land,  there  fhould 
not  even  be  the  traces  of  any  quadruped,  only  excepting  a 
few  rats,  and  a fort  of  fox-dog,  which  is  a domeftic  animal 
with  the  natives. 

Neither  is  there  any  mineral  worth  notice,  but  a green 
jafper  or  ferpent-ftone,  of  which  the  New  Zealanders  make 
their  tools  and  ornaments.  This  is  efteemed  a precious 
article  by  them  ; and  they  have  fome  fuperftitious  notions 
about  the  method  of  its  generation,  which  we  could  not 
perfe(flly  underftand.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  wherever 
it  may  be  found  (which,  they  fay,  is  in  the  channel  of  a 
large  river  far  to  the  Southward),  it  is  difpofed  in  the  earth 
in  thin  layers,  or,  perhaps,  in  detached  pieces,  like  our 
flints  ; for  the  edges  of  thofe  pieces,  which  have  not  been 
cut,  are  covered  with  a whitifli  cruft  like  thefe.  A piece  of 
this  fort  was  purchafed,  about  eighteen  inches  long,  a foot 
broad,  and  near  two  inches  thick ; which  yet  feemed  to  be 
only  the  fragment  of  a larger  piece. 

The  natives  do  not  exceed  the  common  ftature  of  Euro- 

* In  a feparate  memorandum-book,  Mr.  Anderfon  mentions  the  monftrous  animal  of 
the  lizard  kind,  defcribed  by  the  two  boys  after  they  left  the  ifland. 

VoL.  I.  X 


153 

^777- 

February. 

t . ,/ 


peans ; 


1 54 


'777- 

February. 

V—- '"Y— 


A VOYAGE  TO 

peans ; and,  in  general,  are  not  fo  well  made,  efpecially 
about  the  limbs.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  effect  of  lifting, 
for  the  moft  part,  on  their  hams  ; and  of  being  confined, 
by  the  hilly  difpofition  of  the  country,  from  ufing  that 
fort  of  exercife  which  contributes  to  render  the  body 
ftraight  and  well-proportioned.  There  are,  however,  feve- 
ral  exceptions  to  this  ; and  fome  are  remarkable  for  their 
large  bones  and  mufcles  ; but  few  that  I have  feen  are  cor- 
pulent. 

Their  colour  is  of  different  calls,  from  a pretty  deep  black 
to  a yellowilli  or  olive  tinge ; and  their  features  alfo  are 
various,  fome  refembling  Europeans.  But,  in  general,  their 
faces  are  round,  with  their  lips  full,  and  alfo  their  nofes 
toward  the  point ; though  the  firft  are  not  uncommonly 
thick,  nor  the  laft  flat.  I do  not,  however,  recolle6l  to 
have  feen  an  inftance  of  the  true  aquiline  nofe  amongft 
them.  Their  teeth  are  commonly  broad,  white,  and  well 
fet ; and  their  eyes  large,  with  a very  free  motion,  which 
feems  the  effe<5l  of  habit.  Their  hair  is  black,  flraight, 
and  ftrong,  commonly  cut  fhort  on  the  hind  part,  with  the 
reft  tied  on  the  crown  of  the  head  : but  fome  have  it  of  a 
curling  difpofition,  or  of  a browm  colour.  In  the  young, 
the  countenance  is  generally  free  or  open  ; but  in  many  of 
the  men  it  has  a ferious  call,  and  fometimes  a fullennefs  or 
referve,  efpecially  if  they  are  ftrangers.  The  women  are, 
in  general,  fmaller  than  the  men ; but  have  few  peculiar 
graces,  either  in  form  or  features,  to  diftinguifli  them. 

The  drefs  of  both  fexes  is  alike ; and  confifls  of  an  ob- 
long  garment  about  five  feet  long,  and  four  broad,  made 
from  the  filky  flax  already  mentioned.  This  feems  to  be 
their  moft  material  and  complex  manufa<5lure,  which  is 
executed  by  knotting  ; and  their  work  is  often  ornamented 

with 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


155 


with  pieces  of  dog-fkin,  or  chequered  at  the  corners.  1777. 
Idiey  bring  two  corners  of  this  garment  over  the  fhoulders,  , 
and  fallen  it  on  the  brealf  with  the  other  part,  which  co- 
vers the  body  ; and  about  the  beUy,  it  is  again  tied  with  a 
girdle  made  of  mat.  Sometimes  they  cover  it  with  large 
feathers  of  birds  (which  feem  to  be  wrought  into  the  piece 
of  cloth  when  it  is  made),  or  with  dog-fhin ; and  that 
alone  we  have  feen  worn  as  a covering.  Over  this  gar- 
ment many  of  them  wear  mats,  which  reach  from  the 
Ilioulders  to  near  the  heels.  But  the  moft  common  outer- 
covering is  a quantity  of  the  above  fedgy  plant,  badly 
drelTed,  which  they  fallen  on  a firing  to  a conliderable 
length,  and,  throwing  it  about  the  Ihoulders,  let  it  fall 
down  on  all  lides,  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  thighs.  When 
they  lit  down  with  this  upon  them,  either  in  their  boats, 
or  upon  the  Ihore,  it  would  be  difficult  to  dillinguiffi  them 
from  large  grey  Hones,  if  their  black  heads,  projecSIing  be- 
yond their  coverings,  did  not  engage  one  to  a ftridter  exa- 
mination. 

By  way  of  ornament,  they  fix  in  their  heads  feathers,  or 
combs  of  bone,  or  wood,  adorned,  with  pearl  fliell,  or  the 
thin  inner  fkin  of  fome  leaf.  And  in' the  ears,  both  of 
men  and  women,  which  are  pierced,  or  rather  flit,  are 
hung  fmall  pieces  of  jafper,  bits  of  cloth,  or  beads  when 
they  can  get  them.  A few  alfo  have  the  feptum  of  the 
nofe  bored  in  its  lower  part ; but  no  ornament  was  worn 
there  that  we  faw  ; though  one  man  palTed  a twig  through 
it,  to  fliew  us  that  it  was  fometimes  tiled  for  that  pur- 
pofe.  They  wear  long  beards,  but  are  fond  of  having  them 
fliaved. 

Some  are  pundlured  or  ftained  in  the  face  with  curious 
fpiral  and  other  figures,  of  a black  or  deep  blue  colour ; 

X 2 but 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777,  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  this  be  ornamental,  or  intended 
. as  a mark  of  particular  diftindtion ; and  the  women,  who 

are  marked  fo,  have  the  pundlure  only  on  their  lips,  or  a 
fmall  fpot  on  their  chins.  Both  fexes  often  befmear  their 
faces  and  heads  with  a red  paint,  which  feems  to  be 
a martial  ochre  mixed  with  greafe ; and  the  women 
fometimes  wear  necklaces  of  fliark’s  teeth,  or  bunches 
of  long  beads,  which  'feem  to  be  made  of  the  leg-bones 
of  fmall  birds,  or  a particular  Ihell.  A few  alfo  have 
fmall  triangular  aprons  adorned  with  the  feathers  of  par- 
rots, or  bits  of  pearl  fhells,  furnidied  with  a double  or  treble 
fet  of  cords  to  fallen  them  about  the  waill.  I have  fome- 
times feen  caps  or  bonnets  made  of  the  feathers  of  birds, 
which  may  be  reckoned  as  ornaments ; for  it  is  not  their 
cuftom  to  wear  any  covering  on  their  heads. 

They  live  in  the  fmall  coves  formerly  defcribed,  in  com- 
panies of  forty  or  fifty,  or  more  ; and  fometimes  in  lingle 
families,  building  their  huts  contiguous  to  each  other; 
which,  in  general,  are  miferable  lodging-places.  The  bell 
I ever  faw  was  about  thirty  feet  long,  fifteen  broad,  and  fix 
high,  built  exadlly  in  the  manner  of  one  of  our  country 
barns.  The  inlide  was  both  llrong  and  regularly  made  of 
fupporters  at  the  lides,  alternately  large  and  fmall,  well 
fallened  by  means  of  withes,  and  painted  red  and  black. 
The  ridge  pole  was  llrong ; and  the  large  buU-rulhes, 
which  compofed  the  inner  part  of  the  thatching,  were  laid 
with  great  exa6lnefs  parallel  to  each  other.  At  one  end 
was  a fmall  fquare  hole,  which  ferved  as  a door  to-  creep  in 
at ; and  near  it  another  much  fmaller,  feemingly  for  let- 
ting out  the  fmoke,  as  no  other  vent  for  it  could  be  feen. 
This,  however,  ought  to  be  conlidered  as  one  of  the  bell, 
and  the  refidence  of  fome  principal  perfon ; for  the  greatefl 

part 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


157 


part  of  them  are  not  half  the  above  fize,  and  feldom  exceed  1777. 
four  feet  in  height ; being,  behdes,  indifferently  built,  , 
though  proof  againft  wind  and  rain. 

No  other  furniture  is  to  be  feen  in  them,  than  a few 
fmall  bafkets  or  bags,  in  which  they  put  their  fifhing- 
hooks,  and  other  trifles  ; and  they  fit  down  in  the 
middle  round  a fmall  fire,  where  they  alfo  probably  fleep, 
without  any  other  covering  than  what  they  wear  in  the 
day,  or  perhaps  without  that ; as  fuch  confined  places 
mufi;  be  very  warm,  though  inhabited  but  by  a few 
perfons. 

They  live  chiefly  by  fifliing,  making  ufe  either  of  nets 
of  different  kinds,  or  of  wooden  fifli-hooks  pointed  with 
bone ; but  fo  oddly  made,  that  a ftranger  is  at  a lofs  to 
know  how  they  can  anfwer  fuch  a purpofe.  It  alfo  ap- 
pears, that  they  remove  their  habitations  from  one  place 
to  another  when  the  fifh  grow  fcarce,  or  for  fome  other 
reafon;  for  we  found  houfes  now  built  in  feveral  parts, 
where  there  had  been  none  when  we  were  here  during:  our 
lafi:  voyage,  and  even  thefe  have  been  already  deferted. 

Their  boats  are  well  built,  of  planks  raifed  upon  each 
other,  and  faftened  with  ftrong  withes,  wliich  alfo  bind 
a long  narrow  piece  on  the  outfide  of  the  feams  to  pre- 
vent their  leaking.  Some  are  fifty  feet  long,  and  fo  broad 
as  to  be  able  to  fail  without  an  outrigger ; but  the  fmaller 
fort  commonly  have  one ; and  they  often  fallen  two  toge- 
ther by  rafters,  which  we  then  call  a double  canoe.  They 
carry  from  five  to  thirty  men  or  more ; and  have  often  a 
large  head  ingenioufly  carved,  and  painted  with  a figure 
at  the  point,  which  feems  intended  to  reprefent  a man, 
with  his  features  diilorted  by  rage.  Their  paddles  are 
abortt  four  or  five  feet  long,  narrow,  and  pointed  ; with 

which, 


Oi 


A VOYAGE  TO 


8 

1777.-  which,  when  they  keep  time,  the  boat  is  puflied  along 
, Febiuary.^  pretty  fwiftly.  Their  fail,  which  is  feldom  ufed,  is  made 
of  a mat  of  a triangular  fliape,  having  the  broadeft 
part  above. 

The  only  method  of  dreffing  their  fhli,  is  by  roafting, 
or  rather  baking ; for  they  are  intirely  ignorant  of  the  art 
of  boiling.  In  the  fame  manner  they  drefs  the  root,  and 
part  of  the  ftalk,  of  the  large  fern-tree,  in  a great  hole  dug 
for  that  purpofe,  which  ferves  as  an  oven.  After  which 
they  fplit  it,  and  find,  within,  a fine  gelatinous  fubftance, 
like  boiled  fago  powder,  but  firmer.  They  alfo  ufe  another 
fmaller  fern  root,  which  feems  to  be  their  fubftitute  for 
bread,  as  it  is  dried  and  carried  about  with  them,  together 
with  dried  fifli  in  great  quantities,  when  they  remove  their 
families,  or  go  far  from  home.  This  they  beat  with  a ftick 
till  it  becomes  pretty  foft,  when  they  chew  it  fufficiently, 
and  fpit  out  the  hard  fibrous  part,  the  other  having  a 
fweetifii  mealy  tafte  not  at  all  difagreeable. 

When  they  dare  not  venture  to  fea,  or  perhaps  from 
choice,  they  fupply  the  place  of  other  fifii  with  mufcles 
and  fea-ears  ; great  quantities  of  the  fliells  of  which  lie  in 
heaps  near  their  houfes.  And  they  fometimes,  though 
rarely,  find  means  to  kill  rails,  penguins,  and  fliags,  which 
help  to  vary  their  diet.  They  alfo  breed  confiderable  num- 
bers of  the  dogs,  mentioned  before,  for  food ; but  thefe 
cannot  be  confidered  as  a principal  article  of  diet.  From 
whence  we  may  conclude,  that,  as  there  is  not  the  leafi: 
fign  of  cultivation  of  land,  they  depend  principally  for  their 
fubfiftence  on  the  fea,  which,  indeed,  is  very  bountiful  in 
its  fupply. 

Their  method  of  feeding  correfponds  with  the  naftinefs 
of  their  perfons,  which  often  fmell  difagreeably  from  the 

quantity 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


159 


quantity  of  greafe  about  them,  and  their  clothes  never  be-  1777. 
ing  wadied.  We  have  feen  them  eat  the  vermin,  with  . 
which  their  heads  are  I'ufliciently  hocked. 

They  alfo  ufed  to  devour,  with  the  greateft  eagernefs, 
large  quantities  of  ftinking  train  oil,  and  blubber  of  feals, 
which  we  were  melting  at  the  tent,  and  had  kept  near  two 
months  ; and,  on  board  the  fhips,  they  were  not  fatisfied 
with  emptying  the  lamps,  but  actually  fwallowed  the  cot- 
ton, and  fragrant  wick,  with  equal  voracity.  It  is  worthy 
of  notice,  that  though  the  inhabitants  of  Van  Diemen’s 
land  appear  to  have  but  a fcanty  fubfiftence,  they  would 
not  even  tafte  our  bread,  though  they  faw  us  eat  it ; where- 
as thefe  people  devoured  it  greedily,  when  both  mouldy 
and  rotten.  But  this  muft  not  be  imputed  to  any  defeat  in 
their  fenfations  ; for  I have  obferved  them  throw  away 
things  which  we  eat,  with  evident  difguft,  after  only  fmell- 
ing  to  them. 

They  fliew  as  much  ingenuity,  both  in  invention  and 
execution,  as  any  uncivilized  nations  under  fimilar  cir- 
cumftances.  For,  without  the  ufe  of  any  metal  tools, 
they  make  every  thing  by  which  they  procure  their  fub- 
liftence,  clothing,  and  warlike  weapons,  with  a degree  of 
neatnefs,  ftrength,  and  convenience  for  accomplidiing  their 
fever al  purpofes.  Their  chief  mechanical  tool  is  formed 
exadtly  after  the  manner  of  our  adzes  ; and  is  made,  as  are 
alfo  the  chiffel  and  goudge,  of  the  green  ferpent-ftone  or 
jafper,  already  mentioned ; though  fometimes  they  are 
compofed  of  a black,  fmooth,  and  very  folid  hone.  But 
their  mafter-piece  feems  to  be  carving,  which  is  found 
upon  the  moll  trifling  things  ; and,  in  particular,  the  heads 
of  their  canoes  are  fometimes  ornamented  with  it  in  fuch 
a manner,  as  not  only  fhews  much  delign,  but  is  alfo  an 

example 


example  of  their  great  labour  and  patience  in  execution. 
Their  cordage,  for  fidiing-lines  is  equal,  in  ftrength  and 
evennefs,  to  that  made  by  us  ; and  their  nets  not  at  all  in- 
ferior. But  what  muft  coft  them  more  labour  than  any 
other  article,  is  the  making  the  tools  we  have  mentioned ; 
for  the  Hone  is  exceedingly  hard,  and  the  only  method  of 
•fafhioning  it,  we  can  guefs  at,  is  by  rubbing  one  ftone  upon 
another,  which  can  have  but  a How  effect.  Their  fublfitute 
for  a knife  is  a fliell,  a bit  of  flint,  or  jafper.  And,  as  an 
auger,  to  bore  holes,  they  fix  a fliark’s  tooth  in  the  end  of  a 
fmall  piece  of  wood.  It  is  true,  they  have  a fmall  faw  made 
of  fome  jagged  fillies  teeth,  fixed  on  the  convex  edge  of  a 
piece  of  wood  nicely  carved.  But  this,  they  fay,  is  only 
ufed  to  cut  up  the  bodies  of  their  enemies  whom  they  kill 
in  battle. 

No  people  can  have  a quicker  fenfe  of  an  injury  done  to 
them,  and  none  are  more  ready  to  relent  it.  But,  at  the  fame 
time,  they  will  take  an  opportunity  of  being  infolent  when 
they  think  there  is  no  danger  of  punifhment ; which  is  fo 
contrary  to  the  fpirit  of  genuine  bravery,  that,  perhaps, 
their  eagernefs  to  refent  injuries  is  to  be  looked  upon  rather 
as  an  effecT  of  a furious  difpofition  than  of  great  courage. 
They  alfo  appear  to  be  of  a fufpicious  or  miftruftful  temper 
(which,  however,  may  rather  be  acquired  than  natural),  for 
ftrangers  never  came  to  our  fliips  immediately,  but  lay  in 
their  boats  at  a fmall  diftance,  either  to  obferve  our  motions, 
or  confult  whether  or  no  they  fhould  rifk  their  fafety  with 
us.  To  this  they  join  a great  degree  of  diflionefty ; for 
they  Heal  every  thing  they  can  lay  their  hands  on,  if  there 
be  the  leaf!  hope  of  not  being  detected  ; and,  in  trading,  I 
have  little  doubt  but  they  would  take  advantages,  if  they 
thought  it  could  be  done  with  fafety ; as  they  not  only  refufe 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


i6i 


to  triift  a thing  in  one’s  hand  for  examination,  but  exult  if 
they  think  they  have  tricked  you  in  the  bargain. 

Such  conduct,  however,  is,  in  fome  meafure,  to  be  ex- 
pected where  there  appears  to  be  but  little  fubordination, 
and  confequently  few,  if  any,  laws,  to  punilh  tranfgref- 
lions.  For  no  man’s  authority  feems  to  extend  farther 
than  his  own  family  ; and  when,  at  any  time,  they  join  for 
mutual  defence,  or  any  other  purpofe,  thofe  amongft  them 
who  are  eminent  for  courage  or  prudence,  are  directors. 
How  their  private  quarrels  are  terminated  is  uncertain ; 
but,  in  the  few  we  faw,  which  were  of  little  confequence, 
the  parties  concerned  were  clamorous  and  diforderly. 

Their  pubhc  contentions  are  frequent,  or  rather  perpe- 
tual ; for  it  appears,  from  their  number  of  weapons,  and 
dexterity  in  uhng  them,  that  war  is  their  principal  pro- 
feffion.  Thefe  weapons  are  fpears,  patoos  and  halberts,  or 
fometimes  ftones.  The  firlt  are  made  of  hard  wood  point- 
ed, of  different  lengths,  from  five,  to  twenty,  or  even  thirty 
feet  long.  The  fliort  ones  are  ufed  for  throwing  as  darts. 
The  patoo  or  emeete  is  of  an  elliptical  fiiape,  about  eighteen 
inches  long,  with  a handle  made  of  wood,  ftone,  the  bone 
of  fome  fea  animal,  or  green  jafper,  and  feems  to  be  their 
principal  dependence  in  battle.  The  halbert,  or  long  club, 
is  about  five  or  fix  feet  long,  tapering  at  one  end  with  a 
carved  head,  and  at  the  other,  broad  or  flat,  with  fharp 
edges. 

Before  they  begin  the  onfet,  they  join  in  a war-fong,  to 
which  they  all  keep  the  exaClefi;  time,  and  foon  raife  their 
paflion  to  a degree  of  frantic  fury,  attended  with  the  mofi: 
horrid  dilfortion  of  their  eyes,  mouths,  and  tongues,  to 
ftrike  terror  into  their  enemies  ; which,  to  thofe  who  have 
not  been  accuftomed  to  fuch  a practice,  makes  them  ap- 

VoL.  I.  Y jjear 


^777- 

February. 


i62 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  pear  more  like  demons  than  men,  and  would  almoft  chill 
. the  boldelt  with  fear.  To  this  fucceeds  a circumftance,  al- 

moft  foretold  in  their  fierce  demeanor,  horrid,  cruel,  and 
difgraceful  to  human  nature ; which  is,  cutting  in  pieces, 
even  before  being  perfecSlly  dead,  the  bodies  of  their  ene- 
mies, and,  after  drelfing  them  on  a fire,  devouring  the 
flelh,  not  only  without  reluctance,  but  with  peculiar  fatif- 
faCtion. 

One  might  be  apt  to  fuppofe,  that  people,  capable  of 
fuch  excefs  of  cruelty,  mull  be  deftitute  of  every  humane 
feeling,  even  amongft  their  own  party.  And  yet  we  find 
them  lamenting  the  lofs  of  their  friends,  with  a violence 
of  expreffion  which  argues  the  molt  tender  remembrance  of 
them.  For  both  men  and  women,  upon  the  death  of  thofe 
connected  with  them,  whether  in  battle  or  otherwife,  be- 
wail them  with  the  molt  doleful  cries ; at  the  fame  time 
cutting  their  foreheads  and  cheeks,  with  Ihells  or  pieces  of 
flint,  in  large  gaflies,  until  the  blood  flows  plentifully  and 
mixes  with  their  tears.  They  alfo  carve  pieces  of  their 
green  ftone,  rudely  fliaped,  as  human  figures,  which  they 
ornament  with  bright  eyes  of  pearl-fhell,  and  hang  them 
about  their  necks,  as  memorials  of  thofe  whom  they  held 
moft  dear ; and  their  affeClions  of  this  kind  are  fo  Itrong, 
that  they  even  perform  the  ceremony  of  cutting,  and  la- 
menting for  joy,  at  the  return  of  any  of  their  friends,  who 
have  been  abfent  but  for  a fhort  time. 

The  children  are  initiated,  at  a very  early  age,  into  all 
the  practices,  good  or  bad,  of  their  fathers  ; fo  that  you 
find  a boy  or  girl,  nine  or  ten  years  old,  able  to  perform  all 
the  motions,  and  to  imitate  the  frightful  geftures,  by  which 
the  more  aged  ufe  to  infpire  their  enemies  with  terror, 
keeping  the  flriCleft  time  in  their  fong.  They  likewife 

fing. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

fiiig,  with  fome  degree  of  melody,  the  traditions  of  their 
forefathers,  their  adfions  in  war,  and  other  indifferent  fub- 
je(5ls  ; of  all  which  they  are  immoderately  fond,  and  fpend 
much  of  their  time,  in  thefe  amufements,  and  in  playing 
on  a fort  of  flute. 

Their  language  is  far  from  being  harfli  or  difagreeable, 
though  the  pronunciation  is  frequently  guttural;  and  what- 
ever (qualities  are  requifite  in  any  other  language  to  make 
it  mufical,  certainly  obtain  to  a confiderable  degree  here, 
if  we  may  judge  from  the  melody  of  fome  forts  of  their 
fongs.  It  is  alfo  fufliciently  comprehenfive,  though,  in 
many  refpecfls,  deficient,  if  compared  with  our  European 
languages,  which  owe  their  perfection  to  long  improve- 
ment. But  a fmall  fpecimen  is  here  fubjoined,  from  which 
fome  judgment  may  be  formed.  I collected  a great  many 
of  their  words,  ^both  now  and  in  the  courfe  of  our  former 
voyage ; and  being  equally  attentive,  in  my  inquiries,  about 
the  languages  of  the  other  iflands  throughout  the  South 
Sea,  I have  the  ampleft  proof  of  their  wonderful  agreement, 
or  rather  identity.  This  general  obfervation  has,  indeed, 
been  already  made  in  the  accounts  of  the  former  voyages 
I fliall  be  'enabled,  how^ever,  to  confirm  and  ftrengthen  it, 
by  a frefh  lift  of  words,  feleCted  from  a large  vocabulary 
in  my  pofleflion  ; and  by  placing,  in  the  oppofite  column, 
the  correfponding  words  as  ufed  at  Otaheite,  the  curious 
reader  will,  at  one  view,  be  furnifhed  with  fuflicient  mate- 
rials for  judging  by  what  fubordinate  changes  the  differ- 
ence of  dialed  has  been  effected. 

* See  Hawkefworth’s  Colleaion,  Vol.  iii.  p.  474,  475,  and  Captain  Cook’s  Voyage, 
V ol.  ii.  p.  364. 

^ ^ Englifli 


163 


1777. 

February. 


164 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777* 

February. 


Englifh. 

New  Zealand. 

Otaheite. 

Water^ 

Ewy, 

Evy. 

A tail  of  a dog., 

Wyeroo, 

Ero. 

Death,  dead. 

Kaoo,  matte, 

Matte,  roa. 

1’ofly, 

Ererre, 

Eraire. 

A houfe. 

Ewharre, 

Ewharre. 

To  Jleep, 

Moea, 

Moe. 

Af/h-hook, 

Makoee, 

Maton. 

Shut, 

Opanee, 

Opanee. 

A bed. 

Moenga, 

Moera. 

A butterfly. 

Epaipe, 

Pepe. 

To  chew,  or  eat. 

Hekaee, 

Ey. 

Cold, 

Makkareede, 

Mareede.^ 

To-day, 

Agooanai, 

Aooanai. 

The  hand. 

Reenga, 

Ereema. 

Large, 

Keeerahoi, 

Erahoi. 

Red, 

Whairo, 

Oora,  oora. 

We, 

Taooa^ 

Taooa. 

Where  is  itf 

Kahaia, 

Tehaia. 

A flone. 

Powhy, 

Owhy. 

A man. 

T angata. 

Taata, 

Black, 

Purra,  purra. 

Ere,  ere. 

White, 

Ema, 

Ooama. 

T 0 refide,  or  dwell. 

Nohoanna, 

Nohonoa. 

Out,  not  within. 

Woho, 

Woho. 

Male  kind  (of  any  animal), 

Toa, 

Etoa. 

Female, 

Eoowha, 

Eooha. 

A floark. 

Mango, 

Mao. 

To  underjland. 

Geetaia, 

Eetea. 

Forgot,  . 

Warre, 

Ooaro. 

Teflerday, 

Taeninnahoi, 

Ninnahoi. 

One, 

Tahaee, 

Atahay. 

THE 

PACIFIC  OCE 

A N. 

165 

Englifh. 

New  Zealand. 

Otaheite. 

1777. 

I’wo^ 

Pvooa, 

Erooa. 

February, 

V 

T'hree^ 

Toroo, 

Toroo. 

Four^ 

Faa, 

Ahaa. 

Five, 

Reema, 

Ereema. 

Six, 

Ono, 

Aono. 

Seven, 

Heetoo, 

Aheitoo. 

Fight, 

Waroo, 

A waroo. 

Nine, 

Eeva, 

Aeeva. 

Fen, 

Angahoora, 

Ahooroo. 

The  New  Zealanders  to  thefe  numerals  prefix  Ma\  as. 

Eleven, 

Matahee. 

Fwelve,  &c.  8cc. 

Marooa,  ^c.  &c. 

Fwenty, 

Mangahoora. 

••  O'l 

■^r  c? 

. h'  ■ ' .•'  • 


■HWi  1 

“tifsd. 


■ ‘ . -vs  ^ i o^A-'n  1 


•T 

‘4^ 


„7- ■ . 


.rcx-:  C 

.cx>ivri.'  '•  ‘ * 

. U-;irA 

.' if  .'  H 

.•  i;o/v  - • ' *■ ’’^onQ  ^ . 

/ ■ * . vMi  rrf/  - ..  ; ^ <00^11; 

.Y,>.sOQ^'‘*^A.  ■ f " 

,y^  ' ^ */lV  * vr A, ' *■  r ^*-V'/>5T. 


fii  jaA  ; 


.•■.('{ 5, pt  2li^inir:L 

* '•  f 'ff'*.  ■> " “ ’ 

'tf  ^ 


''  % '■  ■ V 

• '•■’•/ 7 rv^ 

>^V( 

.r" 


v^•,.•.:  A.C. 


t .‘ 


i ^ * *^1' 


1 ‘ / 


.wVf  ‘ . f. 


r ■ ' ' ^•*  ■ 


’ iV. 


Iv- 


r:-Ai 


r/s  - 
'*^Ml  ■ 


•• 


' ^r- 


.'-k^  ' 


A 


VOYAGE 

TO  THE 

PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


BOOK  II. 

FROM  LEAVING  NEW  ZEALAND  TO  OUR  ARRIVAL  AT 
OTAHEITE,  OR  THE  SOCIETY  ISLANDS. 

CHAP.  I. 

Profecution  of  the  Voyage. — Behaviour  of  the  Two  New  Zea- 
landers on  board. — Unfavourable  Winds. — An  I/land  called 
Mangeea  difcovered. — The  Coaji  of  it  examined. — Tranf 
aSlions  with  the  Natives. — An  Account  of  their  Perfons, 

Drefs,  and  Canoe. — Defcription  of  the  I/land. — A Specimen 
of  the  Language. — Difpoftion  of  the  Inhabitants. 

ON  the  25th,  at  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning,  a light  1777. 
breeze  fpringing  up  at  North  Weft  by  Weft,  we 
weighed,  ftood  out  of  the  Sound,  and  made  fail  Tuefday25. 
through  the  ftrait,  with  the  Difcovery  in  company.  We  had 
hardly  got  the  length  of  Cape  Teerawitte,  when  the  wind  • 
took  us  aback  at  South  Eaft.  It  continued  in  this  quarter  till 

two 


A VOYAGE  TO 


i68 


February. 

( — ^ 

Wednef.  z6. 
Thurfday  27. 


Friday  28. 


two  o’clock  the  next  morning,  when  we  had  a few  hours 
calm.  After  which  we  had  a breeze  at  North ; but  here  it 
fixed  not  long,  before  it  veered  to  the  Eaft,  and  after  that  to 
the  South.  At  length,  on  the  27th,  at  eight  o’clock  in  the 
morning,  we  took  our  departure  from  Cape  Pallifer,  which, 
at  this  time,  bore  Weft,  feven  or  eight  leagues  diftant.  We 
had  a fine  gale,  and  I fteered  Eaft  by  North. 

We  had  no  fooner  loft  fight  of  the  land  than  our  two 
New  Zealand  adventurers,  the  fea  ficknefs  they  now  exj^e- 
rienced  giving  a turn  to  their  refledlions,  repented  heartily 
of  the  ftep  they  had  taken.  All  the  foothing  encourage- 
ment we  could  think  of,  availed  but  little.  They  wept, 
both  in  public  and  in  private,  and  made  their  lamentations 
in  a kind  of  fong,  which,  as  far  as  we  could  comprehend 
the  meaning  of  the  words,  was  expreflive  of  their  praifes 
of  their  country  and  people,  from  which  they  were  to  be 
feparated  for  ever.  Thus  they  continued  for  many  days, 
till  their  fea  ficknefs  wore  off,  and  the  tumult  of  their 
minds  began  to  fubfide.  Then  thefe  fits  of  lamentation 
became  lefs  and  lefs  frequent,  and  at  length  entirely  ceafed. 
Their  native  country  and  their  friends  were,  by  degrees, 
forgot,  and  they  appeared  to  be  as  firmly  attached  to  us,  as 
if  they  had  been  born  amongft  us. 

The  wind  had  not  remained  many  hours  at  South,  before 
it  veered  to  South  Eaft  and  Eaft ; and,  with  this,  we  flood  to 
the  North,  till  the  28th  at  noon.  Being  then  in  the  latitude 
of  41°  17",  and  in  the  longitude  of  177°  17'  Eaft,  we  tacked 
and  flood  to  the  South  Eaft,  with  a gentle  breeze  at  Eaft 
North  Eaft.  It  afterward  frefhened,  and  came  about  to 
North  Eaft ; in  which  quarter  it  continued  two  days,  and 
fometimes  blew  a frelh  gale  with  fqualls,  accompanied  with 
fliowers  of  rain. 


On 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


169 


On  the  2d  of  March  at  noon,  being  in  the  latitude  of  1777. 
42°  35'  30'",  longitude  180°  8'  Eaft,  the  wind  fliifted  to  North  . 

Weft;  afterward  to  South  Weft;  and  between  this  point  Sunday 2. 

and  North  it  continued  to  blow,  fometimes  a ftrong  gale 

with  hard  fqualls,  and  at  other  times  very  moderate.  With 

this  wind  we  fteered  North  Eaft  by  Eaft  and  Eaft,  under 

all  the  fail  we  could  carry,  till  the  nth  at  noon,  at  which  Tuefdayn. 

time  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  39°  29",  longitude  196°  4' 

Eaft. 

The  wind  now  veered  to  North  Eaft  and  South  Eaft,  and 
I ftood  to  the  North,  and  to  the  North  Eaft,  as  the  wind 
would  admit,  till  one  o’clock  in  the  morning  on  the  i6th,  Sunday  16. 
when  having  a more  favourable  gale  from  the  North,  I 
tacked  and  ftood  to  the  Eaft ; the  latitude  being  33°  40^  and 
the  longitude  198°  50'  Eaft.  We  had  light  airs  and  calms 
by  turns,  till  noon  the  next  day,  when  the  wind  began  to  Monday  17. 
freftien  at  Eaft  South  Eaft,  and  I again  ftood  to  the  North 
Eaft.  But  as  the  wind  often  veered  to  Eaft  and  Eaft  North 
Eaft,  we  frequently  made  no  better  than  a northerly  courfe ; 
nay  fometimes  to  the  Weftward  of  North.  But  the  hopes 
of  the  wind  coming  more  Southerly,  or  of  meeting  with  it 
from  the  Weftward,  a little  without  the  Tropic,  as  I had 
experienced  in  my  former  vilits  to  this  ocean,  encouraged 
me  to  continue  this  courfe.  Indeed  it  was  neceffary  that  I 
lliould  run  all  rilks,  as  my  proceeding  to  the  North  this 
year,  in  profecution  of  the  principal  obje6l  of  the  voyage, 
depended  entirely  on  my  making  a quick  paflage  to  Ota- 
heite,  or  the  Society  Iflands. 

The  wind  continued  invariably  fixed  at  Eaft  South  Eaft, 
or  feldom  fhifting  above  two  points  on  either  fide.  It  alfo 
•blew  very  faint,  fo  that  it  was  the  27th  before  we  crofted  Thurfdayzy, 
the  Tropic,  and  then  we  were  only  in  the  longitude  of 

VoL.  I.  Z 20l‘^ 


170 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  201°  23'  Eaft,  which  was  nine  degrees  to  the  Weftward  of 

j onr  intended  port.  In  all  this  mn  we  law  nothing,  except 
now  and  then  a Tropic  bird,  that  could  induce  us  to  think 
we  had  failed  near  any  land.  In  the  latitude  of  34°  20', 
longitude  199°,  we  palTed  the  trunk  of  a large  tree,  which 
was  covered  with  barnacles  ; a lign  that  it  had  been  long 
at  fea. 

Saturday  29.  Oil  the  29th,  at  tell  in  the  morning,  as  we  were  handing 
to  the  North  Eaft,  the  Difcovery  made  the  lignal  of  feeing 
land.  We  faw  it  from  the  maft-head  almoft  the  fame  mo- 
ment, bearing  North  Eaft  by  Eaft  by  compafs.  We  fooii 
difcovered  it  to  be  an  ill  and  of  no  great  extent,  and  hood 
for  it  till  funfet,  when  it  bore  North  North  Eaft,  diftant 
about  two  or  three  leagues. 

The  night  was  fpent  in  handing  off  and  on,  and  at  day- 
Sunday  30.  break  the  next  morning,  I bore  up  for  the  lee  or  Weft  fide 
of  the  ifland,  as  neither  anchorage  nor  landing  appeared 
to  be  practicable  on  the  South  fide,  on  account  of  a great 
furf  '■S  which  broke  every  where  with  violence  againft  the 
fliore,  or  againft  the  reef  that  furrounded  it. 

We  prefently  found  that  the  ifland  was  inhabited,  and 
faw  feveral  people,  on  a point  of  the  land  w'e  had  palfed, 
wading  to  the  reef,  where,  as  they  found  the  fhip  leaving 
them  quickly,  they  remained.  But  others,  who  foon  ap- 
peared in  different  parts,  followed  her  courfe ; and  fome- 
times  feveral  of  them  collected  into  fmall  bodies,  who  made 
a fhouting  noife  all  together,  nearly  after  the  manner  of 
the  inhabitants  of  New  Zealand. 

Between  feven  and  eight  o’clock,  we  were  at  the  Weft 
North  Weft  part  of  the  ifland,  and,  being  near  the  Ihore,  we 

* A very  Ingenious  and  fatisfa£lory  account  of  the  caufe  of  the  furf,  is  to  be  met  with 
in  Marfden’s  Hiftory  of  Sumatra,  p.  29.  32. 

could 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


171 


could  perceive  with  our  giafles,  that  feveral  of  the  natives, 
who  appeared  upon  a fandy  beach,  were  all  armed  with 
long  fpears  and  clubs,  which  they  brandiflied  in  the  air 
with  ligns  of  threatening,  or,  as  fome  on  board  interpreted 
their  attitudes,  with  invitations  to  land.  Mod:  of  them  ap- 
peared naked,  except  having  a fort  of  girdle,  which,  being 
brought  up  between  the  thighs,  covered  that  part  of  the 
body.  But  fome  of  them  had  pieces  of  cloth  of  different 
colours,  white,  flriped,  or  chequered,  which  they  wore  as 
a garment,  thrown  about  their  flioulders.  And  almofl:  all 
of  them  had  a white  wrapper  about  their  heads,  not  much 
unhke  a turban ; or,  in  fome  inftances,  like  a high  conical 
cap.  We  could  alfo  perceive  that  they  were  of  a tawny 
colour,  and  in  general  of  a middling  flature,  but  robuft, 
and  inclining  to  corpulence. 

At  this  time,  a fmall  canoe  was  launched  in  a great 
hurry  from  the  further  end  of  the  beach,  and  a man  get- 
ting into  it,  put  off,  as  with  a view  to  reach  the  fliip.  On 
perceiving  this,  I brought  to,  that  we  might  receive  the 
vifit ; but  the  man’s  refolution  failing,  he  foon  returned 
toward  the  beach,  where,  after  fome  time,  another  man 
joined  him  in  the  canoe  ; and  then  they  both  paddled  to- 
ward us.  They  llopt  fliort,  however,  as  if  afraid  to  ap- 
proach, until  Omai,  who  addreffed  them  in  the  Otaheite 
language,  in  fome  meafure  quieted  their  apprehenfions. 
They  then  came  near  enough  to  take  fome  beads  and  nails, 
which  were  tied  to  a piece  of  wood,  and  thrown  into  the 
canoe.  They  feemed  afraid  to  touch  thefe  things,  and  put 
the  piece  of  wood  afide  without  untying  them.  This,  how- 
ever, might  arife  from  fuperHiition ; for  Omai  told  us,  that 
when  they  faw  us  offering  them  prefents,  they  aficed  fome- 
thing  for  Eatooa^  or  god.  He  alfo,  perhaps  impro- 


Z 2 


perly, 


A VOYAGE  TO 


172 


1777.  perly,  put  the  queftion  to  them,  Whether  they  ever  eat 
t ' . human  flelli  ? which  they  anfwered  in  the  negative,  with  a 
mixture  of  indignation  and  abhorrence.  One  of  them, 
whofe  name  was  Mourooa,  being  afked  how  he  came  by 
a fear  on  his  forehead,  told  us  that  it  was  the  confequence 
of  a wound  he  had  got  in  fighting  with  the  people  of  an 
illand,  which  lies  to  the  North  Eaftward,  who  fometimes 
came  to  invade  them.  They  afterward  took  hold  of  a 
rope.  Still,  however,  they  would  not  venture  on  board ; 
but  told  Omai,  who  underftood  them  pretty  well,  that 
their  countrymen  on  fliore  had  given  them  this  caution, 
at  the  fame  time  direcSting  them  to  inquire,  from  whence 
our  blip  came,  and  to  learn  the  name  of  the  Captain.  On 
our  part,  we  inquired  the  name  of  the  illand,  which  they 
called  Mangy  a or  Mange  ea  ; and  fometimes  added  to  it  Nooe^ 
nai,  naiwa.  The  name  of  their  Chief,  they  faid,  was 
Orooaeeka. 

Mourooa  was  lufty  and  well  made,  but  not  very  tall.  His 
features  were  agreeable,  and  his  difpofition  feemingly  no 
lefs  fo;  for  he  made  feveral  droll  gefticulations,  which 
indicated  both  good-nature  and  a fhare  of  humour.  He 
alfo  made  others  which  feemed  of  a ferious  kind,  and  re- 
peated fome  w'ords  with  a devout  air,  before  he  ventured  to 
lay  hold  of  the  rope  at  the  fliip’s  Hern ; which  was  pro- 
bably to  recommend  himfelf  to  the  prote6tion  of  fome  Di- 
vinity. His  colour  was  nearly  of  the  fame  call;  with  that 
common  to  the  moft  fouthern  Europeans.  The  other  man 
was  not  fo  handfome.  Both  of  them  had  ftrong,  ftraight 
hair,  of  a jet  colour,  tied  together  on  the  crown  of  the 
head  with  a bit  of  cloth.  They  wore  fuch  girdles  as  we 
had  perceived  about  thofe  on  fhore,  and  we  found  they 
were  a fubllance  made  from  the  Morus  papyrifera-,  in  the 

fame 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


173 


fame  manner  as  at  the  other  illands  of  this  ocean.  It  was 
glazed  like  the  fort  ufed  by  the  natives  of  the  Friendly 
Illands  ; but  the  cloth  on  their  heads  was  white,  like  that 
which  is  found  at  Otaheite.  They  had  on,  a kind  of  fan- 
dais,  made  of  a graffy  fubftance  interwoven,  which  we  alfo 
obferved  were  worn  by  thofe  w ho  flood  upon  the  beach ; 
and,  as  we  fuppofed,  intended  to  defend  their  feet  againfl 
the  rough  coral  rock.  Their  beards  were  long ; and  the 
inlide  of  their  arms,  from  the  flioulder  to  the  elbow,  and 
fome  other  parts,  were  pundlured  or  tatooed^  after  the  man- 
ner of,  the  inhabitants  of  almofl  all  the  other  illands  in  the 
South  Sea.  The  lobe  of  their  ears  was  pierced,  or  rather 
flit,  and  to  fuch  a length,  that  one  of  them  fluck  there  a 
knife  and  fome  beads,  which  he  had  received  from  us  ; and 
the  fame  perfon  had  two  polifhed  pearl-fliells,  and  a bunch 
of  human  hair,  loofely  twifted,  hanging  about  his  neck, 
which  was  the  only  ornament  we  obferved.  The  canoe 
they  came  in  (which  was  the  only  one  we  faw),  was  not 
above  ten  feet  long,  and  very  narrow ; but  both  flrong  and 
neatly  made.  The  forepart  had  a flat  board  faflened  over 
it,  and  projecting  out,  to  prevent  the  fea  getting  in  on 
plunging,  like  the  fmall  Evaas  at  Otaheite ; but  it  had  an 
upright  Hern,  about  five  feet  high,  like  fome  in  New  Zea- 
land ; and  the  upper  end  of  this  ftern-poft  was  forked. 
The  lower  part  of  the  canoe  was  of  white  wood ; but  the 
upper  was  black,  and  their  paddles,  made  of  wood  of  the 
fame  colour,  not  above  three  feet  long,  broad  at  one  end, 
and  blunted.  They  paddled  either  end  of  the  canoe  for- 
ward indifferently ; and  only  turned  about  their  faces  to 
paddle  the  contrary  way. 

We  now  flood  off  and  on  ; and  as  foon  as  the  fhips  were 
in  a proper  flation,  about  ten  o’clock  I ordered  two  boats, 

one 


1777- 

March. 


174 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  one  of  them  from  the  Difcovery,  to  found  the  coaft,  and  to 
‘ . endeavour  to  find  a landing-place.  With  this  view,  I went 
in  one  of  them  myfelf,  taking  with  me  fuch  articles  to  give 
the  natives,  as  I thought  might  ferve  to  gain  their  good- 
will. I had  no  fooner  put  off'  from  the  fliip,  than  the 
canoe,  with  the  two  men,  which  had  left  us  not  long  be- 
fore, paddled  toward  my  boat ; and,  having  come  along- 
fide,  Mourooa  flept  into  her,  without  being  afked,  and 
without  a moment’s  helitation. 

Omai,  who  was  with  me,  was  ordered  to  inquire  of  him, 
where  we  could  land ; and  he  directed  us  to  two  different 
places.  But  I faw,  with  regret,  that  the  attempt  could  not 
be  made  at  either  place,  unlefs  at  the  rifk  of  having  our 
boats  filled  with  water,  or  even  ftaved  to  pieces.  Nor  were 
we  more  fortunate  in  our  fearch  for  anchorage ; for  we 
could  find  no  bottom,  till  within  a cable’s  length  of  the 
breakers.  There  we  met  with  from  forty  to  twenty  fa- 
thoms depth,  over  fliarp  coral  rocks  ; fo  that  anchoring 
would  have  been  attended  with  much  more  danger  than 
landing. 

While  we  were  thus  employed  in  reconnoitring  the 
fliore,  great  numbers  of  the  natives  thronged  down  upon 
the  reef,  all  armed  as  above  mentioned.  Mourooa,  who 
was  now  in  my  boat,  probably  thinking  that  this  warlike 
appearance  hindered  us  from  landing,  ordered  them  to 
retire  back.  As  many  of  them  complied,  I judged  he  muff 
be  a perfon  of  Ibme  confequence  among  them.  Indeed,  if 
we  underflood  him  right,  he  was  the  king’s  brother.  So 
great  was  the  curiofity  of  feveral  of  them,  that  they  took 
to  the  water,  and,  fwimming  off  to  the  boats,  came  on 
board  them  without  referve.  Nay,  we  found  it  difficult 
to  keep  them  out ; and  Hill  more  difficult  to  prevent 

their 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


175 


their  carrying  off  every  thing  they  could  lay  their  hands  1777. 
upon.  At  length,  when  they  perceived  that  we  were  re-  . , 

turning  to  the  Iliips,  they  all  left  us,  except  our  original 
vifiter  Mourooa.  He,  though  not  without  evident  figns  of 
fear,  kept  his  place  in  my  boat,  and  accompanied  me  on 
board  the  fliip. 

The  cattle  and  other  new  obje£ls,  that  prefented  them- 
felves  to  him  there,  did  not  ftrike  him  with  fo  much  fur- 
prife  as  one  might  have  expelled.  Perhaps  his  mind  was 
too  much  taken  up  about  his  own  fafety,  to  allow  him  to 
attend  to  other  things.  It  is  certain,  that  he  feemed  very 
uneafy ; and  the  fliip,  on  our  getting  on  board,  happening 
to  be  handing  off  Iliore,  this  circumftance  made  him  the 
more  fo.  I could  get  but  little  new  information  from  him  ; 
and  therefore,  after  he  had  made  a fliort  ftay,  I ordered 
a boat  to  carry  him  in  toward  the  land.  As  foon  as  he  got 
out  of  the  cabin,  he  happened  to  humble  over  one  of  the 
goats.  His  curiofity  now  overcoming  his  fear,  he  hopped, 
looked  at  it,  and  afked  Omai,  what  bird  this  was  ? and  not 
receiving  an  immediate  anfwer  from  him,  he  repeated  the 
quehion  to  fome  of  the  people  upon  deck.  The  boat  hav-  • 
ing  conveyed  him  pretty  near  to  the  furf,  he  leaped  into 
the  fea,  and  fwam  afhore.  He  had  no  fooner  landed,  than 
the  multitude  of  his  countrymen  gathered  round  him,  as  if 
with  an  eager  curiolity  to  learn  from  him  what  he  had 
feen;  and  in  this  fituation  they  remained,  when  we  loh 
fight  of  them.  As  foon  as  the  boat  returned,  we  hoifted 
her  in,  and  made  fail  from  the  land  to  the  Northward. 

Thus  were  we  obliged  to  leave,  unvifited,  this  line  ifland, 
which  feemed  capable  of  fupplying  all  our  wants.  It  lies 
in  the  latitude  of  21°  57'’  South ; and  in  the  longitude  of 
201°  53'  Eaft.  Such  parts  of  the  coaft,  as  fell  under  our 

obfervation. 


176 


A VOYAGE  TO 


«777* 

March. 

u..— 


obfervation,  are  guarded  by  a reef  of  coral  rock,  on  the  out- 
fide  of  which  the  fea  is  of  an  unfathomable  depth.  It  is  full 
five  leagues  in  circuit,  and  of  a moderate  and  pretty  equal 
height ; though,  in  clear  weather,  it  may  be  certainly  feen 
at  the  diftance  of  ten  leagues ; for  we  had  not  loft  fight  of  it 
at  night,  when  we  had  run  above  feven  leagues,  and  the 
weather  was  cloudy.  In  the  middle,  it  rifes  into  little  hills, 
from  whence  there  is  a gentle  defcent  to  the  fhore,  which, 
at  the  South  Weft  part,  is  fteep,  though  not  above  ten  or 
twelve  feet  high ; and  has  feveral  excavations  made  by  the 
beating  of  the  waves  againft  a brownifti  fand-ftone  of 
which  it  is  compofed.  The  defcent  here  is  covered  with 
trees  of  a deep  green  colour,  very  thick,  but  not  high, 
which  feem  all  of  one  fort,  unlefs  neareft  the  fhore,  where 
there  are  great  numbers  of  that  fpecies  of  drac/ena  found  in 
the  woods  of  New  Zealand,  which  are  alfo  fcattered  in  fome 
other  places.  On  the  North  Weft  part,  the  lliore,  as  we 
mentioned  above,  ends  in  a fandy  beach ; beyond  which  the 
land  is  broken  down  into  fmall  chafms  or  gullies,  and  has  a 
broad  border  of  trees  refembling  tall  willows  ; which,  from 
its  regularity,  might  be  fuppofed  a work  of  art,  did  not  its 
extent  forbid  us  to  think  fo.  Farther  up  on  the  afcent,  the 
trees  were  of  the  deep  green  mentioned  before.  Some  of 
us  fuppofed  thefe  to  be  the  rima,  intermixed  with  low  cocoa 
palms  ; and  a few  of  fome  other  forts.  They  feemed  not 
fo  thick  as  on  the  South  Weft  part,  and  higher ; which  ap- 
pearance might  be  owing  to  our  nearer  approach  to  the 
fhore.  On  the  little  hills,  were  fome  trees  of  a taller  fort, 
thinly  fcattered ; but  the  other  parts  of  them  were  either 
bare,  and  of  a reddifli  colour,  or  covered  with  fomething 
like  fern.  Upon  the  whole,  the  illand  has  a pretty  afpecft, 
and  might  be  made  a beautiful  Ipot  by  cultivation, 


As 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


177 


As  the  inhabitants  feemed  to  be  both  numerous  and  well 
fed,  fuch  articles  of  provilion  as  the  illand  produces  muft  ^ 
be  in  great  plenty.  It  might,  however,  be  a matter  of  cu- 
riolity  to  know,  particularly,  their  method  of  fubfiftence ; 
for  our  friend  Mourooa  told  us,  that  they  had  no  animals, 
as  hogs  and  dogs,  both  which,  however,  they  had  heard  of; 
but  acknowledged  they  had  plantains,  bread-fruit,  and  taro. 
The  only  birds  we  faw,  were  fome  white  egg-birds,  terns, 
and  noddies  ; and  one  white  heron,  on  the  fliore. 

The  language  of  the  inhabitants  of  Mangeea  is  a dialect 
of  that  fpoken  at  Otaheite ; though  their  pronunciation,  as 
that  of  the  New  Zealanders,  be  more  guttural.  Some  of 
their  words,  of  which  two  or  three  are  perhaps  peculiar  to 
this  ifland,  are  here  fubjoined,  as  taken,  by  Mr.  Anderfon, 
from  Omai,  who  had  learnt  them  in  his  converfations  with 
Mourooa.  The  Otaheite  words,  where  there  is  any  re- 
femblance,  are  placed  oppolite. 


Englifli. 

Mangeea, 

Otaheite. 

A cocoa  nut^ 

Eakkaree, 

Aree. 

Bread-fruity 

Kooroo, 

Ooroo. 

A canoBy 

Ewakka, 

Evaa. 

Friendy 

Naoo,  mou. 

A marly 

Taata,  or  Tangata, 

Taata. 

Clothy  or  cloth  plant y Taia,  taia  aoutee. 

Eoute. 

Goody 

Mata, 

Myty. 

A cluby 

Pooroohee. 

TeSy 

Aee, 

Ai. 

NOy 

Aoure, 

Aoure. 

Afpeary 

Hey  hey. 

A fight  y or  battlcy 

Etamagee, 

Tamaee. 

A womany 

Waheine, 

Waheine. 

VoL.  I. 

A a 

1777- 

March. 


■'W 


178 

A 

VOYAGE 

T 0 

»777* 

Englifh. 

Mangeea, 

Otaheite, 

March. 

A daughter 

Maheine, 

Maheine. 

Jun^ 

Heetaia  matooa. 

I, 

Ou, 

Wou. 

‘fhe/hore, 

Euta, 

Euta, 

What  is  that? 

Ehataieee  ? 

Owytaieeoa  ? 

Thereof 

Oo. 

A chiefs 

Ereekee, 

Eree. 

Greats  ov  powerful,  | 

Manna  (an  adjundi 
to  the  laft)^ 

To  kifs. 

Ooma. 

The  natives  of  Mangeea  feem  to  refemble  thofe  of  Ota- 
heite  and  the  Marqnefas  in  the  beauty  of  their  perfons, 
more  than  any  other  nation  I have  feen  in  thefe  feas ; hav- 
ing a fmooth  flcin,  and  not  being  mufcular.  Their  general 
difpofition  alfo  correfponds,'  as  far  as  we  had  opportunities 
of  judging,  with  that  which  diftinguifhes  the  firft  men- 
tioned people.  For  they  are  not  only  cheerful,  but,  as 
Mourooa  diewed  us,  are  acquainted  with  all  the  lafcivious 
gefticulations  which  the  Otaheiteans  pra6tife  in  their  dances. 
It  may  alfo  be  fuppofed,  that  their  method  of  living  is  li- 
milar.  For,  though  the  nature  of  the  country  prevented 
our  feeing  many  of  their  habitations,  we  obferved  one 
houfe  near  the  beach,  which  much  refembled,  in  its  mode 
of  conftrucSlion,  thofe  of  Otaheite.  It  was  pleafantly  lituated 
in  a grove  of  trees,  and  appeared  to  be  about  thirty  feet 
long,  and  feven  or  eight  high,  with  an  open  end,  which 
reprefented  an  eUipfe  divided  tranfverfely.  Before  it,  was 
fpread  fomething  white  on  a few  bufhes ; which  we  con- 
jecSIured  to  be  a fhliing  net,  and,  to  appearance,  of  a very 
delicate  texture. 


They 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


179 


They  falute  ftrangers  much  after  the  manner  of  the  New 
Zealanders,  by  joining  nofes ; adding,  however,  the  addi-  v 
tional  ceremony  of  taking  the  hand  of  the  perfon  to  whom 
they  are  paying  civilities,  and  rubbing  it  with  a degree  of 
force  upon  their  nofe  and  mouth 

* The  inhabitants  of  the  Palaos,  New  Philippine,  or  rather  Caroline  Iflands,  at  the 
diftance  of  almoft  fifteen  hundred  leagues  from  Mangeea,  have  the  fame  mode  of  falutation. 

“ Leur  civilite,  et  la  marque  de  leur  refpeft,  conlifte  a prendre  la  main  ou  le  pied  de  celui 
a qui  ils  veulent  faire  honneur,  et  s’en  frotter  doucement  tout  le  vifage.”  Lettres  Edi- 
Jiantes  et  Curieufes^  Tom.  xv.  p.  208.  Edit.  1781. 


1777- 

March. 

— » 


A a 2 


CHAP. 


i8o 


A VOYAGE  TO 


CHAP.  II. 


1777- 

March. 


Sunday  30. 
Monday  3 1 . 


April. 
Tuel'day  i. 


The  Difcovery  of  an  IJland  called  IVateeoo, — Its  Coafts  exa^ 
mined. — Vijits  from  the  Natives  on  board  the  Ships. — Mejf. 
Gore,  Burney,  and  Anderfon,  with  Omai,  fent  on  Shore. — 
Mr.  Anderfon's  Narrative  of  their  Reception. — Omai's  Ex- 
pedient to  prevent  their  being  detained. — His  meeting  with 
fome  of  his  Countrymen,  and  their  dijlrefsful  Voyage. — Far- 
ther Account  of  JVateeoo,  and  of  its  Inhabitants. 

After  leaving  Mangeea,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  30th, 
we  continued  our  courfe  Northward  all  that  night, 
and  till  noon  on  the  31ft ; when  we  again  faw  land,  in  the 
direction  of  North  Eaft  by  North,  diftant  eight  or  ten 
leagues. 

Next  morning,  at  eight  o’clock,  we  had  got  abreaft  of  its 
North  end,  within  four  leagues  of  it,  but  to  leeward ; and 
could  now  pronounce  it  to  be  an  ifland,  nearly  of  the  fame 
appearance  and  extent  with  that  we  had  fo  lately  left.  At 
the  fame  time,  another  illand,  but  much  fmaller,  was  feen 
right  ahead.  We  could  have  foon  reached  this ; but  the 
largeft  one  had  the  preference,  as  moft  likely  to  furnifli  a 
fupply  of  food  for  the  cattle,  of  which  we  began  to  be  in 
great  want. 

With  this  view  I determined  to  work  up  to  it;  but  as 
there  was  but  little  wind,  and  that  little  was  unfavourable, 
we  were  ftill  two  leagues  to  leeward  at  eight  o’clock  the 

following 


T H E P A C I F I C O C E A N.  i8t 

following  morning.  Soon  after,  I fent  two  armed  boats  1777. 
from  the  Refolution,  and  one  from  the  Difcovery,  under  . , 

the  command  of  Lieutenant  Gore,  to  look  for  anchoring-  Wednef. 
ground,  and  a landing-place.  In  the  mean  time,  we  plyed 
up  under  the  illand  with  the  fliips. 

Juft  as  the  boats  were  putting  off,  we  obferved  feveral 
fingle  canoes  coming  from  the  fliore.  They  went  firft  to 
the  Difcovery,  fhe  being  the  neareft  ftiip.  It  was  not  long 
after,  when  three  of  thefe  canoes  came  along-ftde  of  the 
Refolution,  each  condudled  by  one  man.  They  are  long 
and  narrow,  and  fupported  by  outriggers.  The  ftern  is 
elevated  about  three  or  four  feet,  fomething  like  a fliip’s 
ftern-poft.  The  head  is  flat  above,  but  prow-like  belotv, 
and  turns  down  at  the  extremity,  hke  the  end  of  a violin. 

Some  knives,  beads,  and  other  trifles  were  conveyed  to 
our  viflters ; and  they  gave  us  a few  cocoa-nuts,  upon 
our  alking  for  them.  But  they  did  not  part  with  them 
by  way  of  exchange  for  what  they  had  received  from 
us.  For  they  feemed  to  have  no  idea  of  bartering ; nor 
did  they  appear  to  eftimate  any  of  our  prefents  at  a high 
rate. 

With  a little  perfuafton,  one  of  them  made  his  canoe  fall 
to  the  fliip,  and  came  on  board ; and  the  other  two,  en- 
couraged by  his  example,  foon  followed  him.  Their  whole 
behaviour  marked  that  they  were  quite  at  their  eafe,  and 
felt  no  fort  of  apprehenflon  of  our  detaining,  or  ufing 
them  ill. 

After  their  departure,  another  canoe  arrived,  conducfted 
by  a man  who  brought  a bunch  of  plantains  as  a prefent 
to  me ; afking  for  me  by  name,  having  learnt  it  from 
Omai,  who  was  fent  before  us  in  the  boat  with  Mr.  Gore. 

In  return  for  this  civility,  I gave  him  an  axe,  and  a piece 

of 


A VOYAGE  TO 


i8a 

1777.  of  red  cloth ; and  he  paddled  back  to  the  lliore  well  fatif- 
. fied.  .1  afterward  nnderftood  from  Omai,  that  this  pre- 
fent  had  been  fent  from  tire  king,  or  principal  Chief  of  the 
bland. 

Not  long  after,  a double  canoe,  in  which  were  twelve 
men,  came  toward  us.  As  they  drew  near  the  fliip,  they 
recited  fome  words  in  concert,  by  way  of  chorus  one  of 
their  number  firft  handing  up,  and  giving  the  word  before 
oach  repetition.  When  they  had  finilhed  their  folemn 
chant,  they  came  along-lide,  and  afked  for  the  Chief.  As 
foon  as  I lliewed  myfelf,  a pig  and  a few  cocoa-nuts  were 
conveyed  up  into  the  Ihip ; and  the  principal  perfon  in  the 
canoe  made  me  an  additional  prefent  of  a piece  of  matting, 
as  foon  as  he  and  his  companions  got  on  hoard. 

Our  viliters  were  condu6ted  into  the  cabin,  and  to  other 
parts  of  the  fhip.  Some  objects  feemed  to  ftrike  them 
with  a degree  of  furpiize ; but  nothing  fixed  their  atten- 
tion for  a moment.  They  were  afraid  to  come  near  the 
cows  and  horfes  ; nor  did  they  form  the  leaft  conception 
of  their  nature.  But  the  fheep  and  goats  did  not  furpafs 
the  limits  of  their  ideas  ; for  they  gave  us  to  underhand, 
that  they  knew  them  to  be  birds.  It  will  appear  rather 
incredible,  that  human  ignorance  could  ever  make  fo 
hrange  a miftake ; there  not  being  the  moft  diftant  fimili- 


* Something  like  this  ceremony  was  performed  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Marquefas, 
when  Captain  Cook  vifited  them  in  1774.  See  his  Voyage^  Vol.  i.  p.  30 1.  It  is  curious 
to  obferve,  at  what  immenfe  diftances  this  mode  of  receiving  ftrangers  prevails.  Padillo, 
who  failed  from  Manilla  in  1710,  on  a voyage  to  difeover  the  Palaos  Iflands,  was  thus  re- 
ceived there.  The  writer  of  the  relation  of  his  voyage  fays,  “ AulTitot  qu’ils  appro- 
« cherent  de  notre  bord,  Ils  fe  mirent  a chanter.  Ils  regloient  la  cadence,  en  frappant 
“ des  mains  fur  leurs  cuifles.” 

Lettres  Edifantes  Curicufes,  Tom.  xv.  p.  323. 

tude 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

tude  between  a Iheep  or  goat,  and  any  winged  animal. 
But  thefe  people  feemed  to  know  nothing  of  the  exiftence 
of  any  other  land-animals,  belides  hogs,  dogs,  and  birds. 
Our  flieep  and  goats,  they  could  fee,  were  very  different 
creatures  from  the  two  firft,  and  therefore  they  inferred, 
that  they  muft  belong  to  the  latter  clafs,  in  which  they 
knew  there  is  a confiderable  variety  of  fpecies.  I made  a 
prefent  to  my  new  friend  of  w^hat  I thought  might  be  mod: 
acceptable  to  him  ; but,  on  his  going  away,  he  feemed  ra- 
ther difappointed  than  pleafed.  I afterward  underftood 
that  he  was  very  delirous  of  obtaining  a dog,  of  which 
animal  this  ifland  could  not  boaft,  though  its  inhabitants 
knew  that  the  race  exifled  in  other  iflands  of  their  ocean. 
Captain  Gierke  had  received  the  like  prefent,  with  the  fame 
view,  from  another  man,  who  met  with  from  him  the  like 
difappointment . 

The  people  in  thefe  canoes  were  in  general  of  a middling 
lize,  and  not  unlike  thofe  of  Mangeea ; though  feveral 
were  of  a blacker  call  than  any  we  faw  there.  Their  hair 
was  tied  on  the  crown  of  the  head,  or  flowing  loofe  about 
the  fhoulders ; and  though  in  fome  it  was  of  a frizzling 
difpofition,  yet,  for  the  mofl  part,  that,  as  well  as  the 
flraight  fort,  was  long.  Their  features  were  various,  and 
fome  of  the  young  men  rather  handfome.  Like  thofe  of 
Mangeea,  they  had  girdles  of  glazed  cloth,  or  fine  matting, 
the  ends  of  which,  being  brought  betwixt  their  thighs,  co- 
vered the  adjoining  parts.  Ornaments,  compofed  of  a fort 
of  broad  grafs,  flained  with  red,  and  ftrung  with  berries  of 
the  night-fliade,  were  worn  about  their  necks.  Their  ears 
were  bored,  but  not  flit ; and  they  were  puncSlured  upon 
the  legs,  from  the  knee  to  the  heel,  wLich  made  them  ap- 
pear as  if  they  wore  a kind  of  boots.  They  alfo  refembled 

the 


iS'j 


1777. 

April. 


184 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  the  inhabitants  of  Mangeea  in  the  length  of  their  beards, 
f . and,  like  them,  wore  a fort  of  fandals  upon  their  feet. 

Their  behaviour  was  frank  and  cheerful,  with  a great  deal 
of  good-nature. 

At  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  Mr.  Gore  returned 
with  the  boat,  and  informed  me,  that  he  had  examined  all 
the  Weft  ftde  of  the  ifland,  without  finding  a place  where 
a boat  could  land,  or  the  ftiips  could  anchor,  the  fliore  be- 
ing every  where  bounded  by  a fteep  coral  rock,  againft 
which  the  fea  broke  in  a dreadful  furf.  But  as  the  na- 
tives feemed  very  friendly,  and  to  exprefs  a degree  of  dif- 
appointment  when  they  faw  that  our  people  failed  in  their 
attempts  to  land,  Mr.  Gore  was  of  opinion,  that  by  means 
of  Omai,  who  could  heft  explain  our  requeft,  they  might 
be  prevailed  \Tpon  to  bring  off  to  the  boats,  beyond  the 
furf,  fuch  articles  as  we  moft  wanted ; in  particular,  the 
ftems  of  plantain  trees,  which  make  good  food  for  the 
cattle.  Having  little  or  no  wind,  the  delay  of  a day  or  two 
was  not  of  any  moment ; and  therefore  I determined  to  try 
the  experiment,’  and  got  every  thing  ready  againft  the  next 
morning. 

Thurfday  5.  Soon  after  day-break,  we  obferved  fome  canoes  coming 
off  to  the  fliips,  and  one  of  them  diredfed  its  courfe  to  the 
Refolution.  In  it  was  a hog,  with  fome  plantains  and 
cocoa  nuts,  for  which  the  people,  who  brought  them,  de- 
manded a dog  from  us,  and  refufed  every  other  thing  that 
we  offered  in  exchange.  One  of  our  gentlemen  on  board, 
happened  to  have  a dog  and  a bitch,  which  were  great 
nuifances  in  the  fliip,  and  might  have  been  difpofed  of  on 
this  occafion  for  a purpofe  of  real  utility,  by  propagating  a 
race  of  fo  ufeful  an  animal  in  this  ifland.  But  their  owner 
had  no  fuch  views,  in  making  them  the  companions  of  his 

voyage. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


185 

voyage.  However,  to  gratify  thefe  people,  Omai  parted  1777. 
with  a favourite  dog  he  had  brought  from  England ; and  . . 

with  this  acquilition  they  departed  highly  fatisfied. 

About  ten*  o’clock,  I difpatched-  Mr.  Gore  with  three 
boats,  two  from  the  Refolution,  and  one  from  the  Difco- 
very,  to  try  the  experiment  he  had  propofed.  And,  as  I 
could  confide  in  his  diligence  and  ability,  I left  it  entirely  to 
himfelf,  to  a(fi:  as,  from  circumftances,  he  fliould  judge  to 
be  mofl:  proper.  Two  of  the  natives,  who  had  been  on 
board,  accompanied  him,  and  Omai  went  with  him  in  his 
boat  as  an  interpreter.  The  fliips  being  a full  league  from 
the  ifiand  when  the  boats  put  off,  and  having  but  little 
wind,  it  was  noon  before  we  could  work  up  to  it.  We  then 
faw  our  three  boats  riding  at  their  grapplings,  juft;  without 
the  furf,  and  a prodigious  number  of  the  natives  on  the 
fliore,  abreaft  of  them.  By  this  we  concluded,  that  Mr. 

Gore,  and  others  of  our  people,  had  landed,  and  our  impa- 
tience to  know  the  event  may  be  eafily  conceived.  In  order 
to  obferve  their  motions,  and  to  be  ready  to  give  them  fuch 
afliftance  as  they  might  want,  and  our  refpedtive  fituations 
would  admit  of,  I kept  as  near  the  fliore  as  was  prudent.  I 
was  fenfible,  however,  that  the  reef  was  as  effecftual  a bar- 
rier between  us  and  our  friends  who  had  landed,  and  put 
them  as  much  beyond  the  reach  of  our  proteft ion,  as  if  half 
the  circumference  of  the  globe  had  intervened.  But  the 
iflanders,  it  was  probable,  did  not  know  this  fo  well  as  we 
did.  Some  of  them,  now  and  then,  came  off  to  the  fliips  in 
their  canoes,  with  a few  cocoa  nuts  ; which  they  exchanged 
for  whatever  was  offered  to  them,  without  feeming  to  give 
the  preference  to  any  particular  article. 

Thefe  occafional  vifits  ferved  to  leffen  my  folicitude  about 
our  people  who  had  landed.  Though  we  could  get  no  in- 
Vo  l.  1.  B b formation 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1 86 


1777, 

April. 


formation  from  our  vifiters  ; yet  their  venturing  on  board 
feemed  to  imply,  at  lead:,  that  their  countrymen  on  lliore 
had  not  made  an  improper  ufe  of  the  confidence  put  in 
them.  At  length,  a little  before  fun-fet,  we  had  the  fatisfac- 
tion  of  feeing  the  boats  put  off.  When  they  got  on  board, 

I found  that  Mr.  Gore  himfelf,  Omai,  Mr.  Anderfon,  and 
Mr.  Burney,  were  the  only  perfons  who  had  landed.  The 
tranfa(ffions  of  the  day  were  now  fully  reported  to  me  by 
Mr.  Gore ; but  Mr.  Anderfon’s  account  of  them  being  very 
particular,  and  including  fome  remarks  on  the  ifland  and 
its  inhabitants,  I fliall  give  it  a place  here,  nearly  in  his  own 
words. 

“We  rowed  toward  a fmall  fandy  beach,  upon  which, 
and  upon  the  adjacent  rocks,  a great  number  of  the  natives 
had  aflembled ; and  came  to  an  anchor  within  a hundred 
yards  of  the  reef,  which  extends  about  as  far,  or  a little 
farther,  from  the  fliore.  Several  of  the  natives  fwam  off, 
bringing  cocoa  nuts  ; and  Omai,  with  their  countrymen, 
whom  we  had  with  us  in  the  boats,  made  them  fenfible  of 
our  wifii  to  land.  But  their  attention  was  taken  up,  for  a 
little  time,  by  the  dog,  which  had  been  carried  from  the 
Blip,  and  was  juft  brought  on  fliore,  round  whom  they 
flocked  with  great  eagernefs.  Soon  after,  two  canoes  came 
off;  and,  to  create  a greater  confidence  in  the  iflanders,  we 
determined  to  go  unarmed,  and  run  the  hazard  of  being 
treated  well  or  ill. 

Mr.  Burney,  the  firft  Lieutenant  of  the  Difcovery,  and 
I,  went  in  one  canoe,  a little  time  before  the  other  ; and  our 
conducftors,  watching  attentively  the  motions  of  the  furf, 
landed  us  fafely  upon  the  reef.  An  illander  took  hold  of 
each  of  us,  obvioufly  with  an  intention  to  fupport  us  in 
walking,  over  the  rugged  rocks,  to  the  beach,  where  feveral 

of 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


187 

of  the  others  met  us,  holding  the  green  boughs,  of  a fpe-  1777. 
cies  of  Mmtofa,  in  their  hands,  and  faluted  us  by  applying  . 
their  nofes  to  ours. 

We  were  conducSted  from  the  beach  by  our  guides, 
amidft  a great  crowd  of  people,  who  flocked  with  very 
eager  curiolity  to  look  at  us  ; and  would  have  prevented  our 
proceeding,  had  not  fome  men,  who  feemed  to  have  autho- 
rity, dealt  blows,  with  little  diftindlion,  amongft  them,  to 
keep  them  off.  We  were  then  led  up  an  avenue  of  cocoa- 
palms  ; and  foon  came  to  a number  of  men,  arranged  in 
two  rows,  armed  with  clubs,  which  they  held  on  their 
fhoulders,  much  in  the  manner  we  reft  a mufquet.  After 
Avalking  a little  way  amongft  thefe,  Ave  found  a perfon 
who  feemed  a Chief,  fitting  on  the  ground  crofs-legged, 
cooling  himfelf  with  a fort  of  triangular  fan,  made  from 
a leaf  of  the  cocoa-palm,  with  a polifli^d  handle,  of  black 
wood,  fixed  to  one  corner.  In  his  ears  Avere  large  bunches 
of  beautiful  red  feathers,  Avhich  pointed  forward.  But  he 
had  no  other  mark,  or  ornament,  to  diftinguifli  him  from 
the  reft  of  the  people  ; though  they  all  obeyed  him  Avith 
the  greateft  alacrity.  He  either  naturally  had,  or  at  this 
time  put  on,  a ferious,  but  not  fevere  countenance  ; and  Ave 
Avere  defired  to  falute  him  as  he  fat,  by  fome  people  Avho 
feemed  of  confequence. 

We  proceeded  ftill  amongft  the  men  armed  AAdth  clubs, 
and  came  to  a fecond  Chief,  who  fat  fanning  himfelf,  and 
ornamented  as  the  firft.  He  Avas  remarkable  for  his  flze, 
and  uncommon  corpulence,  though,  to  appearance,  not 
aboA'e  thirty  years  of  age.  In  the  fame  manner,  Ave  AA^ere 
condudted  to  a third  Chief,  who  feemed  older  than  the  tAVo 
former,  and,  though  not  fo  fat  as  the  fecond,  AA^^as  of  a large 
fize.  He  alfo  AA'as  fitting,  and  adorned  AA'ith  red  feathers ; 

B b 2 and 


i88 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  and  after  fainting  him  as  we  had  done  the  others,  he  de- 
, lired  ns  both  to  lit  down.  Which  we  were  very  willing  to 
do,  being  pretty  well  fatigned  with  walking  np,  and  with 
the  excellive  heat  we  felt  amongll  the  vail  crowd  that  fnr- 
ronnded  ns. 

In  a few  minntes,  the  people  were  ordered  to  feparate  ; 
and  we  faw,  at  the  diftance  of  thirty  yards,  abont  twenty 
yonng  women,  ornamented  as  the  Chiefs,  with  red  fea- 
thers, engaged  in  a dance,  which  they  performed  to  a flow 
and  ferions  air,  fnng  by  them  all.  We  got  np,  and  went 
forward  to  fee  them  ; and  thongh  we  mnft  have  been 
ftrange  objects  to  them,  they  continued  their  dance,  with- 
out paying  the  leall  attention  to  us.  They  feemed  to  be 
directed  by  a man  who  ferved  as  a prompter,  and  mentioned 
each  motion  they  were  to  make.  But  they  never  changed 
the  fpot,  as  we  do  in  dancing,  and  though  their  feet  were 
not  at  reft,  this  exercife  conlifted  more  in  moving  the  fingers 
very  nimbly,  at  the  fame  time  holding  the  hands  in  a prone 
pofition  near  the  face,  and  now  and  then  alfo  clapping  them 
together ’ib  Their  motions  and  fong  were  performed  in 
fuch  exaft  concert,  that  it  fhould  feem  they  had  been  taught 
with  great  care ; and  probably  they  were  felecfted  for  this 
ceremony,  as  few  of  thofe  whom  we  faw  in  the  crowd 
equalled  them  in  beauty.  In  general,  they  were  rather 
ftout  than  flender,  with  black  hair  flowing  in  ringlets  down 
the  neck,  and  of  an  olive  complexion.  Their  features  were, 
rather,  fuller  than  what  we  allow  to  perfect  beauties,  and 
much  alike  ; but  their  eyes  were  of  a deep  black,  and  each 

* The  dances  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Caroline  Iflands,  have  a great  refemblance  to 
thofe  here  defcribed.  See  Lettres  Ed'if.  et  Curieufes^  Tom.  xv.  p.  315.  See  alfo,  in  the 
fame  volume,  p.  207.  what  is  faid  of  the  fmging  and  dancing  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Palaos  Iflands,  which  belong  to  the  fame  group. 


countenance 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


189 


countenance  exprelTed  a degree  of  complacency  and  mo-  1777. 
defty,  peculiar  to  the  fex  in  every  part  of  the  world ; but  . . 

perhaps  more  confpicuous  here,  where  Nature  prefented  us 
with  her  producfdions  in  the  fulleft  perfe6lion,  unbiaffed  in 
fentiment  by  cuftom,  or  unreftrained  in  manner  by  art. 

Their  fliape  and  limbs  were  elegantly  formed.  For,  as 
their  drefs  conlifted  only  of  a piece  of  glazed  cloth  faftened 
about  the  waift,  and  fcarcely  reaching  fo  low  as  the  knees, 
in  many  we  had  an  opportunity  of  obferving  every  part. 

This  dance  was  not  finiflied,  when  we  heard  a noife,  as  if 
fome  horfes  had  been  galloping  toward  us  ; and,  on  looking 
alide,  we  faw  the  people  armed  with  clubs,  who  had  been 
delired,  as  we  fuppofed,  to  entertain  us  with  the  light  of 
their  manner  of  fighting.  This  they  now  did,  one  party 
purfuing  another  who  fled. 

As  we  fuppofed  the  ceremony  of  being  introduced  to  the 
Chiefs  was  at  an  end,  we  began  to  look  about  for  Mr.  Gore 
and  Omai ; and,  though  the  crowd  would  hardly  fufler  us 
to  move,  we  at  length  found  them  coming  up,  as  much  in- 
commoded by  the  number  of  people  as  we  had  been,  and 
introduced  in  the  fame  manner  to  the  three  Chiefs,  whofe 
names  were  Otteroo,  Taroa,  and  Fatouweera.  Each  of 
thefe  expe6ted  a prefent ; and  Mr.  Gore  gave  them  fuch 
things  as  he  had  brought  with  him  from  the  fliip,  for  that 
purpofe.  After  this,  making  ufe  of  Omai  as  his  interpre- 
ter, he  informed  the  Chiefs  with  what  intention  we  had 
come  on  fhore ; but  was  given  to  underhand,  that  he  muft 
wait  till  the  next  day,  and  then  he  fliould  have  what  was 
wanted. 

They  now  feemed  to  take  fome  pains  to  feparate  us  from 
each  other ; and  every  one  of  us  had  his  circle  to  furround 
and  gaze  at  him.  For  my  own  part,  I was,  at  one  time, 

above 


A VOYAGE  TO 


190 


1777- 

April. 


above  an  hour  apart  from  my  friends  ; and  when  I told  the 
Chief,  with  whom  1 fat,  that  I wanted  to  fpeak  to  Omai,  he 
peremptorily  refufed  my  requeft.  At  the  fame  time,  I 
found  the  people  began  to  ileal  feveral  trifling  things  which 
I had  in  my  pocket ; and  when  I took  the  liberty  of  com- 
plaining to  tho  Chief  of  this  treatment,  he  juitified  it.  From 
thefe  circumilances,^  I now  entertained  appreheniions,  that 
they  might  have  formed  the  defign  of  detaining  us  amongft 
them.  They  did  not,  indeed,  feem  to  be  of  a difpoiition  fo 
favage,  as  to  make  us  anxious  for  the  fafety  of  our  perfons ; 
but  it  was,  neverthelefs,  vexing  to  think,  we  had  hazarded 
being  detained  by  their  curioiity.  In  this  iituation,  I afked 
for  fomething  to  eat ; and  they  readily  brought  to  me  fome 
cocoa-nuts,  bread-fruit,  and  a fort  of  four  pudding,  which 
was  prefented  by  a woman.  And  on  my  complaining  much 
of  the  heat,  occafioned  by  the  crowd,  the  Chief  himfelf 
condefcended  to  fan  me,  and  gave  me  a fmall  piece  of  cloth, 
which  he  had  round  his  wailf . 

Mr.  Burney  happening  to  come  to  the  place  where  I was, 
I mentioned  my  fufpicions  to  him;  and,  to  put  it  to  the 
tell,  whether  they  were  well-founded,  we  attempted  to  get 
to  the  beach.  But  we  were  flopped,  when  about  half-way, 
by  fome  men,  who  told  us,  that  we  mufl  go  back  to  the 
place  which  we  had  left.  On  coming  up,  we  found  Omai 
entertaining  the  fame  appreheniions.  But  he  had,  as  he 
fancied,  an  additional  reafon  for  being  afraid ; for  he  had 
obferved,  that  they  had  dug  a hole  in  the  ground  for  an 
oven,  which  they  were  now  heating ; and  he  coidd  aflign  no 
other  reafon  for  this,  than  that  they  meant  to  roall,  and  eat 
us,  as  is  pradlifed  by  the  inhabitants  of  New  Zealand.  Nay, 
he  went  fo  far  as  to  afk  them  the  queftion  ; at  which  they 
were  greatly  furprized,  afking,  in  return,  whether  that  was 

a cuflom 


THEPACIFICOCEAN.  191 

a cuftom  with  us  ? Mr.  Burney  and  I were  rather  angry  1777. 
that  they  lliould  be  thus  fufpe6led  by  him ; there  having,  . , 

as  yet,  been  no  appearances,  in  their  condu(5l  toward  us,  of 
their  being  capable  of  fuch  brutality. 

In  this  manner  we  were  detained  the  greateft  part  of  the 
day,  being  fometimes  together,  and  fometimes  feparated ; 
but  always  in  a crowd ; who,  not  fatisfied  with  gazing  at 
us,  frequently  defired  us  to  uncover  parts  of  our  fkin ; the 
fight  of  which  commonly  produced  a general  murmur  of 
admiration.  At  the  fame  time  they  did  not  omit  thefe  op- 
portunities of  rifling  our  pockets ; and,  at  laft,  one  of  them 
fnatched  a fmall  bayonet  from  Mr.  Gore,  which  hung  in  its 
flieath  by  his  flde.  This  was  reprefented  to  the  Chief, 
who  pretended  to  fend  fome  perfon  in  fearch  of  it.  But,  in 
all  probability,  he  countenanced  the  theft ; for,  foon  after, 

Omai  had  a dagger  ftolen  from  his  flde,  in  the  fame  man- 
ner ; though  he  did  not  mifs  it  immediately. 

Whether  they  obferved  any  flgns  of  uneaflnefs  in  us,  or 
that  they  voluntarily  repeated  their  emblems  of  friendfhip 
when  we  exprefled  a deflre  to  go,  I cannot  tell ; but,  at  this 
time,  they  brought  fome  green  boughs,  and,  flicking  their 
ends  in  the  ground,  defired  w^e  might  hold  them  as  we  fat. 

Upon  our  urging  again  the  buflnefs  we  came  upon,  they 
gave  us  to  underftand,  that  we  mull  flay  and  eat  with 
them ; and  a pig  which  we  faw,  foon  after,  lying  near  the 
oven,  which  they  had  prepared  and  heated,  removed  Omai’s 
apprehenflon  of  being  put  into  it  himfelf ; and  made  us 
think  it  might  be  intended  for  our  repafl.  The  Chief  alfo 
promifed  to  fend  fome  people  to  procure  food  for  the  cattle ; 
but  it  was  not  till  pretty  late  in  the  afternoon,  that  we  faw 
them  return  with  a few  plantain-trees,  which  they  carried 
to  our  boats. 


In 


In  the  mean  time,  Mr.  Burney  and  I attempted  again  to 
go  to  the  beach;  but  when  we  arrived,  found  ourfelves 
Avatched  by  people,  who,  to  appearance,  had  been  placed 
there  for  this  purpofe.  For  when  I tried  to  wade  in  upon 
the  reef,  one  of  them  took  hold  of  my  clothes,  and  dragged 
me  back.  I picked  up  fome  fmall  pieces  of  coral,  which 
they  required  me  to  throw  down  again;  and,  on  my  refu- 
fal,  they  made  no  fcruple  to  take  them  forcibly  from  me. 
I had  gathered  fome  fmall  plants ; but  thefe  alfo  I could  not 
be  permitted  to  retain.  And  they  took  a fan  from  Mr. 
Burney,  which  he  had  received  as  a prefent  on  coming 
afliore.  Omai  faid,  we  had  done  wrong  in  taking  up  any 
thing;  for  it  was  not  the  cuftom  here  to  permit  freedoms  of 
that  kind  to  ftrangers,  till  they  had,  in  fome  meafure,  na- 
turalized them  to  the  country,  by  entertaining  them  with 
fehivity  for  two  or  three  days. 

Finding  that  the  only  method  of  procuring  better  treat- 
ment was  to  yield  implicit  obedience  to  their  will,  we  went 
up  again  to  the  place  we  had  left ; and  they  now  promifed, 
that  we  fliould  have  a canoe  to  carry  us  off  to  our  boats, 
after  we  had  eaten  of  a repaft  which  had  been  prepared 
for  us. 

Accordingly,  the  fecond  Chief,  to  whom  we  had  been  in- 
troduced in  the  morning,  having  feated  himfelf  upon  a low 
broad  ftool  of  blackiili  hard  wood,  tolerably  poliflied,  and 
directing  the  multitude  to  make  a pretty  large  ring,  made 
us  lit  down  by  him.  A conliderable  number  of  cocoa-nuts 
were  now  brought ; and,  fliortly  after,  a long  green  bafket, 
with  a fufhcient  quantity  of  baked  plantains  to  have  ferved 
a dozen  perfons.  A piece  of  the  young  hog,  that  had  been 
drelfed,  was  then  fet  before  each  of  us,  of  which  we  were 
defired  to  eat.  Our  appetites,  however,  had  failed,  from 

the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


193 


the  fatigvie  of  the  day ; and  though  we  did  eat  a little  to  1777. 
pleafe  them,  it  was  without  fatisfacSlion  to  ourfelves. 

It  being  now  near  fun-fet,  we  told  them  it  was  time  to 
go  on  board.  This  they  allowed ; and  fent  down  to  the 
beach  the  remainder  of  the  vidfuals  that  had  been  dreffed, 
to  be  carried  with  us  to  the  fliips.  But,  before  we  fet  out, 

Omai  was  treated  with  a drink  he  had  been  ufed  to  in  his 
own  country ; which,  we  obferved,  was  made  here,  as  at 
other  illands  in  the  South  Sea,  by  chewing  the  root  of  a 
fort  of  pepper.  We  found  a canoe  ready  to  put  us  off  to 
our  boats ; which  the  natives  did,  with  the  fame  caution 
as  when  we  landed.  But,  even  here,  their  thievilh  difpo- 
lition  did  not  leave  them.  For  a perfon  of  fome  confe- 
quence  among  them,  who  came  with  us,  took  an  opportu- 
nity, juft  as  they  were  puftiing  the  canoe  into  the  furf,  to 
fnatch  a bag  out  of  her,  which  I had,  with  the  greateft 
difficulty,  preferved  all  the  day ; there  being  in  it  a fmall 
pocket-piftol,  which  I was  umvilling  to  part  with.  Per- 
ceiving him,  I called  out,  expreffing  as  much  difpleafure  as 
I could.  On  which  he  thought  proper  to  return,  and  fwim 
with  the  bag  to  the  canoe ; but  denied  he  had  ftolen  it, 
though  detected  in  the  very  a6t.  They  put  us  on  board 
our  boats,  with  the  cocoa-nuts,  plantains,  and  other  provi- 
ftons,  which  they  had  brought ; and  we  rowed  to  the  fliips, 
very  well  pleafed  that  we  had  at  laft  got  out  of  the  hands  of 
our  troublefome  mafters. 

W e regretted  much,  that  our  reftrained  fltuation  gave  us 
fo  little  opportunity  of  making  obfervations  on  the  country. 

For,  during  the  whole  day,  we  were  feldom  a hundred 
yards  from  the  place  where  we  were  introduced  to  the 
Chiefs  on  landing ; and,  confequently,  were  confined  to  the 
furrounding  objects.  The  firft  thing  that  prefented  itfelf, 

VoL.  I.  C c worthy 


194 


A VOYAGE  TO 


^7l7- 

April, 


worthy  of  oiir  notice,  was  the  number  of  people ; which  muft 
have  been,  at  leaft,  two  thoufand.  For  thofe  who  welcomed 
us  on  the  fliore,  bore  no  proportion  to  the  multitude  we 
found  amongfl  the  trees,  on  proceeding  a little  way  up. 

We  could  alfo  obferve,  that,  except  a few,  thofe  we  had 
hitherto  feen  on  board,  were  of  the  lower  clafs.  For  a great 
number  of  thofe  we  now  met  with,  had  a fuperior  dignity 
in  their  air,  and  were  of  a much  whiter  call.  In  general, 
they  had  the  hair  tied  on  the  crown  of  the  head,  long, 
black,  and  of  a moft  luxuriant  growth.  Many  of  the 
young  men  were  perfecfl  models  in  lliape,  of  a complexion 
as  delicate  as  that  of  the  women,  and,  to  appearance,  of  a 
difpohtion  as  amiable.  Others,  who  were  more  advanced 
in  years,  were  corpulent ; and  all  had  a remarkable  fmooth- 
nefs  of  the  fkin.  Their  general  drefs  was  a piece  of  cloth, 
or  mat,  wrapped  about  the  wailf,  and  covering  the  parts 
which  modefty  conceals.  But  fome  had  pieces  of  mats, 
moll  curioully  varied  with  black  and  white,  made  into  a fort 
of  jacket  without  lleeves  ; and  others  wore  conical  caps  of 
cocoa-nut  core,  neatly  interwoven  with  fmall  beads,  made 
of  a fhelly  fubllance.  Their  ears  were  pierced ; and  in  them 
they  hung  bits  of  the  membraneous  part  of  fome  plant,  or 
Buck  there  an  odoriferous  flower,  which  feemed  to  be  a 
fpecies  of  gardenia.  Some,  who  were  of  a fuperior  clafs,  and 
alfo  the  Chiefs,  had  two  little  balls,  with  a common  bafe, 
made  from  the  bone  of  fome  animal,  which  was  hung 
round  the  neck,  with  a great  many  folds  of  fmall  cord. 
And  after  the  ceremony  of  introduction  to  the  Chiefs  was 
over,  they  then  appeared  without  their  red  feathers  ; which 
are  certainly  conlidered  here  as  a particular  mark  of  dif- 
tinClion ; for  none  but  themfelves,  and  the  young  women 
who  danced,  aflumed  them. 


Some 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


195 


Some  of  the  men  were  pumStured  all  over  the  fides  and  1777. 
back  in  an  uncommon  manner ; and  fome  of  the  women  . . 

had  the  fame  ornament  on  their  legs.  But  this  method  was 
confined  to  thofe  who  feemed  to  be  of  a fuperior  rank ; and 
the  men,  in  that  cafe,  were  alfo  generally  diftinguiflied  by 
their  fize  and  corpulence,  unlefs  very  young.  The  women 
of  an  advanced  age  had  their  hair  cropped  fliort;  and  many 
were  cut,  in  oblique  lines,  all  over  the  fore-part  of  the  body ; 
and  fome  of  the  wounds,  which  formed  rhomboidal  figures, 
had  been  fo  lately  inflidled,  that  the  coagulated  blood  ftill 
remained  in  them. 

The  wife  of  one  of  the  Chiefs  appeared  with  her  child, 
laid  in  a piece  of  red  cloth,  which  had  been  prefented  to 
her  hufband;  and  feemed  to  carry  it  with  great  tender- 
nefs,  fuckling  it  much  after  the  manner  of  our  women. 

Another  Chief  introduced  his  daughter,  who  was  young 
and  beautiful;  but  appeared  with  all  the  timidity  natu- 
ral to  the  fex ; though  file  gazed  on  us  with  a kind  of  an- 
xious concern,  that  feemed  to  ftruggle  with  her  fear,  and 
to  exprefs  her  aftonifhment  at  fo  unufual  a fight.  Others 
advanced  with  more  firmnefs,  and,  indeed,  were  lefs  re- 
ferved  than  we  expelled ; but  behaved  with  a becoming 
modefiy.  We  did  not  obferve  any  perfonal  deformities 
amongfi:  either  fex;  except  in  a few  who  had  fears  of 
broad  fuperficial  ulcers,  remaining  on  the  face  and  other 
parts.  In  proportion  to  the  number  of  people  afiembled, 
there  appeared  not  many  old  men  or  women ; which  may 
eafily  be  accounted  for,  by  fuppofing  that  fuch  as  were 
in  an  advanced  period  of  life,  might  neither  have  the 
inchnation,  nor  the  ability,  to  come  from  the  more  diftant  / 

parts  of  the  illand.  On  the  other  hand,  the  children 
were  numerous ; and  both  thefe,  and  the  men,  climbed 

C c 2 the 


196 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  the  trees  to  look  at  us,  when  we  were  hid  by  the  furround- 
. ing  crowd. 

About  a third  part  of  the  men  were  armed  with  clubs  and 
fpears ; and,  probably,  thefe  were  only  the  perfons  who 
had  come  from  a diftance,  as  many  of  them  had  fmall  baf- 
kets,  mats,  and  other  things,  faftened  to  the  ends  of  their 
weapons.-  The  clubs  were  generally  about  lix  feet  long, 
made  of  a hard  black  wood,  lance-fliaped  at  the  end,  but 
much  broader,  with  the  edge  nicely  fcolloped,  and  the 
whole  neatly  poliflied.  Others  of  them  were  narrower  at 
the  point,  much  fliorter,  and  plain;  and  fome  were  even 
fo  fmall,  as  to  be  ufed  with  one  hand.  The  fpears  were 
made  of  the  fame  wood,  fimply  pointed  ; and,  in  general, 
above  twelve  feet  long;  though  fome  were  fo  diort,  that 
they  feemed  intended  to  be  thrown  as  darts. 

The  place  where  we  were  all  the  day,  was  under  the 
fliade  of  various  trees ; in  which  they  preferved  their  ca- 
noes from  the  fun.  About  eight  or  ten  of  them  were  here, 
all  double  ones ; that  is,  two  lingle  ones  fattened  toge- 
ther (as  is  ufual,  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  Pacific 
Ocean),  by  rafters  lafhed  acrofs.  They  were  about  twenty 
feet  long,  about  four  feet  deep,  and  the  fides  rounded  with 
a plank  raifed  upon  them,  which  was  fattened  ttrongly  by 
means  of  withes.  Two  of  thefe  canoes  were  mott  curioufly 
ttained,  or  painted,  all  over  with  black,  in  numberlefs  fmall 
figures ; as  fquares,  triangles,  &c.  and  excelled,  by  far, 
any  thing  of  that  kind  I had  ever  feen  at  any  other  ifland 
in  this  ocean.  Our  friends  here,  indeed,  feemed  to  have  ex- 
erted more  fkill  in  doing  this,  than  in  punduring  their  own 
' bodies.  The  paddles  were  about  four  feet  long,  nearly  ellip- 
tical; but  broader  at  the  upper  end  than  the  middle.  Near 
the  fame  place  was  a hut  or  flied,  about  thirty  feet  long, 

and 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


197 


and  nine  or  ten  high ; in  which,  perhaps,  thefe  boats  are 
built ; but,  at  this  time,  it  was  empty. 

The  greateft  number  of  the  trees  around  us  were  cocoa- 
palms  ; fome  forts  of  hibijcus ; a fpecies  of  euphorbia  ; and, 
toward  the  fea,  abundance  of  the  fame  kind  of  trees  we 
had  feen  at  Mangeea  Nooe  Nainaiwa;  and  which  feemed 
to  furround  the  fliores  of  this  ifland  in  the  fame  manner. 
They  are  tall  and  flender,  not  much  unlike  a cyprefs ; but 
with  bunches  of  long,  round,  articulated  leaves.  The  na- 
tives call  them  etoa.  On  the  ground  we  faw  fome  grafs  ; 
a fpecies  of  convolvulus ; and  a good  deal  of  treacle-mujiard^ 
There  are  alfo,  doubtlefs,  other  fruit-trees  and  ufeful  plants 
which  we  did  not  fee.  For,  befdes  feveral  forts  of  plan- 
tains^ they  brought,  at  different  times,  roots  which  they 
call  taro  (the  coccos  of  other  countries);  a bread-fruit; 
and  a bafket  of  roafted  nuts,  of  a kidney -fhape,  in  tafte 
like  a chefnut,  but  coarfer. 

What  the  foil  of  the  illand  may  be,  farther  inland,  we 
could  not  tell.  But,  toward  the  fea,  it  is  nothing  more 
than  a bank  of  coral,  ten  or  twelve  feet  high,  fteep,  and 
rugged ; except  where  there  are  fmall  fandy  beaches,  at 
fome  clefts  where  the  afcent  is  gradual.  The  coral,  though 
it  has,  probably,  been  expofed  to  the  weather  for  many 
centuries,  has  undergone  no  farther  change  than  becom- 
ing black  on  the  furface ; which,  from  its  irregularity,  is 
not  much  unlike  large  maffes  of  a burnt  fubftance.  But, 
on  breaking  fome  pieces  off,  we  found,  that,  at  the  depth 
of  two  or  three  inches,  it  was  juft  as  frefli  as  the  pieces  that 
had  been  lately  thrown  upon  the  beach  by  the  waves.  The 
reef  or  rock,  that  lines  the  fhore  entirely,  runs  to  different 
breadths  into  the  fea,  where  it  ends,  all  at  once,  and  be- 
comes like  a high,  fteep  wall.  It  is,  nearly,  even  with  the 

furface 


198 


A VOYAGE  TO 


furface  of  the  water,  and  of  a brown  or  brick  colour  ; but 
April.  ^ texture  is  rather  porous,  yet  fufhcient  to  withftand  the 
wafliing  of  the  furf  which  continually  breaks  upon  it.” 

Though  the  landing  of  our  Gentlemen  proved  the  means 
of  enriching  my  Journal  with  the  foregoing  particulars, 
the  principal  object  I had  in  view  was,  in  a great  meafure, 
unattained  ; for  the  day  was  fpent  without  getting  any  one 
thing  from  the  illand  worth  mentioning.  The  natives, 
however,  were  gratified  with  a fight  they  never  before  had ; 
and,  probably,  will  never  have  again.  And  mere  curiofity 
feems  to  have  been  their  chief  motive  for  keeping  the 
gentlemen  under  fuch  reftraint,  and  for  ufing  every  art  to 
prolong  their  continuance  amongft  them. 

It  has  been  mentioned,  that  Omai  was  fent  upon  this  ex- 
pedition ; and,  perhaps,  his  being  Mr.  Gore’s  interpreter 
was  not  the  only  fervice  he  performed  this  day.  He  was 
alked,  by  the  natives,  a great  many  queftions  concerning 
us,  our  fliips,  our  country,  and  the  fort  of  arms  we  ufed ; 
and,  according  to  the  account  he  gave  me,  his  anfwers  were 
not  a little  upon  the  marvellous.  As,  for  inftance,  he  told 
them,  that  our  country  had  fliips  as  large  as  their  ifland ; on 
board  which  were  inftruments  of  war  (defcribing  our  guns), 
of  fuch  dimenfions,  that  feveral  people  might  fit  within 
them ; and  that  one  of  them  was  fufficient  to  crufli  the 
whole  ifland  at  one  fliot.  This  led  them  to  inquire  of  him, 
what  fort  of  guns  we  a6lually  had  in  our  two  fliips.  He 
faid,  that  though  they  were  but  fmall,  in  comparifon  with 
thofe  he  had  jufl  defcribed,  yet,  with  fuch  as  they  were,  we 
could,  with  the  greateft  eafe,  and  at  the  diftance  the  fliips 
were  from  the  fliore,  deftroy  the  ifland,  and  kill  every  foul 
in  it.  They  perfevered  in  their  inquiries,  to  know  by 
what  means  this  could  be  done ; and  Omai  explained  the 

matter 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


199 


matter  as  well  as  he  could.  He  happened  luckily  to  have  a ,777. 
few  cartridges  in  his  pocket.  Thefe  he  produced;  the 
balls,  and  the  gunpowder  which  was  to  fet  them  in  motion, 
were  fubmitted  to  infpe(5lion  ; and,  to  fupply  the  defe(5ls  of 
his  defcription,  an  appeal  was  made  to  the  fenfes  of  the 
fpe6lators.  It  has  been  mentioned  above,  that  one  of  the 
Chiefs  had  ordered  the  multitude  to  form  themfelves  into 
a circle.  This  furniflied  Omai  with  a convenient  ftage  for 
his  exhibition.  In  the  centre  of  this  amphitheatre,  the  in- 
confiderable  quantity  of  gunpowder,  collected  from  his 
cartridges,  was  properly  difpofed  upon  the  ground,  and, 
by  means  of  a bit  of  burning  wood  from  the  oven,  where 
dinner  was  drefling,  fet  on  fire.  The  fudden  blaft,  and 
loud  report,  the  mingled  flame  and  fmoke,  that  inftantly 
fucceeded,  now  filled  the  whole  aflembly  with  aftonifli- 
ment ; they  no  longer  doubted  the  tremendous  power  of  our 
weapons,  and  gave  full  credit  to  all  that  Omai  had  faid. 

If  it  had  not  been  for  the  terrible  ideas  they  conceived 
of  the  guns  of  our  fliips,  from  this  fpecimen  of  their  mode 
of  operation,  it  was  thought  that  they  would  have  detained 
the  gentlemen  all  night.  For  Omai  afiured  them,  that,  if 
he  and  his  companions  did  not  return  on  board  the  fame 
day,  they  might  expert  that  I would  fire  upon  the  ifland. 

And  as  we  flood  in  nearer  the  land  in  the  evening,  than 
we  had  done  any  time  before,  of  which  pofition  of  the 
lliips  they  were  obferved  to  take  great  notice,  they,  proba- 
bly, thought  we  were  meditating  this  formidable  attack ; 
and,  therefore,  fuffered  their  guefls  to  depart ; under  the 
expectation,  however,  of  feeing  them  again  on  fliore  next 
morning.  But  I was  too  fenfible  of  the  rifk  they  had  al- 
ready run,  to  think  of  a repetition  of  the  experiment. 

This  day,  it  feems,  was  deflined  to  give  Omai  more  oc- 

cafions 


200 


A. VOYAGE  TO 


777.  Gallons  than  one,  of  being  brought  forward  to  bear  a prin- 
_ . cipal  part  in  its  tranfadfions.  The  illand,  though  never 
before  vilited  by  Europeans,  adfually  happened  to  have 
other  ftrangers  reliding  in  it ; and  it  was  entirely  owing  to 
Omai’s  being  one  of  Mr.  Gore’s  attendants,  that  this  cu- 
rious circumllance  came  to  our  knowledge. 

Scarcely  had  he  been  landed  upon  the  beach,  when  he 
found,  amongft  the  crowd  there  alTembled,  three  of  his  own 
countrymen,  natives  of  the  Society  Illands.  At  the  diftance 
of  about  two  hundred  leagues  from  thofe  illands,  an  im- 
menfe,  unknown  ocean  intervening,  with  fuch  wretched 
fea-boats  as  their  inhabitants  are  known  to  make  ufe  of, 
and  fit  only  for  a palfage  where  light  of  land  is  fcarcely 
ever  loft,  fuch  a meeting,  at  fuch  a place,  fo  accidentally 
vilited  by  us,  may  well  be  looked  upon  as  one  of  thofe  un- 
expedted  lituations,  with  which  the  writers  of  feigned  ad- 
ventures love  to  furprize  their  readers,  and  which,  when 
they  really  happen  in  common  life,  deferve  to  be  recorded 
for  their  lingularity. 

It  may  ealily  be  guefted,  with  what  mutual  furprize  and 
fatisfadlion  Omai  and  his  countrymen  engaged  in  converfa- 
tion.  Their  ftory,  as  related  by  them,  is  an  affedting  one. 
About  twenty  perfons  in  number,  of  both  fexes,  had  em- 
barked on  board  a canoe  at  Otaheite,  to  crofs  over  to  the 
neighbouring  illand  Ulietea.  A violent  contrary  wind  aril- 
ing,  they  could  neither  reach  the  latter,  nor  get  back  to  the 
former.  Their  intended  paftage  being  a very  fliort  one, 
their  ftock  of  provilions  was  fcanty,  and  foon  exhaufted. 
The  hardftiips  they  fuftered,  while  driven  along  by  the 
ftorm,  they  knew  not  whither,  are  not  to  be  conceived. 
They  pafled  many  days  without  having  any  thing  to  eat  or 
drink.  Their  numbers  gradually  diminiflied,  worn  out  by 
! famine 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


201 


famine  and  fatigue.  Four  men  only  furvived,  when  the  1777. 
canoe  overfet ; and  then  the  perdition  of  this  fmall  rem- 
nant  feemed  inevitable.  However,  they  kept  hanging  by 
the  lide  of  their  veffel,  during  fome  of  the  laft  days,  till 
Providence  brought  them  in  light  of  the  people  of  this 
illand,  who  immediately  fent  out  canoes,  took  them  off 
their  wreck,  and  brought  them  afliore.  Of  the  four  who 
were  thus  faved,  one  was  fince  dead.  The  other  three,  who 
lived  to  have  this  opportunity  of  giving  an  account  of  their 
almoft  miraculous  tranfplantation,  fpoke  highly  of  the  kind 
treatment  they  here  met  with.  And  fo  well  fatisfied  were 
they  with  their  fituation,  that  they  refufed  the  offer  made 
to  them  by  our  gentlemen,  at  Omai’s  requeft,  of  giving 
them  a paffage  on  board  our  fliips,  to  reflore  them  to  their 
native  iflands.  The  fimilarity  of  manners  and  language, 
had  more  than  naturalized  them  to  this  fpot ; and  the  frefh 
connexions  which  they  had  here  formed,  and  which  it 
would  have  been  painful  to  have  broken  off,  after  fuch  a 
length  of  time,  fufhciently  account  for  their  declining  to 
revilit  the  places  of  their  birth.  They  had  arrived  upon 
this  illand  at  leafl  twelve  years  ago.  For  I learnt  from  Mr. 
Anderfon,  that  he  found  they  knew  nothing  of  Captain 
Wallis'’s  vifit  to  Otaheite  in  1765  ; nor  of  feveral  other  me- 
morable occurrences,  fuch  as  the  conquefl  of  Ulietea  by 
thofe  of  Bolabola,  which  had  preceded  the  arrival  of  the 
Europeans.  To  Mr.  Anderfon  I am  alfo  indebted  for  their 
names,  Orououte,  Otirreroa,  and  Tavee ; the  firft,  born  at 
Matavai  in  Otaheite;  the  fecond,  at  Ulietea;  and  the  third 
at  Huaheine. 

The  landing  of  our  gentlemen  on  this  ifland,  though 
they  failed  in  the  objedl  of  it,  cannot  but  be  confidered  as 
a very  fortunate  circumftance.  It  has  proved,  as  we  have 
VoL.  I.  D d feen, 


202 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  feen,  the  means  of  bringing  to  onr  knowledge  a matter  of 
. . fa6t,  not  only  very  curious,  but  very  inftru6tive.  The  ap- 

plication of  the  above  narrative  is  obvious.  It  will  ferve  to 
explain,  better  than  a thoufand  conje6tures  of  fpeculative 
reafoners,  how  the  detached  parts  of  the  earth,  and,  in 
particular,  how  the  illands  of  the  South  Sea,  may  have  been 
hrft  peopled ; efpecially  thofe  that  lie  remote  from  any  in- 
habited continent,  or  from  each  other 

This  illand  is  called  Wateeoo  by  the  natives.  It  lies  in 
the  latitude  of  20°  South,  and  in  the  longitude  201°  45^ 
Eaft,  and  is  about  fix  leagues  in  circumference.  It  is  a 
beautiful  fpot,  with  a furface  compofed  of  hills  and  plains, 
and  covered  with  verdure  of  many  hues.  Our  gentlemen 
found  the  foil,  where  they  pafled  the  day,  to  be  light  and 
fandy.  But  farther  up  the  country,  a different  fort,  per- 
haps, prevails  ; as  we  faw  from  the  fliip,  by  the  help  of 
our  giaffes,  a reddifli  caft  upon  the  rifing  grounds.  There 

* Such  accidents  as  this  here  related,  probably  happen  frequently  in  the  Pacific  Ocean. 
In  1696,  two  canoes,  having  on  board  thirty  perfons  of  both  fexes,  were  driven,  by  con- 
trary winds  and  tempeftuous  weather,  on  the  ifle  of  Samal,  one  of  the  Philippines,  after 
being  toft  about  at  fea  feventy  days,  and  having  performed  a voyage,  from  an  ifland  called 
by  them  Amorfot,  300  leagues  to  the  Eaft  of  Samal.  Five  of  the  number  who  had  em- 
barked, died  of  tlie  hardftiips  fuffered  during  this  extraordinary  paflage.  See  a particular 
account  of  them,  and  of  the  iflands  they  belonged  to,  in  Lettres  Edifiantes  CurieufeSy 
Tom.  XV.  from  p.  196.  to  p.  215.  In  the  fame  Volume,  from  p.  282.  to  p.  320.  we 
have  the  relation  of  a fimilar  adventure,  in  1721,  when  two  canoes,  one  containing  twen- 
ty-four, and  the  other  fix  perfons,  men,  women,  and  children,  were  driven,  from  an  ifland 
they  called  Farroilep,  Northward  to  the  Ifle  of  Guam,  or  Guahan,  one  of  the  Ladrones 
or  Mariannes.  But  thefe  had  not  failed  fo  far  as  their  countrymen,  who  reached  Samal 
as  above,  and  they  had  been  at  fea  only  twenty  days.  There  feems  to  be  no  reafon  to 
doubt  the  general  authenticity  of  thefe  two  relations.  The  information  contained  in  the 
letters  of  the  Jefuits,  about  thefe  iflands,  now  known  under  the  name  of  the  Carolines, 
and  difcovered  to  the  Spaniards  by  the  arrival  of  the  canoes  at  Samal  and  Guam,  has  been 
adopted  by  all  our  later  writers.  See  Prefident  de  Brofle’s  Voyages  aux  Terres  AuJlraleSy 
Tom.  ii.  from  p.  443.  to  p.  490.  See  alfo  the  Modern  Unlverfal  Hijiory. 


the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


203 


the  inhabitants  have  their  houfes;  for  we  could  perceive  1777. 
two  or  three,  which  were  long  and  fpacious.  Its  produce,  . . 

with  the  addition  of  hogs,  we  found  to  be  the  fame  as  at 
the  laft  illand  we  had  vifited,  which  the  people  of  this,  to 
whom  we  pointed  out  its  polition,  called  Owhavarouah  ; a 
name  fo  different  from  Mangeea  Nooe  Nainaiwa,  which  we 
learnt  from  its  own  inhabitants,  that  it  is  highly  probable 
Owhavarouah  is  another  illand. 

From  the  circumftances  already  mentioned,  it  appears, 
that  Wateeoo  can  be  of  little  ufe  to  any  fliip  that  wants  re- 
frelliment,  unlefs  in  a cafe  of  the  mod:  abfolute  neceffity. 

The  natives,  knowing  now  the  value  of  fome  of  our  com- 
modities, might  be  induced  to  bring  off  fruits  and  hogs,  to 
a fhip  Handing  off  and  on,  or  to  boats  lying  off  the  reef,  as 
ours  did.  It  is  doubtful,  however,  if  any  frefh  water  could 
be  procured.  For,  though  fome  was  brought,  in  cocoa  nut 
lliells,  to  the  gentlemen,  they  were  told,  that  it  was  at  a 
conliderable  diftance ; and,  probably,  it  is  only  to  be  met 
with  in  fome  ftagnant  pool,  as  no  running  ft  ream  was  any 
where  feen. 

According  to  Omai’s  report  of  what  he  learnt  in  conver- 
fation  with  his  three  countrymen,  the  manners  of  thefe 
iflanders,  their  method  of  treating  ftrangers,  and  their  ge- 
neral habits  of  life,  are  much  like  thofe  that  prevail  at 
Otaheite,  and  its  neighbouring  ifles.  Their  religious  cere- 
monies and  opinions  are  alfo  nearly  the  fame.  For,  upon 
feeing  one  man,  who  was  painted  all  over  of  a deep  black 
colour,  and  inquiring  the  reafon,  our  gentlemen  were  told, 
that  he  had  lately  been  paying  the  laft  good  offices  to  a de- 
ceafed  friend ; and  they  found,  that  it  was  upon  fimilar 
occaffons,  the  women  cut  themfelves,  as  already  mentioned. 

From  every  circumftance,  indeed,  it  is  indubitable,  that  the 

D d 2 natives 


A VOYAGE  TO 


natives  of  Wateeoo  fprnng,  originally,  from  the  fame  flock, 
which  hath  fpread  itfelf  fo  wonderfully  all  over  the  im- 
menfe  extent  of  the  South  Sea.  One  would  fuppofe,  how- 
ever, that  they  put  in  their  claim  to  a more  illuflrious  ex- 
traflion ; for  Omai  afTured  us,  that  they  dignified  their 
illand  with  the  appellation  of  JVenooa  no  te  Eatooa,  that  is, 
A land  of  gods  ; efteeming  themfelves  a fort  of  divinities, 
and  pofTeffed  with  the  fpirit  of  the  Eatooa.  This  wild  en- 
thufiaflic  notion  Omai  feemed  much  to  approve  of,  telling 
us  there  were  inflances  of  its  being  entertained  at  Otaheite ; 
but  that  it  was  univerfally  prevalent  amongft  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Mataia,  or  Ofnaburg  Illand. 

The  language  fpoken  at  Wateeoo  was  equally  well  un- 
derflood by  Omai,  and  by  our  two  New  Zealanders.  What 
its  peculiarities  may  be,  when  compared  with  the  other 
dialedls,  I am  not  able  to  point  out ; for,  though  Mr.  An- 
derfon  had  taken  care  to  note  down  a fpecimen  of  it,  the 
natives,  who  made  no  diflin6lion  of  the  objedls  of  their 
theft.  Hole  the  memorandum  book.. 


CHAP. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


205. 


CHAP.  IIL 

Wenooa-ette,  or  Otakootaia-i  vifited. — Account  of  that  IJlandj 
and  of  its  Produce. — Hervefs  Ifland^  or  ’Perougge  mou  At- 
tooa,  found  to  be  inhabited. — ’PranfaBions  with  the  Natives. 

— P’heir  Perfons,  Drefs,  Language^  Canoes. — Fruitlefs  At- 
tempt to  land  there. — Reafons  for  bearing  away  for  the 
. Friendly  Iflands. — Palmerjlon's  IJland  touched  at. — Defcrip- 
tion  of  the  two  Places  where  the  Boats  landed. — Refrejh- 
ments  obtained  there. — ConjeBures  on  theForma.tion  of  fuch 
low  Iflands. — Arrival  at  the  Friendly  Iflands.. 

Light  airs  and  calms  having  prevailed,  by  turns,  all  J777» 
the  night  of  the  3d,  the  Eafterly  fwell  had  carried  the  t — — 
fhips  fome  diftance  from  Wateeoo,  before  day-break.  But  Friday  4. 
as  I had  failed  in  my  object  of  procuring,  at  that  place, 
fome  effecStual  fupply,  I faw  no  reafon  for  Haying  there  any 
longer.  I,  therefore,  quitted  it,  without  regret,  and  fleered 
for  the  neighbouring  illand,  which,  as  has  been  mentioned, 
we  difcovered  three  days  before. 

With  a gentle  breeze  at  Eaft,  we  got  up  with  it,  before 
ten  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  I immediately  difpatched 
Mr.  Gore,  with  two  boats,  to  endeavour  to  land,  and  get 
fome  food  for  our  cattle.  As  there  feemed  to  be  no  inha- 
bitants here  to  obilru6l  our  taking  away  whatever  we 
might  think  proper,  I was  confident  of  his  being  able  to 
make  amends  for  our  late  difappointment,  if  the  landing 
could  be  effedled.  There  was  a reef  here  furrounding  the 

land, 


2o6 


A VOYAGE  TO 


land,  as  at  Wateeoo,  and  a conliderable  furf  breaking 
againft  the  rocks.  Notwithftanding  which,  our  boats  no 
fooner  reached  the  lee,  or  Weft  hde  of  the  ifland,  but  they 
ventured  in,  and  Mr.  Gore  and  his  party  got  fafe  on  Ihore. 
I could,  from  the  fliip,  fee  that  they  had  fucceeded  fo  far ; 
and  1 immediately  fent  a fmall  boat  to  know  what  farther 
affiftance  was  wanting.  She  did  not  return  till  three  o’clock 
in  the  afternoon,  having  waited  to  take  in  a lading  of  what 
ufeful  produce  the  illand  afforded.  As  foon  as  flie  was 
cleared,  flie  was  fent  again  for  another  cargo ; the  Jolly 
boat  was  alfo  difpatched,  and  Mr.  Gore  was  ordered  to  be 
on  board,  with  all  the  boats,  before  night ; which  was  com- 
plied wdth. 

The  fupply  obtained  here,  confifted  of  about  a hun- 
dred cocoa  nuts  for  each  fliip  ; and  befldes  this  refrefli- 
ment  for  ourfelves,  we  got  for  our  cattle  fome  grafs,  and  a 
quantity  of  the  leaves  and  branches  of  young  cocoa  trees, 
and  of  the  wharra  tree,  as  it  is  called  at  Otaheite,  the  pa7i- 
danus  of  the  Eafl:  Indies.  This  latter  being  of  a foft, 
fpungy,  juicy  nature,  the  cattle  eat  it  very  w^ell,  when 
cut  into  fmall  pieces ; fo  that  it  might  be  faid,  wdthout 
any  deviation  from  truth,  that  we  fed  them  upon  billet 
wood. 

This  ifland  lies  in  the  latitude  of  19°  51^  South,  and  the 
longitude  of  201°  37^  Eafl,  about  three  or  four  leagues  from 
Wateeoo,  the  inhabitants  of  which  called  it  Otakootaia ; and 
fometimes  they  fpoke  of  it  under  the  appellation  of  JVencoa- 
ette^  which  flgnifies  little  ifland.  Mr.  Anderfon,  who  was 
on  fliore  with  our  party,  and  walked  round  it,  gueffed  that 
it  could  not  be  much  more  than  three  miles  in  circuit. 
From  him  I alfo  learned  the  following  particulars.  The 
beach,  within  the  reef,  is  compofed  of  a white  coral  fand ; 

above 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


207 


above  which,  the  land  within  does  not  rife  above  fix  or 
feven  feet,  and  is  covered  with  a light  reddifli  foil ; but  is 
entirely  deftitute  of  water. 

The  only  common  trees  found  there  were  cocoa-palms, 
of  which  there  were  feveral  clufters  ; and  vaft  numbers  of 
the  wharra.  There  were,  likewife,  the  callophyllum<i  fu- 
riana,  guettarda^  a fpecies  of  tournefortia^  and  taberna, 
montan^e,  with  a few  other  flirubs  ; and  fome  of  the  etoa 
tree  feen  at  Wateeoo.  A fort  of  bind-weed  over-ran  the  va- 
cant fpaces ; except  in  fome  places,  where  was  found  a 
conhderable  quantity  of  treacle-mujlard,  a fpecies  offpurge^ 
with  a few  other  fmall  plants,  and  the  morinda  citrifolia ; 
the  fruit  of  which  is  eaten  by  the  natives  of  Otaheite  in 
times  of  fcarcity.  Omai,  who  had  landed  with  the  party, 
dreffed  fome  of  it  for  their  dinner  ; but  it  proved  very  in- 
different. 

The  only  bird  feen  amongfl  the  trees,  was  a beautiful 
cuckoo,  of  a chefnut  brown,  variegated  with  black,  which 
was  fliot.  But,  upon  the  fliore,  were  fome  egg-birds ; a 
fmall  fort  of  curlew ; blue  and  white  herons ; and  great 
numbers  of  noddies  ; which  laft,  at  this  time,  laid  their  eggs, 
a little  farther  up,  on  the  ground,  and  often  refled  on  the 
wbarra  tree. 

One  of  our  people  caught  a lizard,  of  a mofl  forbidding 
afpedl,  though  fmall,  running  up  a tree  ; and  many,  of  an- 
other fort,  were  feen.  The  bullies  toward  the  fea,  were 
frequented  by  infinite  numbers  of  a fort  of  moth,  elegantly 
fpeckled  with  red,  black,  and  white.  There  were  alfo  fe- 
veral other  forts  of  moths,  as  well  as  fome  pretty  butter- 
flies; and  a few  other  infedls. 

Though  there  were,  at  this  time,  no  fixed  inhabitants 
upon  the  ifland,  indubitable  marks  remained  of  its  being, 

at 


1777. 
April. 

,h 


2o8 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  at  leall,  occafionally  frequented.  In  particular,  a few  empty 
, , huts  were  found.  There  were  alfo  feveral  large  ftones 

ere6led,  like  monuments,  under  the  lliade  of  fome  trees ; 
and  feveral  fpaces  inclofed  w ith  fmaller  ones ; where,  pro- 
bably, the  dead  had  been  buried.  And,  in  one  place,  a 
great  many  cockle-lliells,  of  a particular  fort,  finely  groov- 
ed, and  larger  than  the  fill:,  were  to  be  feen ; from  which 
it  was  reafonable  to  conjecture,  that  the  ifland  had  beenvi- 
fited  by  perfons  who  feed,  partly,  on  fliell-fifli.  In  one  of 
the  huts,  Mr.  Gore  left  a hatchet,  and  fome  nails,  to  the  full 
value  of  what  We  took  away. 

As  foon  as  the  boats  were  hoifted  in,  I made  fail  again  to 
the  Northward,  with  a light  air  of  wind  Eafterly ; intend- 
ing to  try  our  fortune  at  Hervey’s  Illand,  which  was  difco- 
vered  in  1773,  during  my  lafi;  voyage  -^--.  Although  it  was 
not  above  fifteen  leagues  diftant,  yet  we  did  not  get  fight  of 
Sunday  6.  it  till  day-break  in  the  morning  of  the  ’ 6th,  when  it  bore 
Well  South  Weft,  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  leagues. 
As  we  drew  near  it,  at  eight  o’clock,  we  obferved  feveral 
canoes  put  off  from  the  fliore  ; and  they  came  direcftly  to- 
ward the  fliips.  This  was  a fight  that,  indeed,  furprized 
me,  as  no  figns  of  inhabitants  were  feen  when  the  illand 
was  fir  ft  difcovered ; which  might  be  owdng  to  a pretty 
brifk  wind  that  then  blew,  and  prevented  their  canoes  ven- 
turing out,  as  the  fliips  pafled  to  leeward ; whereas  now  we 
were  to  windward. 

As  we  ftill  kept  on  toward  the  ifland,  fix  or  feven  of  the 
canoes,  aU  double  ones,  foon  came  near  us.  There  were, 
from  three  to  fix  men,  in  each  of  them.  They  flopped  at 
the  diftance  of  about  a ftone’s  throw  from  the  fliip ; and  it 

* See  Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  190.  where  this  ifland  is  faid  to  be  about 
fix  leagues  in  circuit. 


was 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


209 


Was  fome  time  before  Omai  could  prevail  upon  them  to  1777. 
come  along-lide ; but  no  entreaties  could  induce  any  of  . . 

them  to  venture  on  board.  Indeed  their  diforderly  and  cla- 
morous behaviour,  by  no  means  indicated  a difpolition  to 
truft  us,  or  treat  us  well.  We  afterward  learnt  that  they 
had  attempted  to  take  fome  oars  out  of  the  Difcovery’s  boat, 
that  lay  along-lide,  and  ftruck  a man  who  endeavoured  to 
prevent  them.  They  alfo  cut  away,  with  a fliell,  a net 
with  meat,  which  hung  over  that  fliip’s  Hern,  and  abfo- 
lutely  refufed  to  reftore  it ; though  we,  afterward,  pur- 
chafed  it  from  them.  Thofe  who  were  about  our  lliip,  be- 
haved in  the  fame  daring  manner  ; for  they  made  a fort  of 
hook,  of  a long  ftick,  with  which  they  endeavoured,  open- 
ly, to  rob  us  of  feveral  things ; and,  at  laft,  adfually  got  a 
frock,  belonging  to  one  of  our  people  that  was  towing, 
over-board.  At  the  fame  time,  they  immediately  fliewed  a 
knowledge  of  bartering,  and  fold  fome  filli  they  had 
(amongft  which  was  an  extraordinary  flounder,  fpotted  like 
porphyry ; and  a cream-coloured  eel,  fpotted  with  black), 
for  fmall  nails,  of  which  they  were  immoderately  fond,  and 
called  them  goore.  But,  indeed,  they  caught,  with  the 
greateft  avidity,  bits  of  paper,  or  any  thing  elfe  that  w'as 
thrown  to  them ; and  if  what  was  thrown  fell  into  the  fea, 
they  made  no  fcruple  to  fwim  after  it. 

Thefe  people  feemed  to  differ  as  much  in  perfon,  as  in 
difpolition,  from  the  natives  of  Wateeoo;  though  the  dif- 
tance  between  the  two  iflands  is  not  very  great.  Their  co- 
lour was  of  a deeper  call ; and  feveral  had  a fierce,  rugged 
afpe(5l,  refembling  the  natives  of  New  Zealand ; but  fome 
were  fairer.  They  had  llrong  black  hair,  which,  in  general, 
they  wore  either  hanging  loofe  about  the  llioulders,  or 
tied  in  a bunch  on  the  crown  of  the  head.  Some,  however, 

VoL.  I.  E e had 


210 


A VOYAGE  TO 


*777- 

Apiil. 


V.^ ' 


had  it  cropped  pretty  fliort ; and,  in  two  or  three  of  them, 
it  was  of  a brown,  or  reddifli  colour.  Their  only  covering 
was  a narrow  piece  of  mat,  wrapt  feveral  times  round  the 
lower  part  of  the  body,  and  which  palled  between  the 
thighs  ; but  a fine  cap  of  red  feathers  was  feen  lying  in 
one  of  the  canoes.  The  Ihell  of  a pearl-oyfier  poliflied, 
and  hung  about  the  neck,  was  the  only  ornamental  fafhion 
that  we  obferved  amongft  them  ; for  not  one  of  them  had 
adopted  that  mode  of  ornament,  fo  generally  prevalent 
amongft  the  natives  of  this  Ocean,  of  puiufturing,  or  fa- 
tooing  their  bodies. 

Though  lingular  in  this,  we  had  the  moft  unequivocal 
proofs  of  their  being  of  the  fame  common  race.  Their 
language  approached  ftill  nearer  to  the  dialecft  of  Otaheite,^ 
than  that  of  Wateeoo,  or  Mangeea.  Like  the  inhabitants 
of  thefe  two  illands,  they  inquired  from  whence  our  lliips 
came  ; and  whither  bound;  who  was  our  Chief;  the  num- 
ber of  our  men  on  board ; and  even  the  Ihip’s  name.  And 
they  very  readily  anfwered  fuch  queftions  as  we  propofed 
to  them.  Amongft  other  things,  they  told  us,  they  had 
feen  two  great  lliips,  like  ours,  before ; but  that  they  had 
not  fpoken  with  them  as  they  failed  paft.  There  can  be  no 
doubt,  that  thefe  were  the  Refolution  and  Adventure.  We 
learnt  from  them,  that  the  name  of  their  ifland  is  Te- 
rouggemou  Atooa;  and  that  they  were  fubje6l  to  Teere- 
vatooeah,  king  of  Wateeoo  According  to  the  account 
that  they  gave,  their  articles  of  food  are  cocoa-nuts,  fifti, 
and  turtle  ; the  illand  not  producing  plantains,  or  bread- 
fruit; and  being  deftitute  of  hogs  and  dogs.  Their  canoes, 
of  which  near  thirty  were,  at  one  time,  in  fight,  are  pretty 


* I'he  reader  will  obferve,  that  this  name  bears  little  affinity  to  any  one  of  the  names 
of  the  three  Chiefs  of  Wateeoo,  as  preferved  by  Mr.  Anderfon. 

large. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


2II 


large,  and  well  built.  In  the  conftru6tion  of  the  hern,  they  1777. 
bear  fome  refemblance  to  thofe  of  Wateeoo  ; and  the  head  , , 

^ — f 

projecSls  out  nearly  in  the  fame  manner ; but  the  extremity 
is  t turned  up  inftead  of  down. 

Having  but  very  little  wind,  it  was  one  o’clock  before  we 
<lrew  near  the  North  Weft  part  of  the  ill  and  ; the  only  part 
where  there  feemed  to  be  any  probability  of  finding  an- 
chorage for  our  fliips,  or  a landing-place  for  our  boats.  In 
this  pofition,  I fent  Lieutenant  King,  with  two  armed  boats, 
to  found  and  reconnoitre  the  coaft,  while  we  ftood  off  and 
on  with  the  fliips.  The  inftant  the  boats  were  hoifted  out, 
our  vifiters  in  the  canoes,  who  had  remained  along-fide  all 
the  while,  bartering  their  little  trifles,  fufpended  their  traf- 
fic, and,  pufhing  for  the  Ihore  as  faft  as  they  could,  came 
near  us  no  more. 

At  three  o’clock,  the  boats  returned ; and  Mr.  King  in- 
formed me,  “ That  there  was  no  anchorage  for  the  fliips ; 
and  that  the  boats  could  only  land  on  the  outer  edge  of  the 
reef,  which  lay  about  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  dry 
land.  He  fiid,  that  a number  of  the  natives  came  down 
upon  the  reef,  armed  with  long  pikes  and  clubs,  as  if  they 
intended  to  oppofe  his  landing.  And  yet,  when  he  drew 
near  enough,  they  threw  fome  cocoa-nuts  to  our  people, 
and  invited  them  to  come  on  fliore ; though,  at  the  very 
fame  time,  he  obferved  that  the  women  were  very  bufy 
bringing  down  a frelh  fupply  of  fpears  and  darts.  But,  as 
he  had  no  motive  to  land,  he  did  not  give  them  an  oppor- 
tunity to  ufe  them.” 

Having  received  this  report,  I confidered,  that,  as  the 
fliips  could  not  be  brought  to  an  anchor,  we  fliould  find 
that  the  attempt  to  procure  grafs  here,  would  occafion  much 
delay,  as  well  as  be  attended  with  fome  danger.  Befides, 

E e 2 we 


212 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  we  were  equally  in  want  of  water ; and  though  the  inha- 
bitants  had  told  us,  that  there  was  water  on  their  ifland, 
yet  we  neither  knew  in  what  quantity,  nor  from  \vhat  dif- 
tance,  we  might  be  obliged  to  fetch  it.  And,  after  all, 
fuppoling  no  other  obftrucStion,  we  were  fure,  that  to  get 
over  the  reef,  would  be  an  operation  equally  difficult  and 
tedious. 

Being  thus  difappointed  at  all  the  iflands  we  had  met 
with,  fince  our  leaving  New  Zealand,  and  the  unfavour- 
able winds,  and  other  unforefeen  circumftances,  having 
unavoidably  retarded  our  progrefs  fo  much,  it  was  now 
impoffible  to  think  of  doing  any  thing  this  year,  in  the 
high  latitudes  of  the  Northern  hemifphere,  from  which 
we  were  ftill  at  fo  great  a diftance,  though  the  feafon  for 
our  operations  there  was  already  begun.  In  this  lituation, 
it  was  abfolutely  neceffary  to  purfue  fuch  meafures  as  were 
moft  likely  to  preferve  the  cattle  we  had  on  board,  in  the 
firft  place ; and,  in  the  next  place  (which  was  ftill  a more 
capital  objed:),  to  fave  the  Ifores  and  provilions  of  the  ffiips, 
that  we  might  be  better  enabled  to  profecute  our  Northern 
difcoveries,  which  could  not  now  commence  till  a year 
later  than  was  originally  intended. 

If  1 had  been  fo  fortunate  as  to  have  procured  a fupply 
of  water,  and  of  grafs,  at  any  of  the  illands  we  had  lately 
vilited,  it  was  my  purpofe  to  have  flood  back  to  the  South, 
till  I had  met  with  a Wefterly  wind.  But  the  certain  con- 
fequence  of  doing  this,  without  fuch  a fupply,  would  have 
been  the  lofs  of  all  the  cattle,  before  we  could  poffibly 
reach  Otaheite,  without  gaining  any  one  advantage,  with 
regard  to  the  great  objedl  of  our  voyage. 

I,  therefore,  determined  to  bear  away  for  the  Friendly 
Iflands,  where  I was  fure  of  meeting  with  abundance  of 

every 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


213 


every  thing  I wanted  : and  it  being  neceflary  to  run  in  the  1777- 
night,  as  well  as  in  the  day,  I ordered  Captain  Clerke  to  ■ > 

keep  about  a league  ahead  of  the  Refolution.  I ufed  this 
precaution,  becaufe  his  fliip  could  heft  claw  off  the  land ; 
and  it  was  very  poffible  we  might  fall  in  with  fome,  in  our 
paflage. 

The  longitude  of  Hervey’s  Ifland,  when  firfl;  dilcovered, 
deduced  from  Otaheite,  by  the  time-keeper,  was  found  to 
be  201°  6'  Eaft,  and  now,  by  the  fame  time-keeper,  deduced 
from  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound,  200°  56"  Eaft.  Hence  I con- 
clude, that  the  error  of  the  time-keeper,  at  this  time,  did 
not  exceed  twelve  miles  in  longimde. 

When  we  bore  away,  I fleered  Weft  by  South,  with  a 
fine  breeze  Eafterly.  I propofed  to  j^roceed  firft  to  Middle- 
burgh,  or  Eooa  ; thinking,  if  the  wind  continued  favour- 
able, that  we  had  food  enough  on  board,  for  the  cattle,  to 
laft  till  we  fliould  reach  that  ifland.  But,  about  noon,  next 
day,  thofe  faint  breezes,  that  had  attended  and  retarded  us  Monday  7. 
fo  long,  again  returned ; and  I found  it  necelTary  to  haul 
more  to  the  North,  to  get  into  the  latitude  of  Palmerfton’s 
and  Savage  Illands,  difcovered  in  1774,  during  my  laft  voy- 
age ; that,  if  neceflity  required  it,  we  might  have  re- 
courfe  to  them. 

This  day,  in  order  to  fave  our  water,  I ordered  the  ftill  to 
be  kept  at  work,  from  fix  o’clock  in  the  morning  to  four 
in  the  afternoon  ; during  which  time,  we  procured  from 
thirteen  to  fixteen  gallons  of  frefli  water.  There  has  been 
lately  made  fome  improvement,  as  they  are  pleafed  to  call 
it,  of  this  machine,  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  much  for  the 
worfe. 

Thefe  light  breezes  continued  till  the  loth,  when  we  Thurfdayio. 

* See  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  2.  3. 


had, 


214 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  had,  for  fome  hours,  the  wind  blowing  frefli  from  the 
, , North,  and  North  North  Weft ; being  then  in  the  lati- 

tude of  18°  38',  and  longitude  198°  24^  Eaft,  In  the  after- 
noon, we  had  fome  thunder  fqualls  from  the  South,  at- 
tended with  heavy  rain  ; of  which  water  we  collecfted 
enough  to  fill  five  puncheons.  After  thefe  fqualls  had 
blown  over,  the  wind  came  round  to  the  North  Eaft,  and 
North  Weft ; being  very  unfettled  both  in  ftrength  and  in 
Friday  II.  pofition,  till  about  noon  the  next  day,  when  it  fixed  at 
North  Weft,  and  North  North  Weft,  and  blew  a frefti 
breeze,  with  fair  weather. 

Thus  were  we  perfecuted  with  a wind  in  our  teeth, 
whichever  way  we  dire61;ed  our  courfe ; and  we  had  the 
additional  mortification  to  find  here,  thofe  very  winds, 
which  we  had  reafon  to  expert  8°  or  10°  farther  South. 
They  came  too  late  ; for  I durft  not  truft  their  continuance  ; 
and  the  event  proved  that  I judged  right. 

Sunday  13.  At  length,  at  day-break,  in  the  morning  of  the  13th,  we 
faw  Palmerfton  Ifland,  bearing  Weft  by  South,  diftant  about 
five  leagues.  However,  we  did  not  get  up  with  it,  till  eight 
Monday  14.  o’clock  the  iiext  moming.  I then  fent  four  boats,  three 
from  the  Refolution,  and  one  from  the  Difcovery,  with  an 
officer  in  each,  to  fearch  the  coaft  for  the  moft  convenient 
landing-place.  For,  now,  we  were  under  an  abfolute  necef- 
. fity  of  procuring,  from  this  illand,  fome  food  for  the  cattle ; 
otherwife  we  muft  have  loft  them. 

What  is  comprehended  under  the  name  of  Palmerfton’s 
Ifland,  is  a group  of  fmall  illots,  of  which  there  are,  in 
the  whole,  nine  or  ten,  lying  in  a circular  dire6tion,  and 
eonnecfted  together  by  a reef  of  coral  rocks.  The  boats  firft 
examined  the  South  Eafternmoft  of  the  iftots  which  com- 
pofe  this  group  ; and,  failing  there,  ran  down  to  the  fecond, 

where 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN.  215 

where  w^e  had  the  fatisfa6lion  to  fee  them  land.  I then  1777. 
bore  down  with  the  fliips,  till  abreaft  of  the  place,  and  . . 

there  w^e  kept  handing  off  and  on.  For  no  bottom  was  to 
be  found  to  anchor  upon  ; which  was  not  of  much  confe- 
quence,  as  the  party  w ho  had  landed  from  our  boats,  were 
the  only  human  beings  upon  the  ill  and. 

About  one  o’clock,  one  of  the  boats  came  on  board,  laden 
with  fcurvy-grafs  and  young  cocoa-nut  trees  ; which,  at 
this  time,  was  a feaft  for  the  cattle.  The  fame  boat 
brought  a meffage  from  Mr.  Gore,  who  commanded  the 
party,  informing  me,  that  there  was  plenty  of  fuch  pro- 
duce upon  the  illand,  as  alfo  of  the  wharra  tree,  and  fome 
cocoa-nuts.  This  determined  me  to  get  a good  fupply 
of  thefe  articles,  before  I quitted  this  ftation ; and,  before 
evening,  I went  afliore  in  a fmall  boat,  accompanied  by 
Captain  Clerke. 

We  found  every  body  hard  at  work,  and  the  landing 
place  to  be  in  a fmall  creek,  formed  by  the  reef,  of  fome- 
thing  more  than  a boat’s  length  in  every  diredtion,  and  co- 
vered from  the  force  of  the  fea,  by  rocks  projedting  out  on 
each  fide  of  it.  The  illand  is  fcarcely  a mile  in  circuit ; and 
not  above  three  feet  higher  than  the  level  of  the  fea.  It 
appeared  to  be  compofed  entirely  of  a coral  fand,  with  a 
fmall  mixture  of  blackilh  mould,  produced  from  rotten  ve- 
getables. Notwithftanding  this  poor  foil,  it  is  covered  with 
trees  and  bullies  of  the  fame  kind  as  at  Wenooa-ette,  though 
with  lefs  variety ; and  amongft  thefe  are  fome  cocoa  palms. 

Upon  the  trees  or  bullies  that  front  the  fea,  or  even  farther 
in,  w^e  found  a great  number  of  men  of  war  birds.  Tropic 
birds,  and  two  forts  of  boobies,  which,  at  this  time,  were 
laying  their  eggs,  and  fo  tame,  that  they  fuffered  us  to  take 
them  off  w'ith  our  hands.  Their  neffs  were  only  a few 

flicks 


2i6 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  Hicks  loofely  put  together  ; and  the  Tropic  birds  laid  their 
. eggs  on  the  ground,  under  the  trees.  Thefe  differ  much 
from  the  common  fort,  being  entirely  of  a moft  fplendid 
white,  flightly  tinged  with  red,  and  having  the  two  long 
tail-feathers  of  a deep  crimfon  or  blood  colour.  Of  each 
fort,  our  people  killed  a conliderable  number  ; and,  though 
not  the  moft  delicate  food,  they  were  acceptable  enough  to 
us  who  had  been  long  confined  to  a fait  diet,  and  who, 
confequently,  could  not  but  be  glad  of  the  moft  indifferent 
variety.  We  met  with  vaft  numbers  of  red  crabs,  creeping 
about,  every  where  amongft  the  trees ; and  we  caught  fe- 
veral  fifli  that  had  been  left  in  holes  upon  the  reef,  when 
the  fea  retired. 

At  one  part  of  the  reef,  which  looks  into,  or  bounds,  the 
lake  that  is  within,  there  was  a large  bed  of  coral,  almoft 
even  with  the  furface,  which  afforded,  perhaps,  one  of  the 
moft  enchanting  profpecls,  that  Nature  has,  any  where, 
l^roduced.  Its  bafe  was  fixed  to  the  fliore,  but  reached  fo 
far  in,  that  it  could  not  be  feen ; fo  that  it  feemed  to  be 
fufpended  in  the  water,  which  deepened  fo  fuddenly,  that, 
at  the  diftance  of  a few  yards,  there  might  be  feven  or 
eight  fathoms.  The  fea  was,  at  this  time,  quite  unruffled  ; 
and  the  fun,  fliining  bright,  expofed  the  various  forts  of 
coral,  in  the  moft  beautiful  order ; fome  parts  branching 
into  the  water  with  great  luxuriance  ; others  lying  col- 
lected in  round  balls,  and  in  various  other  figures  ; all 
which  were  greatly  heightened  by  fpangles  of  the  richeft 
colours,  that  glowed  from  a number  of  large  clams,  which 
were  every  where  interfperfed.  But  the  appearance  of 
thefe  was  ftill  inferior  to  that  of  the  multitude  of  fifties, 
that  glided  gently  along,  feemingly  with  the  moft  perfect 
fecurity.  The  colours  of  the  different  forts  were  the  moft 

beautiful 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


217 


beautiful  that  can  be  imagined ; the  yellow,  blue,  red,  1777- 
black.  See.  far  exceeding  any  thing  that  art  can  produce.  . . 

Their  various  forms,  alfo,  contributed  to  increafe  the  rich- 
nefs  of  this  fubmarine  grotto,  which  could  not  be  furveyed 
without  a pleafing  tranfport,  mixed,  however,  with  regret, 
that  a work,  fo  ftupendoully  elegant,  fliould  be  concealed, 
in  a place  where  mankind  could  feldom  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  rendering  the  praifes  juftly  due  to  fo  enchanting 
a feene. 

There  were  no  traces  of  inhabitants  having  ever  been 
here ; if  we  except  a fmall  piece  of  a canoe  that  was 
found  upon  the  beach  ; which,  probably,' may  have  drifted 
from  fome  other  illand.  But,  what  is  pretty  extraordi- 
nary, we  faw  feveral  fmall  brown  rats  on  this  fpot ; a cir- 
cumftance,  perhaps,  difficult  to  account  for,  unlefs  we  allow 
that  they  were  imported  in  the  canoe  of  which  we  faw  the 
remains. 

After  the  boats  were  laden,  I returned  on  board,  leaving 
Mr.  Gore,  with  a party,  to  pafs  the  night  on  fliore,  in  order 
to  be  ready  to  go  to  work  early  the  next  morning. 

That  day,  being  the  15th,  was  accordingly  fpent,  as  the  Tuefdayi5. 
preceding  one  had  been,  in  collecSling,  and  bringing  on 
board,  food  for  the  cattle,  confifting  chiefly  of  palm-cab- 
bage,  young  cocoa-nut  trees,  and  the  tender  branches  of 
the  zvharra  tree.  Having  got  a fufficient  fupply  of  thefe, 
by  funfet,  I ordered  every  body  on  board.  But havinglittle 
or  no  wind,  I determined  to  wait,  and  to  employ  the  next 
day,  by  endeavouring  to  get  fome  cocoa-nuts  for  our  peo- 
ple, from  the  next  illand  to  leeward,  where  we  could  ob- 
ferve  that  thofe  trees  were  in  much  greater  abundance, 
than  upon  that  where  we  had  already  landed,  and  where 
only  the  wants  of  our  cattle  had  been  relieved. 

VoL.  I.  F f 


With 


2I8 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  With  this  view,  I kept  handing  oiF  and  on,  all  night ; 

. . and,  in  the  morning,  between  eight  and  nine  o’clock,  I 

Wednef.  16.  Went  with  the  boats  to  the  Weft  fide  of  the  ifland,  and 
landed  with  little  difficulty.  I immediately  fet  the  people 
with  me  to  work,  to  gather  cocoa-nuts,  which  we  found  in 
great  abundance.  But  to  get  them  to  our  boats  was  a 
tedious  operation ; for  we  were  obliged  to  carry  them  at 
leaft  half  a mile  over  the  reef,  up  to  the  middle  in  wa- 
ter. Omai,  who  was  with  me,  caught,  with  a fcoop  net, 
in  a very  ffiort  time,  as  much  fiffi  as  ferved  the  whole 
party  on  ffiore  for  dinner,  befides  fending  fome  to  both 
Blips.  Here  were  alfo  great  abundance  of  birds,  particu- 
larly men-of-war  and  Tropic  birds  ; fo  that  we  fared  fump- 
tuoully.  And  it  is  but  doing  juftice  to  Omai  to  fay,  that, 
in  thefe  excurfions  to  the  uninhabited  iflands,  he  was  of 
the  greateft  ufe.  For  he  not  only  caught  the  fiffi,  but 
dreflfed  thefe,  and  the  birds  we  killed,  in  an  oven,  with 
heated  ftones,  after  the  fafliion  of  his  country,  with  a 
dexterity  and  good-humour  that  did  him  great  credit.  The 
boats  made  two  trips,  before  night,  well  laden  ; with  the 
laft,  I returned  on  board,  leaving  Mr.  Williamfon,  my 
third  Lieutenant,  with  a party  of  men,  to  prepare  ano- 
ther lading  for  the  boats  which  I propofed  to  fend  next 
morning. 

Thurfday  17.  I,  accordingly,  difpatched  them  at  feven  o’clock,  and  they 
returned  laden  by  noon.  No  time  was  loft  in  fending  them 
back  for  another  cargo  ; and  they  carried  orders  for  every 
body  to  be  on  board  by  funfet.  This  being  complied  with, 
we  hoifted  in  the  boats  and  made  fail  to  the  Weftward,  with 
a light  air  of  wind  from  the  North. 

We  found  this  illot  near  a half  larger  than  the  other,  and 
almoft  entirely  covered  with  cocoa-palms ; the  greateft  part 

of 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


219 


of  wliich  abounded  with  excellent  nuts,  having,  often,  both  1777. 
old  and  young  on  the  fame  tree.  They  were,  indeed,  too  . , 

thick,  in  many  places,  to  grow  wdth  freedom.  The  other 
produ6lions  were,  in  general,  the  fame  as  at  the  other  iflot. 

Tw'o  pieces  of  board,  one  of  which  was  rudely  carved,  with 
an  elliptical  paddle,  were  found  on  the  beach.  Probably, 
thefe  had  belonged  to  the  fame  canoe,  the  remains  of  which 
were  feen  on  the  other  beach,  as  the  two  illots  are  not  above 
half  a mile  apart.  A young  turtle  had  alfo  been  lately 
throw  n alliore  here,  as  it  was  hill  full  of  maggots.  There 
w^ere  fewer  crabs  than  at  the  laft  place  ; but  we  found  fome 
fcorpions,  a few  other  infedts,  and  a greater  number  of  filh 
upon  the  reefs.  Amongft  thefe  were  fome  large  eels,  beau- 
tifully fpotted,  which,  when  followed,  would  raife  them- 
felves  out  of  the  water,  and  endeavour,  with  an  open  mouth, 
to  bite  their  purfuers.  The  other  forts  w^ere,  chiefly,  par- 
rot-fifli,  fnappers,  and  a brown  fpotted  rock-fifli,  about  the 
flze  of  a haddock,  fo  tame,  that  inftead  of  fwimming  away, 
it  would  remain  fixed,  and  gaze  at  us.  Had  we  been  in  ab- 
folute  want,  a fufficient  fupply  might  have  been  had ; for 
thoufands  of  the  clams,  already  mentioned,  ftuck  upon  the 
reef,  fome  of  which  weighed  two  or  three  pounds.  There 
were,  befldes,  fome  other  forts  of  fliell-fifli ; particularly, 
the  large  periwinckle.  When  the  tide  flowed,  feveral  fliarks 
came  in,  over  the  reef,  fome  of  which  our  people  killed  ; 
but  they  rendered  it  rather  dangerous  to  walk  in  the  water 
at  that  time. 

The  party  w^ho  were  left  on  fhore  with  Mr.  Williamfon, 
were  a good  deal  peftered  (as  Mr.  Gore’s  had  been)  with 
mufquitoes,  in  the  night.  Some  of  them,  in  their  excur- 
flons,  fliot  two  curlews,  exacflly  like  thofe  of  England ; and 
faw  fome  plovers,  or  fand-pipers,  upon  the  fliore ; but,  in 

F f 2 the 


220 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  the  wood,  no  other  bird,  befides  one  or  two  of  the  cuckoos 
— that  were  feen  at  Wenooa-ette. 

Upon  the  whole,  we  did  not  fpend  our  time  unprofitably 
at  this  laft  illot ; for  we  got  there  about  twelve  hundred 
cocoa-nuts,  which  were  equally  divided  amongft  the  whole 
crew ; and  were,  douhtlefs,  of  great  ufe  to  them,  both  on 
account  of  the  juice  and  of  the  kernel.  A fliip,  therefore, 
palling  this  way,  if  the  weather  be  moderate,  may  expert 
to  fucceed  as  we  did.  But  there  is  no  water  upon  either  of 
the  illots  where  we  landed.  Were  that  article  to  be  had, 
and  a palTage  could  be  got  into  the  lake,  as  we  may  call 
it,  furrounded  by  the  reef,  where  a lliip  could  anchor,  I 
lliould  prefer  this  to  any  of  the  inhabited  illands,  if  the 
only  want  were  refrelhment.  For  the  quantity  of  filh 
that  might  be  procured,  would  be  fuflicient ; and  the  peo- 
ple might  roam  about,  unmolelled  by  the  petulance  of  any 
inhabitants. 

The  nine  or  ten  low  illots,  comprehended  under  the 
name  of  Palmerfton’s  Illand,  may  be  reckoned  the  heads 
or  fummits  of  the  reef  of  coral  rock,  that  connedls  them 
together,  covered  only  with  a thin  coat  of  fand,  yet  clothed, 
as  already  obferved,  with  trees  and  plants,  molt  of  which 
are  of  the  fame  forts  that  are  found  on  the  low  grounds  of 
the  high  Illands  of  this  ocean. 

There  are  dilferent  opinions,  amongft  ingenious  theorifts, 
concerning  the  formation  of  fuch  low  illands  as  Palmer- 
lion’s.  Some  wiU  have  it,  that,  in  remote  times,  thefe  little 
feparate  heads  or  illots  were  joined,  and  formed  one  conti- 
nued and  more  elevated  tra6l  of  land,  which  the  fea,  in  the 
revolution  of  ages,  has  waflied  away,  leaving  only  the 
higher  grounds  ; which,  in  time,  alfo,  will,  according  to 
this  theory,  lliare  the  fame  fate.  Another  conjecture  is, 

that 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


221 


that  they  have  been  thrown  np  by  earthquakes,  and  are  the  1777- 
efFe6l  of  internal  convullions  of  the  globe.  A third  opi-  . 
nion,  and  which  appears  to  me  as  the  moll  probable  one, 
maintains,  that  they  are  formed  from  flioals,  or  coral  banks, 
and,  of  confequence,  increaling.  Without  mentioning  the 
feveral  arguments  made  ufe  of  in  fupport  of  each  of  thefe 
fyftems,  1 fliall  only  defcribe  fuch  parts  of  Palmerlfon’s 
Illand,  as  feU  under  my  own  obfervation  when  I landed 
upon  it. 

The  foundation  is,  every  where,  a coral  rock ; the  foil  is 
coral  fand,  with  which  the  decayed  vegetables  have,  but  in 
a few  places,  intermixed,  fo  as  to  form  any  thing  like  mould. 

From  this,  a very  ftrong  prefumption  may  be  drawn,  that 
thefe  little  fpots  of  land,  are  not  of  very  ancient  date,  nor 
the  remains  of  larger  iflands  now  buried  in  the  ocean.  For, 
upon  either  of  thefe  fuppolitions,  more  mould  mull  have 
been  formed,  or  fome  part  of  the  original  foil  would  have 
remained.  Another  circumftance  confirmed  this  doctrine 
of  the  increafe  of  thefe  illots.  We  found  upon  them,  far 
beyond  the  prefent  reach  of  the  fea,  even  in  the  mofi:  vio- 
lent ftorms,  elevated  coral  rocks,  which,  on  examination, 
appeared  to  have  been  perforated,  in  the  fame  manner  that 
the  rocks  are,  that  now  compofe  the  outer  edge  of  the  reef. 

This  evidently  fliews,  that  the  fea  had  formerly  reached  fo 
far ; and  fome  of  thefe  perforated  rocks  were  almofi;  in  the 
centre  of  the  land. 

But  the  ftrongeft  proof  of  the  increafe,  and  from  the 
caufe  we  have  afligned,  was  the  gentle  gradation  obferv- 
able  in  the  plants  round  the  ficirts  of  the  illands  ; from 
within  a few  inches  of  high-water  mark,  to  the  edge  of  the 
wood.  In  many  places,  the  divifions  of  the  plants,  of  dif- 
ferent growths,  were  very  difiinguiiliable,  efpecially  on  the 

lee. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  lee,  or  weft-fide.  This  I apprehend  to  have  been  the  ope- 
t . ration  of  extraordinary  high  tides,  occalioned  by  violent, 

accidental  gales  from  the  Weftward ; which  have  heaped 
up  the  fand  beyond  the  reach  of  common  tides.  The  re- 
gular and  gentle  operation  of  thefe  latter,  again,  throw'  up 
fand  enough  to  form  a barrier  againft  the  next  extraordi- 
nary high  tide,  or  form,  fo  as  to  prevent  its  reaching  as  far 
as  the  former  had  done,  and  deftroying  the  plants  that  may 
have  begun  to  vegetate  from  cocoa-nuts,  roots,  and  feed 
brought  thither  by  birds,  or  thrown  up  by  the  fea.  This, 
doubtlefs,  happens  very  frequently ; for  we  found  many 
cocoa-nuts,  and  fome  other  things,  juft  fprouting  up,  only 
a few  inches  beyond  where  the  fea  reaches  at  prefent,  in 
places  where,  it  was  evident,  they  could  not  have  had  their 
origin  from  thofe,  farther  in,  already  arrived  at  their  full 
growth.  At  the  fame  time,  the  increafe  of  vegetables  will 
add  faft  to  the  height  of  this  new-created  land ; as  the  fallen 
leaves,  and  broken  branches,  are,  in  fuch  a climate,  foon 
converted  into  a true  black  mould,  or  foil 

Perhaps  there  is  another  caufe,  which,  if  allowed,  wiU 


* Mr.  Anderfon,  in  his  Journal,  mentions  the  following  particulars,  relative  to  Palmer- 
fton’s  Ifland,  which  ftrongly  confirm  Captain  Cook’s  opinion  about  its  formation.  “ On 
the  laft  of  the  two  ifiots,  where  we  landed,  the  trees,  being  in  great  numbers,  had  al- 
ready  formed,  by  their  rotten  parts,  little  rifings  or  eminences,  which,  in  time,  from  the 
“ fame  caufe,  may  become  fmall  hills.  Whereas,  on  the  firft  iflot,  the  trees  being  lefs 
“ numerous,.no  fuch  thing  had,  as  yet,  happened.  Neverthelefs,  on  that  little  fpot,  the 
“ manner  of  formation  was  more  plainly  pointed  out.  For,  adjoining  to  it,  was  a fmall 
“ ifle,  which  had,  doubtlefs,  been  very  lately  formed ; as  it  was  not,  as  yet,  covered  with 
“ any  trees,  but  had  a great  many  fhrubs,  fome  of  which  were  growing  among  pieces  of 
“ coral  that  the  fea  had  thrown  up.  There  was  ftill  a more  fure  proof  of  this  method  of 
“ formation  a little  farther  on,  where  two  patches  of  fand,  about  fifty  yards  long,  and  a 
“ foot  or  eighteen  inches  high,  lay  upon  the  reef,  but  not,  as  yet,  furnilhed  with  a fingle 
“ bufti,  or  tree.” 


accelerate 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


223 


accelerate  the  increafe  of  thefe  iflands  as  much  as  any  other;  1777. 
and  will  alfo  account  for  the  fea  having  receded  from  thofe  . , 

elevated  rocks  before-mentioned.  This  is,  the  fpreading  of 
the  coral  bank,  or  reef,  into  the  fea;  which,  in  my  opi- 
nion, is  continually,  though  imperceptibly,  effedled.  The 
waves’  receding,  as  the  reef  grows  in  breadth  and  height, 
leave  a dry  rock  behind,  ready  for  the  reception  of  the 
broken  coral  and  fand,  and  every  other  depofit  neceffary 
for  the  formation  of  land  fit  for  the  vegetation  of  plants. 

In  this  manner,  there  is  little  doubt,  that,  in  time,  the 
whole  reef  will  become  one  ifland ; and,  I think,  it  wiU  ex- 
tend gradually  inward,  either  from  the  increafe  of  the  iflots 
already  formed ; or  from  the  formation  of  new  ones,  upon 
the  beds  of  coral,  within  the  inclofed  lake,  if  once  they  in- 
creafe fo  as  to  rife  above  the  level  of  the  fea. 

After  leaving  Palmerfton’s  Ifland,  I fleered  Wefl,  with  a 
view  to  make  the  befl  of  my  way  to  Annamooka.  We  flill 
continued  to  have  variable  winds,  frequently  between  the 
North  and  Wefl,  with  fqualls,  fome  thunder,  and  much 
rain.  During  thefe  fliowers,  which  were,  generally,  very 
copious,  we  faved  a confiderable  quantity  of  water ; and 
finding  that  we  could  get  a greater  fupply  by  the  rain,  in 
one  hour,  than  we  could  get  by  diflillation  in  a month,  I 
laid  afide  the  flill,  as  a thing  attended  with  more  trouble 
than  profit. 

The  heat,  which  had  been  great  for  about  a month,  be- 
came now  much  more  difagreeable  in  this  clofe  rainy  wea- 
ther ; and,  from  the  moiflure  attending  it,  threatened  foon 
to  be  noxious  ; as  the  fliips  could  not  be  kept  dry,  nor  the 
fkuttles  open,  for  the  fea.  However,  it  is  remarkable 
enough,  that  though  the  only  refrefliment  we  had  received 
fince  leaving  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  was  that  at  New  Zea- 
land ; 


224 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  land  ; there  was  not,  as  yet,  a fingle  perfon,  on  board, 
. . hck,  from  the  conftant  ufe  of  fait  food,  or  viciffitude  of 

climate. 

Thurfday  24.  In  the  night  between  the  24th  and  25th  we  pafled  Savage 
Monday  38.  which  I had  difcovered  in  1774  and  on  the  28th, 

at  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning,  we  got  fight  of  the  illands 
which  lie  to  the  Eaftward  of  Annamooka,  bearing  North  by 
Weft,  about  four  or  five  leagues  diftant.  I fleered  to  the 
South  of  thefe  iflands,  and  then  hauled  up  for  Annamooka; 
which,  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  bore  North  Weft  by  North, 
Fallafajeea  South  Weft  by  South,  and  Komango  North  by 
Weft,  diftant  about  five  miles.  The  weather  being  fqually, 
with  rain,  I anchored,  at  the  approach  of  night,  in  fifteen 
fathoms  deep  water,  over  a bottom  of  coral-fand,  and 
fliells  ; Komango  bearing  North  Weft,  about  two  leagues 
diftant. 

* For  an  account  of  the  difcovery  of  Savage  Ifland ; a defcription  of  it ; and  the 
behaviour  of  its  inhabitants,  on  Captain  Cook’s  landing,  fee  his  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  3. 
to  p.  7. 


CHAP. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Intercourfe  with  the  'Natives  of  Komango,  and  other  IJlands. 

— Arrival  at  Annamooka. — ’tranJaBions  there. — Feenou, 
a principal  Chief.,  from  Fongataboo,  comes  on  a Vifit. — Fhe 
Manner  of  his  Reception  in  the  Ifland.,  and  on  board. — 

Injiances  of  the  pilfering  Difpofition  of  the  Natives. — Some 
Account  of  Annamooka. — The  Pajfage  from  it  to  Hapaee. 

SOON  after  we  had  anchored,  two  canoes,  the  one  with  1777. 

four,  and  the  other  with  three  men,  paddled  toward  , , 

us,  and  came  along-lide  without  the  leaft  helitation.  They  Monday  28. 
brought  fome  cocoa-nuts,  bread-fruit,  plantains,  and  fugar- 
cane,  which  they  bartered  with  us  for  nails.  One  of  the 
men  came  on  board ; and  when  thefe  canoes  had  left  us, 
another  vilited  us  ; but  did  not  ftay  long,  as  night  was  ap- 
proaching. Komango,  the  illand  neareft  to  us,  was,  at  leaft, 
five  miles  off ; which  lliews  the  hazard  thefe  people  would 
run,  in  order  to  polfefs  a few  of  our  moft  trifling  ar- 
ticles. Befides  this  fupply  from  the  fhore,  we  caught,  this 
evening,  with  hooks  and  lines,  a confiderable  quantity  of 
fifli. 

Next  morning,  at  four  o’clock,  I fent  Lieutenant  King,  Tuefday  29. 
with  two  boats,  to  Komango,  to  procure  refreftiments  ; 
and,  at  five,  made  the  fignal  to  weigh,  in  order  to  ply  up 
to  Annamooka,  the  wind  being  unfavourable  at  North 
Weft. 

VoL.  I.  G g 


It 


226 


A VOYAGE  TO 


It  was  no  fooner  day -light,  than  we  were  vifited  by  lix  or 
feven  canoes  from  different  iflands,  bringing  with  them, 
befides  fruits  and  roots,  two  pigs,  feveral  fowls,  fome  large 
wood-pigeons,  fmall  rails,  and  large  violet-coloured  coots. 
All  thefe  they  exchanged  with  us  for  beads,  nails,  hatchets, 
8cc.  They  had  alfo  other  articles  of  commerce ; fuch  as 
pieces  of  their  cloth,  fifh-hooks,  fmall  bafkets,  mufical 
reeds,  and  fome  clubs,  fpears,  and  bows.  But  I ordered, 
that  no  curiofities  Ihould  be  purchafed,  till  the  fhips  fhould 
he  fupplied  with  provifions,  and  leave  given  for  that  pur- 
pofe.  Knowing,  alfo,  from  experience,  that,  if  all  our 
people  might  trade  with  the  natives,  according  to  their 
own  caprice,  perpetual  quarrels  would  enfue,  I ordered 
that  particular  perfons  fhould  manage  the  traffic  both  on 
board  and  on  ffiore,  prohibiting  all  others  to  interfere. 
Before  mid-day,  Mr.  King’s  boat  returned  with  feven  hogs, 
fome  fowls,  a quantity  of  fruit  and  roots  for  ourfelves,  and 
fome  grafs  for  the  cattle.  His  party  was  very  civilly  treated 
at  Komango.  The  inhabitants  did  not  feem  to  be  nume- 
rous ; and  their  huts,  which  flood  clofe  to  each  other, 
wdthin  a plantain  walk,  were  but  indifferent.  Not  far  from 
them,  was  a pretty  large  pond  of  freffi  water,  tolerably 
good ; but  there  was  not  any  appearance  of  a flream. 
With  Mr.  King,  came  on  board  the  Chief  of  the  illand, 
named  Tooboulangee ; and  another,  whofe  name  was  Taipa. 
They  brought  with  them  a hog,  as  a prefent  to  me,  and 
promifed  more  the  next  day. 

As  foon  as  the  boats  were  aboard,  I flood  for  Anna- 
mooka ; and  the  wind  being  fcant,  I intended  to  go  be- 
tween Annamooka-ette  and  the  breakers  to  the  South 
Eafl  of  it.  But,  on  drawing  near,  we  met  with  very  irre- 

* That  is,  Little  Annamooka. 

gular 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


227 


gular  foundings,  varying,  every  caft,  ten  or  twelve  fathoms.  1777. 
This  obhged  me  to  give  up  the  defign,  and  to  go  to  the  , . 

Southward  of  all ; which  carried  us  to  leeward,  and  made 
it  neceffary  to  fpend  the  night  under  fail.  It  was  very 
dark  ; and  'we  had  the  wind,  from  every  direction,  accom- 
panied with  heavy  fliowers  of  rain.  So  that,  at  day-light 
the  next  morning,  we  found  ourfelves  much  farther  off  Wednef.  30. 
than  we  had  been  the  evening  before  ; and  the  little  wind 
that  now  blew,  was  right  in  our  teeth. 

We  continued  to  ply,  all  day,  to  very  little  purpofe  ; and, 
in  the  evening,  anchored  in  thirty-nine  fathoms  water; 
the  bottom  coral  rocks,  and  broken  fhells  ; the  Weft  point 
of  Annamooka  bearing  Eaft  North  Eaft,  four  miles  diftant. 
Tooboulangee  and  Taipa  kept  their  promife,  and  brought 
off  to  me  fome  hogs.  Several  others  were  alfo  procured  by 
bartering,  from  different  canoes  that  followed  us  ; and  as 
much  fruit  as  we  could  weU  manage.  It  was  remarkable, 
that,  during  the  whole  day,  our  vifiters  from  the  iflands 
would  hardly  part  with  any  of  their  commodities  to  any 
body  but  me.  Captain  Clerke  did  not  get  above  one  or 
tw'o  hogs. 

At  four  o’clock  next  morning,  1 ordered  a boat  to  be  May. 
hoifted  out,  and  fent  the  Mafter  to  found  the  South  Weft 
fide  of  Annamooka ; where  there  appeared  to  be  a har- 
bour, formed  by  the  ifland  on  the  North  Eaft,  and  by  fmall 
illots,  and  fhoals,  to  the  South  Weft  and  South  Eaft.  In 
the  mean  time,  the  fliips  were  got  under  fail,  and  wrought 
up  to  the  ifland. 

When  the  Mafter  returned,  he  reported,  that  he  had 
founded  between  Great  and  Little  Annamooka,  where  he 
found  ten  and  twelve  fathoms  depth  of  water,  the  bottom 
coral  fand  ; that  the  place  was  very  well  flieltered  from  all 

G g 2 winds ; 


228 

A VOYAGE  TO 

J777' 

May. 

' ' 

winds ; but  that  there  was  no  frefh  water  to  be  found,  ex- 
cept at  fome  diftance  inland  ; and  that,  even  there,  little  of 
it  was  to  be  got,  and  that  little  not  good.  For  this  reafon 
only,  and  it  was  a very  fufficient  one,  I determined  to  an- 
chor on  the  North  fide  of  the  ifland,  where,  during  my 
lafi:  voyage,  I had  found  a place  fit  both  for  w^atering  and 
landing. 

It  was  not  above  a league  difiant ; and  yet  we  did  not 
reach  it  till  five  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  being  confiderably 
retarded  by  the  great  number  of  canoes  that  continually 

• 

crowded  round  the  fliips,  bringing  to  us  abundant  fupplies 
of  the  produce  of  their  ifland.  Amongft  thefe  canoes,  there 
were  fome  double  ones,  with  a large  fail,  that  carried  be- 
tween forty  and  fifty  men  each.  Thefe  failed  round  us, 
apparently,  with  the  fame  eafe,  as  if  we  had  been  at  an- 
chor. There  were  feveral  women  in  the  canoes,  who  were, 
perhaps,  incited  by  curiofity  to  vifit  us;  though,  at  the 
fame  time,  they  bartered  as  eagerly  as  the  men,  and  ufed 
the  paddle  with  equal  labour  and  dexterity.  I came  to  an 
anchor  in  eighteen  fathoms  water,  the  bottom  coarfe  coral 
fand  ; the  ifland  extending  from  Eafi:  to  South  Weft ; and 
the  Weft  point  of  the  Wefternmoft  cove  South  Eaft,  about 
three  quarters  of  a mile  diftant.  Thus  I refumed  the  very 
fame  ftation  which  I had  occupied  when  I vifited  Anna- 
mooka  three  years  before  ; and,  probably,  almoft  in  the 
fame  place  where  Tafman,  the  firft  difcoverer  of  this,  and 
fome  of  the  neighbouring  iflands,  anchored  in  1643  t. 

The  following  day,  while  preparations  were  making  for 

* See  Captain  Cook’s  laft  Voyage,  Vol.  ii.  p.  9. 

f See  Tafman’s  account  of  this  ifland,  in  Mr.  Dalrymple’s  valuable  Colledfion  of 
Voyages  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  Vol.  ii.  p.  79,  80.  The  few  particulars  mentioned  by 
Tafman,  agree  remarkably  with  Captain  Cook’s  more  extended  relation. 

watering, 

THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


229 


watering,  I went  alliore,  in  the  forenoon,  accompanied  by  1777. 
Captain  Clerke,  and  fome  of  the  Officers,  to  fix  on  a place  . 
where  the  obfervatories  might  be  fet  up,  and  a guard  be  Friday  2. 
ftationed ; the  natives  having  readily  given  us  leave.  They 
alfo  accommodated  us  with  a boat-houfe,  to  ferve  as-  a tent, 
and  file  wed  us  every  other  mark  of  civility.  Toobou,  the 
Chief  of  the  illand,  condu61;ed  me  and  Omai  to  his  houfe. 

We  found  it  fituated  on  a pleafant  fpot,  in  the  centre  of  his 
plantation.  A fine  grafs-plot  furrounded  it,  which,  he 
gave  us  to  underftand,  was  for  the  purpofe  of  cleaning 
their  feet,  before  they  went  within  doors.  I had  not,  be- 
fore, obferved  fuch  an  inffcance  of  attention  to  cleanlinefs 
at  any  of  the  places  I had  vifited  in  this  ocean ; but,  after- 
ward, found  that  it  was  very  common  at  the  Friendly 
Iflands.  The  floor  of  Toobou’s  houfe  was  covered  with 
mats ; and  no  carpet,  in  the  moft  elegant  Engliih  drawing- 
room, could  be  kept  neater.  While  we  were  on  fliore,  we 
procured  a few  hogs,  and  fome  fruit,  by  bartering;  and, 
before  we  got  on  board  again,  the  fhips  were  crowded  with 
the  natives.  Few  of  them  coming  empty-handed,  every 
neceflary  refreffiment  was  now  in  the  greateft  plenty. 

I landed  again  in  the  afternoon,  with  a party  of  ma- 
rines ; and,  at  the  fame  time,  the  horfes,  and  fuch  of  the 
cattle  as  were  in  a weakly  ftate,  were  fent  on  lliore.  Every 
thing  being  fettled  to  my  fatisfadfion,  I returned  to  the 
Ihip  at  funfet,  leaving  the  command  upon  the  ifland  to 
Mr.  King.  Taipa,  who  was  now  become  our  fail  friend, 
and  who  feemed  to  be  the  only  adtive  perfon  about  us, 
in  order  to  be  near  our  party  in  the  night,  as  well  as  the 
day,  had  a houfe  brought,  on  men’s  flioulders,  a full 
quarter  of  a mile,  and  placed  clofe  to  the  flied  which  our 
party  occupied. 


Next 


230 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  Next  day,  our  various  operations  on  fhore  began.  Some 
> . were  employed  in  making  hay  for  the  cattle ; others  in  fill- 

Saturday  3.  ing  our  Water  calks  at  the  neighbouring  ftagnant  pool ; 

and  a third  party  in  cutting  wood.  The  greateft  plenty  of 
this  lad:  article  being  abread:  of  the  diips,  and  in  a fituation 
the  mod:  convenient  for  getting  it  on  board,  it  was  natural 
to  make  choice  of  this.  But  the  trees  here,  which  our 
people  erroneoully  fuppofed  to  be  manchineel,  but  were  a 
fpecies  of  pepper,  called  faitanoo  by  the  natives,  yielded  a 
juice  of  a milky  colour,  of  fo  corrodve  a nature,  that  it 
raifed  bliders  on  the  Ikin,  and  injured  the  eyes  of  our 
workmen.  They  were,  therefore,  obliged  to  defid:  at  this 
place,  and  remove  to  the  cove,  in  which  our  guard  was 
Hationed,  and  where  we  embarked  our  water.  Other  wood, 
more  fuitable  to  our  purpofes,  was  there  furnidied  to  us 
by  the  natives.  Thefe  were  not  the  only  employments  we 
were  engaged  in,  for  Medfs.  King  and  Bayly  began,  this 
day,  to  obferve  equal  altitudes  of  the  fun,  in  order  to  get 
th^  rate  of  the  time-keepers.  In  the  evening,  before  the 
natives  retired  from  our  pod,  Taipa  harangued  them  for 
fome  time.  We  could  only  guefs  at  the  fubje6t;  and 
judged,  that  he  was  indrudfing  them  how  to  behave  to- 
ward us,  and  encouraging  them  to  bring  the  produce  of  the 
idand  to  market.  We  experienced  the  good  ededls  of  his 
eloquence,  in  the  plentiful  fupply  of  providons  which, 
next  day,  we  received. 

Sunday  4.  Nothing  worth  notice  happened,  on  the  4th  and  5th, 
Mondays,  except  that,  on  the  former  of  thefe  days,  the  Difcovery 
lod:  her  fmall  bower  anchor,  the  cable  being  cut  in  two 
by  the  rocks.  This  misfortune  made  it  necedary  to  exa- 
mine the  cables  of  the  Refolution,  which  were  found  to 
be  unhurt. 


On 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


231 


On  the  6th,  we  were  vifited  by  a great  Chief  from  Ton-  1777. 
gataboo,  whofe  name  was  Feenou,  and  whom  Taipa  was  . 
pleafed  to  introduce  to  us  as  King  of  all  the  Friendly  Hies.  Tuefday6. 
I was  now  told,  that,  on  my  arrival,  a canoe  had  been 
difpatched  to  Tongataboo  with  the  news ; in  confequence 
of  which,  this  Chief  immediately  pafled  over  to  Anna- 
mooka.  The  Officer  an  fliore  informed  me,  that  when 
he  firft  arrived,  all  the  natives  were  ordered  out  to  meet 
him,  and  paid  their  obeifance  by  bowing  their  heads  as 
low  as  his  feet,  the  foies  of  which  they  alfo  touched  with 
each  hand,  firft  with  the  palm,  and  then  with  the  back 
part.  There  could  be  little  room  to  fufpetft  that  a perfon, 
received  with  fb  much  refpedt,  could  be  any  thing  lefs 
than  the  King. 

In  the  afternoon,  I went  to  pay  this  great  man  a vifit, 
having  firft  received  a prefent  of  two  fifli  from  him, 
brought  on  board  by  one  of  his  fervants.  As  foon  as  I 
landed,  he  came  up  to  me.  He  appeared  to  be  about 
thirty  years  of  age,  tall,  but  thin,  and  had  more  of  the 
European  features,  than  any  I had  yet  feen  here.  When 
the  firft  falutation  was  over,  I afked  if  he  was  the  King. 

For,  notwithftanding  what  I had  been  told,  finding  he  was 
not  the  man  whom  I remembered  to  have  feen  under  that 
characfter  during  my  former  voyage,  I began  to  entertain 
doubts.  Taipa  officially  anfwered  for  him,  and  enume- 
rated no  lefs  than  one  hundred  and  fifty-three  iflands,  of 
which,  he  faid,  Feenou  was  the  Sovereign.  After  a fliort 
ftay,  our  new  vifiter,  and  five  or  fix  of  his  attendants,  ac- 
companied me  on  board.  I gave  fuitable  prefents  to  them 
all,  and  entertained  them  in  fuch  a manner,  as  I thought 
would  be  moft  agreeable. 

In  the  evening,  I attended  them  on  fliore  in  my  boat, 

into 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  into  which  the  Chief  ordered  three  hogs  to  be  put,  as  a 
• . return  for  the  prefents  he  had  received  from  me.  I was 

now  informed  of  an  accident  which  had  juft  happened, 
the  relation  of  which  will  convey  fome  idea  of  the  extent 
of  the  authority  exercifed  here  over  the  common  people. 
While  Feenou  was  on  board  my  ftiip,  an  inferior  Chief, 
for  what  reafon  our  people  on  fliore  did  not  know,  ordered 
all  the  natives  to  retire  from  the  poft  we  occupied.  Some 
of  them  having  ventured  to  return,  he  took  up  a large 
ftick,  and  beat  them  moft  unmercifully.  He  ftruck  one 
man,  on  the  ftde  of  the  face,  with  fo  much  violence,  that 
the  blood  guflied  out  of  his  mouth  and  noftrils ; and,  after 
lying  fome  time  motionlefs,  he  was,  at  laft,  removed  from 
the  place,  in  convulftons.  The  perfon  who  had  inflidted 
the  blow,  being  told  that  he  had  killed  the  man,  only 
laughed  at  it ; and,  it  was  evident,  that  he  was  not  in  the 
leaft  forry  for  what  had  happened.  We  heard,  afterward, 
that  the  poor  fufferer  recovered. 

The  Difcovery  having  found  again  her  fmall  bower  an- 
Wednef.  7,  chor,  fliifted  her  birth  on  the  7th ; but  not  before  her  beft 
bower  cable  had  fliared  the  fate  of  the  other.  This  day,  I 
had  the  company  of  Feenou  at  dinner;  and  alfo  the  next 
Thurfdays,  day,  wheii  he  was  attended  by  Taipa,  Toobou,  and  fome 
other  Chiefs.  It  was  remarkable,  that  none  but  Taipa  was  al- 
lowed to  fit  at  table  with  him,  or  even  to  eat  in  his  prefence. 
I own  that  I conftdered  Feenou  as  a very  convenient  gueft, 
on  account  of  this  etiquette.  For,  before  his  arrival,  I had, 
generally,  a larger  company  than  I could  well  find  room 
for,  and  my  table  overflowed  with  crowds  of  both  fexes. 
For  it  is  not  the  cuftom  at  the  Friendly  Iflands,  as  it  is  at 
Otaheite,  to  deny  to  their  females  the  privilege  of  eating 
in  company  with  the  men. 


The 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


233 


The  firft  day  of  our  arrival  at  Annamooka,  one  of  the  1777. 
natives  had  ftolen,  out  of  the  fliip,  a large  junk  axe.  I now  . 
applied  to  Feenou  to  exert  his  authority  to  get  it  reftored  to 
me  ; and  fo  implicitly  was  he  obeyed,  that  it  was  brought 
on  board  while  we  were  at  dinner.  Thefe  people  gave  us 
very  frequent  opportunities  of  remarking  what  expert 
thieves  they  were.  Even  fome  of  their  Chiefs  did  not  think 
this  profeffion  beneath  them.  On  the  9th,  one  of  them  Friday  9. 
was  detected  carrying  out  of  the  fliip,  concealed  under  his 
clothes,  the  bolt  belonging  to  the  fpun  yarn  winch ; for 
which  I fentenced  him  to  receive  a dozen  laflies,  and  kept 
him  confined  till  he  paid  a hog  for  his  liberty.  After  this, 
we  were  not  troubled  with  thieves  of  rank.  Their  fervants, 
or  flaves,  however,  were  ftill  employed  in  this  dirty  work  ; 
and  upon  them  a flogging  feemed  to  make  no  greater  im- 
preflion,  than  it  would  have  done  upon  the  main-maft.  • 

When  any  of  them  happened  to  be  caught  in  the  adl,  their 
mafters,  far  from  interceding  for  them,  would  often  advife 
us  to  kill  them.  As  this  was  a punifhment  we  did  not 
choofe  to  inflidt,  they  generally  efcaped  without  any  pu- 
nifliment  at  ail ; for  they  appeared  to  us  to  be  equally  infen- 
fible  of  the  fliame,  and  of  the  pain  of  corporal  chafiifement. 

Captain  Clerke,  at  laft,  hit  upon  a mode  of  treatment, 
which,  we  thought,  had  fome  effect.  He  put  them  under 
the  hands  of  the  barber,  and  completely  fliaved  their  heads ; 
thus  pointing  them  out  as  obje6ls  of  ridicule  to  their  coun- 
trymen, and  enabling  our  people  to  deprive  them  of  future 
opportunities  for  a repetition  of  their  rogueries,  by  keeping 
them  at  a diftance. 

Feenou  was  fo  fond  of  aflTociating  with  us,  that  he  dined 
on  board  every  day  ; though,  fometimes,  he  did  not  partake 
of  our  fare.  On  the  loth,  fome  of  his  fervants  brought  a Saturday  10, 

VoL.  I.  H h mefs. 


234 


A VOYAGE  TO 


Sunday  1 1. 


Monday  12. 
Tuefday  13. 

Wednef.  14. 


mefs,  which  had  been  drefled  for  him  on  fliore.  It  conlifted  • 
of  fifli,  foup,  and  yams.  Infteadof  common  water  to  make 
the  foup,  cocoa-nut  liquor  had  been  made  ufe  of,  in  which 
the  fifli  had  been  boiled  or  ftewed ; probably  in  a wooden 
veffel,  with  hot  Hones  ; but  it  was  carried  on  board  in  a 
plantain  leaf.  I tailed  of  the  mefs,  and  found  it  fo  good, 
that  I,  afterward,  had  fome  fiili  dreffed  in  the  fame  way. 
Though  my  cook  fucceeded  tolerably  well,  he  could  pro- 
duce nothing  equal  to  the  dilli  he  imitated. 

Finding  that  we  had  quite  exhauited  the  iiland,  of  almoil 
every  article  of  food  that  it  afforded,  I employed  the  nth 
in  moving  off,  from  the  fhore,  the  horfes,  obfervatories,  and 
other  things  that  we  had  landed,  as  alfo  the  party  of  ma- 
rines who  had  mounted  guard  at  our  ilation,  intending  to 
fail,  as  foon  as  the  Difcovery  ihould  have  recovered  her  heft 
bower  anchor.  Feenou,  underilanding  that  I meant  to  pro- 
ceed directly  to  Tongataboo,  importuned  me  ilrongly  to 
alter  this  plan,  to  which  he  expreffed  as  much  averiion,  as 
if  he  had  fome  particular  intereft  to  promote  by  diverting 
me  from  it.  In  preference  to  it,  he  warmly  recommended 
an  iiland,  or  rather  a group  of  illands,  called  Hapaee,  lying 
to  the  North  Eaft.  There,  he  affured  us,  we  could  be  fup- 
plied  plentifully  with  every  refrelliment,  in  the  eafeft 
manner ; and,  to  add  weight  to  his  advice,  he  engaged  to 
attend  us  thither  in  perfon.  He  carried  his  point  with  me ; 
and  Hapaee  was  made  choice  of  for  our  next  Ilation.  As  it 
had  never  been  vilited  by  any  European  lliips,  the  examina- 
tion of  it  became  an  objedl  with  me. 

The  1 2th,  and  the  13th,  were  fpent  in  attempting  the  re- 
covery of  Captain  Gierke’s  anchor,  which,  after  much 
trouble,  was  happily  accomplifhed ; and  on  the  14th,  in  the 
morning,  we  got  under  fail,  and  left  Annamooka. 

This 


f 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


235 


This  illaiid  is  fomewhat  higher  than  the  other  fmall  illes 
that  furround  it ; but,  ftill,  it  cannot  be  admitted  to  the  ^ 
rank  of  thofe  of  a moderate  height,  fuch  as  Mangeea  and 
Wateeoo.  The  fliore,  at  that  part  where  our  fliips  lay,  is 
compofed  of  a deep,  rugged  coral  rock,  nine  or  ten  feet 
high,  except  where  there  are  two  fandy  beaches,  which 
have  a reef  of  the  fame  fort  of  rock  extending  crofs  their 
entrance  to  the  fliore,  and  defending  them  from  the  fea. 
The  fait  water  lake  that  is  in  the  centre  of  the  illand,  is 
about  a mile  and  a half  broad ; and  round  it,  the  land  rifes 
like  a bank,  with  a gradual  afcent.  But  we  could  not  trace 
its  having  any  communication  with  the  fea.  And  yet,  the 
land  that  runs  acrofs  to  it,  from  the  largeft  fandy  beach, 
being  flat  and  low,  and  the  foil  fandy,  it  is  moft  likely  that 
it  may  have,  formerly,  communicated  that  way.  The  foil 
on  the  riflng  parts  of  the  ifland,  and  efpecially  toward 
the  fea,  is  either  of  a reddifh  clayey  difpofltion,  or  a black, 
loofe  mould ; but  there  is,  no  where,  any  flream  of  frefli 
water. 

The  ifland  is  very  well  cultivated,  except  in  a few  places ; 
and  there  are  fome  others,  which,  though  they  appear  to 
lie  wafte,  are  only  left  to  recover  the  ftrength  exhaufted  by 
conftant  culture ; for  we  frequently  faw  the  natives  at  work 
upon  thefe  fpots,  to  plant  them  again.  The  plantations 
conlift  chiefly  of  yams  and  plantains.  Many  of  them  are 
very  extenflve,  and  often  inclofed  with  neat  fences  of  reed, 
difpofed  obliquely  acrofs  each  other,  about  fix  feet  high. 
Within  thefe  we  often  faw  other  fences  of  lefs  compafs, 
furrounding  the  houfes  of  the  principal  people.  The  bread- 
fruit, and  cocoa-nut  trees,  are  interfperfed  with  little  order; 
but  chiefly  near  the  habitations  of  the  natives ; and  the 
other  parts  of  the  ifland,  efpecially  toward  the  fea,  and 

H h 2 about 


>777- 

May. 


236 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  about  the  fides  of  the  lake,  are  covered  with  trees  and 
. bullies  of  a moll  luxuriant  growth ; the  laft  place  having  a 

great  many  mangroves,  and  the  firft  a vaft  number  of  the 
faitanoo  trees  already  mentioned.  There  feem  to  be  no 
rocks  or  ftones,  of  any  kind,  about  the  illand,  that  are  not 
coral ; except  in  one  place,  to  the  right  of  the  fandy  beach, 
where  there  is  a rock  twenty  or  thirty  feet  high,. of  a cal- 
careous ftone,  of  a yellowifh  colour,  and  a very  clofe  texture. 
But  even  about  that  place,  which  is  the  higheft  part  of  the 
land,  are  large  pieces  of  the  fame  coral  rock  that  compofes 
the  fliore. 

Belides  walking  frequently  up  into  the  country,  which 
we  were  permitted  to  do  without  interruption,  we  fome- 
times  amufed  ourfelves  in  fliooting  wild  ducks,  not  unlike 
the  widgeon,  which  are  very  numerous  upon  the  fait  lake, 
and  the  pool  where  we  got  our  water.  In  thefe  excurhons, 
we  found  the  inhabitants  had  often  deferted  their  houfes  to 
come  down  to  the  trading  place,  without  entertaining  any 
fufpicion,  that  ftrangers,  rambling  about,  would  take  away, 
or  deftroy,  any  thing  that  belonged  to  them.  But  though, 
from  this  circumftance,  it  might  be  fujipofed  that  the 
greater  part  of  the  natives  were  fometimes  collected  at  the 
beach,  it  was  impoffible  to  form  any  accurate  computation 
of  their  number;  as  the  continual  refort  of  viliters  from 
other  illands,  mixing  with  them,  might  ealily  millead  one. 
However,  as  there  was  never,  to  appearance,  above  a thou- 
fand  perfons  collected  at  one  time,  it  would,  perhaps,  be 
fufficient  to  allow  double  that  number  for  the  whole  illand. 
The  place  where  fuch  numbers  alfembled  daily,  and  the 
bay  where  our  boats  landed,  are  faithfully  reprefented  in  a 
drawing  by  Mr.  Webber. 

To  the  North  and  North  Eaft  of  Annamooka,  and  in  the 

diredl 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


237 


dire6I  track  to  H apace,  whither  we  were  now  bound,  the 
fea  is  fprinkled  with  a great  number  of  fmall  illes.  Amidft  ^ 
the  fhoals  and  rocks  adjoining  to  this  group,  I could  not  be 
affured  that  there  was  a free  or  fafe  paffage  for  fuch  large 
fliips  as  ours ; though  the  natives  failed  through  the  in- 
tervals in  their  canoes.  For  this  fubftantial  reafon,  when 
we  weighed  anchor  from  Annamooka,  I thought  it  ne- 
ceffary  to  go  to  the  Weftward  of  the  above  illands,  and 
fleered  North  North  Weft,  toward  Kao  ’i''  and  Toofoa,  the 
two  moft  Wefterly  illands  in  fight,  and  remarkable  for 
their  great  height.  Feenou,  and  his  attendants,  remained 
on  board  the  Refolution  till  near  noon,  when  he  went  into 
the  large  failing  canoe,  which  had  brought  him  from  Ton- 
gataboo,  and  flood  in  amongft  the  duller  of  illands  above 
mentioned,  of  which  we  were  now  almoft  abreaft ; and  a 
tide  or  current  from  the  Weftward  had  fet  us,  fince  our 
failing  in  the  morning,  much  over  toward  them. 

They  lie  fcattered,  at  unequal  diftances,  and  are,  in  ge- 
neral, nearly  as  high  as  Annamooka;  but  only  from  two 
or  three  miles,  to  half  a mile  in  length,  and  fome  of  them 
fcarcely  fo  much.  They  have  either  fteep  rocky  fliores 
like  Annamooka,  or  reddifti  cliffs ; but  fome  have  fandy 
beaches  extending  almoft  their  whole  length.  Moft  of 

* As  a proof  of  the  great  difficulty  of  knowing  accurately  the  exaft  names  of  the 
South  Sea  Iflands,  as  procured  from  the  natives,  I obferve  that  what  Captain  Cook  calls 
Aghao^  Mr.  Anderfon  calls  Kao  \ and  Tafman’s  drawing,  as  I find  it  in  Mr.  Dalrymple’s 
Colledlion  of  Voyages,  gives  the  name  of  Kaybay  to  the  fame  ifland.  Tafman’s  and 
Captain  Cook’s  Amattafoa^  is,  with  Mr.  Anderfon,  Kofoa.  Captain  Cook’s  Komango^  is 
Tafman’s  Amango.  There  is  fcarcely  an  inftance,  in  which  fuch  variations  are  not  ob- 
fervable.  Mr.  Anderfon’s  great  attention  to  matters  of  this  fort  being,  as  we  learn 
from  Captain  King,  well  known  to  every  body  on  board,  and  admitted  always  by  Captain 
Cook  himfelf,  his  mode  of  fpelling  has  been  adopted  on  the  engraved  chart  of  the  Friendly 
Iflands ; which  has  made  it  neceflary  to  adopt  it  alfo,  in  printing  the  journal. 


1777- 

May. 


them 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  them  are  entirely  clothed  with  trees,  amongft  which  are 
^ . many  cocoa  palms,  and  each  forms  a profpedf  hke  a beau- 

tiful garden  placed  in  the  fea.  To  heighten  this,  the  ferene 
weather  we  now  had,  contributed  very  much ; and  the 
whole  might  fupply  the  imagination  with  an  idea  of  fome 
fairy  land  realized.  It  fliould  feem,  that  fome  of  them, 
at  leaft,  may  have  been  formed,  as  we  fuppofed  Palmer- 
fton’s  Illand  to  have  been ; for  there  is  one,  which,  as  yet, 
is  entirely  fand,  and  another,  on  which  there  is  only  one 
bufli,  or  tree. 

At  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  being  the  length  of 
Kotoo,  the  Wellernmoft  of  the  above  clufter  of  fmall 
illands,  we  fleered  to  the  North,  leaving  Toofoa  and  Kao 
on  our  larboard,  keeping  along  the  Weft  fide  of  a reef  of 
rocks,  which  lie  to  the  Weftward  of  Kotoo,  till  we  came  to 
their  Northern  extremity,  round  which  we  hauled  in  for 
the  illand.  It  was  our  intention  to  have  anchored  for  the 
night ; but  it  came  upon  us  before  we  could  find  a place  in 
lefs  than  fifty-five  fathoms  water;  and  rather  than  come  to 
in  this  depth,  I chofe  to  fpend  the  night  under  fail. 

We  had,  in  the  afternoon,  been  within  two  leagues  of 
Toofoa,  the  fmoke  of  which  we  faw  feveral  times  in  the  day. 
The  Friendly  Iflanders  have  fome  fuperftitious  notions  about 
the  volcano  upon  it,  which  they  call  Kollofeea^  and  fay  it  is 
an  Otooa,  or  divinity.  According  to  their  account,  it  fome- 
times  throws  up  very  large  ftones ; and  they  compare  the 
crater^  to  the  fize  of  a fmall  illot,  which  has  never  ceafed 
fmoking  in  their  memory ; nor  have  they  any  tradition  that 
it  ever  did.  We  fometimes  faw  the  fmoke  riling  from  the 
centre  of  the  illand,  while  we  were  at  Annamooka,  though 
at  the  diftance  of  at  leaft  ten  leagues.  Toofoa,  we  were  told, 
is  but  thinly  inhabited,  but  the  water  upon  it  is  good. 


At 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


^39 


At  day-break  the  next  morning,  being  then  not  far  from  1777. 
Kao,  which  is  a vaft  rock  of  a conic  figure,  we  fleered  to  . . 

the  Eaft,  for  the  paffage  between  the  illands  Footooha  and  Thurfday  15. 
Hafaiva,  with  a gentle  breeze  at  South  Eafl.  About  ten 
o’clock,  Feenou  came  on  board,  and  remained  with  us  all 
day.  He  brought  with  him  two  hogs,  and  a quantity  of 
fruit ; and,  in  the  courfe  of  the  day,  feveral  canoes,  from 
the  different  illands  round  us,  came  to  barter  quantities  of 
the  latter  article,  which  was  very  acceptable,  as  our  flock 
was  nearly  expended.  At  noon,  our  latitude  was  19°  49^  45"'' 

South,  and  we  had  made  feven  miles  of  longitude  from  Anna- 
mooka;  Toofoabore  North,  88°  Well;  Kao  North,  71°  Well; 

Footooha  North,  89°  Well ; and  Hafaiva  South,  12°  Well. 

After  paffing  Footooha,  we  met  with  a reef  of  rocks ; 
and,  as  there  was  but  little  wind,  it  coll  us  fome  trouble  to 
keep  clear  of  them.  This  reef  lies  between  Footooha  and 
Neeneeva,  which  is  a 'fmall  low  ille,  in  the  direction  of 
Eafl  North  Eafl  from  Footooha,  at  the  diflance  of  feven  or 
eight  miles.  Footooha  is  a fmall  illand,  of  middling  height, 
and  bounded  all  round  by  a fleep  rock.  It  lies  South  67° 

Eafl,  diflant  fix  leagues  from  Kao,  and  three  leagues  from 
Kotoo,  in  the  direvSlion  of  North  33°  Eafl.  Being  pafl  the 
reef  of  rocks  jufl  mentioned,  we  hauled  up  for  Neeneeva, 
in  hopes  of  finding  anchorage ; but  were  again  difappoint- 
ed,  and  obliged  to  fpend  the  night,  making  fhort  boards. 

For,  although  we  had  land  in  every  diredlion,  the  fea  was 
unfathomable. 

In  the  courfe  of  this  night,  we  could  plainly  fee  flames 
iffuing  from  the  volcano  upon  Toofoa,  though  to  no  great 
height. 

At  day-break  in  the  morning  of  the  i6th,  with  a gentle  Friday  16. 
breeze  at  South  Eafl,  we  fleered  North  Eafl  for  Hapaee, 

which 


240 


.» 777- 
May. 

V 


Saturday  17. 


A VOYAGE  TO 

which  w-as  now  in  fight ; and  we  could  judge  it  to  be  low 
land,  from  the  trees  only  appearing  above  the  water. 
About  nine  o’clock  Ave  could  fee  it  plainly  forming  three 
illands,  nearly  of  an  equal  fize ; and  foon  after,  a fourth 
to  the  Southward  of  thefe,  as  large  as  the  others.  Each 
feemed  to  be  about  fix  or  feven  miles  long,  and  of  a fimilar 
height  and  appearance.  The  Northernmofl  of  them  is 
called  Haanno,  the  next  Foa,  the  third  Lefooga,  and  the 
Southernmofl  Hoolaiva ; but  all  four  are  included,  by  the 
natives,  under  the  general  name  Hapaee. 

The  wind  fcanting  upon  us,  we  could  not  fetch  the  land ; 
fo  that  we  were  forced  to  ply  to  windward.  In  doing  this, 
Ave  once  paffed  over  fome  coral  rocks,  on  Avhich  aac  had 
only  fix  fathoms  Avater;  but  the  moment  we  Avere  over 
them,  found  no  ground  Avith  eighty  fathoms, of  line.  At  this 
time,  the  ifles  of  Hapaee  bore,  from  North,  50°  Eaft,  to  South, 
9°  Weft.  We  got  up  wdth  the  Northernmofl  of  thefe  ifles  by 
funfet ; and  there  found  ourfelves  in  the  very  fame  diftrefs, 
for  want  of  anchorage,  that  Ave  had  experienced  the  tAVO 
preceding  evenings  ; fo  that  Ave  had  another  night  to  fpend 
under  fail,  Avith  land  and  breakers  in  every  direction.  To- 
Avard  the  evening,  Feenou,  Avho  had  been  on  board  all  day, 
AA'^ent  forward  to  Hapaee,  and  took  Omai  in  the  canoe  Avith 
him.  He  did  not  forget  our  difagreeable  fttuation ; and 
kept  up  a good  fire,  all  night,  by  way  of  a land-mark. 

As  foon  as  the  day-light  returned,  being  then  clofe  in 
Avith  Foa,  we  faw  it  Avas  joined  to  Haanno,  by  a reef 
running  even  Avith  the  furface  of  the  fea,  from  the  one 
ifland  to  the  other.  I now  difpatched  a boat  to  look  for  an- 
chorage. A proper  place  Avas  foon  found ; and  Ave  came  to, 
abreaft  of  a reef,  being  that  Avhich  joins  Lefooga  to  Foa  (in 
the  fame  manner  that  Foa  is  joined  to  Haanno),  having 

tAventy- 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


241 


twenty-four  fathoms  depth  of  water;  the  bottom  coral  1777. 
fand.  In  this  ftation,  the  northern  point  of  Hapaee,  or  the  . 
North  end  of  Haanno,  bore  North,  16°  Eaft.  The  Southern 
point  of  Hapaee,  or  the  South  end  of  Hoolaiva,  South,  29° 

Weft  ; and  the  North  end  of  Lefooga,  South,  65°  Eaft.  Two 
ledges  of  rocks  lay  without  us ; the  one  bearing  South, 

50°  Weft ; and  the  other  Weft  by  North  f North,  diftant 
two  or  three  miles.  We  lay  before  a creek  in  the  reef, 
which  made  it  convenient  landing  at  all  times  ; and  we  were 
not  above  three  quarters  of  a mile  from  the  fliore. 


I i 


VOL.  1. 


CHAP. 


242 


A VOYAGE  TO 


CHAP.  V. 


Arrival  of  the  Ships  at  Hapaee^  and  friendly  Reception  there. 
Prefents  and  Solemnities  on  the  Occajion. — Single  Combats 
with  Clubs.’^Wreftling  and  Boxing  Matches. — Female 
Combatants. — Marines  exercifed. — A Dance  performed  by 
Men. — Fireworks  exhibited. — The  Night-entertainments  of 
Jinging  and  dancing  particularly  defcribed. 

s 

1777-  T3  Y the  time  we  had  anchored,  the  fhips  were  filled  with 
1 — — i JD  the  natives,  and  fnrrounded  by  a multitude  of  canoes, 
Saturday  17.  fiUed  alfo  with  them.  They  brought,  from  the  fliore,  hogs, 
fowls,  fruit,  and  roots,  which  they  exchanged  for  hatchets, 
knives,  nails,  beads,  and  cloth.  Feenou  and  Omai  having 
come  on  board,  after  it  was  light,  in  order  to  introduce  me 
to  the  people  of  the  illand,  I foon  accompanied  them  on 
fliore,  for  that  purpofe,  landing  at  the  North  part  of  Le- 
fooga,  a little  to  the  right  of  the  fhip’s  ftation. 

The  Chief  conducted  me  to  a houfe,  or  rather  a hut, 
fituated  clofe  to  the  fea-beach,  which  I had  feen  brought 
thither,  but  a few  minutes  before,  for  our  reception.  In 
this  Feenou,  Omai,  and  myfelf,  were  feated.  The  other 
Chiefs,  and  the  multitude,  compofed  a circle,  on  the  out- 
fide,  fronting  us  ; and  they  alfo  fat  down.  I was  then 
afked.  How  long  I intended  to  flay  ? On  my  faying.  Five 
days,  Taipa  was  ordered  to  come  and  fit  by  me,  and  pro- 
claim 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


243 


claim  this  to  the  people.  He  then  harangued  them,  in  a 1777. 
fpeech  moftly  dictated  by  Feenou.  The  purport  of  it,  as  I , . 

learnt  from  Omai,  was,  that  they  were  all,  both  old  and 
young,  to  look  upon  me  as  a friend,  who  intended  to  re- 
main with  them  a few  days  ; that,  during  my  ftay,  they 
muif  not  fteal  any  thing,  nor  moleft  me  any  other  way ; and 
that  it  was  expelled,  they  fhould  bring  hogs,  fowls,  fruit, 

8cc.  to  the  Iliips,  where  they  would  receive,  in  exchange 
for  them,  fuch  and  fuch  things,  which  he  enumerated. 

Soon  after  T aipa  had  finifhed  this  addrefs  to  the  affembly, 

Feenou  left  us.  Taipa  then  took  occafion  to  hgnify  to  me, 
that  it  was  neceflary  I fliould  make  a prefent  to  the  Chief  of 
the  illand,  whofe  name  was  Earoupa.  I was  not  unprepared 
for  this  ; and  gave  him  fuch  articles  as  far  exceeded  his  ex- 
pecflation.  My  liberality  to  him  brought  upon  me  demands, 
of  the  fame  kind,  from  two  Chiefs  of  other  ifles  who  were 
prefent ; and  from  Taipa  himfelf.  When  Feenou  returned, 
which  was  immediately  after  I had  made  the  laft  of  thefe 
prefents,  he  pretended  to  be  angry  with  Taipa  for  fuffer- 
ing  me  to  give  away  fo  much  ; but  I looked  upon  this  as  a 
mere  finelTe  ; being  confident  that  he  acfiied  in  concert  with 
the  others.  He  now  took  his  feat  again,  and  ordered 
Earoupa  to  fit  by  him,  and  to  harangue  the  people  as  Taipa 
had  done,  and  to  the  fame  purpofe ; dictating,  as  before, 
the  heads  of  the  fpeech. 

Thefe  ceremonies  being  performed,  the  Chief,  at  my 
requeft,  conducted  me  to  three  fiagnant  pools  of  frefli  wa- 
ter, as  he  was  pleafed  to  call  it : and,  indeed,  in  one  of  thefe 
the  water  was  tolerable,  and  the  fituation  not  inconvenient 
for  filling  our  calks.  After  viewing  the  watering-place, 
we  returned  to  our  former  ftation,  where  I found  a baked 
hog,  and  fome  yams,  fmoking  hot,  ready  to  be  carried  on 

I i 2 board 


244 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  board  for  my  dinner.  I invited  Feenou,  and  his  friends,  to 
, . partake  of  it ; and  we  embarked  for  the  fliip  ; but  none  but 

himfelf  fat  down  with  us  at  the  table.  After  dinner  I con- 
ducted them  on  fliore  ; and,  before  I returned  on  board,  the 
Chief  gave  me  a fine  large  turtle,  and  a qiiantity  of  yams^ 
Our  fupply  of  provifions  was  copious ; for,  in  the  courfe  of 
the  day,  we  got,  by  barter,  along-fide  the  fliip,  about  twenty 
fmall  hogs,  befide  fruit  and  roots..  I was  told,  that  on  my 
firfi:  landing  in  the  morning,  a man  came  off  to  the  fhips, 
and  ordered  every  one  of  the  natives  to  go  on  fliore.  Pro- 
bably,. this  was  done  with  a view  to  have  the  whole  body  of 
inhabitants  prefent  at  the  ceremony  of  my  reception ; for 
when  that  was  over,  multitudes  of  them  returned  again  to- 
the  fliips. 

Sunday  18.  Next  moriiing  early,  Feenou,.  and  Omai,  who  fcarcely 
ever  quitted  the  Chief,  and  now  flept  on  fliore,  came  on> 
board.  The  object  of  the  vifit,  was  to  require  my  prefeiice 
upon  the  ifland.  After  fome  time,  1 accompanied  them  ; 
and,  upon  landing,  was  condudfed  to  the  fame  place  where 
I had  been  feated  the  day  before  ; and  where  I faw  a large 
concourfe  of  people  already  aflTembled.  I guefiTed  that 
fomething  more  than  ordinary  was  in  agitation  ; but  could 
not  tell  what,  nor  could  Omai  inform  me. 

I had  not  been  long  feated,  before  near  a hundred  of  the 
natives  appeared  in  fight,  and  advanced,  laden  with  yams, 
bread-fruit,  plantains,  cocoa-nuts,  and  fugar-canes.  They 
depofited  their  burdens,  in  two  heaps,  or  piles,  upon  our 
left,  being  the  fide  they  came  from.  Soon  after,  arrived  a 
number  of  others  from  the  right,  bearing  the  fame  kind 
of  articles ; which  were  collected  into  two  piles  upon  that 
fide.  To  thefe  were  tied  two  pigs,  and  fix  fowls  ; and  to 
thofe,  upon  the  left,  fix  pigs,  and  two  turtles.  Earoupa 

feated 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


245 


feated  liimfelf  before  the  feveral  articles  upon  the  left ; 17; 

and  another  Chief  before  thofe  upon  the  right ; they  , 
being,  as  I judged,  the  two  Chiefs  who  had  collected  them, 
by  order  of  Feenou,  who  feemed  to  be  as  implicitly  obey- 
ed here,  as  he  had  been  at  Annamooka;  and,  in  confe- 
quence  of  his  commanding  fuperiority  over  the  Chiefs  of 
Hapaee,  had  laid  this  tax  upon  them  for  the  prefent  oc- 
calion. 

As  foon  as  this  munificent  colledfion  of  provifions  was 
laid  down  in  order,  and  difpofed  to  the  befl  advantage,  the 
bearers  of  it  joined  the  multitude,  who  formed  a large  circle 
round  the  whole.  Prefently  after,  a number  of  men  en- 
tered this  circle,  or  area,  before  us,  armed  with  clubs,  made 
of  the  green  branches  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree.  Thefe  paraded 
about,  for  a few  minutes,  and  then  retired ; the  one  half  tO' 
one  fide,  and  the  other  half  to  the  other  fide ; feating  them- 
felves  before  the  fpedtators.  Soon  after,  they  fuccellively 
entered  the  lifts,  and  entertained  us  with  fingle  combats. 

One  champion,  riling  up  and  ftepping  forward  from  one 
fide,  challenged  thofe  of  the  other  fide,  by  expreflive  gef- 
tures,  more  than  by  words,  to  fend  one  of  their  body  to  op- 
l^ofe  him.  If  the  challenge  was  accepted,  which  was  gene- 
rally the  cafe,  the  two  combatants  put  themfelves  in  proper 
attitudes,  and  then  began  the  engagement,  which  con- 
tinued till  one  or  other  owned  himfelf  conquered,  or  till 
their  weapons  were  broken.  As  foon  as  each  combat  was 
over,  the  vidtor  fquatted  himfelf  down  facing  the  Chief, 
then  rofe  up,  and  retired.  At  the  fame  time,  fome  old  men, 
who  feemed  to  fit  as  judges,  gave  their  plaudit  in  a few 
words ; and  the  multitude,  efpecially  thofe  on  the  fide  to 
which  the  vidtor  belonged,  celebrated  the  glory  he  had  ac- 
quired, in  two  or  three  huzzas. 


This 


246 


A VOYAGE  TO 


777.  This  entertainment  was,  now  and  then,  fnfpended  for  a 
few  minutes.  During  thefe  intervals  there  were  both 
wreftling  and  boxing  matches.  The  firfl:  were  performed 
in  the  fame  manner  as  at  Otaheite ; and  the  fecond  differed 
very  little  from  the  method  pra6lifed  in  England.  But 
what  ifruck  us  with  molf  furprize,  was,  to  fee  a couple  of 
lufty  wenches  ftep  forth,  and  begin  boxing,  without  the 
leafl  ceremony,  and  with  as  much  art  as  the  men.  This 
contelf , however,  did  not  laid  above  half  a minute,  before 
one  of  them  gave  it  up.  The  conquering  heroine  received 
the  fame  applaufe  from  the  fpectators,  which  they  beftow- 
ed  upon  the  fuccefsful  combatants  of  the  other  fex.  We 
expreffed  fome  dillike  at  this  part  of  the  entertainment ; 
which,  however,  did  not  prevent  two  other  females  from 
entering  the  lifts.  They  feemed  to  be  girls  of  fpirit,  and 
would  certainly  have  given  each  other  a good  drubbing, 
if  two  old  women  had  not  interpofed  to  part  them.  All 
thefe  combats  were  exhibited  in  the  midft  of,  at  leaft,  three 
thoufand  people ; and  were  condudf ed  with  the  greateft 
good  humour  on  all  fides  ; though  fome  of  the  champions, 
women  as  well  as  men,  received  blows,  which,  doubtlefs, 
they  muft  have  felt  for  fome  time  after. 

As  foon  as  thefe  diverfions  were  ended,  the  Chief  told 
me,  that  the  heaps  of  proviftons,  on  our  right-hand,  were 
a prefent  to  Omai ; and  that  thofe,  on  our  left-hand,  being 
about  two-thirds  of  the  whole  quantity,  were  given  to  me. 
He  added,  that  I might  take  them  on  board  whenever  it 
was  convenient ; but  that  there  would  be  no  occafton  to 
fet  any  of  our  people  as  guards  over  them,  as  I might  be 
aftiired,  that  not  a lingle  cocoa-nut  would  be  taken  away 
by  the  natives.  So  it  proved ; for  I left  every  thing  be- 
hind, and  returned  to  the  fliip  to  dinner,  carrying  the 

Chief 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


247 


Chief  with  me ; and  when  the  provifions  were  removed  on  1777. 
board,  in  the  afternoon,  not  a Angle  article  was  miffing.  , . 

There  was  as  much  as  loaded  four  boats ; and  I could  not 
but  be  ftruck  with  the  munificence  of  Feenou;  for  this 
prefent  far  exceeded  any  I had  ever  received  from  any  of 
the  Sovereigns  of  the  various  illands  I had  vifited  in  the 
Pacific  Ocean.  I loft  no  time  in  convincing  my  friend, 
that  I was  not  infenfible  of  his  liberality ; for,  before  he 
quitted  my  fliip,  I beftowed  upon  him  fuch  of  our  com- 
modities, as,  I guelTed,  were  moft  valuable  in  his  eftima- 
tion.  And  the  return  I made  was  fo  much  to  his  fatisfac- 
tion,  that,  as  foon  as  he  got  on  fliore,  he  left  me  ftill  in- 
debted to  him,  by  fending  me  a freffi  prefent,  confifting  of 
two  large  hogs,  a confiderable  quantity  of  cloth,  and  fome 
yams. 

Feenou  had  exprelfed  a defire  to  fee  the  marines  go 
through  their  military  exercife.  As  I w^as  defirous  to  gratify 
his  curiofity,  I ordered  them  all  alliore,  from  both  fliips,  in 
the  morning  of  the  20th.  After  they  had  performed  various  Tuefday  20. 
evolutions,  and  fired  feveral  vollies,  with  which  the  nume- 
rous body  of  fpedfators  feemed  well  pleafed,  the  Chief  en- 
tert'ained  us,  in  his  turn,  with  an  exhibition,  which,  as  was 
acknowledged  by  us  all,  was  performed  with  a dexterity 
and  exa6lnefs,  far  furpaffing  the  fpecimen  we  had  given  of 
our  military  manoeuvres.  It  was  a kind  of  a dance,  fo  en- 
tirely different  from  any  thing  I had  ever  feen,  that,  1 fear, 

I can  give  no  defcription  that  will  convey  any  tolerable  idea 
of  it  to  my  readers.  It  was  performed  by  men ; and  one 
hundred  and  five  perfons  bore  their  parts  in  it.  Each  of 
them  had  in  his  hand  an  inftrument  neatly  made,  fiiaped 
fome  what  like  a paddle,  of  two  feet  and  a half  in  length, 
with  a fmall  handle,  and  a thin  blade ; fo  that  they  were 

very 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  very  light.  With  thefe  inftruments  they  made  many  and 
. . various  flouridies,  each  of  which  was  accompanied  with  a 

different  attitude  of  the  body,  or  a different  movement.  At 
firft,  the  performers  ranged  themfelves  in  three  lines ; and, 
by  various  evolutions,  each  man  changed  his  ftation  in  fuch 
a manner,  that  thofe  who  had  been  in  the  rear,  came  into 
the  front.  Nor  did  they  remain  long  in  the  fame  pofition ; 
but  thefe  changes  were  made  by  pretty  quick  tranfitions. 
At  one  time  they  extended  themfelves  in  one  line ; they, 
then,  formed  into  a femicircle ; and,  laftly,  into  two  fquare 
columns.  While  this  lafl  movement  was  executing,  one  of 
them  advanced,  and  performed  an  antic  dance  before  me ; 
with  which  the  whole  ended. 

The  mufical  inflruments  confifled  of  two  drums,  or 
rather  two  hollow  logs  of  wood,  from  which  fome  varied 
notes  were  produced,  by  beating  on  them  with  two  flicks. 
It  did  not,  however,  appear  to  me,  that  the  dancers  w^ere 
much  afhfled  or  diredled  by  thefe  founds,  but  by  a chorus 
of  vocal  mufic,  in  which  all  the  performers  joined  at  the 
fame  time.  Their  fong  was  not  deflitute  of  pleafing  me- 
lody ; and  all  their  correfponding  motions  were  executed 
w'ith  fo  much  fkill,  that  the  numerous  body  of  dancers 
feemed  to  a6l,  as  if  they  were  one  great  machine.  It 
was  the  opinion  of  every  one  of  us,  that  fuch  a perform- 
ance would  have  met  with  univerfal  applaufe  on  a Eu- 
ropean theatre  ; and  it  fo  far  exceeded  any  attempt  we  had 
made  to  entertain  them,  that  they  feemed  to  pique  them- 
felves upon  the  fuperiority  they  had  over  us.  As  to  our 
mufical  inflruments,  they  held  none  of  them  in  the  leafl 
efleem,  except  the  drum  ; and  even  that  they  did  not 
think  equal  to  their  own.  Our  French  horns,  in  particu- 
lar, feemed  to  be  held  in  great  contempt ; for  neither  here, 

nor 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


249 


nor  at  any  other  of  the  iflands,  would  they  pay  the  fmalleft 
attention  to  them. 

In  order  to  give  them  a more  favourable  opinion  of  Eng- 
lifli  amufements,  and  to  leave  their  minds  fully  imprelfed 
with  the  deepeft  fenfe  of  our  fuperior  attainments,  I directed 
fome  fireworks  to  be  got  ready;  and,  after  it  was  dark, 
played  them  off  in  the  prefence  of  Feenou,  the  other 
Chiefs,  and  a vaft  concourfe  of  their  people.  Some  of  the 
preparations  we  found  damaged ; but  others  of  them  were 
in  excellent  order,  and  fucceeded  fo  perfectly,  as  to  anfwer 
the  end  I had  in  view.  Our  water  and  fky-rockets,  in  par- 
ticular, pleafed  and  aftoniflied  them  beyond  all  conception ; 
and  the  fcale  was  now  turned  in  our  favour. 

This,  however,  feemed  only  to  furnifh  them  with  an 
additional  motive  to  proceed  to  frefli  exertions  of  their  very 
lingular  dexterity  ; and  our  fireworks  were  no  fooner  ended, 
than  a fucceflion  of  dances,  which  Feenou  had  got  ready 
for  our  entertainment,  began.  As  a prelude  to  them,  a 
band  of  mulic,  or  chorus  of  eighteen  men,  feated  them- 
felves  before  us,  in  the  centre  of  the  circle,  compofed  by 
the  numerous  fpecStators,  the  area  of  which  was  to  be  the 
fcene  of  the  exhibitions.  Four  or  five  of  this  band,  had 
pieces  of  large  bamboo,  from  three  to  five  or  fix  feet  long, 
each  managed  by  one  man,  who  held  it  nearly  in  a vertical 
pofition,  the  upper  end  open,  but  the  other  end  clofed  by 
one  of  the  joints.  With  this  clofe  end,  the  performers  kept 
conftantly  ftriking  the  ground,  though  flowly,  thus  pro- 
ducing different  notes,  according  to  the  different  lengths  of 
the  inftruments,  but  all  of  them  of  the  hollow'  or  bafe  fort ; 
to  counteracfl  w'hich,  a perfon  kept  ftriking  quickly,  and 

* Mr.  Anderfon’s  account  of  the  night  dances  being  much  fuller  than  Captain  Cook’s, 
the  reader  will  not  be  difpleafed  that  it  has  been  adopted. 

VoL.  I.  K k 


with 


250 


A VOYAGE  TO 


with  two  flicks,  a piece  of  the  fame  fuhflance,  fplit,  and 
laid  along  the  ground,  and,  by  that  means,  furnifhing  a 
tone  as  acute,  as  thofe  produced  by  the  others  were  grave. 
The  relf  of  the  band,  as  well  as  thofe  who  performed  upon 
the  bamboos,  fung  a flow  and  foft  air,  which  fo  tempered 
the  harfher  notes  of  the  above  inflruments,  that  no  bye- 
flander,  however  accuflomed  to  hear  the  mofl  perfect  and 
varied  modulation  of  fweet  founds,  could  avoid  confelT- 
ing  the  vafl  power,  and  pleafing  effedl,  of  this  fimple 
harmony. 

The  concert  having  continued  about  a quarter  of  an 
hour,  twenty  women  entered  the  circle.  Mofl  of  them  had, 
upon  their  heads,  garlands  of  the  crimfon  flowers  of  the 
China  rofe,  or  others ; and  many  of  them  had  ornamented 
their  perfons  with  leaves  of  trees,  cut  with  a great  deal  of 
nicety  about  the  edges.  They  made  a circle  round  the 
chorus,  turning  their  faces  toward  it,  and  began  by  finging 
a foft  air,  to  which  refponfes  were  made  by  the  chorus  in 
the  fame  tone ; and  thefe  were  repeated  alternately.  All 
this  while,  the  women  accompanied  their  fong  with  feveral 
very  graceful  motions  of  their  hands  toward  their  faces, 
and  in  other  directions  at  the  fame  time,  making  conflantly 
a ftep  forward,  and  then  back  again,  with  one  foot,  while 
the  other  was  fixed.  They  then  turned  their  faces  to  the 
aflembly,  fung  fome  time,  and  retreated  flowly  in  a body,  to 
that  part  of  the  circle  which  was  oppofite  the  hut  where  the 
principal  fpeClators  fat.  After  this,  one  of  them  advanced 
from  each  fide,  meeting  and  paffing  each  other  in  the  front, 
and  continuing  their  progrefs  round,  till  they  came  to  the 
refl.  On  which,  two  advanced  from  each  fide,  two  of  whom 
alfo  pafled  each  other,  and  returned  as  the  former  ; but 
the  other  two  remained,  and  to  thefe  came  one,  from  each 

fide. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


^51 


fide,  by  intervals,  tiU  the  whole  number  had  again  formed 
a circle  about  the  chorus. 

Their  manner  of  dancing  was  now  changed  to  a quicker 
meafure,  in  which  they  made  a kind  of  half  turn  by  leap- 
ing, and  clapped  their  hands,  and  fnapped  their  fingers,  re- 
peating fome  words  in  conjun6lion  with  the  chorus.  To- 
ward the  end,  as  the  quicknefs  of  the  mufic  increafed, 
their  geftures  and  attitudes  were  varied  with  wonderful 
vigour  and  dexterity ; and  fome  of  their  motions,  perhaps, 
would,  with  us,  be  reckoned  rather  indecent.  Though  this 
part  of  the  performance,  mofi:  probably,  was  not  meant  to 
convey  any  wanton  ideas,  but  merely  to  difplay  the  afto- 
nilliing  variety  of  their  movements. 

To  this  grand  female  ballet,  fucceeded  one  performed  by 
fifteen  men.  Some  of  them  were  old;  but  their  age  feemed 
to  have  abated  little  of  their  agility  or  ardour  for  the  dance. 
They  were  difpofed  in  a fort  of  circle,  divided  at  the  front, 
with  their  faces  not  turned  out  toward  the  aflembly,  nor 
inward  to  the  chorus  ; but  one  half  of  their  circle  faced  for- 
ward as  they  had  advanced,  and  the  other  half  in  a con- 
trary direcSlion.  They,  fometimes,  fung  flowly,  in  concert 
with  the  chorus ; and,  while  thus  employed,  they  alfo  made 
feveral  very  fine  motions  with  their  hands,  but  different 
from  thofe  made  by  the  women,  at  the  fame  time  inclining 
the  body  to  either  fide  alternately,  by  railing  one  leg,  which 
was  flretched  outward,  and  refting  on  the  other;  the  arm  of 
the  fame  fide  being  alfo  ftretched  fully  upward.  At  other 
limes,  they  recited  fentences  in  a mufical  tone,  which  were 
anfwered  by  the  chorus ; and,  at  intervals,  increafed  the 
meafure  of  the  dance,  by  clapping  the  hands,  and  quicken- 
ing the  motions  of  the  feet,  which,  however,  were  never 
varied.  At  the  end,  the  rapidity  of  the  mufic,  and  of  the 

K k 2 * dancing, 


1777- 

May. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


dancing,  increafed  fo  much,  that  it  was  fcarcely  poffible  to 
diftinguifli  the  different  movements ; though  one  might  fup- 
pofe  the  adfiors  were  now  almoft  tired,  as  their  performance 
had  lafted  near  half  an  hour. 

After  a confiderable  interval,  another  adf,  as  we  may  call 
it,  began.  Twelve  men  now  advanced,  who  placed  them- 
felves  in  double  rows  fronting  each  other,  but  on  oppolite 
lides  of  the  circle ; and,  on  one  fide,  a man  was  flationed, 
who,  as  if  he  had  been  a prompter,  repeated  feveral  fen- 
tences,  to  which  the  twelve  new  performers,  and  the  chorus, 
replied.  They  then  fung  flowly ; and  afterward  danced 
and  fung  more  quickly,  for  about  a quarter  of  an  hour,  after 
the  manner  of  the  dancers  whom  they  had  fucceeded. 

Soon  after  they  had  finifhed,  nine  women  exhibited  them- 
felves,  and  fat  down  fronting  the  hut  where  the  Chief  was, 
A man  then  rofe,  and  flruck  the  firft  of  thefe  women  on  the 
hack,  with  both  fifls  joined.  He  proceeded,  in  the  fame 
manner,  to  the  fecond  and  third ; but  when  he  came  to  the 
fourth,  whether  from  accident  or  defign  I cannot  tell,  in- 
ftead  of  the  back,  he  flruck  her  on  the  breafl.  Upon  this  a 
perfon  rofe  inflantly  from  the  crowd,  who  brought  him  to 
the  ground  with  a blow  on  the  head ; and  he  was  carried 
off  without  the  leaft  noife  or  diforder.  But  this  did  not  fave 
the  other  five  women  from  fo  odd  a difcipline,  or  perhaps 
neceffary  ceremony ; for  a perfon  fucceeded  him,  who 
treated  them  in  the  fame  manner.  Their  difgrace  did  not 
end  here ; for  when  they  danced,  they  had  the  mortification 
to  find  their  performance  twice  difapproved  of,  and  were 
obliged  to  repeat  it.  This  dance  did  not  differ  much  from 
that  of  the  firfl  women,  except  in  this  one  circumflance, 
that  the  prefent  fet,  fometimes  raifed  the  body  upon  one  leg, 
by  a fort  of  double  motion,  and  then  upon  the  other  alter- 
nately. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


253 


nately,  in  which  attitude  they  kept  fnapping  their  fingers  ; 
and,  at  the  end,  they  repeated,  with  great  agility,  the  brifk 
movements,  in  which  the  former  group  of  female  dancers 
had  fhewn  themfelves  fo  expert. 

In  a little  time,  a perfon  entered  unexpectedly,  and  faid 
fomething  in  a ludicrous  way,  about  the  fireworks  that  had 
been  exhibited,  which  extorted  a burft  of  laughter  from  the 
multitude.  After  this,  we  had  a dance  compofed  of  the 
men  who  attended,  or  had  followed,  Feenou.  They  formed 
a double  circle  (i.  e.  one  within  another)  of  twenty-four 
each,  round  the  chorus,  and  began  a gentle  foothing  fong, 
with  correfponding  motions  of  the  hands  and  head.  This 
lafled  a confiderable  time,  and  then  changed  to  a much 
quicker  meafure,  during  which  they  repeated  fentences, 
either  in  conjunction  with  the  chorus,  or  in  anfwer  to  fome 
fpoken  by  that  band.  They  then  retreated  to  the  back  part 
of  the  circle,  as  the  women  had  done,  and  again  advanced, 
on  each  fide,  in  a triple  row,  till  they  formed  a femicircle, 
which  was  done  very  flowly,  by  inclining  the  body  on  one 
leg,  and  advancing  the  other  a little  way,  as  they  put  it 
down.  They  accompanied  this,  with  fuch  a foft  air  as  they 
had  fung  at  the  beginning ; but  foon  changed  it  to  repeat 
fentences  in  a hardier  tone,  at  the  fame  time  quickening  the 
dance  very  much,  till  they  finifhed  with  a general  fhout  and 
clap  of  the  hands.  The  fame  was  repeated  feveral  times  ; 
but,  at  laft,  they  formed  a double  circle,  as  at  the  beginning, 
danced,  and  repeated  very  quickly,  and  finally  clofed  with 
feveral  very  dexterous  tranfpofitions  of  the  two  circles. 

The  entertainments  of  this  memorable  night  concluded 
with  a dance,  in  which  the  principal  people  prefent  ex- 
hibited. It  refembled  the  immediately  preceding  one,  in 
fome  refpedts,  having  the  fame  number  of  performers,  who 

began 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  began  nearly  in  the  fame  way;  but  their  ending,  at  each 
^ - i interval,  was  different : for  they  increafed  their  motions  to 

a prodigious  quicknefs,  fliaking  their  heads  from  flioulder 
to  flioulder,  with  fuch  force,  that  a fpecStator,  unaccuftomed 
to  the  fight,  would  fuppofe,  that  they  ran  a rifk  of  diflo- 
cating  their  necks.  This  was  attended  with  a fmart  clap- 
ping of  the  hands,  and  a kind  of  favage  holla ! or  fliriek, 
not  unlike  what  is  fometimes  pradtifed  in  the  comic  dances 
on  our  European  theatres.  They  formed  the  triple  femi- 
circle,  as  the  preceding  dancers  had  done ; and  a perfon, 
who  advanced  at  the  head  on  one  fide  of  the  femicircle, 
began  by  repeating  fomething  in  a truly  mufical  recitative, 
which  was  delivered  with  an  air  fo  graceful,  as  might  put 
to  the  blufli  our  moft  applauded  performers.  He  was  an- 
fwered  in  the  fame  manner,  by  the  perfon  at  the  head  of 
the  oppofite  party.  This  being  repeated  feveral  times,  the 
whole  body,  on  one  fide,  joined  in  the  refponfes  to  the 
whole  correfponding  body  on  the  oppofite  fide,  as  the  femi- 
circle advanced  to  the  front ; and  they  finifhed,  by  finging 
and  dancing  as  they  had  begun. 

Thefe  two  laft  dances  were  performed  with  fo  much 
fpirit,  and  fo  great  exadfnefs,  that  they  met  with  univerfal 
approbation.  The  native  fpe6lators,  who,  no  doubt,  were 
perfect  judges  whether  the  feveral  performances  were  pro- 
perly executed,  could  not  withhold  their  applaufes  at  fome 
particular  parts ; and  even  a Ifranger,  who  never  faw  the 
diverfion  before,  felt  fimilar  fatisfa6tion,  at  the  fame  inftant. 
For  though,  through  the  whole,  the  moft  ftricft  concert  was 
obferved,  fome  of  the  geftures  were  fo  expreflive,  that  it 
might  be  faid,  they  fpoke  the  language  that  accompanied 
them ; if  we  allow  that  there  is  any  connedlion  between 
motion  and  found.  At  the  fame  time,  it  fliould  be  obferved, 

that 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


255 


that  though  the  mulic  of  the  chorus,  and  that  of  the 
dancers,  correfponded,  conftant  pravStice  in  thefe  favourite  ^ 
amufements  of  our  friends,  feems  to  have  a great  fliare  in 
effecting  the  exadf  time  they  keep  in  their  performances. 
For  we  obferved,  that  if  any  of  them  happened  accidentally 
to  be  interrupted,  they  never  found  the  fmalleft  difficulty 
in  recovering  the  proper  place  of  the  dance  or  fong.  And 
their  perfect  difcipline  was  in  no  inftance  more  remark- 
able, than  in  the  fudden  tranlitions  they  fo  dexteroully 
made  from  the  ruder  exertions,  and  harlh  founds,  to  the 
foftell  airs,  and  gentleft  movements 

The  place  where  the  dances  were  performed,  was  an 
open  fpace  amongft  the  trees,  juft  by  the  fea,  with  lights,  at 
fmall  intervals,  placed  round  the  inftde  of  the  circle.  The 
concourfe  of  people  was  pretty  large,  though  not  equal  to 
the  number  affembled  in  the  forenoon,  when  the  marines 
exercifed.  At  that  time,  fome  of  our  gentlemen  guefled 
there  might  be  prefent  about  five  thoufand  perfons ; others 
thought  there  were  more  ; but  they  who  reckoned  that 
there  were  fewer,  probably,  came  nearer  to  the  truth. 

* In  a former  note,  at  p.  188.  it  was  obferved,  that  the  fongs  and  dances  of  the  Caro- 
line Iflanders,  in  the  North  Pacific,  bear  a great  refemblance  to  thofe  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Wateeoo.  The  remark  may  be  now  extended  to  thofe  of  the  Friendly  Iflanders,  de- 
fcribed  at  large  in  this  chapter.  That  the  reader  may  judge  for  himfelf,  I have  feledled 
the  following  particulars  from  Father  Cantova’s  account.  “ Pendant  la  nuit,  au  clair 
“ de  la  lune,  ils  s’aflTemblent,  de  temps  en  temps,  pour  chanter  & danfer  devant  la  maifon 
“ de  leur  Tamok.  Leurs  danfes  fe  font  au  fon  de  la  voix,  car  ils  n’ont  point  d’inftru- 
“ ment  de  mufique.  La  beaute  de  la  danfe,  confifte  dans  I’exadfe  uniformite  des  mouve- 
“ mens  du  corps.  Les  hommes,  fepares  des  femmes,  fe  poftent  vis-a-vis  les  uns  des 
“ autres ; apres  quoi,  ils  remuent  la  tete,  les  bras,  les  mains,  les  pieds,  en  cadence  < — 

“ Leur  tete  eft  couverte  de  plumes,  ou  de  fleurs ; — et  I’on  voit,  attachees  a leurs  oreilles, 

“ des  feuilles  de  palmier  tiflTues  avec  aflez  d’art. — Les  femmes,  de  leur  cote, — fe  regardant 
“ les  unes  les  autres,  commencent  un  chant  pathetique  & langoureux,  accompagnant  le 
“ fon  de  leur  voix  du  mouvement  cadence  de  la  tete  & des  bras.”  Leitres  Ed'ifiantes  isf 
Curieufesy  Tom.  xv.  p.  314,  315. 


CHAP. 


356 


A VOYAGE  TO 


CHAP.  VI. 


1777- 

May. 


Defcription  of  Lefooga. — Its  cultivated  State, — Its  'Extent. — 
TranfaSiions  there, — A Fej^taleOculiJl, — Singular  Expedients 
for  /having  off  the  Hair. — Hhe  Ships  change  their  Station. — 
A remarkable  Mount  and  Stone. — Defcription  ofHoolaiva. — 
Account  of  Poulaho^  King  of  the  Friendly  IJlands. — Refpedi- 
ful  Manner  in  which  he  is  treated  by  his  People. — Depar-  . 
ture  from  the  Hapaee  Ijlands. —Some  Account  of  Kotoo. — 
Return  of  the  Ships  to  Annamooka. — Poulaho  and  Feenou 
meet. — Arrival  at  Tongataboo. 


URIOSITY,  on  both  fides,  being  now  fnfficiently 


gratified,  by  the  exhibition  of  the  various  entertain- 
ments I have  defcribed,  I began  to  have  time  to  look  about 
me.  Accordingly,  next  day,  I took  a walk  into  the  ifland  of 
Lefooga,  of  which  I was  defirous  to  obtain  fome  know- 
ledge. I found  it  to  be,  in  fevefal  refpedts,  fuperior  to  An- 
namooka. The  plantations  were  both  more  numerous,  and 
more  extenfive.  In  many  places,  indeed,  toward  the  fea,  ef- 
pecially  on  the  Eafl;  fide,  the  country  is  ftill  wafte ; owing, 
perhaps,  to  the  fandy  foil ; as  it  is  much  lower  than  Anna- 
mooka, and  its  furrounding  ifles.  But,  toward  the  middle 
of  the  illand,  the  foil  is  better ; and  the  marks  of  confider- 
able  population,  and  of  improved  cultivation,  were  very 
confpicuous.  For  we  met  here  with  very  large  plantations, 
inclofed  in  fuch  a manner,  that  the  fences  running  parallel 


1777- 

May. 


to 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


257 


to  each  other,  form  fine  fpacious  public  roads,  that  would  1777. 
appear  ornamental  in  countries  where  rural  conveniences 
have  been  carried  to  the  greatefi:  perfe61:ion.  We  obferved 
large  fpots  covered  with  the  paper  mulberry-trees  ; and  the 
plantations,  in  general,  were  well  flocked  with  fuch  roots 
and  fruits  as  are  the  natural  produce  of  the  ifland.  To 
thefe  I made  fome  addition,  by  fowing  the  feeds  of  Indian 
corn,  melons,  pumpkins,  and  the  like.  At  one  place  was 
a houfe,  four  or  five  times  as  large  as  thofe  of  the  com- 
mon fort,  with  a large  area  of  grafs  before  it ; and,  I take 
it  for  granted,  the  people  refort  thither  on  certain  public 
occafions.  Near  the  landing-place,  we  faw  a mount,  two 
or  three  feet  high,  covered  with  gravel ; and  on  it  ftood 
four  or  five  fmall  huts,  in  which,  the  natives  told  us, 
the  bodies  of  fome  of  their  principal  people  had  been 
interred. 

The  ifiand  is  not  above  feven  miles  long ; and,  in  fome 
places,  not  above  two  or  three  broad.  The  Eafi;  fide  of  it, 
which  is  expofed  to  the  trade-wind,  has  a reef,  running  to 
a confiderable  breadth  from  it,  on  which  the  fea  breaks 
with  great  violence.  It  is  a continuation  of  this  reef  that 
joins  Lefooga  to  Foa,  which  is  not  above  half  a mile 
difiant ; and,  at  low  water,  the  natives  can  walk  upon  this 
reef,  which  is  then  partly  dry,  from  the  one  ifland  to  the 
other.  The  fhore  itfelf  is  either  a coral  rock,  fix  or  feven 
feet  high,  or  a fandy  beach ; but  higher  than  the  Weft 
fide ; which,  in  general,  is  not  more  than  three  or  four 
feet  from  the  level  of  the  fea,  with  a fandy  beach  its  whole 
length. 

When  I returned  from  my  excurfion  into  the  country, 
and  went  on  board  to  dinner,  I found  a large  failing  canoe 
fall:  to  the  fhip’s  ftern.  In  this  canoe  was  Latooliboula, 

VoL.  I.  ' LI  whom 


258 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  whom  I had  feen  at  Tongataboo,  during  my  laft  voyage; 

, . ^md  who  was  then  fuppoled  by  us  to  be  the  King  of  that 

illand.  He  fat  in  the  canoe,  with  all  that  gravity,  by  whichj 
as  I have  mentioned  in  my  Journal  he  was  fo  remarka- 
bly diftinguiflied  at  that  time ; nor  could  I,  by  any  intrea- 
ties, prevail  upon  him  now  to  come  into  the  fliip.  Many 
of  the  illanders  were  prefent ; and  they  all  called  him 
Areekee^  which  lignifies  King.  I had  never  heard  any  one 
of  them  give  this  title  to  F eenou,  however  extenlive  his  au- 
thority over  them,  both  here,  and  at  Annamooka,  had  ap- 
peared to  be ; which  had,  all  along,  inclined  me  to  fufpedl, 
that  he  was  not  the  King ; though  his  friend  Taipa  had 
taken  pains  to  make  me  believe  he  was.  Latooliboula  re- 
mained under  the  ftern  till  the  evening,  when  he  retired  in 
his  canoe  to  one  of  the  iflands.  Feenou  was  on  board  my 
fliip  at  the  fame  time  ; but  neither  of  thefe  great  men  took 
the  lead;  notice  of  the  other. 

Thurfday  22.  Nothing  material  happened  the  next  day,  except  that 

fome  of  the  natives  hole  a tarpaulin,  and  other  things, 

/ 

* See  Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  206,  207.  The  name  of  this  extraordinary 
perfonage  is  there  faid  to  be  Kohagee  too  Fallangou ; which  cannot,  by  the  moft  flcilful 
etymologift,  be  tortured  into  the  leaft  moft  diftant  refemblance  of  Latooliboula.  It  is 
remarkable,  that  Captain  Cook  ftiould  not  take  any  notice  of  his  having  called  the  fame 
perfon  by  two  names  fo  very  different.  Perhaps  we  may  account  for  this  by  fuppofing  one 
to  be  the  name  of  the  perfon,  and  the  other  the  defcription  of  his  title  or  rank.  This 
fuppofition  feems  well  founded,  when  we  confider,  that  Latoo,  in  the  language  of  thefe 
people,  is  fometimes  ufed  to  fignify  a Great  Chief ; and  Dr.  Forfter,  in  his  Obfervatlons, 
p.  378,  379.  and  elfewhere,  fpeaks  of  the  fovereign  of  Tongataboo,  under  the  title  of 
their  Latoo.  This  very  perfon  is  called,  by  Dr.  Forfter,  p.  370.  Latoo-Nlpooroo  \ which 
furnifties  a very  ftriking  inftance  of  the  variations  of  our  people  in  writing  down  the  fame 
word  as  pronounced  by  the  natives.  However,  we  can  eafdy  trace  the  affinity  between 
Nipooroo  and  Lihoula,  as  the  changes  of  the  confonants  are  fuch  as  are  perpetually  made, 
upon  hearing  a word  pronounced,  to  which  our  ears  have  not  been  accuftomed.  Mr. 
Anderfon  here  agrees  with  Captain  Cook  in  writing  Latooliboula. 


from 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


259 


from  off  the  deck.  They  were  foon  miffed,  and  the  thieves  1777. 
piirfued ; but  a little  too  late.  I applied,  therefore,  to  . ■ 

Feenou,  who,  if  he  was  not  king,  was  at  lead;  veiled  with 
the  highell  authority  here,  to  exert  it,  in  order  to  have 
my  things  reftored.  He  referred  me  to  Earoupa ; who 
put  me  off,  from  time  to  time ; and,  at  lall,  nothing  was 
done. 

In  the  morning  of  the  23d,  as  we  were  going  to  un-  Friday  23. 
moor,  in  order  to  leave  the  ifland,  Feenou,  and  his  prime- 
minifter  Taipa,  came  along-Iide  in  a failing  canoe,  and  in- 
formed me,  that  they  were  fetting  out  for  Vavaoo,  an 
ifland,  which,  they  faid,  lies  about  two  days  fail  to  the 
Northward  of  Hapaee.  The  obje£l  of  their  voyage,  they 
would  have  me  believe,  was  to  get  for  me  an  additional 
fupply  of  hogs,  and  fome  red-feathered  caps  for  Omai,  to 
carry  to  Otaheite,  where  they  are  in  high  efteem.  Feenou 
affured  me,  that  he  fliould  be  back  in  four  or  five  days  ; 
and  delired  me  not  to  fail  till  his  return,  when,  he  pro- 
mifed,  he  would  accompany  me  to  Tongataboo.  I thought 
this  a good  opportunity  to  get  fome  knowledge  of  Vavaoo, 
and  propofed  to  him  to  go  thither  with  the  fliips.  But  he 
feemed  not  to  approve  of  the  plan  ; and,  by  way  of  divert- 
ing me  from  it,  told  me,  that  there  was  neither  harbour, 
nor  anchorage  about  it.  I,  therefore,  confented  to  wait,  in 
my  prefent  llation,  for  his  return  ; and  he  immediately 
fet  out. 

The  next  day,  our  attention  was,  for  fome  time,  taken  Saturday  24. 
up  with  a report,  induftrioully  fpread  about  by  fome  of  the 
natives,  that  a fliip,  like  ours,  had  arrived  at  Annamooka 
lince  we  left  it ; and  was  now  at  anchor  there.  The  pro- 
pagators of  the  report  were  pleafed  to  add,  that  Toobou,  the 
Chief  of  that  ifland,  was  haflening  thither  to  receive  thefe 

L 1 2 new- 


26o  a V O Y a G E T O 

1777-  new-comers  ; and  as  we  knew  that  he  had  adlually  left  ns, 

. we  were  the  more  ready  to  believe  there  might  be  fome 
foundation  for  the  flory  of  this  unexpe(5ted  arrival.  How- 
ever, to  gain  fome  farther  information,  I went  on  lliore 
with  Omai,  in  quell  of  the  man  who,  it  was  faid,  had 
brought  the  firll  account  of  this  event  from  Annamooka. 
We  found  him  at  the  houfe  of  Earoupa  ; where  Omai  put 
fuch  quellions  to  him  as  I thought  neceffary  ; and  the  an- 
fwers  he  gave,  were  fo  clear  and  fatisfa6lory,  that  I had  not 
a doubt  remaining.  But,  juft  about  this  time,  a Chief,  of 
fome  note,  whom  we  well  knew,  arrived  from  Annamooka ; 
and  declared,  that  no  fliip  was  at  that  ifland,  nor  had  been, 
fince  our  leaving  it.  The  propagator  of  the  report,  finding 
himfelf  detedled  in  a falfehood,  inftantly  withdrew,  and  we 
faw  no  more  of  him.  What  end  the  invention  of  this  tale 
could  anfwer,  was  not  eafy  to  conjedlure ; unlefs  we  fuppofe 
it  to  have  been  artfully  contrived,  to  get  us  removed  from 
the  one  illand  to  the  other. 

Sunday  25.  In  my  walk,  on  the  25th,  I happened  to  ftep  into  a houfe, 
where  a woman  was  drelfing  the  eyes  of  a young  child,  who 
feemed  blind ; the  eyes  being  much  inflamed,  and  a thin 
film  fpread  over  them.  The  inftruments  flie  ufed  were  two 
flender  wooden  probes,  with  which  flie  had  bruflied  the 
eyes  fo  as  to  make  them  bleed.  It  feems  worth  mention- 
ing, that  the  natives  of  thefe  iflands  fliould  attempt  an  ope- 
ration of  this  fort ; though  I entered  the  houfe  too  late,  to 
defcribe  exadlly  how  this  female  oculift  employed  the 
wretched  tools  Ihe  had  to  work  with. 

I was  fortunate  enough  to  fee  a different  operation  going 
on  in  the  fame  houfe,  of  which  I can  give  a tolerable  ac- 
count. I found  there  another  woman  fliaving  a child’s 
head,  with  a fliark’s  tooth,  ftuck  into  the  end  of  a piece  of 

flick. 


THEPACIFICOCEAN.  261 

Hick.  I obferved,  that  flie  firft  wet  the  hair  with  a rag  1777. 
dipped  in  water,  applying  her  inftrument  to  that  part  which  , . 

file  had  previoully  foaked.  The  operation  feemed  to  give 
no  pain  to  the  child ; although  the  hair  was  taken  off  as 
clofe  as  if  one  of  our  razors  had  been  employed.  Encou- 
raged by  what  I now  faw,  I,  foon  after,  tried  one  of  thefe 
lingular  inftruments  upon  myfelf,  and  found  it  to  be  an 
excellent  fuccedaneu7n.  However,  the  men  of  thefe  illands 
have  recourfe  to  another  contrivance  when  they  hiave  their 
beards.  The  operation  is  performed  with  two  lliells  ; one 
of  which  they  place  under  a fmall  part  of  the  beard,  and 
with  the  other,  applied  above,  they  fcrape  that  part  off.  In 
this  manner  they  are  able  to  fliave  very  clofe.  The  pro- 
cefs  is,  indeed,  rather  tedious,  but  not  painful ; and  there 
are  men  amongft  them  who  feem  to  profefs  this  trade. 

It  was  as  common,  while  we  were  here,  to  fee  our  failors 
go  afhore  to  have  their  beards  fcraped  off,  after  the  fafliion 
of  Hapaee,  as  it  was  to  fee  their  Chiefs  come  on  board  to  be 
lhaved  by  our  barbers. 

Finding  that  little  or  nothing  of  the  produce  of  the  illand 
was  now  brought  to  the  fliips,  I refolved  to  change  our 
ftation,  and  to  wait  Feenou’s  return  from  Vavaoo,  in  fome 
other  convenient  anchoring-place,  where  refrefliments 
might  ftill  be  met  with.  Accordingly,  in  the  forenoon 
of  the  26th,  we  got  under  fail,  and  flood  to  the  Southward  Monday  26. 
along  the  reef  of  the  illand ; having  fourteen  and  thirteen 
fathoms  water,  with  a fandy  bottom.  However,  we  met 
with  fever al  detached  flioals.  Some  of  them  were  difco- 
vered  by  breakers  ; fome,  by  the  water  upon  them  appearing 
difcoloured;  and  others,  by  the  lead.  At  half  paft  two  in 
the  afternoon,  having  already  palTed  feveral  of  thefe  llioals, 
and  feeing  more  of  them  before  us,  I hauled  into  a bay, 

that 


262 


A VOYAGE  TO 


that  lies  between  the  South  end  of  Lefooga,  and  the  North 
end  of  Hoolaiva,  and  there  anchored  in  feventeen  fathoms 
water ; the  bottom  a coral-fand ; the  point  of  Lefooga  bear- 
ing South  Eaft  by  Ealf,  a mile  and  a half  diftant.  The  Uif- 
covery  did  not  get  to  an  anchor  till  funfet.  She  had  touched 
upon  one  of  the  flioals  ; but  backed  off  again,  without  re- 
ceiving any  damage. 

As  foon  as  we  had  anchored,  I fent  Mr.  Bligh  to  found 
the  bay  where  we  were  now  ftationed ; and  myfelf,  accom- 
panied by  Mr.  Gore,  landed  on  the  Southern  part  of  Le- 
fooga, to  examine  the  country,  and  to  look  for  fredi  water. 
Not  that  we  now  wanted  a fupply  of  this  article,  having 
filled  all  the  calks  at  our  late  ftation ; but  I had  been  told, 
that  this  part  of  the  ifiand  could  afford  us  fome,  preferable 
to  any  we  had  got  at  the  former  watering-place.  This  will 
not  be  the  only  time  I fliall  have  occafion  to  remark,  that 
thefe  people  do  not  know  what  good  water  is.  We  were 
condudted  to  two  wells ; but  the  water  in  both  of  them 
proved  to  be  execrable ; and  the  natives,  our  guides,  afiured 
us  that  they  had  none  better. 

Near  the  South  end  of  the  ifiand,  and  on  the  Weft:  fide, 
we  met  with  an  artificial  mount.  From  the  fize  of  fome 
trees  that  were  growing  upon  it,  and  from  other  appear- 
ances, I guefied  that  it  had  been  raifed  in  remote  times.  I 
judged  it  to  be  about  forty  feet  high;  and  the  diameter 
of  its  fummit  meafured  fifty  feet.  At  the  bottom  of  this 
mount,  flood  a ftone,  which  muft  have  been  hewn  out  of 
coral  rock.  It  was  four  feet  broad,  two  and  a half  thick, 
and  fourteen  high ; and  we  were  told  by  the  natives  pre- 
fent,  that  not  above  half  its  length  appeared  above  ground. 
They  called  it  I’angata  Arekee"^^ ; and  faid,  that  it  had  been 

* Tangata^  in  their  language,  is  man ; Arekce^  king. 

fet 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


263 


fet  \ip,  and  the  mount  raifed,  by  fome  of  their  forefathers,  1777. 
in  memory  of  one  of  their  kings  ; but  how  long  fince,  they  , 
could  not  tell. 

Night  coming  on,  Mr.  Gore  and  I returned  on  board; 
and,  at  the  fame  time,  Mr.  Bligh  got  back  from  founding 
the  bay,  in  which  he  found  from  fourteen  to  twenty  fa- 
thoms water ; the  bottom,  for  the  mod:  part,  fand,  but  not 
without  fome  coral  rocks.  The  place  where  we  now  an- 
chored is  much  better  flieltered  than  that  which  we  had 
lately  come  from ; but  between  the  two  is  another  anchor- 
ing ftation,  much  better  than  either.  Lefooga  and  Hoolaiva 
are  divided  from  each  other  by  a reef  of  coral  rocks,  which 
is  dry  at  low  water ; fo  that  one  may  walk,  at  that  time, 
from  the  one  to  the  other,  without  wetting  a foot.  Some 
of  our  Gentlemen,  who  landed  in  the  latter  ifland,  did  not 
find  the  lead:  mark  of  cultivation,  or  habitation,  upon  it ; 
except  a fingle  hut,  the  relidence  of  a man  employed  to 
catch  fifli  and  turtle.  It  is  rather  extraordinary,  that  it 
diould  be  in  this  deferted  ftate,  communicating  fo  immedi- 
ately with  Lefooga,  which  is  fo  perfe6lly  cultivated  ; for, 
though  the  foil  is  quite  fandy,  all  the  trees  and  plants  found, 
in  a natural  ftate,  on  the  neighbouring  illands,  are  pro- 
duced here  with  the  greated:  vigour.  The  Ead:  lide  of  it 
has  a reef  like  Lefooga;  and  the  Wed:  fide  has  a bending, 
at  the  North  part,  where  there  feems  to  be  good  anchorage. 
Uninhabited  as  Hoolaiva  is,  an  artificial  mount,  like  that 
at  the  adjoining  illand,  has  been- raifed  upon  it,  as  high  as 
fome  of  the  furrounding  trees. 

At  day-break,  next  morning,  I made  the  fignal  to  weigh ; Tuefday  27. 
and,  as  I intended  to  attempt  a padage  to  Annamooka, 
in  my  way  to  Tongataboo,  by  the  South  Wed:,  amongd: 
the  intervening  idands,  I fent  the  Mader  in  a boat  to 

found 


264 


A VOYAGE  T O 


1777,  I'oiind  before  the  fliips.  But  before  we  w^ould  get  under 
y . fail,  the  wind  became  unfettled ; which  made  it  unfafe 
to  attempt  a paffage  this  way,  till  we  w'ere  better  ac- 
quainted with  it.  I,  therefore,  lay  faft,  and  made  the  fignal 
for  the  Mafter  to  return ; and  afterw^ard  fent  him  and  the 
Mafter  of  the  Difcovery,  each  in  a boat,  with  inftru(5fions 
to  examine  the  channels,  as  far  as  they  could,  allowing 
themfelves  time  to  get  back  to  the  Blips  before  the  clofe  of 
the  day. 

About  noon,  a large  failing  canoe  came  under  our  Bern, 
in  which  was  a perfon  named  Futtafaihe,  or  Poulaho,  or 
both ; who,  as  the  natives  then  on  board  told  us,  w as  King 
of  Tongataboo,  and  of  all  the  neighbouring  iflands  that  we 
had  feen  or  heard  of.  It  was  a matter  of  furprize  to  me,  to 
have  a Branger  introduced  under  this  character,  which  I 
had  fo  much  reafon  to  believe  really  belonged  to  another. 
But  they  perBBed  in  their  account  of  the  fupreme  dig- 
nity of  this  new  viBter ; and  now,  for  the  BrB  time,  they 
ow'ned  to  me,  that  Feenou  was  not  the  King,  but  only  a 
fubordinate  Chief,  though  of  great  power ; as  he  was  often 
fent  from  Tongataboo  to  the  other  illands,  on  warlike  expe- 
ditions, or  to  decide  difierences.  It  being  my  intereB,  as 
well  as  my  inclination,  to  pay  court  to  all  the  great  men, 
without  making  inquiry  into  the  validity  of  their  afllimed 
titles,  I invited  Poulaho  on  board ; as  I underBood  he  was 
very  defirous  to  come.  He  could  not  be  an  unwelcome 
gueB;  for  he  brought  with  him,  as  a prefent  to  me,  tw'o 
good  fat  hogs ; though  not  fo  fat  as  himfelf.  If  weight  of 
body  could  give  weight  in  rank  or  power,  he  was  certainly 
the  moB  eminent  man  in  that  refpedt,  we  had  feen ; for, 
though  not  very  tall,  he  was  very  unwieldy,  and  almoB 
fliapelefs  with  corpulence.  He  feemed  to  be  about  forty 

years 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


265 


years  of  age,  had  ftraight  hair,  and  his  features  differed  a 1777. 
good  deal  from  thofe  of  the  bulk  of  his  people.  I found 
him  to  be  a fedate,  fenfible  man.  He  viewed  the  lliip,  and 
the  feveral  new  objects,  with  uncommon  attention ; and 
afked  many  pertinent  queftions  ; one  of  which  was.  What 
could  induce  us  to  vifit  thefe  illands  ? After  he  had  fatisfied 
his  curiolity  in  looking  at  the  cattle,  and  other  novelties 
which  he  met  with  upon  deck,  I defired  him  to  walk  down 
into  the  cabin.  To  this  fome  of  his  attendants  obje61;ed, 
faying,  that,  if  he  were  to  accept  of  that  invitation,  it  muft 
happen,  that  people  would  walk  over  his  head ; which  could 
not  be  permitted.  I direcSled  my  interpreter  Omai,  to  tell 
them,  that  I would  obviate  their  obje6lion,  by  giving  orders, 
that  no  one  fliould  prefume  to  walk  upon  that  part  of  the 
deck  which  was  over  the  cabin.  Whether  this  expedient 
would  have  fatisfied  them,  was  far  from  appearing ; but  the 
Chief  himfelf,  lefs  fcrupulous,  in  this  refpedf,  than  his  at- 
tendants, waved  all  ceremony,  and  walked  down  without 
any  flipulation.  He  now  appeared  to  be  as  folicitous  him- 
felf, as  his  people  were,  to  convince  us  that  he  was  king, 
and  not  Feenou,  who  had  paffed  with  us  as  fuch.  For  he 
foon  perceived,  that  we  had  fome  doubts  about  it ; which 
doubts  Omai  was  not  very  defirous  of  removing.  The 
clofefl  connection  had  been  formed  between  him  and  Fee- 
nou, in  teftimony  of  which,  they  had  exchanged  names  ; 
and,  therefore,  he  was  not  a little  chagrined,  that  another 
perfon  now  put  in  his  claim  to  the  honours  which  his 
friend  had  hitherto  enjoyed. 

Poulaho  fat  down  with  us  to  dinner ; but  he  eat  little,  and 
drank  lefs.  When  we  rofe  from  the  table,  he  defired  me  to 
accompany  him  afhore.  Omai  was  afked  to  be  of  the  party ; 
but  he  was  too  faithfully  attached  to  Feenou,  to  fhew  any 

VoL.  I.  Mm  attention 


2.66 


A VOYAGE  TO 


Av 


attention  to  his  competitor;  and,  therefore,  excnfed  him- 
felf.  I attended  the  Chief  in  my  own  boat,  having  firft 
made  prefents  to  him,  of  fuch  articles  as,  I could  obferve, 
he  valued  much,  and  were  even  beyond  his  expectation  to 
receive.  I Avas  not  difappointed  in  my  view  of  thus  fecur- 
ing  his  friendfliip ; for  the  moment  the  boat  reached  the 
beach,  and,  before  he  quitted  her,  he  ordered  two  more 
hogs  to  be  brought,  and  delivered  to  my  people  to  be  con- 
veyed on  board.  He  was  then  carried  out  of  the  boat,  by 
fome  of  his  own  people,  upon  a board  refembling  a hand- 
barrow,  and  went  and  feated  himfelf  in  a fmall  houfe  near 
the  fliore ; which  feemed  to  have  been  eredfed  there  for  his 
accommodation.  He  placed  me  at  his  hde ; and  his  attend- 
ants, who  Avere  not  numerous,  feated  themfelves  in  a femi- 
circle  before  us,  on  the  outlide  of  the  houfe.  Behind  the 
Chief,  or  rather  on  one  fide,  fat  an  old  Avoman,  Avith  a fort 
of  fan  in  her  hand,  whofe  office  it  Avas  to  prevent  his  being 
peftered  with  the  flies. 

The  feveral  articles  which  his  people  had  got,  by  trading 
on  board  the  fhips,  Avere  noAV  difplayed  before  him.  He 
looked  over  them  all,  Avith  attention,  inquired  Avhat  they 
had  given  in  exchange,  and  feemed  pleafed  with  the  bar- 
gains they  had  made.  At  length,  he  ordered  every  thing  to 
be  reftored  to  the  refpecflive  oAvners,  except  a glafs  boAvl, 
with  Avhich  he  was  fo  much  pleafed,  that  he  referved  it  for 
himfelf.  The  perfons  who  brought  thefe  things  to  him, 
flrft  fquatted  themfelves  doAvn  before  him,  then  they  depo- 
fited  their  feveral  purchafes,  and  immediately  rofe  up  and 
retired.  The  fame  refpe6lful  ceremony  Avas  obferved  in 
taking  them  aAvay  ; and  not  one  of  them  prefumed  to  fpeak 
to  him  Handing.  I flayed  till  feveral  of  his  attendants  left 
liim,  firfl  paying  him  obeifance,  by  boAving  the  head  down 

to 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


267 


to  the  foie  of  his  foot,  and  touching  or  tapping  the  fame,  1777. 
with  the  upper  and  under  fide  of  the  fingers  of  both  hands.  . , 

Others,  who  were  not  in  the  circle,  came,  as  it  feemed,  on 
purpofe,  and  paid  him  this  mark  of  refpe61:,  and  then  re- 
tired, without  fpeaking  a word.  I was  quite  charmed  with 
the  decorum  that  was  obferved.  I had,  no  where,  feen  the 
like,  not  even  amongft  more  civilized  nations. 

I found  the  mafter  returned  from  his  expedition,  when  I 
got  on  board.  He  informed  me,  that,  as  far  as  he  had  pro- 
ceeded, there  was  anchorage,  and  a paffage  for  the  fliips ; 
but  that,  toward  the  South  and  South  Eaft,  he  faw  a num- 
ber of  fmall  illes,  llioals,  and  breakers.  Judging,  from  this 
report,  that  my  attempting  a paffage  that  way  would  be  at- 
tended with  fome  rifk,  I now  dropped  all  thoughts  of  it ; 
thinking  it  better  to  return  toward  Annamooka  by  the 
fame  route,  which  we  had  fo  lately  experienced  to  be  a 
fafe  one. 

Having  come  to  this  refolution,  I fliould  have  failed  next  Wednef.  28. 
morning,  if  the  wind  had  not  been  too  far  Southerly,  and, 
at  the  fame  time,  very  unfettled.  Poulaho,  the  king,  as  I 
fliall  now  call  him,  came  on  board  betimes ; and  brought, 
as  a prefent  to  me,  one  of  their  caps,  made,  or,  at  leaff, 
covered,  with  red  feathers.  Thefe  caps  were  much  fought 
after  by  us ; for  we  knew  they  would  be  highly  valued  at 
Otaheite.  But,  though  very  large  prices  were  offered,  not 
one  was  ever  brought  for  fale ; which  fliewed,  that  they 
were  no  lefs  valuable  in  the  eflimation  of  the  people  here  ; 
nor  was  there  a perfon  in  either  fliip,  that  could  make  him- 
felf  the  proprietor  of  one,  except  myfelf.  Captain  Clerke, 
and  Omai.  Thefe  caps,  or  rather  bonnets,  are  compofed 
of  the  tail  feathers  of  the  Tropic  bird,  with  the  red  fea- 
thers of  the  parroquets  wrought  upon  them,  or  jointly  with 

M m 2 them. 


268 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  them.  They  are  made  fo  as  to  tie  upon  the  forehead  with- 
. . out  any  crown,  and  have  the  form  of  a femicircle,  whofe 

radius  is  eighteen  or  twenty  inches.  But  a drawing  which  ^ 
Mr.  Webber  has  made  of  Poulaho,  drefled  in  one  of  thefe 
bonnets,  will  convey  the  heft  idea  of  them.  The  Chief 
ft ayed  on  board  till  the  evening,  when  he  left  us  ; but  his 
brother,  whofe  name  was  alfo  Futtafaihe,  and  one  or  two,  or 
more,  of  his  attendants,  continued  in  the  Ihip  all  night. 

Thurfday  29.  At  day-break,  the  next  morning,  I weighed  with  a fine 

breeze,  at  Eaft  North  Eaft,  and  ftood  to  the  Weftward, 
with  a view  to  return  to  Annamooka,  by  the  track  we 
had  already  experienced.  We  were  followed  by  fever al 
failing  canoes,  in  one  of  which  was  the  king.  As  foon 
as  he  got  on  board  the  Refolution,  he  inquired  for  his 
brother,  and  the  others  who  had  remained  with  us  all 
night.  It  now  appeared,  that  they  had  ftayed  without  his 
leave ; for  he  gave  them,  in  a very  few  words,  fuch  a re- 
primand as  brought  tears  from  their  eyes ; and  yet  they 
were  men  not  lefs  than  thirty  years  of  age.  He  was, 
however,  foon  reconciled  to  their  making  a longer  ftay  ; 
for,  on  quitting  us,  he  left  his  brother,  and  five  of  his  at- 
tendants, on  board.  We  had  alfo  the  company  of  a Chief, 
juft  then  arrived  from  Tongataboo,  whofe  name  was  Too- 
boueitoa.  The  moment  he  arrived,  he  fent  his  canoe 
away,  and  declared,  that  he  and  five  more,  who  came 
with  him,  would  fteep  on  board ; fo  that  I had  now  my 
cabin  filled  with  vifiters.  This,  indeed,  was  fome  incon- 
venience ; but  I bore  with  it  more  willingly,  as  they  brought 
plenty  of  provifions  with  them,  as  prefents  to  me ; for 
which  they  ahvays  had  fuitable  returns. 

About  one  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  Eafterly  wind  w^as 
fucceeded  by  a frefli  breeze  at  South  South  Eaft.  Our  courfe, 

now 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


269 


now  being  South  South  Weft,  or  more  Southerly,  we  were 
obliged  to  ply  to  windward,  and  did  but  juft  fetch  the  North 
lide  of  Footooha  by  eight  o’clock,  where  we  fpent  the 
night,  making  fhort  boards. 

The  next  morning  we  plyed  up  to  Lofanga,  where, 
according  to  the  information  of  our  friends,  there  was  an- 
chorage. It  was  one  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  before  we 
got  foundings,  under  the  lee  or  North  Weft  fide,  in  forty 
fathoms  water,  near  half  a mile  from  the  fliore ; but  the 
bank  was  fteep,  and  the  bottom  rocky,  and  a chain  of 
breakers  lay  to  leeward.  All  thefe  circumftances  being 
againft  us,  I ftretched  away  for  Kotoo,  with  the  expectation 
of  finding  better  anchoring  ground  under  that  ifland.  But 
fo  much  time  had  been  fpent  in  plying  up  to  Lofanga, 
that  it  was  dark  before  we  reached  the  other ; and,  finding 
no  place  to  anchor  in,  the  night  was  fpent  as  the  preced- 
ing one. 

At  day-break,  on  the  31ft,  I ftood  for  the  channel  which 
is  between  Kotoo,  and  the  reef  of  rocks  that  lie  to  the 
Weft  ward  of  it ; but,  on  drawing  near,  I found  the  wind 
too  fcant  to  lead  us  through.  I,  therefore,  bore  up  on  the 
outfide  of  the  reef,  and  ftretched  to  the  South  Weft,  till  near 
noon,  when,  perceiving  that  we  made  no  progrefs  to  wind- 
ward, and  being  apprehenlive  of  lofing  the  illands,  with  fo 
many  of  the  natives  on  board,  I tacked  and  ftood  back,  in- 
tending to  wait  till  fome  more  favourable  opportunity.  We 
did  but  juft  fetch  in  with  Footooha,  between  which  and 
Kotoo  we  fpent  the  night,  under  reefed  topfails  and  forefail. 
The  wind  blew  frefli,  and  by  fqualls,  with  rain ; and  we 
were  not  without  apprehenfions  of  danger.  I kept  the  deck 
till  midnight,  when  I left  it  to  the  Mafter,  with  fuch  direc- 
tions as,  I thought,  would  keep  the  fliips  clear  of  the  fhoals 

and 


1777- 

May. 

V 


Friday  30. 


Saturday  34. 


270 


A V O Y A G E TO 


1777.  and  rocks,  that  lay  round  us.  But,  after  making  a trip  to 
. the  North,  and  handing  back  again  to  the  South,  our  Ihip, 

by  a fmall  fliift  of  the  wind,  fetched  farther  to  the  wind- 
ward than  was  expe61:ed.  By  this  means  flie  was  very  near 
running  full  upon  a low  fandy  ille,  called  Pootoo  Pootooa, 
furrounded  with  breakers.  It  happened,  very  fortunately, 
that  the  people  had  juft  been  ordered  upon  the  deck,  to  put 
the  fliip  about,  and  the  moft  of  them  were  at  their  ftations ; 
fo  that  the  neceffary  movements  were  not  only  executed 
with  judgment,  but  alfo  with  alertnefs  ; and  this  alone  faved 
us  from  deftru(5lion.  The  Difcovery  being  aftern,  w'as  out 
of  danger.  Such,  hazardous  fituations  are  the  unavoid- 
able companions  of  the  man,  who  goes  upon  a voyage  of 
difcovery. 

This  circumftance  frightened  our  paffengers  fo  much, 
that  they  exprefled  a ftrong  deftre  to  get  afliore.  Accord- 
Sunday  i.  ingly,  as  foon  as  day -light  returned,  I hoifted  out  a boat, 
and  ordered  the  Officer  who  commanded  hei'j  after  land- 
ing them  at  Kotoo,  to  found  along  the  reef  that  fpits  off 
from  that  ifland,  for  anchorage.  For  I was  full  as  much 
tired  as  they  could  be,  with  beating  about  amongft  the 
furrounding  ifles  and  flibals,  and  determined  to  get  to  an 
anchor,  fomewhere  or  other,  if  poffible.  While  the  boat 
was  abfent,  we  attempted  to  turn  the  fliips  through  the 
channel,  between  the  fandy  ifle  and  the  reef  of  Kotoo,  in 
expeblation  of  finding  a moderate  depth  of  water  behind 
them  to  anchor  in.  But,  meeting  with  a tide  or  current 
againft  us,  we  were  obliged  to  defift,  and  anchor  in  fifty  fa- 
thoms water,  with  the  fandy  ille  bearing  Eaft  by  North,  one 
mile  diftant. 

We  lay  here  till  the  4th.  While  in  this  ftation  we 
were,  feveral  times,  vifited  by  the  king,  by  Tooboueitoa, 

. and 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


271 


and  by  people  from  the  neighbouring  iflands,  who  came  1777. 
off  to  trade  with  us,  though  the  wind  blew  very  frefli  , 
mod;  of  the  time.  The  mailer  was  now  fent  to  found  the 
channels  between  the  iflands  that  lie  to  the  Eallward ; and 
I landed  on  Kotoo,  to  examine  it,  in  the  forenoon  of 

the  2d.  Monday  2. 

This  illand  is  fcarcely  accellible  by  boats,  on  account  of 
coral  reefs  that  furround  it.  It  is  not  more  than  a mile 
and  half,  or  two  miles,  long ; and  not  fo  broad.  The  North 
Well  end  of  it  is  low,  like  the  illands  of  Hapaee ; but  it  riles 
fuddenly  in  the  middle,  and  terminates  in  reddilh  clayey 
cliffs,  at  the  South  Eall  end,  about  thirty  feet  high.  The 
foil,  in  that  quarter,  is  of  the  fame  fort  as  in  the  cliffs  ; but, 
in  the  other  parts,  it  is  a loofe,  black  mould.  It  produces 
the  fame  fruits  and  roots  which  we  found  at  the  other 
iilands  ; is  tolerably  cultivated,  but  thinly  inhabited.  While 
I ^vas  walking  all  over  it,  our  people  were  employed  in 
cutting  fome  grafs  for  the  cattle ; and  we  planted  fome  me- 
lon feeds,  with  which  the  natives  feemed  much  pleafed,  and 
inclofed  them  with  branches.  On  our  return  to  the  boat, 
we  paffed  by  two  or  three  ponds  of  dirty  water,  which  was 
more  or  lefs  brackifli  in  each  of  them ; and  faw  one  of  their 
burying-places,  which  was  much  neater  than  thofe  that 
were  met  with  at  Hapaee. 

On  the  4th,  at  feven  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  ; and,  Wedner.  4. 
with  a fredi  gale  at  Eall  South  Eall,  Hood  away  for  Anna- 
mooka,  where  we  anchored,  next  morning,  nearly  in  the  Thaifday 
fame  llation  which  we  had  fo  lately  occupied. 

1 went  on  lliore  foon  after,  and  found  the  inhabitants 
very  bufy  in  their  plantations,  digging  up  yams  to  bring  to 
market ; and,  in  the  courfe  of  the  day,  about  two  hundred 
of  them  had  affem^^led  on  the  beach,  and  traded  with  as 

mucli 


^72 


A VOYAGE  TO 


*777- 

june. 

V,  I./ 


Friday  6. 


much  eagernefs,  as  during  our  late  vifit.  Their  flock  ap- 
peared to  have  been  recruited  much,  though  we  had  re- 
turned fo  foon  ; but,  inflead  of  bread-fruit,  which  was  the 
only  article  we  could  purchafe  on  our  firfl  arrival,  nothing 
was  to  be  feen  now  but  yams,  and  a few  plantains.  This 
fliews  the  quick  fucceflion  of  the  feafons,  at  leafl  of  the  dif- 
ferent vegetables  produced  here,  at  the  feveral  times  of  the 
year.  It  appeared  alfo  that  they  had  been  very  bufy,  while 
we  were  abfent,  in  cultivating ; for  we  now  faw  feveral  large 
plantain  fields,  in  places  which  we  had,  fo  lately,  feen  lying 
wafle.  The  yams  were  now  in  the  greatefl  perfecflion  ; and 
we  procured  a good  quantity,  in  exchanges  for  pieces  of 
iron. 

Thefe  people,  in  the  abfence  of  Toobou,  whom  we  left 
behind  us  at  Kotoo,  with  Poulaho  and  the  other  Chiefs, 
feemed  to  be  under  little  fubordination.  For  we  could  not 
perceive,  this  day,  that  one  man  afiTumed  more  authority 
than  another.  Before  I returned  on  board,  I vifited  the 
feveral  places  where  I had  fown  melon  feeds,  and  had  the 
mortification  to  find,  that  mofl  of  them  were  deflroyed  by 
a fmall  ant ; but  fome  pine-apple  plants,  which  I had  alfo 
left,  were  in  a thriving  flate. 

About  noon,  next  day,  Feenou  arrived  from  Vavaoo.  He 
told  us,  that  feveral  canoes,  laden  with  hogs,  and  other 
provifions,  which  had  failed  with  him  from  that  illand,  had 
been  lofl,  owing  to  the  late  blowing  weather;  and  that  every 
body  on  board  them  had  perifhed.  This  melancholy  tale 
did  not  feem  to  affedl  any  of  his  countrymen  who  heard  it ; 
and,  as  to  ourfelves,  we  were,  by  this  time,  too  well  ac- 
quainted with  his  charadler,  to  give  much  credit  to  fuch  a 
ftory.  The  truth,  probably,  was,  that  he  had  not  been  able 
to  procure  at  Vavaoo  the  fupplies  which  he  expected ; or,  if 

he 


THEPACIFICOCEAN.  273 

he  got  any  there,  that  he  had  left  them  at  Hapaee,  which  1777. 
lay  in  his  way  back,  and  where  he  could  not  but  receive  . . 

intelligence  that  Poulaho  had  been  with  us  ; who,  there- 
fore, he  knew,  would,  as  his  fuperior,  have  all  the  merit 
and  rew'ard  of  procuring  them,  though  he  had  not  any 
lliare  of  the  trouble.  The  invention  of  this  lofs  at  fea 
was,  however,  well  imagined.  For  there  had  lately  been 
very  blowing  weather;  in  fo  much,  that  the  King,  and 
other  Chiefs,  who  had  followed  us  from  Hapaee  to 
Kotoo,  had  been  left  there,  not  caring  to  'venture  to 
fea  when  we  did ; but  delired  I might  wait  for  them  at 
Annamooka,  which  was  the  reafon  of  my  anchoring  there, 
this  fecond  time,  and  of  my  not  proceeding  directly  to 
Tongataboo. 

The  following  morning,  Poulaho,  and  the  other  Chiefs  Saturday  7. 
who  had  been  wind-bound  with  him,  arrived.  I happened, 
at  this  time,  to  be  afliore  in  company  with  Feenou ; who 
now  feemed  to  be  fenfible  of  the  impropriety  of  his  con- 
dud,  in  affuming  a charader  that  did  not  belong  to  him. 

For  he  not  only  acknowledged  Poulaho  to  be  King  of 
Tongataboo,  and  the  other  illes ; but  affeded  to  infift 
much  on  it,  which,  no  doubt,  was  with  a view'  to  make 
amends  for  his  former  prefumption.  I left  him,  to  vifit 
this  greater  man,  whom  I found  fitting  with  a few  people 
before  him.  But,  every  one  haftening  to  pay  court  to  him, 
the  circle  increafed  pretty  fafi:.  I was  very  defirous  of  ob- 
ferving  Feenou’s  behaviour  on  this  occafion  ; and  had  the 
mofi:  convincing  proof  of  his  fuperiority ; for  he  placed 
himfelf  amongft  the  reft  that  fat  before  Poulaho,  as  atten- 
dants on  his  majefty.  He  feemed,  at  firft,  rather  abaflied  ; 
as  fome  of  us  w'ere  prefent  w'ho  had  been  ufed  to  fee  him 
ad  a different  part ; but  he  foon  recovered  himfelf.  Some 
VoL.  I.  N n little 


274 


A. VOYAGE  TO 


1777- 

June. 


Sunday  8. 


little  converfation  paffed  between  thefe  two  Chiefs,  which 
none  of  ns  underftood ; nor  were  we  fatisfied  with  Omai’s 
interpretation  of  it.  We  were,  however,  by  this  time, 
fnfficiently  undeceived  as  to  Feenou’s  rank.  Both  he  and 
Ponlaho  went  on  board  with  me  to  dinner ; but  only  the 
latter  fat  at  table.  Feenou,  having  made  his  obeifance,  in 
the  ufual  way,  fainting  his  fovereign’s  foot  with  his  head 
and  hands,  retired  out  of  the  cabin The  king  had  be- 
fore told  ns,  that  this  would  happen  ; and  it  now  appeared, 
that  Feenou  could  not  even  eat  nor  drink  in  his  royal  pre- 
fence. 

At  eight  o’clock,  next  morning,  we  weighed  and  fleer- 
ed for  Tongataboo,  having  a gentle  breeze  at  North  Eafl. 
About  fourteen  or  fifteen  failing  veflels,  belonging  to  the 
natives,  fet  out  with  us  ; but  every  one  of  them  outrun  the 
fhips  confiderably.  Feenou  was  to  have  taken  his  paflage 
in  the  Refolution  ; but  preferred  his  own  canoe  ; and  put 
two  men  on  board,  to  condu6l  us  to  the  befl  anchorage. 
We  fleered  South  by  Wefl  by  compafs. 

At  five  in  the  afternoon  we  faw  two  fmall  iflands,  bear- 


* Marks  of  profound  refpe£l,  very  fimilar  to  thofe  paid  by  natives  of  the  Friendly 
Iflands  to  their  fovereign,  are  alfo  paid  to  the  principal  Chiefs,  or  Tamoles  of  the  Caroline 
Iflands,  as  appears  from  father  Cantova’s  account  here  tranfcribed.  “ Lorfqu’un  Tamole 
donne  audience,  il  paroit  aflis  fur  une  table  elevee  : les  peuples  s’inclinent  devant  lui 
“ jufqu’a  terre ; & du  plus  loin  qu’ils  arrivent,  ils  marchent  le  corps  tout  courbe,  & la 
“ tete  prefqu’entre  les  genoux,  jufqu’a  ce  qu’ils  foient  aupres  de  fa  perfonne ; alors  ils 
“ s’afleyent  a plate  terre ; &,  les  yeux  baifles,  ils  resolvent  fes  ordres  avec  le  plus  profond 
“ refpeft.  Quand  le  Tamole  les  congedie,  ils  fe  retirent,  en  fe  courbant  de  la  meme 
“ maniere  que  quand  ils  font  venus,  & ne  fe  relevent  que  lorfqu’ils  font  hors  de  fa  pre- 
“ fence.  Ses  paroles  font  autant  d’oracles  qu’on  revere ; on  rend  a fes  ordres  une 
“ obeiflance  aveugle ; enfin,  on  baife  les  mains  & les  pieds,  quand  on  lui  demande 
“ quelque  grace.”  Lettres  Edijiantes  ^ Cuneufes^  Tom.  xv.  p.  312,  313. 


ing 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


275 


ing  Weft,  about  four  leagues  diftant.  Our  pilots  called  the 
one  Hoonga  Hapaee,  and  the  other  Hoonga  Tonga.  They 
lie  in  the  latitude  of  20*^  36' ; and  ten  or  eleven  leagues 
from  the  Weft  point  of  Annamooka,  in  the  diredtion  of 
South,  46°  Weft.  According  to  the  account  of  the  iflanders 
on  board,  only  five  men  refide  upon  Hoonga  Hapaee  ; and 
Hoonga  Tonga  is  uninhabited  ; but  both  of  them  abound 
with  fea-fowl. 

We  continued  the  fame  courfe  till  two  o’clock  next  Monday  9. 
morning,  when,  feeing  fome  lights  ahead,  and  not  know- 
ing whether  they  were  on  fliore,  or  on  board  the  canoes, 

WQ  hauled  the  wind,  and  made  a fliort  trip,  each  way,  till 
day-break.  We  then  refumed  our  courfe  to  the  South  by 
Weft  ; and,  prefently  after,  faw  feveral  fmall  illands  before 
us,  and  Eooa  and  Tongataboo  beyond  them.  We  had,  at 
this  time,  twenty-five  fathoms  water,  over  a bottom  of 
broken  coral  and  fand.  The  depth  gradually  decreafed  as 
we  drew  near  the  ifles  above  mentioned,  which  lie  ranged 
along  the  North  Eaft  fide  of  Tongataboo.  By  the  direc- 
tion of  our  pilots  we  fteered  for  the  middle  of  it,  and  for 
the  wideft  fpace  between  the  fmall  ifles  which  we  were  to 
pafs ; having  our  boats  ahead,  employed  in  founding. 

We  were,  infenfibly,  drawn  upon  a large  fiat,  upon  which 
lay  innumerable  coral  rocks,  of  different  depths,  below 
the  furface  of  the  water.  Notwithftanding  all  our  care 
and  attention  to  keep  the  fliip  clear  of  them,  we  could  not 
prevent  her  from  ftriking  on  one  of  thefe  rocks.  Nor 
did  the  Difcovery,  though  behind  us,  efcape  any  better. 
Fortunately,  neither  of  the  fliips  ftuck  faft,  nor  received 
any  damage.  We  could  not  get  back  without  increafing 
the  danger,  as  we  had  come  in  almoft  before  the  wind. 

Nor  could  we  caft  anchor,  but  with  the  certainty  of  having 

N n 2 our 


*777- 

June. 


276 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  our  cables  inftantly  cut  in  two  by  the  rocks.  We  had  no 
. . other  refource  but  to  proceed.  To  this,  indeed,  we  were 

encouraged,  not  only  by  being  told,  but  by  feeing,  that 
there  was  deeper  water  between  us  and  the  Ihore.  How- 
ever, that  we  might  be  better  informed,  the  moment  we 
found  a fpot  where  we  could  drop  the  anchor,  clear  of 
rocks,  we  came  to ; and  fent  the  Mailers,  with  the  boats, 
to  found. 

Soon  after  we  had  anchored,  which  was  about  noon,  fe- 
ver al  of  the  inhabitants  of  Tongataboo  came  off  in  their 
canoes  to  the  Ihips.  Thefe,  as  well  as  our  pilots,  alfured 
us,  that  we  lliould  find  deep  water  farther  in,  and  a bottom 
free  from  rocks.  They  were  not  millaken;  for,  about  four 
o’clock,  the  boats  made  the  fignal  for  having  found  good 
anchorage.  Upon  this  we  weighed,  and  Hood  in  till  dark, 
and  then  anchored  in  nine  fathoms,  having  a fine,  clear, 
fandy  bottom. 

During  the  night  we  had  fome  lliowers  of  rain ; but  to- 
ward the  morning,  the  wind  Ihifted  to  the  South,  and  South 
Tuefday  10.  Eall,  and  brought  on  fair  Weather.  At  day-break  we  weigh- 
ed, and,  working  in  to  the  fhore,  met  with  no  obfi:ru6lions, 
but  fuch  as  were  vifible,  and  eafily  avoided. 

While  we  were  plying  up  to  the  harbour,  to  which  the 
natives  directed  us,  the  king  kept  failing  round  us  in 
his  canoe.  There  were,  at  the  fame  time,  a great  many 
fmall  canoes  about  the  Ihips.  Two  of  thefe,  which  could 
not  get  out  of  the  way  of  his  royal  velfel,  he  run  quite 
over,  with  as  little  concern,  as  if  they  had  been  bits  of 
wood.  Amongll  many  others  who  came  on  board  the  Re- 
fblution,  was  Otago  ’-b  who  had  been  fo  ufeful  to  me  when 
I vifited  Tongataboo  during  my  lalt  voyage  ; and  one  Too- 

* See  a print  of  him  in  Captain  Cook’s  Vopge,  Vol.  i.  p.  197. 

bou, 


S A'  A-  T r 1/ 


Tongataboo  Hakbovk. 

y//- 

a SMum /o.,/uy{c . b S/////<m2<> 

ObTcrvaloiyrouit  - ■”‘,'4 

ll^oivg’  184  /fi£. 

SS-sj  JS 


.1-  Xautio  5 Afilcs 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


boil,  who,  at  that  time,  had  attached  himfelf  to  Captain  1777. 
Furneaux.  Each  of  them  brought  a hog,  and  fome  yams,  , , 

as  a teftimony  of  his  friendfhip ; and  I was  not  wanting,  on 
my  part,  in  making  a fuitable  return. 

At  length,  about  two  in  the  afternoon,  we  arrived  at  our 
intended  ftation.  It  was  a very  fnug  place,  formed  by  the 
Ihore  of  Tongataboo  on  the  South  Eaft,  and  two  fmall 
iflands  on  the  Eaft  and  North  Eaft.  Here  we  anchored  in 
ten  fathoms  water,  over  a bottom  of  oozy  fand,  diftant 
from  the  fhore  one-third  of  a mile. 


CHAP. 


-78  A V O Y A G E T O 


CHAP.  VII. 

Friendly  Reception  at  Fo7igatahoo, — Manner  of  dijlributing  a 
baked  Hog  and  Kava  to  Poulaho'’s  Attendants. — Fhe  Ob- 
fervatory,  &c.  eredled. — Fbe  Village  where  the  Chiefs  rejide-t 
and  the  adjoining  Country-^  defcribed. — Interviews  with  Ma- 
reewagee-,  and  'Toobou,  and  the  King's  Son. — A grand 
Haiva,  or  entertainment  of  Songs  and  Dances,  given  by 
Mareevoagee. — exhibition  of  Fireworks. — Manner  of  IVreJl- 
ling  and  Boxing. — Dijiribution  of  the  Cattle. — Thefts  cojti- 
fnitted  by  the  Natives. — Poulaho,  and  the  other  Chiefs,  con- 
fined on  that  Account. — Poulaho's  Prefent,  and  Haiva. 

1777*  OOON  after  we  had  anchored,  having  firft  dined,  I 
O landed,  accompanied  by  Omai,  and  fome  of  the  Of- 
Tuefday  lo.  ficci's.  Wc  found  the  king  waiting  for  ns  upon  the  beach. 

He,  immediately,  conducted  us  to  a fmall  neat  houfe,  htu- 
ated  a little  within  the  fkirts  of  the  wood,  with  a fine  large 
area  before  it.  This  houfe,  he  told  me,  was  at  my  fervice, 
during  our  flay  at  the  illand ; and  a better  fituation  we 
could  not  wifh  for. 

We  had  not  been  long  in  the  houfe,  before  a pretty  large 
circle  of  the  natives  were  affembled  before  us,  and  feated 
upon  the  area.  A root  of  the  kava  plant  being  brought,  and 
laid  down  before  the  king,  he  ordered  it  to  be  fplit  into 
pieces,  and  diftributed  to  feveral  people  of  both  fexes,  who 
began  the  operation  of  chewing  it ; and  a bowl  of  their  fa- 
vourite 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


279 


vourite  liquor  was  foon  prepared.  In  the  mean  time,  a 1777. 
baked  hog,  and  two  bafkets  of  baked  yams,  were  produced,  . . 

and  afterward  divided  into  ten  portions.  Thefe  portions 
were  then  given  to  certain  people  prefent ; but  how  many 
were  to  fhare  in  each,  I could  not  tell.  One  of  them,  I 
obferved,  was  bellowed  upon  the  king’s  brother ; and  one 
remained  undifpofed  of,  which,  I judged,  was  for  the 
king  himfelf,  as  it  was  a choice  bit.  The  liquor  was  next 
ferved  out ; but  Poulaho  feemed  to  give  no  directions 
about  it.  The  firll  cup  was  brought  to  him,  which  he 
ordered  to  be  given  to  one  who  fat  near  him.  The  fecond 
was  alfo  brought  to  him,  and  this  he  kept.  The  third 
was  given  to  me ; but  their  manner  of  brewing  having 
quenched  my  thirll,  it  became  Omai’s  property.  The  reft 
of  the  liquor  was  diftributed  to  different  people,  by  direc- 
tion of  the  man  who  had  the  management  of  it.  One  of 
the  cups  being  carried  to  the  king’s  brother,  he  retired 
with  this,  and  with  his  mefs  of  victuals.  Some  others 
alfo  quitted  the  circle  with  their  portions ; and  the  reafon 
was,  they  could  neither  eat  nor  drink  in  the  royal  prefence ; 
but  there  were  others  prefent,  of  a much  inferior  rank,  of 
both  fexes,  who  did  both.  Soon  after,  moft  of  them  with- 
drew, carrying  with  them  what  they  had  not  eat  of  their 
lliare  of  the  feaft. 

I obferved,  that  not  a fourth  part  of  the  company  had 
tailed  either  the  viCluals  or  the  drink ; thofe  who  partook 
of  the  former,  I fuppofed  to  be  of  the  king’s  houlliold.  The 
feiwants  who  diftributed  the  baked  meat,  and  the  kava^  al- 
ways delivered  it  out  of  their  hand  fitting,  not  only  to  the 
king,  but  to  every  other  perfon.  It  is  worthy  of  remark, 
though  this  was  the  firll  time  of  our  landing,  and  a great 
many  people  were  prefent  who  had  never  feen  us  before, 

yet 


28o 


A VOYAGE  TO 


«/77- 

June. 


Wcdtef.  1 1 


yet  no  one  was  troublefome ; but  the  greateft  good  order 
, was  prelerved,  throughout  the  w'hole  affembly. 

Before  I returned  on  board,  I went  in  fearch  of  a water- 
ing place,  and  was  conducSted  to  fome  ponds,  or  rather  holes, 
containing  frefli  water,  as  they  were  pleafed  to  call  it.  The 
contents  of  one  of  thefe,  indeed,  were  tolerable ; but  it  was 
at  fome  diftance  inland,  and  the  fupply  to  be  got  from  it 
was  very  inconfiderable.  Being  informed,  that  the  little 
ill  and  of  Pangimodoo,  near  which  the  Blips  lay,  could 
better  furnifli  this  neceffary  article,  I w^ent  over  to  it,  next 
. morning,  and  was  fo  fortunate  as  to  find  there  a fmall  pool, 
that  had  rather  freflier  water,  than  any  we  had  met  with 
amongft;  thefe  iflands.  The  pool  being  very  dirty,  I or- 
dered it  to  be  cleaned ; and  here  it  was  that  we  watered 
the  Blips. 

As  I intended  to  make  fome  Bay  at  Tongataboo,  ive 
pitched  a tent,  in  the  forenoon,  juB  by  the  houfe  which 
Poulaho  had  alfigned  for  our  ufe.  The  horf^s,  cattle,  and 
Bleep,  were  afterward  landed,  and  a party  of  marines, 
with  their  Ofiicer,  Bationed  there  as  a guard.  The  obfer- 
vatory  was  then  fet  up,  at  a fmall  diBance  from  the  other 
tent ; and  Mr.  King  refided  on  Biore,  to  attend  the  obfer- 
vations,  and  to  fuperintend  the  feveral  operations  neceflary 
to  be  conduced  there.  For  the  fails  were  carried  thither, 
to  be  repaired ; a party  was  employed  in  cutting  w^ood  for 
fuel,  and  plank  for  the  ufe  of  the  Blips  ; and  the  gunners 
of  both,  were  ordered  to  remain  upon  the  fpot,  to  conducB 
the  trafiic  with  the  natives,  who  thronged  from  every  part 
of  the  iBand,  with  hogs,  yams,  cocoa-nuts,  and  other  arti- 
cles of  their  produce.  In  a Biort  time,  our  land  poB  was 
like  a fair,  and  the  Blips  were  fo  crowded  with  vifiters,  that 
we  had  hardly  room  to  Bir  upon  the  decks. 


Feenoii 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


281 


Feenoii  had  taken  up  his  refidence  in  our  neighbourhood ; 1777. 

hut  he  was  no  longer  the  leading  man.  However,  we  ftill  . 
found  him  to  be  a perfon  of  confequence,  and  we  had  daily 
proofs  of  his  opulence  and  liberality,  by  the  continuance  of 
his  valuable  prefents.  But  the  king  was  equally  attentive 
in  this  refpe6l ; for  fcarcely  a day  pafled,  without  receiving 
from  him  fome  conliderable  donation.  We  now  heard,  that 
there  were  other  great  men  of  the  ifland,  whom  we  had 
not,  as  yet,  feen.  Otago  and  Toobon,  in  particular,  men- 
tioned a perfon  named  Mareewagee,  who,  they  faid,  was 
of  the  firfl  confequence  in  the  place,  and  held  in  great  ve- 
neration ; nay,  if  Omai  did  not  mifunderftand  them,  fupe- 
perior  even  to  Poulaho,  to  whom  he  was  related  ; but,  being 
old,  lived  in  retirement;  and,  therefore,  would  not  vilit  us. 

Some  of  the  natives  even  hinted,  that  he  was  too  great  a 
man  to  confer  that  honour  upon  us.  This  account  exciting 
my  curiofity,  I,  this  day,  mentioned  to  Poulaho,  that  I was 
very  dehrous  of  waiting  upon  Mareewagee ; and  he  readily 
agreed  to  accompany  me,  to  the  place  of  his  rehdence,  the 
next  morning. 

Accordingly,  we  fet  out,  pretty  early,  in  the  pinnace;  Thurf.  12. 
and  Captain  Gierke  joined  me  in  one  of  his  own  boats. 

We  proceeded  round,  that  is,  to  the  Eaftward  of  the  little  illes 
that  form  the  harbour,  and  then,  turning  to  the  South,  ac- 
cording to  Poulaho’s  diredlions,  entered  a fpacious  bay  or 
inlet,  up  which  we  rowed  about  a league,  and  landed  amidft 
a conliderable  number  of  people,  who  received  us  with  a ' 
fort  of  acclamation,  not  unlike  our  huzzaing.  They  im- 
mediately feparated,  to  let  Poulaho  pafs,  who  took  us  into  a 
fmall  inclofure,  and  drifted  the  piece  of  cloth  he  wore,  for 
a new  piece,  neatly  folded,  that  was  carried  by  a young 
man.  An  old  woman  allifbed  in  drelhirg  him,  and  put  a 

VoL.  I,  O o mat 


282 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  mat  over  his  cloth;  as  we  fuppofed,  to  prevent  its  being 
. . dirtied  when  he  fat  down.  On  our  now  afking  him  where 

Mareewagee  was,  to  our  great  furprize,  he  faid,  he  had 
gone  from  the  place,  to  the  Ihip,  juft  before  we  arrived. 
However,  he  deftred  us  to  Avalk  with  him  to  a malaee^  or 
houfe  of  public  refort,  which  ftood  about  half  a mile  up 
the  country.  But  when  we  came  to  a large  area  before  it, 
he  fat  down  in  the  path,  and  deftred  us  to  walk  up  to  the 
houfe.  We  did  fo,  and  feated  ourfelves  in  front,  while  the 
crowd  that  followed  us  ftlled  up  the  reft  of  the  fpace.  After 
fttting  a little  while,  we  repeated  our  inquiries,  by  means  of 
Omai,  Whether  we  were  to  fee  Mareewagee  ? But  receiving 
no  fatisfa6lory  information,  and  fufpedling  that  the  old 
Chief  Avas  purpofely  concealed  from  us,  we  went  back  to 
our  boats,  much  piqued  at  our  difappointment ; and  when 
I got  on  board,  I found  that  no  fuch  perfon  had  been  there. 
It  afterward  appeared,  that,  in  this  affair,  we  had  laboured 
under  fome  grofs  miftakes,  and  that  our  interpreter  Omai 
had  either  been  miftnformed,  or,  which  is  more  likely,  had 
mifunder ftood  what  was  told  him  about  the  great  man,  on 
whofe  account  we  had  made  this  excurfton. 

The  place  we  went  to  was  a village,  moft  delightfully 
fttuated  on  the  bank  of  the  inlet,  where  all,  or  moft  of  the 
principal  perfons  of  the  illand  reftde ; each  having  his  houfe 
in  the  midft  of  a fmall  plantation,  with  leffer  houfes,  and 
offices  for  fervants.  Thefe  plantations  are  neatly  fenced 
round;  and,  for  the  moft  part,  have  only  one  entrance. 
This  is  by  a door,  faftened,  on  the  inftde,  by  a prop  of  wood ; 
fo  that  a perfon  has  to  knock,  before  he  can  get  admittance. 
Public  roads,  and  narrow  lanes,  lie  between  each  planta- 
tion ; fo  that  no  one  trefpaffeth  upon  another.  Great  part 
of  fome  of  thefe  inclofures  is  laid  out  in  grafs-plots,  and 

planted 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


283 


planted  with  fuch  things  as  feem  more  for  ornament  than  1777. 
ufe.  But  hardly  any  where  without  the  kava  plant,  from  . . 

w'hich  they  make  their  favourite  liquor.  Every  article  of 
the  vegetable  produce  of  the  ifland,  abounded  in  others  of 
thefe  plantations ; but  thefe,  I obferved,  are  not  the  refi- 
dence  of  people  of  the  firft  rank.  There  are  fome  large 
houfes  near  the  public  roads,  with  fpacious  fmooth  grafs- 
plots  before  them,  and  uninclofed.  Thefe,  I was  told,  be- 
longed to  the  king;  and,  probably,  they  are  the  places 
where  their  public  alTemblies  are  held.  It  was  to  one  of 
thefe  houfes,  as  I have  already  mentioned,  that  we  were 
condudled,  foon  after  our  landing  at  this  place. 

About  noon,  the  next  day,  this  Mareewagee,  of  whom  Friday  13. 
we  had  heard  fo  much,  a(51:ually  came  to  the  neighbour- 
hood of  our  poll:  on  fhore ; and,  with  him,  a very  confide- 
rable  number  of  people  of  all  ranks.  I was  informed,  that 
he  had  taken  this  trouble,  on  purpofe  to  give  me  an  oppor- 
tunity of  waiting  upon  him ; having,  probably,  heard  of 
the  difpleafure  I had  Iliewn,  on  my  difappointment  the  day 
before.  In  the  afternoon,  a party  of  us,  accompanied  by 
Feenou,  landed,  to  pay  him  a vilit.  We  found  a perfon 
fitting  under  a large  tree,  near  the  fhore,  a little  to  the 
right  of  the  tent.  A piece  of  cloth,  at  lead:  forty  yards 
long,  was  fpread  before  him,  round  which  a great  number 
of  people,  of  both  fexes,  were  feated.  It  was  natural  to 
fuppofe,  that  this  was  the  great  man ; but  we  were  unde- 
ceived by  Feenou;  who  informed  us,  that  another,  who 
fat  on  a piece  of  mat,  a little  way  from  this  Chief,  to  the 
right  hand,  was  Mareewagee,  and  he  introduced  us  to  him, 
who  received  us  very  kindly,  and  delired  us  to  fit  down  by 
him.  The  perfon,  who  fat  under  the  tree,  fronting  us, 
was  called  Toobou ; and,  when  I have  occafion  to  fpeak  of 

O o 2 him 


284 


1777- 

June. 

V- > 


Saturday  14. 


AVOYAGETO 

him  afterward,  I lhall  call  him  old  Toobou,  to  diftingtiifli 
him  from  his  namefake,  Captain  Fumeaux’s  friend.  Both  he 
and  Mareewagee  had  a venerable  appearance.  The  latter 
is  a llender  man,  and,  from  his  appearance,  feems  to  be 
conliderably  above  threefcore  years  of  age.  The  former  is 
rather  corpulent,  and  almoft  blind  with  a diforder  of  his 
eyes  ; though  not  fo  old. 

Not  expecting  to  meet  with  two  Chiefs,  on  this  occalion, 
I had  only  brought  on  fliore  a prefent  for  one.  This  I now 
found  myfelf  under  a neceffity  of  dividing  between  them  ; 
but  it  happened  to  be  pretty  conliderable,  and  both  of  them 
feemed  fatisfied.  After  this,  we  entertained  them,  for  about 
an  hour,  with  the  performance  of  two  French  horns,  and  a 
drum.  But  they  feemed  moft  pleafed  with  the  firing  off  a 
piftol,  which  Captain  Clerke  had  in  his  pocket.  Before  I 
took  my  leave,  the  large  piece  of  cloth  was  rolled  up,  and, 
with  a few  cocoa-nuts,  prefented  to  me. 

The  next  morning,  old  Toobou  returned  my  vifit  on 
board  the  fhip.  He  alfo  vilited  Captain  Clerke ; and  if  the 
prefent  we  made  to  him,  the  evening  before,  was  fcanty, 
the  deficiency  was  now  made  up.  During  this  time,  Ma- 
reewagee vifited  our  people  afhore ; and  Mr.  King  fliewed 
to  him  every  thing  we  had  there.  He  viewed  the  cattle 
with  great  admiration ; and  the  crofs-cut  faw  fixed  his  at- 
tention for  fome  time. 

Toward  noon,  Poulaho  returned  from  the  place  where 
we  had  left  him  two  days  before,  and  brought  with  him  his 
fon,  a youth  about  twelve  years  of  age.  I had  his  company 
at  dinner ; but  the  fon,  though  prefent,  was  not  allowed  to 
fit  down  with  him.  It  was  very  convenient  to  have  him  for 
my  gueft.  For  when  he  was  prefent,  which  was  generally 
the  cafe  while  we  flayed  here,  every  other  native  was 

excluded 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


285 

excluded  from  the  table;  and  but  few  of  them  would  re-  1777. 
main  in  the  cabin.  Whereas,  if,  by  chance,  it  happened  , , 

that  neither  he  nor  Feenou  were  on  board,  the  inferior 
Chiefs  would  be  very  importunate  to  be  of  our  dining  party, 
or  to  be  admitted  into  the  cabin  at  that  time  ; and  then  we 
were  fo  crowded,  that  we  could  not  fit  down  to  a meal  with 
any  fatisfa6lion.  The  king  was  very  foon  reconciled  to  our 
manner  of  cookery.  But  ftill,  I believe,  he  dined  thus  fre- 
quently with  me,  more  for  the  fake  of  what  we  gave  him 
to  drink,  than  for  what  we  fet  before  him  to  eat.  For  he 
had  taken  a liking  to  our  wine,  could  empty  his  bottle  as 
well  as  mofi;  men,  and  was  as  cheerful  over  it.  He  now 
fixed  his  refidence  at  the  houfe,  or  Malaee^  by  our  tent ; and 
there  he  entertained  our  people,  this  evening,  with  a dance. 

To  the  furprize  of  every  body,  the  unwieldy  Poulaho  en- 
deavoured to  vie  with  others,  in  that  aiStive  amufement. 

In  the  morning  of  the  15th,  I received  a mefiTage  from  Sunday  15, 
old  Toobou,  that  he  wanted  to  fee  me  afhore.  Accordingly 
Omai  and  I went  to  wait  upon  him.  We  found  him,  like 
an  ancient  patriarch,  feated  under  the  fhade  of  a tree,  with  a 
large  piece  of  the  cloth,  made  in  the  illand,  fpread  out  at 
full  length  before  him ; and  a number  of  refpe6lably  look- 
ing people  fitting  round  it.  He  defired  us  to  place  ourfelves 
by  him  ; and  then  he  told  Omai,  that  the  cloth,  together 
with  a piece  of  red  feathers,  and  about  a dozen  cocoa-nuts, 
were  his  prefent  to  me.  I thanked  him  for  the  favour ; 
and  defired  he  would  go  on  board  with  me,  as  I had  nothing 
on  fliore  to  give  him  in  return. 

Omai  now  left  me,  being  fent  for  by  Poulaho ; and,  foon 
after,  Feenou  came,  and  acquainted  me  that  young  Fatta- 
faihe,  Poulaho’s  fon,  defired  to  fee  me.  I obeyed  the  fum- 
monS;  and  found  the  prince,  and  Omai,  fitting  under  a 

large 


286 


A VOYAGE  TO 


’777* 

June. 

I 


large  canopy  of  the  finer  fort  of  cloth  ; with  a piece  of  the 
coarfer  fort,  fpread  under  them  and  before  them,  that  was 
feventy-fix  yards  long,  and  feven  and  a half  broad.  On  one 
fide  was  a large  old  boar  ; and  on  the  other  fide  a heap  of 
cocoa-nuts.  A number  of  people  were  feated  round  the 
cloth ; and,  amongft  them,  I obferved  Mareewagee,  and 
others  of  the  firfi:  rank.  I was  defired  to  fit  down  by  the 
prince ; and  then  Omai  informed  me,  that  he  had  been  in- 
Ifrudfed  by  the  king  to  tell  me,  that,  as  he  and  I were  friends, 
he  hoped  that  his  fon  might  be  joined  in  this  friendfiiip; 
and  that,  as  a token  of  my  confent,  I would  accept  of  his 
prefent.  I very  readily  agreed  to  the  propofal ; and,  it  being 
now  dinner-time,  1 invited  them  all  on  board. 

Accordingly,  the  young  prince,  Mareewagee,  old  Toobou, 
three  or  four  inferior  Chiefs,  and  two  refpedlable  old  ladies 
of  the  firfi  rank,  accompanied  me.  Mareewagee  was  dreffed 
in  a new  piece  of  cloth,  on  the  fkirts  of  which  were  fixed 
fix  pretty  large  patches  of  red  feathers.  This  drefs  feemed 
to  have  been  made,  on  purpofe,  for  this  vifit ; for,  as  foon 
as  he  got  on  board,  he  put  it  off,  and  prefented  it  to  me ; 
having,  I guefs,  heard  that  it  would  be  acceptable,  on  ac- 
count of  the  feathers.  Every  one  of  my  vifiters  received 
from  me  fuch  prefents,  as,  I had  reafon  to  believe,  they  were 
highly  fatisfied  with.  When  dinner  came  upon  table,  not 
one  of  them  would  fit  down,  or  eat  a bit  of  any  thing  that 
was  ferved  up.  On  expreffing  my  furprize  at  this,  they 
were  all  taboo^,  as  they  faid ; which  word  has  a very  com- 
prehenfive  meaning ; but,  in  general,  fignifies  that  a thing 
is  forbidden.  Why  they  were  laid  under  fuch  reflraints,  at 
prefent,  was  not  explained.  Dinner  being  over,  and,  having 
gratified  their  curiofity,  by  fliewing  to  them  every  part  of 
the  fliip,  I then  condudled  them  afiiore. 


As 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


2,87 


As  foon  as  the  boat  reached  the  beach,  Feenou,  and  1777. 
fome  others,  inftantly  ftepped  out.  Young  Fattafaihe  fol-  . 
lowing  them,  was  called  back  by  Mareewagee,  who  now 
paid  the  heir  apparent  the  fame  obeifance,  and  in  the 
fame  manner,  that  I had  feen  it  paid  to  the  king.  And 
when  old  Toobou,  and  one  of  the  old  ladies,  had  fliewn 
him  the  fame  marks  of  refpe6t,  he  was  fuffered  to  land. 

This  ceremony  being  over,  the  old  people  ftepped  from  my 
boat,  into  a canoe,  that  was  waiting  to  carry  them  to  their 
place  of  abode. 

I was  not  forry  to  be  prefent  on  this  occahon,  as  I was 
thus  furnilhed  with  the  moil  unequivocal  proofs  of  the  fu- 
preme  dignity  of  Poulaho  and  his  fon,  over  the  other  prin- 
cipal Chiefs.  Indeed,  by  this  time,  I had  acquired  fome 
certain  information  about  the  relative  fituations  of  the  fe- 
ver al  great  men,  whofe  names  have  been  fo  often  men- 
tioned. I now  knew,  that  Mareewagee  and  old  Toobou 
were  brothers.  Both  of  them  were  men  of  great  property 
in  the  illand,  and  feemed  to  be  in  high  eftimation  with  the 
people ; the  former,  in  particular,  had  the  very  honourable 
appellation  given  to  him,  by  every  body,  of  Motooa  ’Tonga ; 
that  is  to  fay.  Father  of  Tonga,  or  of  his  Country.  The 
nature  of  his  relationfliip  to  the  king  was  alfo  no  longer  a 
fecret  to  us  ; for  we  now  underftood,  that  he  was  his  father- 
in-law  ; Poulaho  having  married  one  of  his  daughters,  by 
whom  he  had  this  fon ; fo  that  Mareewagee  was  the  prince’s 
grandfather.  Poulaho’s  appearance  having  fatisfied  us,  that 
we  had  been  under  a miftake,  in  conlidering  Feenou  as  the 
fovereign  of  thefe  illands,  we  had  been,  at  firft,  much  puz- 
zled about  his  real  rank ; but  that  was,  by  this  time,  afcer- 
tained.  Feenou  was.  one  of  Mareewagee’s  fons;  and  Too- 
boueitoa  was  another. 


On 


285 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  On  my  landing,  I found  the  king,  in  the  houfe  adjoining 
1 — _i  to  our  tent,  along  with  our  j^eople  who  redded  on  lliore. 

The  moment  I got  to  him,  he  bellowed  upon  me  a prefent 
of  a large  hog,  and  a quantity  of  yams.  About  the  dulk 
of  the  evening,  a number  of  men  came,  and,  having  fat 
down  in  a round  group,  began  to  ling  in  concert  with 
the  mulic  of  bamboo  drums,  which  were  placed  in  the 
centre  -b  There  were  three  long  ones,  and  two  lliort.  With 
thefe  they  llruck  the  ground  endwife,  as  before  defcribed. 
There  were  two  others,  which  lay  on  the  ground,  lide  by 
dde,  and  one  of  them  was  fplit  or  lliivered ; on  thefe  a man 
kept  beating  with  two  fmall  dicks.  They  fung  three  fongs 
while  I dayed ; and,  I was  told,  that,  after  I left  them,  the 
entertainment  laded  till  ten  o’clock.  They  burnt  the  leaves 
of  the  wharra  palm  for  a light ; which  is  the  only  thing  I 
ever  faw  them  make  ufe  of  for  this  purpofe. 

While  I was  palling  the  day  in  attendance  on  thefe  great 
men,  Mr.  Anderfon,  with  fome  others,  made  an  excurlion 
into  the  country,  which  furnidied  him  with  the  following 
remarks:  ‘‘  To  the  Wedward  of  the  tent,  the  country  is 
totally  uncultivated  for  near  two  miles,  though  quite  co- 
vered with  trees  and  budies,  in  a natural  date,  growing 
with  the  greated  vigour.  Beyond  this  is  a pretty  large 
plain,  on  which  are  fome  cocoa-trees,  and  a few  fmall 
plantations  that  appear  to  have  been  lately  made  ; and, 
feemingly,  on  ground  that  has  never  been  cultivated  before. 
Near  the  creek,  which  runs  to  the  Wedward  of  the  tent, 


* The  fame  fort  of  evening  concert  is  performed  round  the  houfe  of  the  Chief,  or  Ta- 
male^ at  the  Caroline  Iflands.  “ Le  Tamole  ne  s’endort  qu’au  bruit  d’un  concert  de 
“ mufique  que  forme  une  troupe  de  jeunes  gens,  qui  s’aflemblent  le  foir,  aiitour  de  la 
“ maifon,  et  qui  chantent,  a leur  maniere,  certaines  poefies.”  Lettres  Edifiantes  et  Cu^ 
rieufesj  Tom.  xv.  p.  314. 


the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


289 


the  land  is  quite  flat,  and  partly  overflowed  by  the  fea  every  1777. 
tide.  When  that  retires,  the  furface  is  feen  to  be  compofed  ■ ^*|*^^* 

of  coral  rock,  with  holes  of  yellowifli  mud  fcattered  up  and 
down ; and  toward  the  edges,  where  it  is  a little  firmer,  are 
innumerable  little  openings,  from  which  ilTue  as  many 
fmall  crabs,  of  two  or  three  different  forts,  which  fwarm 
upon  the  fpot,  as  flies  upon  a carcafe ; but  are  fo  nimble, 
that,  on  being  approached,  they  difappear  in  an  inftant,  and 
baffle  even  the  natives  to  catch  any  of  them. 

At  this  place  is  a work  of  art,  which  fliews,  that  thefe 
people  are  capable  of  fome  defign,  and  perfeverance,  when 
they  mean  to  accomplifli  any  thing.  This  work  begins, 
on  one  fide,  as  a narrow  caufeway,  which,  becoming  gra- 
dually broader,  rifes,  with  a gentle  afcent,  to  the  height  of 
ten  feet,  where  it  is  five  paces  broad,  and  the  whole  length 
feventy-four  paces.  Joined  to  this  is  a fort  of  circus, 
whofe  diameter  is  thirty  paces,  and  not  above  a foot  or  two 
higher  than  the  caufeway  that  joins  it,  with  fome  trees 
planted  in  the  middle.  On  the  oppofite  fide,  another  caufe- 
w'ay  of  the  fame  fort  defcends;  but  this  is  not  above  forty 
paces  long,  and  is  partly  in  ruin.  The  whole  is  built  with 
large  coral  ftones,  with  earth  on  the  furface,  which  is  quite 
overgrown  with  low  trees  and  flirubs ; and,  from  its  de- 
caying in  feveral  places,  feems  to  be  of  no  modern  date. 
Whatever  may  have  been  its  ufe  formerly,  it  feems  to  be 
of  none  now ; and  all  that  we  could  learn  of  it  from  the 
natives  was,  that  it  belonged  to  Poulaho,  and  is  called 
EtcheeH'' 

On  the  1 6th,  in  the  morning,  after  vifiting  the  feveral  Monday 
works  now  carrying  on  afliore,  Mr.  Gore,  and  I,  took  a walk 
into  the  country  ; in  the  courfe  of  which  nothing  remark- 
able appeared,  but  our  having  opportunities  of  feeing  the 

VoL.  1.  P p whole 


290 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777* 

June. 


whole  procefs  of  making  cloth,  which  is  the  principal  ma- 
j nufadture  of  thefe  illands,  as  well  as  of  many  others  in  this 
Ocean.  In  the  narrative  of  my  firft  Voyage  a minute 
defcription  is  given  of  this  operation,  as  performed  at 
Otaheite ; but  the  procefs,  here,  differing  in  fome  parti- 
culars, it  may  be  worth  while  to  give  the  following  account 
of  it : 

The  manufadturers,  who  are  females,  take  the  llender 
flalks  or  trunks  of  the  paper-mulberry,  which  they  culti- 
vate for  that  purpofe  ; and  which  feldom  grows  more  than 
fix  or  feven  feet  in  height,  and  about  four  fingers  in  thick- 
nefs.  From  thefe  they  flrip  the  bark,  and  fcrape  off  the 
outer  rind  with  a mufcle-fliell.  The  bark  is  then  rolled 
up  to  take  off  the  convexity  which  it  had  round  the  flalk, 
and  macerated  in  water  for  fome  time  (they  fay,  a night) 
After  this,  it  is  laid  acrofs  the  trunk  of  a fmall  tree  fquared, 
and  beaten  with  a fquare  wooden  inftrument,  about  a foot 
long,  full  of  coarfe  grooves  on  all  fides ; but,  fometimes, 
with  one  that  is  plain.  According  to  the  fize  of  the  bark, 
a piece  is  foon  produced ; but  the  operation  is  often  re- 
peated by  another  hand,  or  it  is  folded  feveral  times,  and 
beat  longer,  which  feems  rather  intended  to  clofe  than  to 
divide  its  texture.  When  this  is  fufiiciently  effected,  it  is 
fpread  out  to  dry ; the  pieces  being  from  four  to  fix,  or 
more,  feet  in  length,  and  half  as  broad.  They  are  then 
given  to  another  perfon,  who  joins  the  pieces,  by  fmear- 
ing  part  of  them  over  with  the  vifcous  juice  of  a berry, 
called  toooy  which  ferves  as  a glue.  Having  been  thus 
lengthened,  they  are  laid  over  a large  piece  of  wood,  with 
a kind  of  ffamp,  made  of  a fibrous  fubftance  pretty  clofely 
interwoven,  placed  beneath.  They  then  take  a bit  of  cloth, 
* Hawkefworth’s  Colleftion  of  Voyages,  Vol.  ii.  p.  210, 

and 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


291 


and  dip  it  in  a juice,  exprefled  from  the  bark  of  a tree, 
called  kokka,  which  they  rub  brifkly  upon  the  piece  that  is 
making.  This,  at  once,  leaves  a dull  brown  colour,  and  a 
dry  glofs  upon  its  furface ; the  ft  amp,  at  the  fame  time, 
making  a flight  impreflion,  that  anfwers  no  other  pur- 
pofe  that  I could  fee,  but  to  make  the  feveral  pieces,  that 
are  glued  together,  ftick  a httle  more  firmly.  In  this  man- 
ner they  proceed,  joining  and  ftaining  by  degrees,  till  they 
produce  a piece  of  cloth,  of  fuch  length  and  breadth  as 
they  want ; generally  leaving  a border,  of  a foot  broad,  at 
the  fides,  and  longer  at  the  ends,  unftained.  Through- 
out the  whole,  if  any  parts  of  the  original  pieces  are  too 
thin,  or  have  holes,  which  is  often  the  cafe,  they  glue  fpare 
bits  upon  them,  till  they  become  of  an  equal  thicknefs. 
When  they  want  to. produce  a black  colour,  they  mix  the 
foot  procured  from  an  oily  nut,  called  dooedooe,  with  the 
juice  of  the  kokka^  in  different  quantities,  according  to  the 
propofed  depth  of  the  tinge.  They  fay,  that  the  black  fort 
of  cloth,  which  is  commonly  moft  glazed,  makes  a cold 
drefs,  but  the  other  a warm  one ; and,  to  obtain  ftrength 
in  both,  they  are  always  careful  to  join  the  fmall  pieces 
lengthwife,  which  makes  it  impoflible  to  tear  the  cloth  in 
any  diredfion  but  one. 

On  our  return  from  the  country,  we  met  with  Feenou, 
and  took  him,  and  another  young  Chief,  on  board  to  din- 
ner. When  our  fare  was  fet  upon  the  table,  neither  of 
them  would  eat  a bit ; faying,  that  they  were  taboo  avy. 
But,  after  inquiring  how  the  victuals  had  been  dreffed, 
having  found  that  no  avy  (water)  had  been  ufed  in  cooking 
a pig  and  fome  yams,  they  both  fat  down,  and  made  a 
very  hearty  meal ; and,  on  being  aflured  that  there  was  no 
water  in  the  wine,  they  drank  of  it  alfo.  From  this  we 

P p a conjedluredj 


292 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777*  conje6tured,  that,  on  feme  account  or  another,  they  were, 

. at  this  time,  forbidden  to  ufe  water ; or,  which  was  more 
probable,  they  did  not  like  the  water  we  made  ufe  of,  it  be- 
ing taken  up  out  of  one  of  their  bathing-places.  This  was 
not  the  only  time  of  our  meeting  with  people  that  were 
taboo  avy ; but,  for  what  reafon,  we  never  could  tell  with 
any  degree  of  certainty. 

Tuefdayi;.  Next  day,  the  17th,  was  fixed  upon  by  Mareewagee,  for 
giving  a grand  Haiva,  or  entertainment ; to  which  we  were 
all  invited.  For  this  purpofe  a large  fpace  had  been  cleared, 
before  the  temporary  hut  of  this  Chief,  near  our  poll:,  as 
an  area  where  the  performances  were  to  be  exhibited.  In 
the  morning,  great  multitudes  of  the  natives  came  in  from 
the  country,  every  one  carrying  a pole,  about  fix  feet  long, 
upon  his  fhoulder ; and  at  each  end  of  every  pole,  a yam 
was  fufpended.  Thefe  yams  and  poles  were  depofited  on 
each  fide  of  the  area,  fo  as  to  form  two  large  heaps,  deco- 
rated with  different  forts  of  fmall  filh,  and  piled  up  to  the 
greatelf  advantage.  They  were  Mareewagee’s  prefent  to 
Captain  Clerke  and  me  ; and  it  was  hard  to  fay,  whether  the 
wood  for  fuel,  or  the  yams  for  food,  were  of  moll:  value  to 
us.  As  for  the  filh,  they  might  ferve  to  pleafe  the  fight, 
but  were  very  offenfive  to  the  fmell ; part  of  them  having 
been  kept  two  or  three  days,  to  be  prefented  to  us  on  this 
occafion. 

Every  thing  being  thus  prepared,  about  eleven  o’clock 
they  began  to  exhibit  various  dances,  which  they  call  mat. 
The  mufic  confilled,  at  firft,  of  feventy  men  as  a chorus, 
who  fat  down ; and  amidft  them  were  placed  three  infiru- 
ments,  which  we  called  drums,  though  very  unlike  them. 

* Mr.  Anderfon’s  defeription  of  the  entertainments  of  this  day  being  much  fuller  than 
Captain  Cook’s,  it  has  been  adopted  as  on  a former  occafion. 

They 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


^93 


They  are  large  cylindrical  pieces  of  wood,  or  trunks  of  1777. 
trees,  from  three  to  four  feet  long,  fome  twice  as  thick  as 
an  ordinary  lized  man,  and  fome  fmaller,  hollowed  entirely 
out,  but  clofe  at  both  ends,  and  open  only  by  a chink,  about 
three  inches  broad,  running  almolf  the  whole  length  of  the 
drums  ; by  which  opening,  the  reft  of  the  wood  is  certainly 
hollowed,  though  the  operation  muft  be  difficult.  This  in- 
ftrument  is  called  naffa ; and,  with  the  chink  turned  toward 
them,  they  fit  and  beat  ftrongly  upon  it,  with  two  cylin- 
drical pieces  of  hard  wood,  about  a foot  long,  and  as  thick 
as  the  wrift ; by  which  means  they  produce  a rude,  though 
loud  and  powerful  found.  They  vary  the  ftrength  and 
rate  of  their  beating,  at  different  parts  of  the  dance ; and 
alfo  change  the  tones,  by  beating  in  the  middle,  or  near  the 
end,  of  their  drum. 

The  firft  dance  conftfted  of  four  ranks,  of  twenty-four 
men  each,  holding  in  their  hands  a little,  thin,  light, 
wooden  inftrument,  above  two  feet  long,  and,  in  ffiape, 
not  unlike  a fmall  oblong  paddle.  With  thefe,  which  are 
called  pagge,  they  made  a great  many  different  motions ; 
fuch  as  pointing  them  toward  the  ground  on  one  fide,  at 
the  fame  time  inclining  their  bodies  that  Avay,  from  which 
they  were  fhifted  to  the  oppofite  fide  in  the  fame  manner ; 
then  palling  them  quickly  from  one  hand  to  the  other,  and 
twirling  them  about  very  dextroufly ; with  a variety  of 
other  manoeuvres,  all  which  were  accompanied  by  corre- 
fponding  attitudes  of  the  body.  Their  motions  were,  at  firft, 
flow,  but  quickened  as  the  drums  beat  fafter ; and  they  re- 
cited fentences,  in  a mufical  tone,  the  whole  time,  which 
were  anfwered  by  the  chorus  ; but  at  the  end  of  a fhort 
fpace  they  all  joined,  and  finiflied  with  a fliout. 

After  cealing  about  two  or  three  minutes,  they  began  as 

before, 


-94 


A VOYAGE  TO 


iV;;.  b.efore,  and  continued,  with  fliort  intervals,  above  a quarter 
. of  an  hour ; when  the  rear  rank  dividing,  fliifted  themfelves 
very  llowly  round  each  end,  and,  meeting  in  the  front, 
formed  the  firft  rank ; the  whole  number  continuing  to 
recite  the  fentences  as  before.  The  other  ranks  did  the 
fame  fucceffively,  till  that  which,  at  firft,  was  the  front, 
became  the  rear  ; and  the  evolution  continued,  in  the  fame 
manner,  till  the  laft  rank  regained  its  firft  fituation.  They 
then  began  a much  quicker  dance  (though  flow  at  firft), 
and  fung  for  about  ten  minutes,  when  the  whole  body  di- 
vided into  two  parts,  retreated  a little,  and  then  approach- 
ed, forming  a fort  of  circular  figure,  which  finiflied  the 
dance ; the  drums  being  removed,  and  the  chorus  going 
off  the  field  at  the  fame  time. 

The  fecond  dance  had  only  two  drums,  with  forty  men 
for  a chorus  ; and  the  dancers,  or  rather  adfors,  confifted  of 
two  ranks,  the  foremoft  having  feventeen,  and  the  other  fif- 
teen perfons.  Feenou  was  at  their  head,  or  in  the  middle 
of  the  front  rank,  which  is  the  principal  place  in  thefe  cafes. 
They  danced  and  recited  fentences,  with  fome  very  fhort  in- 
tervals, for  about  half  an  hour,  fometimes  quickly,  fome- 
times  more  llowly,  but  with  fuch  a degree  of  exacftnefs,  as 
if  all  the  motions  were  made  by  one  man,  which  did  them 
great  credit.  Near  the  clofe,  the  back  rank  divided,  came 
round,  and  took  the  place  of  the  front,  which  again  re- 
fumed its  fituation,  as  in  the  firft  dance ; and  when  they 
finiflied,  the  drums  and  chorus,  as  before,  went  off. 

‘ Three  drums  (which,  at  leaft,  took  two,  and  fometimes 
three  men  to  carry  them)  were  now  brought  in ; and  fe- 
venty  men  fat  down  as  a chorus  to  the  third  dance.  This 
confifted  of  two  ranks,  of  fixteen  perfons  each,  with  young 
Toobou  at  their  head,  who  was  richly  ornamented  with  a 

fort 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


295 


fort  of  garment  covered  with  red  feathers.  Thefe  danced, 
fling,  and  twirled  the  pagge^  as  before ; but,  in  general,  . 
much  quicker,  and  performed  fo  well,  that  they  had  the 
conftant  applaufes  of  the  fpecftators.  A motion  that  met 
Avith  particular  approbation,  was  one  in  which  they  held 
the  face  alide,  as  if  afhamed,  and  the  pcigge  before  it.  The 
back  rank  clofed  before  the  front  one,  and  that  again  re- 
fumed its  place,  as  in  the  two  former  dances  ; but  then  they 
began  again,  formed  a triple  row,  divided,  retreated  to  each 
end  of  the  area,  and  left  the  greateft  part  of  the  ground 
clear.  At  that  inftant,  two  men  entered  very  haftily,  and  ex- 
ercifed  the  clubs  which  they  ufe  in  battle.  They  did  this, 
by  firft  twirling  them  in  their  hands,  and  making  circular 
ftrokes  before  them  with  great  force  and  quicknefs  ; but  fo 
fkilfuUy  managed,  that,  though  handing  quite  clofe,  they 
never  interfered.  They  fliifted  their  clubs  from  hand  to 
hand,  with  great  dexterity  ; and,  after  continuing  a little 
time,  kneeled,  and  made  different  motions,  tolling  the 
clubs  up  in  the  air,  Avhich  they  caught  as  they  fell ; and 
then  went  off  as  haftily  as  they  entered.  Their  heads  were 
covered  with  pieces  of  white  cloth,  tied  at  the  croAvn  (al- 
moft  like  a night-cap)  with  a wreath  of  foliage  round  the 
forehead ; but  they  had  only  very  fmall  pieces  of  white 
cloth  tied  about  their  waifts  ; probably,  that  they  might  be 
cool,  and  free  from  every  encumbrance  or  weight.  A per- 
fon  with  a fpear,  dreffed  like  the  former,  then  came  in,  and 
in  the  fame  hafty  manner ; looking  about  eagerly,  as  if  in 
fearch  of  fomebody  to  throw  it  at.  He  then  ran  haftily  to 
one  ftde  of  the  crowd  in  the  front,  and  put  himfelf  in  a 
threatening  attitude,  as  if  he  meant  to  ftrike  with  his  fpear 
at  one  of  them,  bending  the  knee  a little,  and  trembling, 
as  it  were  with  rage.  He  continued  in  this  manner  only  a 

feiv 


1777- 

June. 




296 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  few  feconds,  when  he  moved  to  the  other  fide,  and  having 
. flood  in  the  fame  pofture  there,  for  the  fame  fliort  time, 
retreated  from  the  ground,  as  faft  as  when  he  made  his  ap- 
pearance. The  dancers,  who  had  divided  into  two  parties, 
kept  repeating  fomething  flowly  all  this  while ; and  now 
advanced,  and  joined  again,  ending  with  univerfal  applaiife. 
It  fliould  feem  that  this  dance  was  conlidered  as  one  of  their 
capital  performances,  if  we  might  judge  from  fornie  of  the 
principal  people  being  engaged  in  it.  For  one  of  the  drums 
was  beat  by  Futtafaihe,  the  brother  of  Poulaho,  another  by 
Feenou,  and  the  third,  which  did  not  belong  to  the  chorus, 
by  Mareewagee  himfelf,  at  the  entrance  of  his  hut. 

The  lafh  dance  had  forty  men,  and  two  drums,  as  a 
chorus.  It  confifted  of  fixty  men,  who  had  not  danced 
before,  difpofed  in  three  rows,  having  twenty-four  in  front. 
But,  before  they  began,  we  were  entertained  with  a pretty 
long  preliminary  harangue,  in  which  the  whole  body  made 
refponfes  to  a fingle  perfon  who  fpoke.  They  recited  fen- 
tences  (perhaps  verfes)  alternately  with  the  chorus,  and 
made  many  motions  with  the  pagge,  in  a very  brifk  mode, 
which  were  all  applauded  with  mareeai!  and  fyfogge  / words 
exprefling  two  different  degrees  of  praife.  They  divided 
into  two  bodies,  with  their  backs  to  each  other;  formed 
again,  fliifted  their  ranks,  as  in  the  other  dances ; divided 
and  retreated,  making  room  for  two  champions,  who  ex- 
ercifed  their  clubs  as  before ; and  after  them  two  others : 
the  dancers,  all  the  time,  reciting  llowly  in  turn  with  the 
chorus  ; after  which  they  advanced,  and  finiflied. 

Thefe  dances,  if  they  can  j^roperly  be  called  fo,  lafted 
from  eleven  till  near  three  o’clock  ; and  though  they  were, 
doubtlefs,  intended,  particularly,  either  in  honour  of  us, 
or  to  fliew  a fpecimen  of  their  dexterity,  vaft  numbers  of 

their 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


297 


their  own  people  attended  as  fpe(5lators.  Their  numbers  1777. 
could  not  be  computed  exacftly,  on  account  of  the  inequality  . 
of  the  ground  ; but,  by  reckoning  the  inner  circle,  and  the 
number  in  depth,  which  was  between  twenty  and  thirty  in 
many  places,  we  fuppofed  that  there  muft  be  near  four 
thoufand.  At  the  fame  time,  there  were  round  the  trading 
place  at  the  tent,  and  Ifraggling  about,  at  lead;  as  many 
more ; and  fome  of  us  computed,  that,  at  this  time,  there 
were  not  lefs  than  ten  or  twelve  thoufand  people  in  our 
neighbourhood ; that  is,  within  the  compafs  of  a quarter 
of  a mile ; drawn  together,  for  the  mod;  part,  by  mere 
curiofity. 

It  is  with  regret  I mention,  that  we  could  not  underhand 
what  was  fpoken,  while  we  were  able  to  fee  what  was  a6led, 
in  thefe  amufements.  This,  doubtlefs,  would  have  afforded 
us  much  information,  as  to  the  genius  and  cuftoms  of  thefe 
people.  It  was  obfervable,  that,  though  the  fpe6tators  al- 
ways approved  of  the  various  motions,  when  well  made,  a 
great  fliare  of  the  pleafure  they  received  feemed  to  arife 
from  the  fentimental  part,  or  what  the  performers  delivered 
in  their  fpeeches.  However,  the  mere  a6ling  part,  inde- 
pendently of  the  fentences  repeated,  was  well  worth  our  no- 
tice, both  with  refpedl  to  the  extendve  plan  on  which  it  was 
executed,  and  to  the  various  motions,  as  well  as  the  exadt 
unity,  with  which  they  were  performed.  The  drawings 
which  Mr.  Webber  made  of  the  performances  at  Hapaee, 
and  which  are  equally  applicable  to  thofe  exhibited  now, 
will  ferve  much  to  illuftrate  the  account  here  given  of  the 
order  in  which  the  a6lors  range  themfelves.  But  neither 
pencil  nor  pen  can  defcribe  the  numerous  adlions  and  mo- 
tions, the  dngularity  of  which  was  not  greater,  than  was  the 
eafe  and  gracefulncfs  with  which  they  were  performed. 

VoL.  I.  Q q 


At 


At  night,  we  were  entertained  with  the  bomai^  or  night 
dances,  on  a fpace  before  Feenou’s  temporary  habitation. 
They  laft ed  about  three  hours  ; in  which  time  we  had  about 
twelve  of  them  performed,  much  after  the  fame  manner  as 
thofe  at  Hapaee.  But,  in  two,  that  were  performed  by  wo- 
men, a number  of  men  came  and  formed  a circle  within  • 
their’s.  And,  in  another,  conlilfing  of  twenty-four  men, 
there  were  a number  of  motions  with  the  hands,  that  we 
had  not  feen  before,  and  were  highly  applauded.  The 
mulic  was,  alfo,  once  changed,  in  the  courfe  of  the  night ; 
and  in  one  of  the  dances,  Feenou  appeared  at  the  head  of 
fifty  men  who  had  performed  at  Hapaee,  and  he  was  well 
drelTed  with  linen,  a large  piece  of  gauze,  and  fome  little 
pi6lures  hung  round  his  neck.  But  it  was  evident,  after 
the  diverfions  were  clofed,  that  we  had  put  thefe  poor 
people,  or  rather  that  they  had  put  themfelves,  to  much 
inconvenience.  For  being  drawn  together  on  this  unin- 
habited part  of  their  illand,  numbers  of  them  were  obliged 
to  lie  down  and  fleep  under  the  buflies,  by  the  fide  of  a 
tree,  or  of  a canoe ; nay  many  either  lay  down  in  the 
open  air,  which  they  are  not  fond  of,  or  walked  about  all 
the  night. 

The  whole  of  this  entertainment  was  conducfled  with  far 
better  order,  than  could  have  been  expelled  in  fo  large  an 
alTembly.  Among  ft  fuch  a multitude,  there  muft  be  a 
number  of  ill-difpofed  people ; and  we,  hourly,  experienced 
it.  All  our  care  and  attention  did  not  prevent  their  plun- 
dering us,  in  every  quarter ; and  that,  in  the  moft  daring 
and  infolent  manner.  There  was  hardly  any  thing  that  they 
did  not  attempt  to  fteal ; and  yet,  as  the  crowd  was  always 
fo  great,  I would  not  allow  the  fentries  to  fire,  left  the  inno- 
cent fliould  fuffer  for  the  guilty.  They  once,  at  noon  day, 

ventured 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


299 


ventured  to  aim  at  taking  an  anchor  from  off  the  Difco- 
very’s  bows ; and  they  would  certainly  have  fucceeded,  if 
the  flook  had  not  hooked  one  of  the  chain  plates  in  lower- 
ing down  the  fhip’s  fide,  from  which  they  could  not  difen- 
gage  it  by  hand ; and  tackles  were  things  they  were  unac- 
quainted with.  The  only  a6t  of  violence  they  were  guilty 
of,  was  the  breaking  the  flioulder  bone  of  one  of  our 
goats,  fo  that  fhe  died  foon  after.  This  lofs  fell  upon  them- 
felves,  as  fhe  was  one  of  thofe  that  I intended  to  leave 
upon  the  ifland;  but  of  this,  the  perfon  who  did  it,  was 
ignorant. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  i8th,  an  incident  happened, 
that  ftrongly  marked  one  of  their  cufloms.  A man  got  out 
of  a canoe  into  the  quarter  gallery  of  the  Refolution,  and 
flole  from  thence  a pewter  bafon.  He  was  difcovered,  pur- 
fued,  and  brought  along-fide  the  fliip.  On  this  occafion, 
three  old  women,  ^yho  were  in  the  canoe,  made  loud  la- 
mentations over  the  prifoner,  beating  their  breafts  and  faces 
in  a moft  violent  manner,  with  the  infide  of  their  fills ; and 
all  this  was  done  without  fhedding  a tear.  This  mode  of 
exprefling  grief  is  what  occafions  the  mark  which  almofl 
all  this  people  bear  on  the  face,  over  the  cheek  bones.  The 
repeated  blows  which  they  infli6l  upon  this  part,  abrade  the 
fkin,  and  make  even  the  blood  flow  out  in  a confiderable 
quantity ; and  when  the  wounds  are  recent,  they  look  as  if 
a hollow  circle  had  been  burnt  in.  On  many  occafions, 
they  adlually  cut  this  part  of  the  face  with  an  inflrument ; 
in  the  fame  manner  as  the  people  of  Otaheite  cut  their 
heads. 

This  day,  I bellowed  on  Mareewagee  fome  prefents,  in 
return  for  thofe  we  had  received  from  him  the  day  before ; 
and  as  the  entertainments  which  he  had  then  exhibited  for 

Qq  2 


>777- 

June. 

' f 


Wednef.  18. 


our 


300 


A VOYAGE  TO 


our  amufement,  called  upon  us  to  make  fome  exhibition  in 
our  way,  I ordered  the  party  of  marines  to  go  through  their 
exercife  on  the  fpot  where  his  dances  had  been  performed ; 
and,  in  the  evening,  played  off  fome  fireworks  at  the  fame 
place.  Poulaho,  with  all  the  principal  Chiefs,  and  a great 
number  of  people,  of  all  denominations,  were  prefent.  The 
platoon  firing,  which  was  executed  tolerably  well,  feemed 
to  give  them  pleafure ; but  they  were  lofl  in  aflonifhment 
when  they  beheld  our  water  rockets.  They  paid  but  little 
attention  to  the  fife  and  drum,  or  French  horns  that  played 
during  the  intervals.  The  king  fat  behind  every  body, 
becaufe  no  one  is  allowed  to  fit  behind  him;  and,  that 
his  view  might  not  be  obfi:ru61;ed,  nobody  fat  immedi- 
ately before  him  ; but  a lane,  as  it  were,  was  made  by  the 
people  from  him,  quite  down  to  the  fpace  allotted  for  the 
fireworks. 

In  expe<5tation  of  this  evening  fhew,  the  circle  of  natives 
about  our  tent  being  pretty  large,  they  engaged,  the  greatefl: 
part  of  the  afternoon,  in  boxing  and  wreflling ; the  firfi;  of 
which  exercifes  they  call  fangatooay  and  the  fecond  foohoo. 
When  any  of  them  choofes  to  wreftle,  he  gets  up  from  one 
fide  of  the  ring,  and  crofies  the  ground  in  a fort  of  mea- 
fured  pace,  clapping  fmartly  on  the  elbow  joint  of  one  arm, 
which  is  bent,  and  produces  a hollow  found ; that  is  rec- 
koned the  challenge.  If  no  perfon  comes  out  from  the  op- 
pofite  fide  to  engage  him,  he  returns,  in  the  fame  manner, 
and  fits  down  ; but.  fometimes  Hands  clapping  in  the  midfi: 
of  the  ground,  to  provoke  fome  one  to  come  out.  If  an 
opponent  appear,  they  come  together  with  marks  of  the 
greateft  good-nature,  generally  fmiling,  and  taking  time  to 
adjuft  the  piece  of  cloth  which  is  faftened  round  the  waift. 
They  then  lay  hold  of  each  other  by  this  girdle,  with  a 

hand 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


30X 


hand  on  each  fide;  and  he  who  fucceeds  in  drawing  his  1777. 
antagonifi:  to  him,  immediately  tries  to  lift  him  upon  his  . » 

bread:,  and  throw  him  upon  his  back ; and  if  he  be  able  to 
turn  round  with  him  two  or  three  times,  in  that  pofition, 
before  he  throws  him,  his  dexterity  never  fails  of  procuring 
plaudits  from  the  fpedlators.  If  they  be  more  equally 
matched,  they  clofe  foon,  and  endeavour  to  throw  each 
other  by  entwining  their  legs,  or  lifting  each  other  from 
the  ground  ; in  which  fiiruggles  they  fliew  a prodigious  ex- 
ertion of  ftrength,  every  mufcle,  as  it  were,  being  ready  to 
burfi:  with  draining.  When  one  is  thrown,  he  immediately 
quits  the  field,  but  the  vi6lor  fits  down  for  a few  feconds, 
then  gets  up,  and  goes  to  the  fide  he  came  from,  who  pro- 
claim the  victory  aloud,  in  a fentence  delivered  flowly,  and 
in  a mufical  cadence.  After  fitting  a Ihort  fpace,  he  rifes 
again  and  challenges ; when  fometimes  feveral  antagonids 
make  their  appearance ; but  he  has  the  privilege  of  choo- 
fing  which  of  them  he  pleafes  to  wredle  with  ; and  has, 
likewife,  the  preference  of  challenging  again,  if  he  diould 
throw  his  adverfary,  until  he  himfelf  be  vanquifhed ; and- 
then  the  oppofite  fide  fing  the  fong  of  victory  in  favour  of 
their  champion.  It  alfo  often  happens,  that  five  or  fix  rife 
from  each  fide,  and  challenge  together ; in  which  cafe,  it  is 
common  to  fee  three  or  four  couple  engaged  on  the  field  at 
once.  But  it  is  adonidiing  to  fee  what  temper  they  preferve 
in  this  exercife  ; for  we  obferved  no  indances  of  their  leav- 
ing the  fpot,  with  the  lead  difpleafure  in  their  counte- 
nances. When  they  find,  that  they  are  fo  equally  matched 
as  not  to  be  likely  to  throw  each  other,  they  leave  off  by 
mutual  confent.  And  if  the  fall  of  one  is  not  fair,  or  if  it 
does  not  appear  very  clearly  who  has  had  the  advantage, 
both  fides  fing  the  victory,  and  then  they  engage  again. 

But 


302 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  But  no  perfon,  who  has  been  vanquifhed,  can  engage  with 
. his  conqueror  a fecond  time. 

The  boxers  advance  hde-ways,  changing  the  fide  at  every 
pace,  with  one  arm  ftretched  fully  out  before,  the  other  be-' 
hind  ; and  holding  a piece  of  cord  in  one  hand,  which  they 
wrap  firmly  about  it,  when  they  find  an  antagonift,  or  elfe 
have  done  fo  before  they  enter.  This,  I imagine,  they  do, 
to  prevent  a diflocation  of  the  hand  or  fingers.  Their  blows 
are  diredted  chiefly  to  the  head ; but  fometimes  to  the 
fides  ; and  are  dealt  out  with  great  adfivity.  They  fhift 
fides,  and  box  equally  well  with  both  hands.  But  one  of 
their  favourite  and  mofl  dextrous  blows,  is,  to  turn  round 
on  their  heel,  juft  as  they  have  ftruck  their  antagonift,  and 
to  give  him  another  very  fmart  one  with  the  other  hand 
backward. 

The  boxing  matches  feldom  laft  long ; and  the  parties 
either  leave  off  together,  or  one  acknowledges  his  being 
beat.  But  they  never  ling  the  fong  of  vidlory  in  thefe 
cafes,  unlefs  one  ftrikes  his  adverfary  to  the  ground  ; which 
fliews,  that,  of  the  two,  wreftling  is  their  moft  approved 
diverfion.  Not  only  boys  engage,  in  both  the  exercifes, 
but  frequently  little  girls  box  very  obftinately  for  a Ihort 
time.  In  all  which  cafes,  it  doth  not  appear,  that  they  ever 
confider  it  as  the  fmalleft  difgrace  to  be  vanquifhed ; and 
the  perfon  overcome  fits  down,  with  as  much  indifference, 
as  if  he  had  never  entered  the  lifts.  Some  of  our  people 
ventured  to  contend  with  them  in  both  exercifes,  but  were 
always  worfted ; except  in  a few  inftances,  where  it  appear- 
ed, that  the  fear  they  were  in  of  offending  us,  contributed 
more  to  the  victory,  than  the  fuperiority  of  the  perfon  they 
engaged. 

The  cattle,  which  we  had  brought,  and  which  were  all 

on 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

on  fhore,  however  carefully  guarded,  I was  fenfible,  run  no 
fmall  rifk,  when  I confidered  the  thievifli  difpolition  of 
many  of  the  natives,  and  their  dexterity  in  appropriating  to 
themfelves  by  health,  what  they  faw  no  profpech  of  obtain- 
ing by  fair  means.  For  this  reafon  I thought  it  prudent  to 
declare  my  intention  of  leaving  behind  me  fome  of  our 
animals ; and  even  to  make  a dihribution  of  them  previ- 
ouily  to  my  departure. 

With  this  view,  in  the  evening  of  the  19th,  I aflembled 
all  the  Chiefs  before  our  houfe,  and  my  intended  prefents 
to  them  were  marked  out.  To  Poulaho,  the  king,  I gave  a 
young  Englilh  bull  and  cow;  to  Mareewagee,  a Cape  ram, 
and  two  ewes  ; and  to  Feenou,  a horfe  and  a mare.  As  my 
defign,  to  make  fuch  a diftribution,  had  been  made  known 
the  day  before,  moft  of  the  people  in  the  neighbourhood 
were  then  prefent.  I inftrudled  Omai  to  tell  them,  that  there 
were  no  fuch  animals  within  many  months  fail  of  their 
ill  and ; that  we  had  brought  them,  for  their  ufe,  from  that 
immenfe  diftance,  at  a vaft  trouble  and  expence ; that> 
therefore,  they  muft  be  careful  not  to  kill  any  of  them, 
till  they  had  multiplied  to  a numerous  race ; and,  laftly, 
that  they  and  their  children  ought  to  remember,  that  they 
had  received  them  from  the  men  of  Britane.  He  alfo  ex- 
plained to  them  their  feveral  ufes,  and  what  elfe  was  ne- 
ceflary  for  them  to  know,  or  rather  as  far  as  he  knew ; 
for  Omai  was  not  very  well  verfed  in  fuch  things  himfelf. 
As  I intended  that  the  above  prefents  fhould  remain  with 
the  other  cattle,  till  we  were  ready  to  fail,  I defired  each  of 
the  Chiefs  to  fend  a man  or  two  to  look  after  their  refpedlive 
animals,  along  with  my  people,  in  order  that  they  might 
be  better  acquainted  with  them,  and  with  the  manner 
of  treating  them.  The  king  and  Feenou  did  fo;  but  nei- 
ther 


303 


1777- 

Tune. 

t - — » 


Thurfday  19. 


304 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  tlier  Mareewagee,  nor  any  other  perfon  for  him,  took  the 
. leaft  notice  of  the  flieep  afterward ; nor  did  old  Toobon 
attend  at  this  meeting,  though  he  was  invited,  and  was  in 
the  neighbourhood.  I had  meant  to  give  him  the  goats, 
viz.  a ram  and  two  ewes ; which,  as  he  was  fo  indifferent 
about  them,  I added  to  the  king’s  fliare. 

Friday  20.  It  foon  appeared,  that  fome  were  diflatisfied  with  this 
allotment  of  our  animals ; for,  early  next  morning,  one  of 
our  kids,  and  two  turkey-cocks,  were  miffing.  I could  not 
be  fo  fimple  as  to  fuppofe,  that  this  was  merely  an  acci- 
dental lofs ; and  I was  determined  to  have  them  again. 
The  firft  ftep  I took  was  to  feize  on  three  canoes  that  hap- 
pened to  be  along-fide  the  ffiips.  I then  went  affiore,  and, 
having  found  the  king,  his  brother,  Feenou,  and  fome 
other  Chiefs,  in  the  houfe  that  we  occupied,  I immediately 
put  a guard  over  them,  and  gave  them  to  underhand,  that 
they  muft  remain  under  reftraint,  till  not  only  the  kid  and 
the  turkeys,  but  the  other  things  that  had  been  flolen  from 
us,  at  different  times,  were  reftored.  They  concealed,  as  well 
as  they  could,  their  feelings,  on  finding  themfelves  prifoners ; 
and,  having  affured  me,  that  every  thing  fliould  be  reftored, 
as  I defired,  fat  down  to  drink  their  kava.,  feemingly  much  at 
their  eafe.  It  was  not  long  before  an  axe,  and  an  iron  w'edge, 
were  brought  to  me.  In  the  mean  time,  fome  armed  natives 
began  to  gather  behind  the  houfe ; but,  on  a part  of  our  guard 
marching  againft  them,  they  difperfed ; and  I advifed  the 
Chiefs  to  give  orders,  that  no  more  fliould  appear.  Such  or- 
ders were  accordingly  given  by  them,  and  they  were  obey- 
ed. On  afking  them  to  go  aboard  with  me  to  dinner,  they 
readily  confented.  But  fome  having  afterward  objected  to 
the  king’s  going,  he  inftantly  rofe  up,  and  declared  he 
would  be  the  firft  man.  Accordingly  w'e  came  on  board, 

I kept 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


305 


1 kept  them  there  till  near  four  o’clock,  when  I condudled 
them  adiore  ; and,  foon  after,  the  kid,  and  one  of  the 
turkey-cocks,  were  brought  back.  The  other,  they  faid, 
fliould  be  reftored  the  next  morning.  I believed  this  would 
happen,  and  releafed  both  them  and  the  canoes. 

After  the  Chiefs  had  left  us,  I walked  out  with  Omai, 
to  obferve  how  the  people  about  us  fared  ; for  this  was  the 
time  of  their  meals.  I found  that,  in  general,  they  were 
at  fliort  commons.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at,  fince 
moft  of  the  yams,  and  other  provifions  which  they  brought 
with  them,  were  fold  to  us ; and  they  never  thought  of  re- 
turning to  their  own  habitations,  while  they  could  find 
any  fort  of  fubliftence  in  our  neighbourhood.  Our  flation 
was  upon  an  uncultivated  point  of  land ; fo  that  there 
were  none  of  the  illanders,  who,  properly,  refided  within 
half  a mile  of  us.  But,  even  at  this  diftance,  the  multitude 
of  flrangers  being  fo  great,  one  might  have  expedfed,  that 
every  houfe  would  have  been  much  crowded.-  It  was  quite 
otherwife.  The  families  refiding  there  wxre  as  much  left 
to  themfelves,  as  if  there  had  not  been  a fupernumerary 
vifiter  near  them.  All  the  flrangers  lived  in  little  tempo- 
rary flieds,  or  under  trees  and  bullies  ; and  the  cocoa-trees 
were  flripped  of  their  branches,  to  eredl  habitations  for  the 
Chiefs. 

In  this  walk  we  met  with  about  half  a dozen  women,  in 
one  place,  at  fupper.  Two  of  the  company,  I obferved, 
being  fed  by  the  others,  on  our  afking  the  reafon,  they 
faid  taboo  mattee.  On  farther  inquiry  we  found,  that  one 
of  them  had,  two  months  before,  wafhed  the  dead  corpfe 
of  a Chief ; and  that,  on  this  account,  flie  was  not  to 
handle  any  food  for  five  months.  The  other  had  performed 
the  fame  office  to  the  corpfe  of  another  perfon  of  inferior 

VoL.  I.  R r rank. 


1777- 
June. 

\ — ; 


3o6 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777*  rank,  and  was  now  under  the  fame  reftri6lion ; but  not  for 
. . fo  long  a time.  At  another  place,  hard  by,  we  faw  another 

woman  fed ; and  we  learnt,  that  fhe  had  affifted  in  wafhing 
the  corpfe  of  the  above-mentioned  Chief. 

Saturday  zi.  Early  the  next  morning,  the  king  came  on  board,  to  in- 
vite me  to  an  entertainment,  which  he  propofed  to  give  the 
fame  day.  He  had  already  been  under  the  barber’s  hands ; 
his  head  being  all  befmeared  with  red  pigment,  in  order 
to  redden  his  hair,  which  was  naturally  of  a dark  brown 
colour.  After  breakfaft,  I attended  him  to  the  Ihore  ; and 
we  found  his  people  very  bufy,  in  two  places,  in  the  front 
of  our  area,  fixing,  in  an  upright  and  fquare  pofition, 
thus  [ o o ]?  four  very  long  polls,  near  two  feet  from  each 
other.  The  fpace  between  the  polls  was  afterward  filled 
up  with  yams ; and  as  they  went  on  filling  it,  they  fallen- 
ed  pieces  of  Hicks  acrofs,  from  poll  to  poll,  at  the  dillance  of 
about  every  four  feet ; to  prevent  the  polls  from  feparating, 
by  the  weight  of  the  inclofed  yams,  and  alfo  to  get  up  by. 
When  the  yams  had  reached  the  top  of  the  firll  polls,  they 
faftened  others  to  them,  and  fo  continued  till  each  pile  was 
the  height  of  thirty  feet,  or  upward.  On  the  top  of  one, 
they  placed  two  baked  hogs ; and  on  the  top  of  the  other, 
a living  one  ; and  another  they  tied  by  the  legs,  half-way 
up.  It  was  matter  of  curiofity  to  obferve,  with  what  facility 
and  difpatch  thefe  two  piles  were  raifed.  Had  our  feamen 
been  ordered  to  execute  fuch  a work,  they  would  have 
fworn  that  it  could  not  be  performed  without  carpenters  ; 
and  the  carpenters  would  have  called  to  their  aid  a dozen 
different  forts  of  tools,  and  have  expended,  at  leall,  a hun- 
dred weight  of  nails  ; and,  after  all,  it  would  have  employ- 
ed them  as  many  days,  as  it  did  thefe  people  hours.  But 
feamen,  like  moll  other  amphibious  animals,  are  always 

the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


307 


the  moft  helplefs  on  land.  After  they  had  completed  thefe  177 
two  piles,  they  made  feveral  other  heaps  of  yams  and  bread-  . 
fmit  on  each  fide  of  the  area ; to  which  were  added  a turtle, 
and  a large  quantity  of  excellent  fifli.  All  this,  with  a piece 
of  cloth,  a mat,  and  fome  red  feathers,  was  the  king’s  pre- 
fent  to  me  ; and  he  feemed  to  pique  himfelf  on  exceeding, 
as  he  really  did,  Feenou’s  liberality,  which  I experienced 
at  Hapaee. 

About  one  o’clock  they  began  the  mai^  or  dances ; the  firft 
of  which  was  almoft  a copy  of  the  firfl  that  was  exhibited  at 
Mareewagee’s  entertainment.  The  fecond  was  conducSIed 
by  Captain  Furneaux’s  Toobou,  who,  as  we  mentioned,  had 
alfo  danced  there  ; and  in  this,  four  or  five  women  were  in- 
troduced, who  went  through  the  feveral  parts  with  as  much 
exadlnefs  as  the  men.  Toward  the  end,  the  performers  di- 
vided to  leave  room  for  two  champions,  who  exercifed  their 
clubs,  as  defcribed  on  a former  occafion.  And,  in  the  third 
dance,  which  was  the  lafl  now  prefented,  two  more  men, 
with  their  clubs,  difplayed  their  dexterity.  The  dances 
were  fucceeded  by  wreftling  and  boxing ; and  one  man  en- 
tered the  lifts  with  a fort  of  club,  made  from  the  ftem  of  a 
cocoa-leaf,  which  is  firm  and  heavy ; but  could  find  no  an- 
tagonift  to  engage  him  at  fo  rough  a fport.  At  night  we 
had  the  bomai  repeated  ; in  which  Poulaho  himfelf  danced, 
drelTed  in  Englifh  manufacfture.  But  neither  thefe,  nor  the 
dances  in  the  day-time,  were  fo  confiderable,  nor  carried 
on  with  fo  much  fpirit,  as  Feenou’s,  or  Mareewagee’s ; and, 
therefore,  there  is  lefs  occafion  to  be  more  particular  in  our 
defcription  of  them. 

In  order  to  be  prefent  the  whole  time,  I dined  afhore. 

The  king  fat  down  with  us  ; but  he  neither  eat  nor  drank. 

I found  that  this  was  owing  to  the  prefence  of  a female, 

R r 2 whom, 


3o8 


A VOYAGE  TO 


whom,  at  his  delire,  I had  admitted  to  the  dining  party ; 
j and  who,  as  we  afterward  underftood,  had  fnperior  rank  to 
himfelf.  As  foon  as  this  great  perfonage  had  dined,  flie 
ftepped  up  to  the  king,  who  put  his  hands  to  her  feet ; and 
then  fhe  retired.  He  immediately  dipped  his  fingers  into  a 
glafs  of  wine,  and  then  received  the  obeifance  of  all  her 
followers.  This  was  the  fingle  inftance  we  ever  obferved 
of  his  paying  this  mark  of  reverence  to  any  perfon.  At 
the  king’s  defire,  1 ordered  fome  fireworks  to  be  played  off 
in  the  evening ; but,  unfortunately,  being  damaged,  this 
exhibition  did  not  anfwer  expectation. 


CHAP. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


309 


CHAP.  VIII. 

Some  of  the  Officers  plundered  by  the  Natives. — ^ 

Party. — A Vifit  to  Poulaho. — A Fiatooka  defcribed. — Ob- 
Jervations  on  the  Country  entertainment  at  Poulaho's 
Houfe. — His  Mourning  Ceremony. — 0/  the  Kava  Plant-) 
and  the  Manner  of  preparing  the  Liquor. — Account  of 
Onevy,  a little  JJland. — -One  of  the  Natives  wounded  by 
a Sentinel. — Meffirs.  King  and  Anderfon  vifit  the  King's 
Brother. — 'Pheir  entertainment. — Another  Mourning  Ce- 
remony.— Manner  of  paffitng  the  Night. — Remarks  on  the 
Country  they  paffied  through. — Preparations  made  for  fail- 
ing. — An  Pclipfe  of  the  Sun,  imperfeBly  obferved. — Mr. 
Anderfon's  Account  of  the  If  and)  and  its  ProduBions. 

AS  no  more  entertainments  were  to  be  expected,  on  1777- 
either  fide,  and  the  curiofity  of  the  populace  was,  ■ , 

by  this  time,  pretty  well  fatisfied  ; on  the  day  after  Poula-  Sunday  22. 
ho’s  haiva,  moft  of  them  left  us.  We  fiill,  however,  had 
thieves  about  us;  and,  encouraged  by  the  negligence  of 
our  own  people,  we  had  continual  inftances  of  their  depre- 
dations. 

Some  of  the  officers,  belonging  to  both  ffiips,  who  had 
made  an  excurfion  into  the  interior  parts  of  the  ifland, 
without  my  leave,  and,  indeed,  without  my  knowledge, 
returned  this  evening,  after  an  abfence  of  two  days.  They 
had  taken  with  them  their  mufquets,  with  the  neceffary 
ammunition,  and  feveral  fmall  articles  of  the  favourite 

commodities ; 


310 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  commodities ; all  which  the  natives  had  the  dexterity  to 
heal  from  them,  in  the  courfe  of  their  expedition.  This 
affair  was  likely  to  be  attended  with  inconvenient  confe- 
' quences.  For,  oiir  plundered  travellers,  upon  their  return, 
without  confulting;  me,  employed  Omai  to  complain  to 
the  king  of  the  treatment  they  had  met  with.  He,  not 
knowing  what  hep  I hiould  take,  and,  from  what  had 
already  happened,  fearing  left  1 might  lay  him  again 

Monday  23.  under  reftraint,  went  off  early  the  next  morning.  His 
example  was  followed  by  Feenou;  fo  that  we  had  not  a 
Chief,  of  any  authority,  remaining  in  our  neighbourhood. 
1 was  very  much  difpleafed  at  this,  and  reprimanded  Omai 
for  having  prefumed  to  meddle.  This  reprimand  put  him 
upon  his  mettle  to  bring  his  friend  F eenou  back ; and  he 
fucceeded  in  the  negociation ; having  this  powerful  argu- 
ment to  urge,  that  he  might  depend  upon  my  ufing  no 
violent  meafures  to  oblige  the  natives  to  reftore  what  had 
been  taken  from  the  gentlemen.  Feenou,  trufting  to  this 
declaration,  returned  toward  the  evening ; and,  encouraged 
by  his  reception,  Poulaho  favoured  us  with  his  company 
the  day  after. 

Tuefday24.  Both  thefe  Chiefs,  upon  this  occafton, ' very  juftly  ob- 
ferved  to  me,  that,  if  any  of  my  people,  at  any  time,  wanted 
to  go  into  the  country,  they  ought  to  be  acquainted  with 
it ; in  which  cafe  they  would  fend  proper  people  along  with 
them ; and  then  they  would  be  anfwerable  for  their  fafety. 
And  1 am  convinced,  from  experience,  that,  by  taking  this 
very  reafonable  precaution,  a man  and  his  property  may  be 
as  fafe  among  thefe  iflanders,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  more 
civilized  world.  Though  1 gave  myfelf  no  trouble  about 
the  recovery  of  the  things  ftolen  upon  this  occafton,  moft 
of  them,  through  Feenou’s  interpofttion,  were  recovered ; 

except 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


311 


except  one  mufquet,  and  a few  other  articles  of  inferior  1777. 
value.  By  this  time  alfo,  we  had  recovered  the  turkey-  . . 

cock,  and  moft  of  the  tools,  and  other  matters,  that  had 
been  ftolen  from  our  workmen. 

On  the  25th,  two  boats,  which  I had  fent  to  look  for  a Wednef.  25. 
channel,  by  which  we  might,  moft  commodioully,  get  to 
fea,  returned.  The  Mafters,  who  commanded  them,  re- 
ported, that  the  channel  to  the  North,  by  which  we  came 
in,  was  highly  dangerous,  being  full  of  coral  rocks  from 
one  fide  to  the  other ; but  that,  to  the  Eaftward,  there  was 
a very  good  channel ; which,  however,  was  very  much 
contracted,  in  one  place,  by  the  fmall  iflands ; fo  that  a 
leading  wind  would  be  requifite  to  get  through  it ; that  is, 
a Wefterly  wind,  which,  we  had  found,  did  not  often  blow 
here.  We  had  now  recruited  the  Ihips  with  wood  and 
water ; we  had  finifhed  the  repairs  of  our  fails ; and  had 
little  more  to  expeCt  from  the  inhabitants,  of  the  produce  of 
their  illand.  However,  as  an  eclipfe  of  the  fun  was  to 
happen  upon  the  5th  of  the  next  month,  I refolved  to  de- 
fer failing  till  that  time  had  elapfed,  in  order  to  have  a 
chance  of  obferving  it. 

Having,  therefore,  fome  days  of  leifure  before  me,  a 
party  of  us,  accompanied  by  Poulaho,  fet  out,  early  next 
morning,  in  a boat,  for  Mooa,  the  village  where  he  and  the  Thurfday  26. 
other  great  men  ufually  re  fide.  As  we  rowed  up  the  inlet, 
we  met  with  fourteen  canoes  fifliing  in  company  ; in  one  of 
which  was  Poulaho’s  fon.  In  each  canoe  was  a triangular 
net,  extended  between  two  poles  ; at  the  lower  end  of  which 
was  a cod  to  receive  and  fecure  the  fifli.  They  had  already 
caught  fome  fine  mullets  ; and  they  put  about  a dozen  into 
our  boat.  I defired  to  fee  their  method  of  filhing  ; which 
they  readily  complied  with.  A flioal  of  fifli  was  fuppofed 

to 


312 


A VOYAGE  I'O 


1777.  to  be  upon  one  of  the  banks,  which  they  inftantly  inclofed 
; . in  a long  net  like  a feine,  or  fet-net.  This  the  fifiiers,  one 

getting  into  the  water  out  of  each  boat,  furrounded  with 
the  triangular  nets  in  their  hands  ; with  which  they  fcooped 
the  fifli  out  of  the  feine,  or  caught  them  as  they  attempted 
to  leap  over  it.  They  fliewed  us  the  whole  procefs  of  this 
operation  (which  feemed  to  be  a fure  one),  by  throwing 
in  fome  of  the  fifli  they  had  already  caught ; for,  at  this 
time,  there  happened  to  be  none  upon  the  bank  that  was 
inclofed. 

Leaving  the  prince  and  his  fifliing  party,  wx  proceeded 
to  the  bottom  of  the  bay,  and  landed  where  we  had  done 
before,  on  our  fruitlefs  errand  to  fee  Mareewagee.  As  foon 
as  we  got  on  fliore,  the  king  deli  red  Omai  to  tell  me,  that 
I need  be  under  no  apprehenhons  about  the  boat,  or  any 
thing  in  her,  for  not  a lingle  article  would  be  touched  by 
any  one  ; and  we  afterward  found  this  to  be  the  cafe.  We 
were  immediately  condudted  to  one  of  Poulaho’s  houfes  not 
far  off,  and  near  the  public  one,  or  malaee^  in  which  we  had 
been,  when  we  firft  vilited  Mooa.  This,  though  pretty 
large,  feemed  to  be  his  private  habitation,  and  was  lituated 
within  a plantation.  The  king  took  his  feat  at  one  end  of 
the  houfe,  and  the  people,  who  came  to  vilit  him,  fat  down, 
as  they  arrived,  in  a femicircle  at  the  other  end.  The  firft 
thing  done,  was  to  prepare  a bowl  of  kava,  and  to  order 
fome  yams  to  be  baked  for  us.  While  thefe  were  getting 
ready,  fome  of  us,  accompanied  by  a few  of  the  king’s  at- 
tendants, and  Omai  as  our  interpreter,  walked  out  to  take  a 
view  of  fiatooka^  or  burying-place,  which  we  had  obferved 
to  be  almoft  clofe  by  the  houfe,  and  was  much  more  exten- 
five,  and  feemingly  of  more  confequence,  than  any  we  had 
feen  at  the  other  illands.  We  were  told,  that  it  belonged  to 

the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


the  king.  It  confifted  of  three  pretty  large  houfes,  fituated 
upon  a riling  ground,  or  rather  juft  by  the  brink  of  it,  with 
a fmall  one,  at  fome  diftance,  all  ranged  longitudinally.  The 
middle  houfe  of  the  three  firft,  was  by  much  the  largeft, 
and  placed  in  a fquare,  twenty-four  paces  by  twenty-eight, 
raifed  about  three  feet.  The  other  houfes  were  placed  on 
little  mounts,  raifed  artificially  to  the  fame  height.  The 
floors  of  thefe  houfes,  as  alfo  the  tops  of  the  mounts  round 
them,  were  covered  with  loofe,  fine  pebbles,  and  the  whole 
was  inclofed  by  large  flat  ftones  of  hard  coral  rock,  pro- 
perly hewn,  placed  on  their  edges  ; one  of  which  ftones  mea- 
fured  twelve  feet  in  length,  two  in  breadth,  and  above  one 
in  thicknefs.  One  of  the  houfes,  contrary  to  what  we  had 
feen  before,  was  open  on  one  fide  ; and  within  it  were  two 
rude,  wooden  bulls  of  men ; one  near  the  entrance,  and  the 
other  farther  in.  On  inquiring  of  the  natives,  who  had 
followed  us  to  the  ground,  but  durft  not  enter  here.  What 
thefe  images  were  intended  for  ? they  made  us  as  fenfible 
as  we  could  wifli,  that  they  were  merely  memorials  of  fome 
Chiefs  who  had  been  buried  there,  and  not  the  reprefenta- 
tions  of  any  deity.  Such  monuments,  it  fliould  feem,  are 
feldom  raifed ; for  thefe  had,  probably,  been  erected  fe- 
veral  ages  ago.  We  were  told,  that  the  dead  had  been  bu- 
ried in  each  of  thefe  houfes ; but  no  marks  of  this  ap- 
peared. In  one  of  them,  was  the  carved  head  of  an  Ota- 
heite  canoe,  which  had  been  driven  afliore  on  their  coaft, 
and  depofited  here.  At  the  foot  of  the  rifing  ground,  was 
a large  area,  or  grafs-plot,  with  different  trees  planted  about 
it;  amongft  which  were  feveral  of  thofe  called  etoa^  very 
large.  Thefe,  as  they  refemble  the  cyprefs,  had  a fine  ef- 

* The  burying-places  of  the  Chiefs  at  the  Caroline  Iflands,  are  alfo  inclofed  in  this 
manner.  See  Lettres  Edifianta  ^ CurleufeSf  Tom.  xv.  p.  309, 

VoL.  I.  S f fea 


314 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  fedt  in  fuch  a place.  There  was,  alfo,  a row  of  low  palms 
. near  one  of  the  houfes,  and  behind  it  a ditch,  in  which 
lay  a great  number  of  old  balkets.  Mr.  Webber’s  draw- 
ing of  this  fiatookay  will  fupply  the  defedts  of  my  de- 
fcription. 

After  dinner,  or  rather  after  we  had  refrefhed  ourfelves 
with  fome  provihons  which  we  had  brought  with  us  from 
our  fhip,  we  made  an  excurlion  into  the  country,  taking  a 
pretty  large  circuit,  attended  by  one  of  the  king’s  minifters. 
Our  train  was  not  great,  as  he  would  not  fuffer  the  rabble 
to  follow  us.  He  alfo  obliged  all  thofe  whom  we  met  upon 
our  progrefs,  to  lit  down,  till  we  had  palTed ; which  is  a 
mark  of  refpedl  due  only  to  their  Sovereigns.  We  found 
by  far  the  greateft  part  of  the  country  cultivated,  and 
planted  with  various  forts  of  produdfions ; and  moft  of 
thefe  plantations  were  fenced  round.  Some  fpots,  where 
plantations  had  been  formerly,  now  produced  nothing,  ly- 
ing fallow ; and  there  were  places  that  had  never  been 
touched,  but  lay  in  a Hate  of  nature  ; and,  yet,  even  thefe 
were  ufeful,  in  affording  them  timber,  as  they  were  gene- 
rally covered  with  trees.  We  met  with  feveral  large  unin- 
habited houfes,  which,  we  were  told,  belonged  to  the  king. 
There  were  many  public  and  well-beaten  roads,  and  abun- 
dance of  foot-paths  leading  to  every  part  of  the  illand. 
The  roads  being  good,  and  the  country  level,  traveUing 
was  very  eafy.  It  is  remarkable,  that  when  we  were  on 
the  moll  elevated  parts,  at  leall  a hundred  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  fea,  we  often  met  with  the  lame  coral  rock, 
which  is  found  at  the  lliore,  projecting  above  the  furface, 
and  perforated  and  cut  into  all  thofe  inequalities  which  are 
ufually  feen  in  rocks  that  lie  within  the  walh  of  the  tide. 
And  yet  thefe  very  fpots,  with  hardly  any  foil  upon  them, 

were 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

were  covered  with  luxuriant  vegetation.  We  were  con- 
ducSled  to  feveral  little  pools,  and  to  fome  fprings  of  wa- 
ter ; but,  in  general,  they  were  either  {linking  or  brackilli, 
though  recommended  to  us  by  the  natives  as  excellent. 
The  former  were,  moftly,  inland,  and  the  latter  near  the 
fliore  of  the  bay,  and  below  high-water  mark ; fo  that 
tolerable  water  could  be  taken  up  from  them,  only  when 
the  tide  was  out. 

When  we  returned  from  our  walk,  which  was  not  till  the 
dufk  of  the  evening,  our  fupper  was  ready.  It  conlifted 
of  a baked  hog,  fome  fifli,  and  yams,  all  excellently  well 
cooked,  after  the  method  of  thefe  illands.  As  there  was 
nothing  to  amufe  us  after  fupper,  we  followed  the  cuftom 
of  the  country,  and  lay  down  to  lleep,  our  beds  being  mats 
fpread  upon  the  floor,  and  cloth  to  cover  us.  The  king, 
who  had  made  himfelf  very  happy  with  fome  wine  and 
brandy  which  we  had  brought,  flept  in  the  fame  houfe,  as 
well  as  feveral  others  of  the  natives.  Long  before  day- 
break, he  and  they  all  rofe,  and  fat  converflng  by  moon- 
light. The  converfation,  as  might  well  be  guelfed,  turned 
wholly  upon  us  ; the  king  entertaining  his  company  with 
an  account  of  what  he  had  feen,  or  remarked.  As  foon  as  it 
was  day,  they  difperfed,  fome  one  way,  and  fome  another ; 
but  it  was  not  long  before  they  all  returned,  and,  with 
them,  feveral  more  of  their  countrymen. 

They  now  began  to  prepare  a bowl  of  kava ; and,  leaving 
them  fo  employed,  I went  to  pay  a vilit  to  Toobou,  Captain 
Furneaux’s  friend,  who  had  a houfe  hard  by,  which,  for 
flze  and  neatnefs,  was  exceeded  by  few  in  the  place.  As  I 
had  left  the  others,  fo  I found  here  a company,  preparing 
a morning  draught.  This  Chief  made  a prefent  to  me  of  a 
Uving  hog,  a baked  one,  a quantity  of  yams,  and  a large 

.S  f 2 piece 


315 

*777- 

Tune. 

t—  -t—  -» 


Friday  27. 


3i6 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  piece  of  cloth.  When  I returned  to  the  king,  I found 
him,  and  his  circle  of  attendants,  drinking  the  fecond 
bowl  of  kava.  That  being  emptied,  he  told  Omai,  that 
he  was  going  prefently  to  perform  a mourning  ceremony, 
called  'Tooge,  on  account  of  a fon  who  had  been  dead 
fome  time ; and  he  delired  us  to  accompany  him.  We 
w'ere  glad  of  the  opportunity,  expelling  to  fee  fomewhat 
new  or  curious. 

The  firlf  thing  the  Chief  did,  was  to  itep  out  of  the  houfe, 
attended  by  two  old  women,  and  put  on  a new  fuit  of 
clothes,  or  rather  a new  piece  of  cloth,  and,  over  it,  an  old 
ragged  mat,  that  might  have  ferved  his  great  grandfather, 
on  fome  fuch  occalion.  His  fervants,  or  thofe  who  attended 
him,  were  all  dreffed  in  the  fame  manner,  excepting  that 
none  of  their  mats  could  vie,  in  antiquity,  with  that  of  their 
mafter.  Thus  equipped,  we  marched  off,  preceded  by  about 
eight  or  ten  perfons,  all  in  the  above  habits  of  ceremony, 
each  of  them,  befides,  having  a fmall  green  bough  about 
his  neck.  Poulaho  held  his  bough  in  his  hand,  till  we  drew 
near  the  place  of  rendezvous,  when  he  alfo  put  it  about 
« his  neck.  We  now  entered  a fmall  inclofure,  in  which  was 
a neat  houfe,  and  we  found  one  man  fitting  before  it.  As 
the  company  entered,  they  pulled  off  the  green  branches 
from  round  their  necks,  and  threw  them  away.  The  king 
having  firft  feated  himfelf,  the  others  fat  down  before  him, 
in  the  ufual  manner.  The  circle  increafed,  by  others  drop- 
ping in,  to  the  number  of  a hundred  or  upward,  moflly 
old  men,  all  dreffed  as  above  defcribed.  The  company  be- 
ing completely  affembled,  a large  root  of  kava,  brought  by 
one  of  the  king’s  fervants,  was  produced,  and  a bowl  which 
contained  four  or  five  gallons.  Several  perfons  now  began 
to  chew  the  root,  and  this  bowl  was  made  brim  full  of 

liquor. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


317 


liquor.  While  it  was  preparing,  others  were  employed  in 
making  drinking  cups  of  plantain  leaves.  The  firlt  cup 
that  was  filled,  was  prefented  to  the  king,  and  he  ordered 
it  to  be  given  to  another  perfon.  The  fecond  was  alfo 
brought  to  him,  which  he  drank,  and  the  third  was  offered 
to  me.  Afterward,  as  each  cup  was  filled,  the  man  who 
filled  it,  afked,  who  was  to  have  it  ? Another  then  named 
the  perfon  ; and  to  him  it  was  carried.  As  the  bowl  grew 
low,  the  man  who  diifributed  the  liquor  feemed  rather  at  a 
lofs  to  whom  cups  of  it  fhould  be  next  fent,  and  frequently 
confulted  thofe  who  fat  near  him.  This  mode  of  diftribu- 
tion  continued,  while  any  hquor  remained  ; and  though 
not  half  the  company  had  a fliare,  yet  no  one  feemed  dif- 
fatisfied.  About  half  a dozen  cups  ferved  for  all ; and  each, 
as  it  was  emptied,  was  thrown  down  upon  the  ground, 
where  the  fervants  picked  it  up,  and  carried  it  to  be  filled 
again.  During  the  whole  time,  the  Chief  and  his  circle 
fat,  as  was  ufually  the  cafe,  with  a great  deal  of  gravity, 
hardly  fpeaking  a word  to  each  other. 

We  had  long  waited  in  expe6tation,  each  moment,  of 
feeing  the  mourning  ceremony  begin ; when,  foon  after 
the  kava  was  drank  out,  to  our  great  furprize  and  difap- 
pointment,  they  all  rofe  up  and  difperfed ; and  Poulaho 
told  us,  he  was  now  ready  to  attend  us  to  the  fliips.  If 
this  was  a mourning  ceremony,  it  was  a flrange  one.  Per- 
haps, it  was  the  fecond,  third,  or  fourth  mourning;  or, 
which  was  not  very  uncommon,  Omai  might  have  mif- 
underllood  what  Poulaho  faid  to  him.  For,  excepting 
the  change  of  drefs,  and  the  putting  the  green  bough 
round  their  necks,  nothing  feemed  to  have  paffed  at  this 
meeting,  but  what  we  faw  them  practife,  too  frequently, 
every  day. 


J777- 

June. 


“ We 


A VOYAGE  TO 


31S 

1777.  “ We  had  feen  the  drinking  of  kava  fometimes,  at  the 

. other  iflands ; but,  by  no  means,  fo  frequently  as  here, 
where  it  feems  to  be  the  only  forenoon  employment  of  the 
principal  people.  The  kava  is  a fpecies  of  pepper,  which 
they  cultivate  for  this  purpofe,  and  efteem  it  a valuable  ar- 
ticle, taking  great  care  to  defend  the  young  plants  from 
any  injury  ; and  it  is  commonly  planted  about  their  houfes. 
It  feldom  grows  to  more  than  a man’s  height;  though  I 
have  feen  fome  plants  almoft  double  that.  It  branches  con- 
liderably,  with  large  heart-fhaped  leaves,  and  jointed  ftalks. 
The  root  is  the  only  part  that  is  ufed  at  the  Friendly  Illands, 
which,  being  dug  up,  is  given  to  the  fervants  that  attend, 
who,  breaking  it  in  pieces,  fcrape  the  dirt  off  with  a fliell, 
or  bit  of  ftick ; and  then  each  begins  and  chews  his  portion, 
which  he  fpits  into  a piece  of  plantain  leaf.  The  perfon, 
who  is  to  prepare  the  liquor,  colle61:s  all  thefe  mouthfuls, 
and  puts  them  into  a large  wooden  dilh  or  bowl,  adding  as 
much  water  as  will  make  it  of  a proper  ftrength.  It  is, 
then,  well  mixed  up  with  the  hands ; and  fome  loofe  fluff, 
of  which  mats  are  made,  is  thrown  upon  the  furface, 
which  intercepts  the  fibrous  part,  and  is  wrung  hard,  to 
get  as  much  hquid  out  from  it,  as  is  poflible.  The  manner 
of  diftributing  it  need  not  be  repeated.  The  quantity  which 
is  put  into  each  cup,  is  commonly  about  a quarter  of  a pint. 
The  immediate  effedl  of  this  beverage  is  not  perceptible  on 
thefe  people,  who  ufe  it  fo  frequently ; but  on  fome  of 
ours,  who  ventured  to  try  it,  though  fo  naftily  prepared,  it 
had  the  fame  power  as  fpirits  have,  in  intoxicating  them ; 
or,  rather,  it  produced  that  kind  of  flupefacSlion,  which  is 
the  confequence  of  ufing  opium,  or  other  fubflances  of  that 

* The  following  account  of  kava^  to  the  end  of  this  paragraph,  is  infertcd  from  Mr. 
Anderfon’s  journal. 

kind. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


319 


kind.  It  Ihould  be  obferved,  at  the  fame  time,  that  though 
thefe  illanders  have  this  liquor  always  frefh  prepared,  and  I 
have  feen  them  drink  it  feven  times  before  noon,  it  is,  ne- 
verthelefs,  fo  difagreeable,  or,  at  leaft,  feems  fo,  that  the 
greateft  part  of  them  cannot  fwallow  it  without  making  wry 
faces,  and  fhuddering  afterward.” 

As  foon  as  this  mourning  ceremony  was  over,  we  left 
Mooa,  and  fet  out  to  return  to  the  fhips.  While  we  rowed 
down  the  lagoon  or  inlet,  we  met  with  two  canoes  coming 
in  from  filhing.  Poulaho  ordered  them  to  be  called  along- 
Iide  our  boat,  and  took  from  them  every  fifli  and  fliell  they 
had  got.  He,  afterward,  flopped  two  other  canoes,  and 
fearched  them,  but  they  had  nothing.  Why  this  was  done, 
I cannot  fay ; for  we  had  plenty  of  provilions  in  the  boat. 
Some  of  this  fifli  he  gave  to  me;  and  his  fervants  fold 
the  reft  on  board  the  fhip.  As  we  proceeded  down  the  in- 
let, we  overtook  a large  failing  canoe.  Every  perfon  on 
board  her,  that  was  upon  his  legs  when  we  came  up,  fat 
down  tiU  we  had  pafled ; even  the  man  who  fleered, 
though  he  could  not  manage  the  helm,  except  in  a ftanding 
pofture. 

Poulaho,  and  others,  having  informed  me,  that  there 
was  fome  excellent  water  On  Onevy,  a little  ifland,  which 
lies  about  a league  off  the  mouth  of  the  inlet,  and  on 
the  North  fide  of  the  Eaftern  channel,  we  landed  there, 
in  order  to  tafte  it.  But  I found  it  to  be  as  brackifh  as 
moft  that  we  had  met  with.  This  ifland  is  quite  in  a 
natural  ftate,  being  only  frequented  as  a fifhing  place, 
and  has  nearly  the  fame  productions  as  Palmerfton’s 
Ifland,  with  fome  etoa  trees.  After  leaving  Onevy,  where 
we  dined,  in  our  way  to  the  fhip,  we  took  a view  of  a cu- 
rious coral  rock,  which  feems  to  have  been  thrown  upon 

the 


320 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777. 

June. 




Saturday  28. 


the  reef  where  it  hands.  It  is  elevated  about  ten  or  twelve 
feet  above  the  furface  of  the  fea  that  furrounds  it.  The 
bafe  it  refts  upon,  is  not  above  one-third  of  the  circumfe- 
rence of  its  projecting  fummit,  which  I judged  to  be  about 
one  hundred  feet,  and  is  covered  with  etoa  and  pandanus 
trees. 

When  we  got  on  board  the  fliip,  I found  that  every  thing 
had  been  quiet  during  my  abfence,  not  a theft  having  been 
committed;  of  which  Feenou,  and  Futtafaihe,  the  king’s 
brother,  who  had  undertaken  the  management  of  his 
countrymen,  boalted  not  a little.  This  fliews  what  power 
the  Chiefs  have,  when  they  have  the  will  to  execute  it; 
which  we  were  feldom  to  expeCt,  lince,  whatever  was 
ftolen  from  us,  generally,  if  not  always,  was  conveyed  to 
them. 

The  good  conduCl  of  the  natives  was  of  fliort  duration ; 
for,  the  next  day,  fix  or  eight  of  them  affaulted  fome  of  our 
people,  who  were  fawing  planks.  They  were  fired  upon 
by  the  fentry ; and  one  was  fuppofed  to  be  wounded,  and 
three  others  taken.  Thefe  I kept  confined  till  night ; and 
did  not  difmifs  them  without  punifhment.  After  this,  they 
behaved  with  a little  more  circumfpeClion,  and  gave  us 
much  lefs  trouble.  This  change  of  behaviour,  was  cer- 
tainly occafioned  by  the  man  being  wounded  ; for,  before, 
they  had  only  been  told  of  the  effeCl  of  fire-arms,  but  now 
they  had  felt  it.  The  repeated  infolence  of  the  natives,  had 
induced  me  to  order  the  mufquets  of  the  fentries  to  be 
loaded  with  fmall  fliot,  and  to  authorize  them  to  fire  on  par- 
ticular occafions.  I took  it  for  granted,  therefore,  that  this 
man  had  only  been  wounded  with  fmall  fliot.  But  Mr. 
King  and  Mr.  Anderfon,  in  an  excurfion  into  the  country, 
met  with  him,  and  found  indubitable  marks  of  his  having 

been 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

been  wounded,  but  not  dangeroufly,  with  a mufquet  ball. 
I never  could  find  out  how  this  mufquet  happened  to  be 
charged  with  ball ; and  there  were  people  enough  ready  to 
fwear,  that  its  contents  were  only  fmall  fliot. 

Mr.  Anderfon’s  account  of  the  excurfion,  juft  menfioned, 
will  fill  up  an  interval  of  two  days,  during  which  nbthing 
of  note  happened,  at  the  fliips  : “ Mr.  King  and  I went,  on 
the  30th,  along  with  Futtafaihe  as  vifiters  to  his  houfe, 
which  is  at  Mooa,  very  near  that  of  his  brother  Poulaho. 
A fliort  time  after  we  arrived,  a pretty  large  hog  was  killed ; 
which  is  done  by  repeated  ftrokes  on  the  head.  The  hair 
was  then  fcraped  off,  very  dextroufly,  with  the  lharp  edge 
of  pieces  of  fplit  bamboo ; taking  the  entrails  out  at  a large 
oval  hole  cut  in  the  belly,  by  the  fame  fimple  inftrument. 
Before  this,  they  had  prepared  an  oven ; which  is  a large 
hole  dug  in  the  earth,  filled  at  the  bottom  with  ftones,  about 
the  fize  of  the  fift,  over  which  a fire  is  made  till  they  are 
red  hot.  They  took  fome  of  thefe  ftones,  wrapt  up  in  leaves 
of  the  bread-fruit  tree,  and  filled  the  hog’s  belly,  ftufiing 
in  a quantity  of  leaves,  to  prevent  their  falling  out,  and 
putting  a plug  of  the  fame  kind  in  the  anus.  The  carcafe 
was  then  placed  on  fome  fticks  laid  acrofs  the  ftones,  in  a 
ftanding  pofture,  and  covered  with  a great  quantity  of  plan- 
tain leaves.  After  which,  they  dug  up  the  earth,  all  round ; 
and  having  thus  effeblually  clofed  the  oven,  the  operation 
of  baking  required  no  farther  interference. 

In  the  mean  time  we  walked  about  the  country,  but  met 
with  nothing  remarkable,  except  a Jiatooka  of  one  houfe, 
ftanding  on  an  artificial  mount,  at  leaft  thirty  feet  high.  A 
little  on  one  fide  of  it,  was  a pretty  large  open  area ; and, 
not  far  off,  was  a good  deal  of  uncultivated  ground ; which, 
on  inquiring  why  it  lay  wafte,  our  guides  feemed  to  fay, 

VoL.  I.  T t belonged 


321 


1777- 

June. 

' 


Monday  30. 


522 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  belonged  to  the  Jiatooka  (which  was  Poulaho’s),  and  was  not, 
. by  any  means,  to  be  touched.  There  was  alfo,  at  no  great 
diftance,  a number  of  etoa  trees,  on  which  clung  vail  num- 
bers of  the  large  ternate  bats,  making  a difagreeable  noife. 
We  could  not  kill  any,  at  this  time,  for  want  of  mufquets  ; 
but  fome,  that  were  got  at  Annamooka,  meafured  near 
three  feet,  when  the  wings  were  extended.  On  our  return- 
ing to  Futtafaihe’s  houfe,  he  ordered  the  hog,  that  had  been 
dreffed,  to  be  produced,  with  feveral  balkets  of  baked  yams, 
and  fome  cocoa-nuts.  But  we  found,  that,  inlfead  of  his 
entertaining  us,  we  were  to  entertain  him ; the  property  of 
the  feaft  being  entirely  transferred  to  us,  as  his  guetls,  and 
we  were  to  difpofe  of  it  as  we  pleafed.  The  fame  perfon 
who  cleaned  the  hog  in  the  morning,  now  cut  it  up  (but 
not  before  we  delired  him),  in  a very  dextrous  manner, 
with  a knife  of  fplit  bamboo ; dividing  the  feveral  parts,  and 
hitting  the  joints,  with  a quicknefs  and  fkill  that  furprized 
us  very  much.  The  whole  was  fet  down  before  us,  though 
at  leaft  fifty  pounds  weight,  until  we  took  a fmall  piece 
away,  and  defired,  that  they  would  fliare  the  reft  amongft 
the  people  fitting  round.  But  it  was  not  without  a great 
many  fcruples  they  did  that  at  laft ; and  then  they  afked, 
what  particular  perfons  they  fhould  give  it  to.  However, 
they  were  very  well  pleafed,  when  they  found,  that  it  was 
not  contrary  to  any  cuftom  of  ours ; fome  carrying  off  the 
portion  they  had  received,  and  others  eating  it  upon  the 
fpot.  It  was  with  great  difficulty,  that  we  could  prevail 
upon  Futtafaihe  himfelf  to  eat  a fmall  bit. 

After  dinner,  we  went  with  him,  and  five  or  fix  people, 
his  attendants,  toward  the  place  where  Poulaho’s  mourning 
ceremony  was  tranfacfted,  the  laft  time  we  were  at  Mooa ; 
but  we  did  not  enter  the  inclofure.  Every  perfon  who  went 

with 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


3^3 


with  us,  had  the  mat  tied  over  his  cloth,  and  fome  leaves  1777. 
about  the  neck,  as  had  been  done  on  the  former  occalion  ; , , 

^ ' _.iii  ~ , — ■ I I* 

and  when  we  arrived  at  a large  open  boat-houfe,  where  a 
few  people  were,  they  threw  away  their  leaves,  fat  down 
before  it,  and  gave  their  cheeks  a few  gentle  ftrokes  with 
the  fill ; after  which  they  continued  fitting,  for  about  ten 
minutes,  with  a very  grave  appearance,  and  then  difperfed, 
without  having  fpoken  a fingle  word.  This  explained 
what  Poulaho  had  mentioned  about  T^ooge ; though,  from 
the  operation  only  lafting  a few  feconds,  he  had  not  been 
obferved  to  perform  it.  And  this  feems  to  be  only  a con- 
tinuation of  the  mourning  ceremony,  by  way  of  condo- 
lence. For,  upon  inquiring,  on  whofe  account  it  was  now 
performed ; we  were  told,  that  it  was  for  a Chief  who  had 
died  at  Vavaoo,  fome  time  ago ; that  they  had  prad:ifed 
it  ever  fince,  and  fliould  continue  to  do  fo,  for  a confider-^ 
able  time  longer. 

In  the  evening,  we  had  a pig,  dreffed  as  the  hog,  with 
yams  and  cocoa-nuts,  brought  for  fupper ; and  Futtafaihe 
finding,  that  we  did  not  like  the  fcruples  they  had  made 
before,  to  accept  of  any  part  of  the  entertainment,  aiked 
us  immediately  to  fliare  it,  and  give  it  to  whom  we  pleafed. 

When  fupper  was  over,  abundance  of  cloth  was  brought 
for  us  to  lleep  in ; but  we  were  a good  deal  diflurbed,  by 
a fingular  inftance  of  luxury,  in  which  their  principal  men 
indulge  themfelves ; that  of  being  beat  while  they  are 
alleep.  Two  women  fat  by  Futtafaihe,  and  performed  this 
operation,  which  is  called  tooge  tooge,  by  beating  brifkly  on 
his  body  and  legs,  with  both  fifls,  as  on  a drum,  till  he  fell 
alleep,  and  continuing  it  the  whole  night,  with  fome  fliort 
intervals.  When  once  the  perfon  is  afleep,  they  abate  a 
little  in  the  ftrength  and  quicknefs  of  the  beating ; but  re-’ 

T t 2 fume 


324 


) 


A VOYAGE  TO 


‘777- 

June. 

» 


July. 

Tuefday  i. 


fume  it,  if  they  obferve  any  appearance  of  his  awaking. 
In  the  morning,  we  found  that  Futtafaihe’s  women  relieved 
each  other,  and  went  to  deep  by  turns.  In  any  other  coun- 
try, it  would  be  fuppofed,  that  fuch  a pra6tice  would  put 
an  end  to  all  reft ; hut  here  it  certainly  ails  as  an  opiate ; 
and  is  a ftrong  proof  of  what  habit  may  effeil.  The  noife 
of  this,  however,  was  not  the  only  thing  that  kept  us 
awake ; for  the  people,  who  pafted  the  night  in  the  houfe, 
not  only  converfed  amongft  each  other  frequently,  as  in 
the  day ; but  all  got  up  before  it  was  light,  and  made  a 
hearty  meal  on  fifli  and  yams,  which  were  brought  to  them 
by  a perfon,  who  feemed  to  know  very  well  the  appointed 
time  for  this  noilurnal  refrefliment. 

Next  morning  we  fet  out  with  Futtafaihe,  and  walked 
down  the  Eaft  ftde  of  the  bay,  to  the  point.  The  country, 
all  along  this  fide,  is  well  cultivated ; but,  in  general,  not 
fo  much  inclofed  as  at  Mooa;  and  amongft  many  other 
plantain  fields  that  we  pafled,  there  was  one  at  leaft  a mile 
long,  which  was  in  excellent  order,  every  tree  growing 
with  great  vigour.  We  found,  that,  in  travelling,  Futta- 
faihe exercifed  a power,  though  by  no  means  wantonly, 
which  pointed  out  the  great  authority  of  fuch  principal 
men ; or  is,  perhaps,  only  annexed  to  thofe  of  the  royal 
family.  For  he  fent  to  one  place  for  fifii ; to  another  for 
yams  ; and  fo  on,  at  other  places  ; and  all  his  orders  were 
obeyed  with  the  greateft  readinefs,  as  if  he  had  been  abfolute 
mafter  of  the  people’s  property.  On  coming  to  the  point,  the 
natives  mentioned  fomething  of  one,  who,  they  faid,  had 
been  fired  at  by  fome  of  our  people ; and,  upon  our  wifliing 
to  fee  him,  they  conducted  us  to  a houfe,  where  we  found 
a man,  who  had  been  fliot  through  the  flioulder,  but  not 
dangeroufly ; as  the  ball  had  entered  a little  above  the  inner 

part 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


32s 


part  of  the  collar-bone,  and  pafled  out  obliquely  backward.  1777. 
We  were  fure,  from  the  hate  of  the  wound,  that  he  was  . 

V., 

the  perfon  who  had  been  fired  at  by  one  of  the  fentinels, 
three  days  before ; though  pofitive  orders  had  been  given, 
that  none  of  them  fliould  load  their  pieces  with  any  thing 
but  fmall  fhot.  We  gave  fome  direcSlions  to  his  friends 
how  to  manage  the  wound,  to  which  no  application  had 
been  made ; and  they  feemed  pleafed,  when  we  told  them 
it  would  get  well  in  a certain  time.  But,  on  our  going 
away,  they  afked  us  to  fend  the  wounded  man  fome  yams, 
and  other  things  for  food ; and  in  fuch  a manner,  that  we 
could  not  help  thinking  they  confidered  it  to  be  our  duty 
to  fupport  him,  till  he  fhould  get  well. 

In  the  evening  we  crolfed  the  bay  to  our  ftation,  in  a 
canoe,  which  Futtafaihe  had  exercifed  his  prerogative  in 
procuring,  by  calling  to  the  firft  that  pafiTed  by.  He  had 
alfo  got  a large  hog  at  this  place ; and  brought  a fervant 
from  his  houfe  with  a bundle  of  cloth,  which  he  wanted 
us  to  take  with  us,  as  a prefent  from  him.  But  the  boat 
being  fmall,  we  objected;  and  he  ordered  it  to  be  brought 
over  to  us  the  next  day.” 

I had  prolonged  my  ftay  at  this  ifiand,  on  account  of  the 
approaching  eclipfe ; but,  on  the  2d  of  July,  on  looking  Wednef.  2. 
at  the  micrometer  belonging  to  the  board  of  longitude,  I 
found  fome  of  the  rack  work  broken,  and  the  inftrument 
ufelefs  till  repaired ; which  there  was  not  time  to  do  be- 
fore it  was  intended  to  be  ufed.  Preparing  now  for  our 
departure,  I got  on  board,  this  day,  all  the  cattle,  poultry, 
and  other  animals,  except  fuch  as  were  deftined  to  remain. 

I had  deligned  to  leave  a turkey-cock  and  hen ; but  having 
now  only  two  of  each  undifpofed  of,  one  of  the  hens, 
through  the  ignorance  of  one  of  my  people,  was  ftrangled, 

and 


326 


A VOYAGE  TO 


J777.  and  died  upon  the  fpot.  I had  brought  three  turkey-hens 

to  thefe  illands.  One  was  killed,  as  above  mentioned ; and 

the  other,  by  an  ufelefs  dog  belonging  to  one  of  the  officers. 
Thefe  two  accidents  put  it  out  of  my  power  to  leave  a pair 
here ; and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  carry  the  breed  to  Ota- 
heite,  for  which  illand  they  were  originally  intended.  I 
was  forry,  afterward,  that  I did  not  give  the  preference  to 
Tongataboo,  as  the  prefent  would  have  been  of  more  value 
there  than  at  Otaheite ; for  the  natives  of  the  former  ifland, 

I am  perfuaded,  would  have  taken  more  pains  to  multiply 
the  breed. 

Thurfday  3.  The  uext  day  we  took  up  our  anchor,  and  moved  the 
ffiips  behind  Pangimodoo,  that  we  might  be  ready  to  take 
the  advantage  of  the  firft  favourable  wind,  to  get  through 
the  narrows.  The  king,  who  was  one  of  our  company, 
this  day,  at  dinner,  I obferved,  took  particular  notice  of  the 
plates.  This  occalioned  me  to  make  him  an  offer  of  one, 
either  of  pewter,  or  of  earthen  ware.  He  chofe  the  firft ; 
and  then  began  to  tell  us  the  feveral  ufes  to  which  he  in- 
tended to  apply  it.  Two  of  them  are  fo  extraordinary,  that 
I cannot  omit  mentioning  them.  He  faid,  that,  whenever 
he  fliould  have  occafion  to  vifit  any  of  the  other  iflands,  he 
would  leave  this  plate  behind  him  at  Tongataboo,  as  a fort 
of  reprefentative,  in  his  abfence,  that  the  people  might  pay 
it  the  fame  obeifance  they  do  to  himfelf  in  perfon.  He 
was  afked,  what  had  been  ufually  employed  for  this  pur- 
pofe,  before  he  got  this  plate  ; and  we  had  the  fatisfacftioii 
of  learning  from  him,  that  this  fingular  honour  had  hither- 
to been  conferred  on  a wooden  bowl  in  which  he  waffied 
his  hands.  The  other  extraordinary  ufe  to  which  he  meant 
to  apply  it,  in  the  room  of  his  wooden  bowl,  was  to  difcover 
a thief.  He  faid,  that,  wffien  any  thing  was  ftolen,  and  the 

thief 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


327 


thief  could  not  be  found  out,  the  people  were  all  affembled  1777. 
together  before  him,  when  he  wafhed  his  hands  in  water  in  , , 

this  veffel ; after  which  it  was  cleaned,  and  then  the  whole 
multitude  advanced,  one  after  another,  and  touched  it  in 
the  fame  manner  as  they  touch  his  foot,  when  .they  pay 
him  obeifance.  If  the  guilty  perfon  touched  it,  he  died 
immediately  upon  the  fpot ; not  by  violence,  but  by  the 
hand  of  Providence ; and  if  any  one  refufed  to  touch  it,  his 
refufal  was  a clear  proof  that  he  was  the  man. 

In  the  morning  of  the  5th,  the  day  of  the  eclipfe,  the  Saturday  £, 
weather  was  dark  and  cloudy,  with  fliowers  of  rain;  fo  ^ 

that  we  had  little  hopes  of  an  obfervation.  About  nine 
o’clock  the  fun  broke  out  at  intervals  for  about  half  an 
hour;  after  which  it  was  totally  obfcured,  till  within  a 
minute  or  two  of  the  beginning  of  the  eclipfe.  We  were 
all  at  our  telefcopes,  viz.  Mr.  Bayly,  Mr.  King,  Captain 
Clerke,  Mr.  Bligh,  and  myfelf.  I loft  the  obfervation,  by 
not  having  a dark  glafs  at  hand,  fuitable  to  the  clouds  that 
were  continually  palling  over  the  fun ; and  Mr.  Bligh  had 
not  got  the  fun  into  the  field  of  his  telefcope ; fo  that  the 
commencement  of  the  eclipfe  was  only  obferved  by  the 
other  three  gentlemen ; and  by  them,  with  an  uncertainty 
of  feveral  feconds,  as  follows  : 


H.  M.  S. 


By  Mr.  Bayly,  at  ii  46  231  * 
Mr.  King,  at  ii  46  28  . 

Capt.  Clerke,  at  ii  47  5 


Apparent  time. 


Mr.  Bayly  and  Mr.  King  obferved,  with  the  achromatic 
telefcopes,  belonging  to  the  board  of  longitude,  of  equal 
magnifying  powers ; and  Captain  Clerke  obferved  with  one 
of  the  reflectors.  The  fun  appeared  at  intervals,  till  about 

the 


A VOYAGE  TO 


328 


1777*  the  middle  of  the  eclipfe  ; after  which  it  w'as  feeii  no  more 
. . during  the  day ; fo  that  the  end  could  not  be  obferved. 

The  difappointment  was  of  little  confequence,  lince  the 
longitude  was  more  than  fufficiently  determined,  indepen- 
dently of  this  eclipfe,  by  lunar  obfervations,  w-hich  will  be 
mentioned  hereafter. 

As  foon  as  we  knew  the  eclipfe  to  be  over,  we  packed  up 
the  inftruments,  took  down  the  obfervatories,  and  fent 
every  thing  on  board  that  had  not  been  already  removed. 
As  none  of  the  natives  had  taken  the  lead:  notice  or  care  of 
0 the  three  flieep  allotted  to  Mareewagee,  I ordered  them  to 

be  carried  back  to  the  fliips.  I w^as  apprehenlive,  that,  if  I 
had  left  them  here,  they  run  great  rilk  of  being  deftroyed 
by  dogs.  That  animal  did  not  exift  upon  this  illand,  when 
I firft  vilited  it  in  1773 ; but  I now  found  they  had  got  a 
good  many,  partly  from  the  breed  then  left  by  myfelf,  and 
partly  from  fome,  imported  lince  that  time,  from  an  illand 
not  very  remote,  called  Feejee.  The  dogs,  however,  at 
prefent,  had  not  found  their  way  into  any  of  the  Friendly 
Iflands,  except  Tongataboo  ; and  none  but  the  Chiefs  there 
had,  as  yet,  got  polTeffion  of  any. 

Being  now  upon  the  eve  of  our  departure  from  this 
illand,  I lliaU  add  fome  particulars  about  it,  and  its  pro- 
du6tions,  for  which  I am  indebted  to  Mr.  Anderfon.  And, 
having  fpent  as  many  weeks  there,  as  I had  done  days 
w^hen  I vilited  it  in  1773,  the  better  opportunities  that  now 
occurred,  of  gaining  more  accurate  information,  and  the 
Ikill  of  that  gentleman,  in  directing  his  enquiries,  will,  in 
fome  meafure,  fupply  the  imperfection  of  my  former  ac- 
count of  this  illand. 

Amfterdam,  Tongataboo,  or  (as  the  natives  alfo  very 

* From  the  4th  to  the  7th  of  Odlober. 


frequently 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


329 


frequently  called  it)  Tonga,  is  about  twenty  leagues  in  1777. 
circuit,  fomewhat  oblong,  though,  by  much,  broadeft  at  . . 

the  Eaft  end ; and  its  greateft  length  from  Eaft  to  Weft.  The 
South  ftiore,  which  I faw  in  1773,  is  ftraight,  and  conftfts 
of  coral  rocks,  eight  or  ten  feet  high,  terminating  perpen- 
dicularly, except  in  fome  places  where  it  is  interrupted  by 
fmaU  fandy  beaches ; on  which,  at  low  water,  a range  of 
black  rocks  may  be  feen.  The  Weft  end  is  not  above  five 
or  fix  miles  broad,  but  has  a fhore  fomewhat  like  that  of 
the  South  fide  ; whereas  the  whole  North  fide  is  environed 
with  flioals  and  illands,  and  the  fliore  within  them  low 
and  fandy.  The  Eaft  fide  or  end  is,  moft  probably,  like  the 
South ; as  the  fliore  begins  to  afiTume  a rocky  appearance, 
toward  the  North  Eaft  point,  though  not  above  feven  or 
eight  feet  high. 

The  ifland  may,  with  the  greateft  propriety,  be  called  a 
low  one,  as  the  trees,  on  the  Weft  part,  where  we  now  lay 
at  anchor,  only  appeared ; and  the  only  eminent  part, 
which  can  be  feen  from  a fliip,  is  the  South  Eaft  point ; 
though  many  gently  rifing  and  declining  grounds  are  ob- 
fervable  by  one  who  is  afliore.  The  general  appearance  of 
the  country  does  not  afford  that  beautiful  kind  of  landfcape 
that  is  produced  from  a variety  of  hills  and  valleys,  lawns, 
rivulets,  and  cafcades  ; but,  at  the  fame  time,  it  conveys  to 
the  fpedtator  an  idea  of  the  moft  exuberant  fertility,  whe- 
ther we  refpedt  the  places  improved  by  art,  or  thofe  ftill  in 
a natural  ftate  ; both  which  yield  all  their  vegetable  pro- 
ducftions  w'ith  the  greateft  vigour,  and  perpetual  verdure. 

At  a diftance,  the  furface  feems  entirely  clothed  with  trees 
of  various  fizes  ; fome  of  which  are  very  large.  But,  above 
the  reft,  the  tall  cocoa-palms  always  raife  their  tufted 
heads ; and  are  far  from  being  the  fmalleft  ornament  to 

VoL.  I.  U 11  any 


330 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  any  country  that  produces  them.  The  boogo^  which  is  a 
. , fpecies  of  fig,  with  narrow  pointed  leaves,  is  the  largeft 

fized  tree  of  the  illand ; and  on  the  uncultivated  fpots,  efpe- 
cially  toward  the  fea,  the  moft  common  buflies  and  fmall 
trees  are  the  pandanus  ; feveral  forts  of  hibifcus  ; the  fai- 
tanoo,  mentioned  more  than  once  in  the  courfe  of  our 
voyage ; and  a few  others.  It  ought  alfo  to  be  obferved, 
that  though  the  materials  for  forming  grand  landfcapes 
are  wanting,  there  are  many  of  what  might,  at  leaft,  be 
called  neat  profped:s,  about  the  cultivated  grounds  and 
dwelling-places  ; but,  more  efpecially,  about  the  Jiatookas  ; 
where  fometimes  art,  and  fometimes  nature,  has  done  much 
to  pleafe  the  eye. 

From  the  fituation  of  Tongataboo,  toward  the  tropic, 
the  climate  is  more  variable,  than  in  countries  farther 
within  that  line  ; though,  perhaps,  that  might  be  owing 
to  the  feafon  of  the  year,  which  was  now  the  winter  fol- 
ftice.  The  winds  are,  for  the  moft  part,  from  fome  point 
between  South  and  Eaft ; and,  when  moderate,  are  com- 
monly attended  with  fine  weather.  When  they  blow 
freflier,  the  weather  is  often  cloudy,  though  open  ; and,  in 
fuch  cafes,  there  is  frequently  rain.  The  wind  fometimes 
veers  to  the  North  Eaft,  North  North  Eaft,  or  even  North 
North  Weft,  but  never  lafts  long,  nor  blows  ftrong  from 
thence  ; though  it  is  commonly  accompanied  by  heavy 
rain,  and  clofe  fultry  weather.  The  quick  fucceftion  of 
vegetables  has  been  already  mentioned  ; but  I am  not  cer- 
tain that  the  changes  of  weather,  by  which  it  is  brought 
about,  are  conftderable  enough  to  make  them  perceptible 
to  the  natives  as  to  their  method  of  life,  or  rather  that  they 
fliould  be  very  fenfible  of  the  different  feafons.  This, 
perhaps,  may  be  inferred  from  the  ftate  of  their  vegetable 

productions. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


331 


produdtions,  which  are  never  fo  much  afFe<5led,  with  re-  1777. 
Ipedt  to  the  foliage,  as  to  filed  that  aU  at  once ; for  every  j 

leaf  is  fucceeded  by  another,  as  faft  as  it  falls  ; which 
caufes  that  appearance  of  univerfal  and  continual  fpring 
found  here. 

The  bafis  of  the  ifland,  as  far  as  we  know,  is  entirely  a 
coral  rock,  which  is  the  only  fort  that  prefents  itfelf  on  the 
fliore.  Nor  did  we  fee  the  lead:  appearance  of  any  other 
done,  except  a few  fmall  blue  pebbles  drewed  about  the 
fiatookas ; and  the  fmooth,  folid  black  done,  fomething  like 
the  lapis  lydius,  of  which  the  natives  make  their  hatchets. 

But  thefe  may,  probably,  have  been  brought  from  other 
idands  in  the  neighbourhood ; for  a piece  of  flatey,  iron- 
coloured  done  was  bought  at  one  of  them,  which  was  never 
feen  here.  Though  the  coral  projects  in  many  places  above 
the  furface,  the  foil  is,  in  general,  of  a condderable  depth. 

In  all  cultivated  places,  it  is,  commonly,  of  a loofe,  black 
colour  ; produced,  feemingly,  in  a great  meafure,  from  the 
rotten  vegetables  that  are  planted  there.  Underneath  which 
is,  very  probably,  a clayey  Jlratum ; for  a foil  of  that  kind 
is  often  feen  both  in  the  low,  and  in  the  riling  grounds ; 
but  efpecially  in  feveral  places  toward  the  fhore,  where  it  is 
of  any  height ; and,  when  broken  off,  appears  fometimes  of 
a reddidi,  though  oftener  of  a brownifh  yellow  colour,  and 
of  a pretty  diff  conddence.  Where  the  fliore  is  low,  the 
foil  is  commonly  fandy,  or  rather  compofed  of  triturated 
coral ; which,  however,  yields  buflies  growing  with  great 
luxuriance ; and  is  fometimes  planted,  not  unfuccefsfully, 
by  the  natives. 

Of  cultivated  fruits,  the  principal  are  plantains ; of  which 
they  have  fifteen  did'erent  forts  or  varieties  ; bread-fruit ; 
two  forts  of  fruit  found  at  Otaheite,  and  known  there  un- 

U u 2 der 


332 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  iier  the  names  of  jambu  and  eeevee ; the  latter  a kind  of 
. . plumb ; and  vaft  numbers  of  lliaddocks,  which,  however, 

are  found  as  often  in  a natural  ft  ate,  as  planted. 

The  roots  are  yams,  of  which  are  two  forts  ; one  black, 
and  fo  large,  that  it  often  weighs  twenty  or  thirty  pounds  ; 
the  other  white,  and  long,  feldom  weighing  a pound ; a 
large  root,  called  kappe ; one  not  unlike  our  white  pota- 
toes, called  mawhaba  ; the  taro^  or  coccos  of  other  places ; 
and  another,  named  jeejee. 

Beftdes  vaft  num.bers  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  they  have  three 
other  forts  of  palms,  two  of  which  are  very  fcarce.  One  of 
them  is  called  beeoo ; which  grows  almoft  as  high  as  the 
cocoa-tree,  has  very  large  leaves  plaited  like  a fan,  and 
clufters  or  bunches  of  globular  nuts,  not  larger  than  a fmall 
piftol  ball,  grow'ing  amongft  the  branches,  with  a very  hard 
kernel,  which  is  fometimes  eat.  The  other  is  a kind  of 
cabbage-tree,  not  diftinguilliable  from  the  cocoa,  but  by 
being  rather  thicker,  and  by  having  its  leaves  more  ragged. 
It  has  a cabbage  three  or  four  feet  long  ; at  the  top  of  which 
are  the  leaves,  and  at  the  bottom  the  fruit,  which  is  fcarcely 
two  inches  long,  refembling  an  oblong  cocoa-nut,  with  an 
inftpid  tenacious  kernel,  called,  by  the  natives,  neeoogoola^ 
or  red  cocoa-nut,  as  it  affumes  a reddifti  call:  when  ripe. 
The  third  fort  is  called  ongo  ongo,  and  much  commoner,  be- 
ing  generally  found  planted  about  their fiatookas.  It  feldom 
grows  higher  than  five  feet,  though  fometimes  to  eight ; 
and  has  a vaft  number  of  oval  comprefled  nuts,  as  large  as 
a pippin,  flicking  immediately  to  the  trunk,  amongft  the 
leaves,  which  are  not  eat.  There  is  plenty  of  excellent 
fugar-cane,  which  is  cultivated  ; gourds  ; bamboo  ; turme- 
ric ; and  a fpecies  of  fig,  about  the  fize  of  a fmall  cherry, 
called  jnatte^  which,  though  wild,  is  fometimes  eat.  But 

the 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


333 


the  catalogue  of  uncultivated  plants  is  too  large  to  be  enu- 
merated here.  Befides  the  pemphis  decafpermum^  mallo-  ^ 
cocca,  jnaba^  and  fome  other  new  genera^  defcribed  by  Dr. 
Forller  there  are  a few  more  found  here ; which,  perhaps, 
the  different  feafons  of  the  year,  and  his  fliort  Ifay,  did  not 
give  him  an  opportunity  to  take  notice  of.  Although  it 
did  not  appear,  during  our  longer  ft  ay,  that  above  a fourth 
part  of  the  trees,  and  other  plants,  were  in  flower ; a cir- 
cumftance  abfolutely  neceflary,  to  enable  one  to  diftinguifli 
the  various  kinds. 

The  only  quadrupeds,  heftdes  hogs,  are  a few  rats,  and 
fome  dogs,  which  are  not  natives  of  the  place,  but  pro- 
duced from  fome  left  by  us  in  1773?  and  by  others  got  from 
Feejee.  Fowls,  which  are  of  a large  breed,  are  domefti- 
cated  here. 

Amongft  the  birds,  are  parrots,  fomewhat  fmaller  than 
the  common  grey  ones,  of  an  indifferent  green  on  the  back 
and  wings,  the  tail  bluifli,  and  the  reft  of  a footy  or  choco- 
late brown ; parroquets,  not  larger  than  a fparrow,  of  a 
fine  yellowifh  green,  with  bright  azure  on  the  crown  of 
the  head,  and  the  throat  and  belly  red ; befides  another 
fort  as  large  as  a dove,  with  a blue  crown  and  thighs,  the 
throat  and  under  part  of  the  head  crimfon,  as  alfo  part  of 
the  belly,  and  the  reft  a beautiful  green. 

There  are  owls  about  the  fize  of  our  common  fort,  but 
of  a finer  plumage ; the  cuckoos,  mentioned  at  Palmerfton’s 
Hland  ; king-fifliers,  about  the  fize  of  a thrufh,  of  a green- 
ifli  blue,  with  a white  ring  about  the  neck ; and  a bird  of 
the  thrufli  kind,  almoft  as  big,  of  a dull  green  colour,  with 
two  yellow  wattles  at  the  bafe  of  the  bill,  which  is  the  only 
finging  one  we  obferved  here ; but  it  compenfates  a good 

* See  his  CharaSlercs  Generum  Plantarum,  Lend.  1776. 


1777- 

July. 


deal 


334 


A VOYAGE  TO 


deal  for  the  want  of  others  by  the  ftrength  and  melody  of 
its  notes,  which  fill  the  woods  at  dawn,  in  the  evening,  and 
at  the  breaking  up  of  bad  weather. 

The  other  land  birds  are  rails,  as  large  as  a pigeon,  of  a 
variegated  grey  colour,  with  a rufiy  neck ; a black  fort  with 
red  eyes,  not  larger  than  a lark  ; large  violet-coloured  coots, 
with  red  bald  crowns ; two  forts  of  fly-catchers ; a very 
fmall  fwallow ; and  three  forts  of  pigeons,  one  of  which  is 
le  raniier  cuivre  of  Monf.  Sonnerat  ; another,  half  the  fize 
of  the  common  fort,  of  a light  green  on  the  back  and 
wings,  with  a red  forehead  ; and  a third,  fomewhat  lefs,  of 
a purple  brown,  but  whitifli  underneath. 

Of  water-fowl,  and  fuch  as  frequent  the  fea,  are  the 
ducks  feen  at  Annamooka,  though  fcarce  here ; blue  and 
white  herons ; tropic  birds  ; common  noddies  ; white  terns ; 
a new  fpecies  of  a leaden  colour,  with  a black  creft;  a 
fmall  bluifli  curlew ; and  a large  plover,  fpotted  with  yellow. 
Befides  the  large  bats,  mentioned  before,  there  is  alfo  the 
common  fort. 

The  only  noxious  or  difgufting  animals  of  the  reptile  or 
infedf  tribe,  are  fea-fnakes,  three  feet  long,  with  black 
and  white  circles  alternately,  often  found  on  fliore ; fome 
fcorpions,  and  centipedes.  There  are  fine  green  guanoes^  a 
foot  and  a half  long ; another  brown  and  fpotted  lizard, 
about  a foot  long ; and  two  other  fmall  forts.  Amongft  the 
other  infe(5ls  are  fome  beautiful  moths ; butterflies ; very 
large  fpiders ; and  others ; making,  in  the  whole,  about 
fifty  different  forts. 

The  fea  abounds  with  fifli,  though  the  variety  is  lefs 
than  might  be  expedfed.  The  moft  frequent  forts  are  mul- 
lets ; feveral  forts  of  parrot-fifli ; filver  fifli ; old  wives ; 


* Voyage  a la  Nouvelle  Guinky  Tab.  CII. 


fome 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


335 


fome  beautifully  fpotted  foies  ; leather-jackets  ; bonnetos ; 1777. 

and  albicores ; befides  the  eels  mentioned  at  Palmerfton’s  , 
llland ; fome  fliarks ; rays ; pipe-fifli ; a fort  of  pike ; and 
fome  curious  devil-fifli. 

The  many  reefs  and  flioals  on  the  North  lide  of  the 
illand,  afford  fhelter  for  an  endlefs  variety  of  fliell-fifli ; 
amongft  which  are  many  that  are  efteemed  precious  in 
Europe.  Such  as  the  true  hammer  oyfter ; of  which,  how- 
ever, none  could  be  obtained  entire ; a large  indentated 
oyfter,  and  feveral  others  ; but  none  of  the  common  fort ; 
panamas ; cones ; a fort  of  gigantic  cockle,  found  alfo  in 
the  Eaft  Indies ; pearl  fliell  oyfters ; and  many  others ; fe- 
veral of  which,  I believe,  have  been  hitherto  unknown  to 
the  moft  diligent  inquirers  after  that  branch  of  natural  hif- 
tory.  There  are,  likewife,  feveral  forts  of  fea  eggs ; and 
many  very  fine  ftar-fifli ; befides  a confiderable  variety  of 
corals ; amongft  which  are  two  red  forts  ; the  one  moft  ele- 
gantly branched,  the  other  tubulous.  And  there  is  no  lefs 
variety  amongft  the  crabs  and  cray-fifh,  which  are  very 
numerous.  To  which  may  be  added,  feveral  forts  of  fponge; 
the  fea  hare,  holothurice-,  and  the  like.” 


C H A P. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


CHAP.  IX. 

A grand  Solemnity <i  called  Natche,  in  Honour  of  the  King^s 
Son,  performed. — T’he  Proceffions  and  other  Cere?nonies, 
during  the  firji  Hay,  defer ibed. — 'fhe  Manner  of  pafping  the 
Night  at  the  King^s  Houfe. — Continuation  of  the  Solemnity, 
the  next  Hay, — ConjeBures  about  the  Nature  of  it. — Hepar- 
ture  from  Tongataboo,  and  Arrival  at  Eooa. — Account  of 
that  If  and,  and  Tranfadlions  there. 


1777.  were  now  ready  to  fail;  but  the  wind  being  Eaft- 

^ V V erly,  we  had  not  fufiicient  day-light  to  turn  through 

Sunday  6.  the  iiarrows,  either  with  the  morning,  or  with  the  evening 
flood ; the  one  falling  out  too  early,  and  the  other  too  late. 
So  that,  without  a leading  wind,  we  were  under  a neceflity 
of  waiting  two  or  three  days. 

I took  the  opportunity  of  this  delay,  to  be  prefent  at  a 
public  folemnity,  to  which  the  king  had  invited  us,  when 
we  went  laft  to  viflt  him,  and  which,  he  had  informed  us, 
was  to  be  performed  on  the  8th.  With  a view  to  this, 
he  and  all  the  people  of  note,  quitted  our  neighbourhood 
Monday  7.  repaired  to  Mooa,  where  the  folemnity 

was  to  be  exhibited.  A party  of  us  followed  them,  the 
Tuefdays.  ncxt  momiug.  We  underftood,  from  what  Poulaho  had 
faid  to  us,  that  his  fon  and  heir  was  now  to  be  initiated 
into  certain  privileges  ; amongft  which  was,  that  of  eating 

with 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


337 


with  his  father ; an  honour  he  had  not,  as  yet,  been  admit-  1^77. 


We  arrived  at^Mboa  about  eight  o’clock,  and  found  the 
king,  with  a large  circle  of  attendants  fitting  before  him, 
within  an  inclofure  fo  fmall  and  dirty,  as  to  excite  my 
wonder  that  any  fuch  could  be  found  in  that  neighbour- 
hood. They  were  intent  upon  their  ufual  morning  occu- 
pation, in  preparing  a bowl  of  kava.  As  this  was  no  li- 
quor for  us,  we  walked  out  to  vifit  fome  of  our  friends, 
and  to  obferve  what  preparations  might  be  making  for  the 
ceremony,  which  was  foon  to  begin.  About  ten  o’clock, 
the  people  began  to  affemble  in  a large  area,  which  is  be- 
fore the  malaee,  or  great  houfe,  to  which  we  had  been  con- 
dudted  the  firft  time  we  vifited  Mooa.  At  the  end  of  a 
road,  that  opens  into  this  area,  hood  fome  men  with  fpears 
and  clubs,  who  kept  conftantly  reciting,  or  chanting,  fliort 
fentences,  in  a mournful  tone,  which  conveyed  fome  idea 
of  diftrefs,  and  as  if  they  called  for  fomething.  This  was 
continued  about  an  hour;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  many 
people  came  down  the  road,  each  of  them  bringing  a yam, 
tied  to  the  middle  of  a pole,  which  they  laid  down,  be- 
fore the  perfons  who  continued  repeating  the  fentences. 
While  this  was  going  on,  the  king  and  prince  arrived,  and 
feated  themfelves  upon  the  area;  and  wx  were  delired  to 
lit  down  by  them,  but  to  pull  off  our  hats,  and  to  untie  our 
hair.  The  bearers  of  the  yams  being  all  come  in,  each 
pole  was  taken  up  between  two  men,  who  carried  it  over 
their  fhoulders.  After  forming  themfelves  into  companies, 
of  ten  or  twelve  perfons  each,  they  marched  acrofs  the 
place,  with  a quick  pace ; each  company,  headed  by  a man 
bearing  a club  or  fpear,  and  guarded,  on  the  right,  by  feve- 
ral  others,  armed  with  different  weapons.  A man  carrying 
VoL.  I.  X X a living 


338 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  a living  pigeon  on  a perch,  clofed  the  rear  of  the  pro- 
j ceffion,  in  which  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  perfons 
walked. 

Omai  was  delired  by  me,  to  afk  the  Chief,  to  what  place 
the  yams  were  to  be  thus  carried,  with  fo  much  folemnity  ? 
but,  as  he  feemed  unwilling  to  give  us  the  information  we 
wanted,  two  or  three  of  us  followed  the  proceffion,  contrary 
to  his  inclination.  We  found  that  they  flopped  before  a 
moral  or  Jiatooka  ’i'"  of  one  houfe  {landing  upon  a mount, 
which  was  hardly  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  place  where 
they  firfl  affembled.  Here  we  obferved  them  depofiting 
the  yams,  and  making  them  up  into  bundles ; but  for  what 
purpofe,  we  could  not  learn.  And,  as  our  prefence  feemed 
to  give  them  uneafinefs,  we  left  them,  and  returned  to  Pou- 
laho,  who  told  us,  we  might  amufe  ourfelves  by  walking 
about,  as  nothing  would  be  done  for  fome  time.  The  fear 
of  lofing  any  part  of  the  ceremony,  prevented  our  being 
long  abfent.  When  we  returned  to  the  king,  he  delired  me 
to  order  the  boat’s  crew  not  to  flir  from  the  boat ; for,  as 
every  thing  would,  very  foon,  be  taboo,  if  any  of  our  people, 
or  of  their  own,  fliould  be  found  walking  about,  they  would 
be  knocked  dowm  with  clubs ; nay  mateed,  that  is,  killed. 
He  alfo  acquainted  us,  that  we  could  not  be  prefent  at  the 
ceremony  ; but  that  we  fhould  be  condu6led  to  a place, 
where  we  might  fee  every  thing  that  palTed.  Obje<5lions 
were  made  to  our  drefs.  We  were  told,  that,  to  qualify  us 
to  be  prefent,  it  was  necelTary  that  we  fliould  be  naked  as 
low  as  the  breafl,  with  our  hats  off,  and  our  hair  untied. 
Omai  offered  to  conform  to  thefe  requifites,  and  began  to 
flrip ; other  objedlions  were  then  flatted ; fo  that  the  ex- 
clulion  was  given  to  him  equally  with  ourfelves. 

♦ .This  is  the  jiatooka  mentioned  above  by  Mr.  Anderfon,  p.  321. 


I did 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


339 


I did  not  much  like  this  reftriiftion ; and,  therefore,  ftole 
out,  to  fee  what  might  now  be  going  forward.  I found 
very  few  people  ftirring,  except  thofe  drelTed  to  attend  the 
ceremony ; fome  of  wdiom  had  in  their  hands  fmall  poles, 
about  four  feet  long,  and  to  the  under-part  of  thefe  were 
faftened  tw^o  or  three  other  flicks,  not  bigger  than  one’s 
finger,  and  about  fix  inches  in  length.  Thefe  men  were 
going  toward  the  jnorai  jufl  mentioned.  I took  the  fame 
road,  and  was,  feveral  times,  flopped  by  them,  all  crying- 
out  taboo.  However,  I went  forward,  \vithout  much  regard- 
ing them,  till  I came  in  fight  of  the  tnorai^  and  of  the  people 
who  were  fitting  before  it.  I was  now  urged,  very  flrongly, 
to  go  back ; and,  not  knowing  what  might  be  the  confe- 
quence  of  a refufal,  I complied.  I had  obferved,  that  the 
people,  who  carried  the  poles,  palfed  this  morai,  or  what  I 
may,  as  weU,  call  temple  ; and  guefling,  from  this  circum- 
flance,  that  fomething  was  tranfacfling  beyond  it,  which 
might  be  worth  looking  at,  I had  thoughts  of  advancing, 
by  making  a round,  for  this  purpofe ; but  I was  fo  clofely 
w'atched  by  three  men,  that  I could  not  put  my  defign  in 
execution.  In  order  to  fliake  thefe  fellows  off,  I returned 
to  the  malaee,  where  I had  left  the  king,  and,  from  thence, 
made  an  elopement  a fecond  time  ; but  I inflantly  met  with 
the  fame  three  men ; fo  that  it  feemed,  as  if  they  had  been 
ordered  to  watch  my  motions.  I paid  no  regard  to  what 
they  faid  or  did,  tiU  I came  within  fight  of  the  king’s  prin- 
cipal Jiatooka  or  moral,  which  1 have  already  defcribed be- 
fore which  a great  number  of  men  w'ere  fitting,  being  the 
fame  perfons  whom  I had  jufl  before  feen  pafs  by  the  other 
moral,  from  which  this  was  but  a little  diflant.  Obferving, 
that  I could  watch  the  proceedings  of  this  company  from 

* See  p.  313. 

X x 2 the 


1777. 

July. 

— V— 


340 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  the  king’s  plantation,  I repaired  thither,  very  much  to  the 
. . fatisfa^lion  of  thofe  who  attended  me. 

As  foon  as  I got  in,  I acquainted  the  gentlemen  who  had 
come  with  me  from  the  lliips,  with  what  I had  feen ; and 
we  took  a proper  Ifation,  to  watch  the  refult.  The  num- 
ber of  people,  at  the  fiatookay  continued  to  increafe  for  fome 
time ; and,  at  length,  we  could  fee  them  quit  their  fitting 
pofture,  and  march  off  in  proceflion.  They  walked  in  pairs, 
one  after  another,  every  pair  carrying,  between  them,  one 
of  the  fmall  poles  above-mentioned,  on  their  flioulders. 
We  were  told,  that  the  fmall  pieces  of  flicks,  faftened  to  the 
poles,  were  yams ; fo  that,  probably,  they  were  meant  to 
reprefent  this  root  emblematically.  The  hindmofl  man  of 
each  couple,  for  the  mofl  part,  placed  one  of  his  hands  to 
the  middle  of  the  pole,  as  if,  without  this  additional  fup- 
port,  it  were  not  flrong  enough  to  carry  the  weight  that 
hung  to  it,  and  under  which  they  all  feemed  to  bend,  as 
they  walked.  This  proceffion  confifled  of  one  hundred  and 
eight  pairs,  and  all,  or  mofl  of  them,  men  of  rank.  They 
came  clofe  by  the  fence  behind  which  we  flood  ; fo  that  we 
had  a full  view  of  them. 

Having  waited  here,  till  they  had  all  paffed,  we  then  re- 
paired to  Poulaho’s  houfe,  and  faw  him  going  out.  We 
could  not  be  allowed  to  follow  him ; but  were,  forthwith, 
condudled  to  the  place  allotted  to  us,  which  was  behind  a 
fence,  adjoining  to  the  area  of  the  Jiatooka  where  the  yams 
had  been  depolited  in  the  forenoon.  As  we  were  not  the 
only  people  who  were  excluded  from  being  publicly  prefent 
at  this  ceremony,  but  allowed  to  peep  from  behind  the  cur- 
tain, we  had  a good  deal  of  company ; and  I obferved,  that 
all  the  other  inclofures,  round  the  place,  Avere  filled  with 
people.  And,  yet,  all  imaginable  care  feemed  to  be  taken, 

that 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


that  they  fliould  fee  as  little  as  poflible  ; for  the  fences  had 
not  only  been  repaired  that  morning,  but,  in  many  places, 
raifed  higher  than  common  ; fo  that  the  tailed;  man  could 
not  look  over  them.  To  remedy  this  defedt  in  our  ftation, 
we  took  the  liberty  to  cut  holes  in  the  fence,  with  our 
knives ; and,  by  this  means,  we  could  fee,  pretty  diftindily,; 
every  thing  that  was  tranfa6ting  on  the  other  lide. 

On  our  arrival  at  our  ftation,  we  found  two  or  three 
hundred  people,  fitting  on  the  grafs,  near  the  end  of  the 
road  that  opened  into  the  area  of  the  7norai ; and  the  num- 
ber continually  increafed,  by  others  joining  them.  At  lengthy 
arrived  a few  men  carrying  fome  fmall  poles,  and  branches 
or  leaves  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree ; and,  upon  their  firft  ap- 
pearance, an  old  man  feated  himfelf  in  the  road,  and,  with 
his  face  toward  them,  pronounced  a long  oration  in  a feri- 
ous  tone.  He  then  retired  back,  and  the  others  advancing 
to  the  middle  of  the  area,  began  to  eredb  a fmall  flied ; em- 
ploying, for  that  purpofe,  the  materials  above-mentioned. 
When  they  had  finiflied  their  work,  they  all  fquatted  down, 
for  a moment,  before  it,  then  rofe  up,  and  retired  to  the  reft 
of  the  company.  Soon  after,  came  Poulaho’s  fon,  preceded 
by  four  or  five  men,  and  they  feated  themfelves  a little  afide 
from  the  fhed,  and  rather  behind  it.  After  th^m,  appeared 
twelve  or  fourteen  women  of  the  firfl  rank,  walking  flowly 
in  pairs,  each  pair  carrying  between  them  a narrow  piece 
of  white  cloth  extended,  about  two  or  three  yards  in  length. 
Thefe  marched  up  to  the  prince,  fquatted  down  before  him  ;■ 
and,  having  wrapped  fome  of  the  pieces  of  the  cloth  they 
had  brought,  round  his  body,  they  rofe  up,  and  retired  in 
the  fame  order,  to  fome  diftance  on  his  left,  and  there  feated 
themfelves.  PoLilaho  himfelf  foon  made  his  appearance, 
preceded  by  four  men,  who  walked  two  and  two  abreafl, 

and 


34^ 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  and  fat  down  on  his  fon’s  left  hand,  about  twenty  paces 
from  him.  The  young  prince,  then,  quitting  his  firft  pofi- 
tion,  went  and  fat  down  under  the  died,  with  his  attend- 
ants ; and  a conliderable  number  more  placed  themfelves 
on  the  grafs,  before  this  royal  canopy.  The  prince  himfelf 
fat  facing  the  people,  with  his  back  to  the  morai.  This 
being  done,  three  companies,  of  ten  or  a dozen  men  in 
each,  darted  up  from  amongft  the  large  crowd,  a little  after 
each  other,  and  running  haftily  to  the  oppolite  dde  of  the 
area,  fat  down  for  a few  feconds  ; after  which,  they  re- 
turned, in  the  fame  manner,  to  their  former  ftations.  To 
them  fucceeded  two  men,  each  of  whom  held  a fmall 
green  branch  in  his  hand,  who  got  up  and  approached  the 
prince,  fitting  down,  for  a few  feconds,  three  different 
times,  as  they  advanced ; and  then,  turning  their  backs, 
retired  in  the  fame  manner,  inclining  their  branches  to 
each  other  as  they  fat.  In  a little  time,  two  more  repeated 
this  ceremony. 

The  grand  proceflion,  which  I had  feen  march  off  from 
the  other  moraiy  now  began  to  come  in.  To  judge  of  the 
circuit  they  had  made,  from  the  time  they  had  been  abfent, 
it  muff  have  been  pretty  large.  As  they  entered  the  area, 
they  marched  up  to  the  right  of  the  flied,  and,  having 
proftrated  themfelves  on  the  grafs,  depofited  their  pretend- 
ed burthens  (the  poles  above-mentioned),  and  faced  round 
to  the  prince.  They  then  rofe  up,  and  retired  in  the  fame 
order,  doling  their  hands,  which  they  held  before  them, 
with  the  molt  ferious  afped,  and  feated  themfelves  along 
the  front  of  the  area.  During  all  the  time  that  this  nume- 
rous band  were  coming  in,  and  depoliting  their  poles,  three 
men,  who  fat  under  the  died,  with  the  prince,  continued 
pronouncing  feparate  fentences,  in  a melancholy  tone. 

After 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


343 


After  this,  a profound  filence  enfued,  for  a little  time, 
and  then  a man,  who  fat  in  the  front  of  the  area,  began  an  ^ 
oration  (or  prayer),  during  which,  at  feveral  different  times, 
he  went  and  broke  one  of  the  poles,  which  had  been 
brought  in  by  thofe  who  had  walked  in  proceflion.  When 
he  had  ended,  the  people,  fitting  before  the  died,  feparated, 
to  make  a lane,  through  which  the  prince  and  his  atten- 
dants paffed,  and  the  affembly  broke  up. 

Some  of  our  party,  fatisfied  with  what  they  had  already 
feen,  now  returned  to  the  fhips ; but  I,  and  two  or  three 
more  of  the  officers,  remained  at  Mooa,  to  fee  the  conclu- 
lion  of  the  folemnity,  which  was  not  to  be  till  the  next  day ; 
being  defirous  of  omitting  no  opportunity,  which  might 
afford  any  information  about  the  religious  or  the  political 
inflitutions  of  this  people.  The  fmall  flicks  or  poles,  which 
had  been  brought  into  the  area,  by  thofe  who  walked  in 
proceflion,  being  left  lying  on  the  ground,  after  the  crowd 
had  difj^erfed,  I went  and  examined  them.  I found,  that  to 
the  middle  of  each,  two  or  three  fmall  flicks  were  tied,  as 
has  been  related.  Yet  we  had  been  repeatedly  told  by  the 
natives,  who  flood  near  us,  that  they  were  young  yams ; 
infomuch  that  fome  of  our  gentlemen  believed  them, 
rather  than  their  own  eyes.  As  I had  the  demonflra- 
tion  of  my  fenfes  to  fatisfy  me,  that  they  were  not  real 
yams,  it  is  clear,  that  we  ought  to  have  underflood  them, 
that  they  w'ere  only  the  artificial  reprefentations  of  thefe 
roots. 

Our  fupper  w^as  got  ready  about  feven  o’clock.  It  con- 
fifted  of  filh  and  yams.  We  might  have  had  pork  alfo ; but 
we  did  not  choofe  to  kill  a large  hog,  which  the  king  had 
given  to  us  for  that  purpofe.  He  flipped  with  us,  and  drank 
pretty  freely  of  brandy  and  water ; fo  that  he  went  to  bed 

with 


1777. 

July. 


344 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  with  a fufficient  dofe.  We  pafled  the  night  in  the  fame 
. honfe  with  him,  and  feveral  of  his  attendants. 

Wedaef.  9.  About  oiie  or  two  o’clock  in  the  morning  they  waked, 
and  converfed  for  about  an  hour,  and  then  went  to  lleep 
again.  All,  but  Poulaho  himfelf,  rofe  at  day -break,  and 
went,  I know  not  whither.  Soon  after,  a woman,  one  of 
thofe  who  generally  attended  upon  the  Chief,  came  in,  and 
inquired  where  he  was.  I pointed  him  out  to  her ; and 
die  immediately  fat  down  by  him,  and  began  the  fame 
operation,  which  Mr.  Anderfon  had  feen  pracStifed  upon 
Futtafaihe,  tapping  or  beating  gently,  with  her  clinched 
fills,  on  his  thighs.  This,  inftead  of  prolonging  his  deep, 
as  was  intended,  had  the  contrary  effect ; however,  though 
he  awaked,  he  continued  to  lie  down. 

Omai,  and  I,  now  went  to  vifit  the  prince,  who  had  part- 
ed from  us  early  in  the  evening.  For  he  did  not  lodge  with 
the  king ; but  in  apartments  of  his  own,  or,  at  lead,  fuch 
as  had  been  allotted  to  him,  at  fome  diftance  from  his  fa- 
ther’s houfe.  We  found  him  with  a circle  of  boys,  or 
youths,  about  his  own  age,  fitting  before  him  ; and  an  old 
woman,  and  an  old  man,  who  feemed  to  have  the  care  of 
him,  fitting  behind.  There  were  others,  both  men  and 
women,  employed  about  their  necefiary  affairs,  in  differ- 
ent departments ; who,  probably,  belonged  to  his  houfe- 
hold. 

From  the  prince  we  returned  to  the  king.  By  this  time 
he  had  got  up,  and  had  a crowded  circle  before  him,  com- 
pofed  chiefly  of  old  men.  While  a large  bowl  of  kava  was 
preparing,  a baked  hog  and  yams,  fmoking  hot,  were 
brought  in ; the  greateft  part  of  which  fell  to  our  fliare, 
and  was  very  acceptable  to  the  boat’s  crew  : for  thefe  people 
eat  very  little  in  a morning;  efpecially  the  kava  drinkers. 

I after- 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


345 


I afterward  walked  out,  and  vifited  feveral  other  Chiefs  ; 1777, 

and  found,  that  all  of  them  were  taking  their  morning  , 
draught,  or  had  already  taken  it.  Returning  to  the  king,  I 
found  him  alleep  in  a fmall  retired  hut,  with  two  women 
tapping  on  his  breech.  About  eleven  o’clock  he  arofe 
again  ; and  then  fome  fifli  and  yams,  which  tailed  as  if 
they  had  been  ilewed  in  cocoa-nut  milk,  were  brought  to 
him.  Of  thefe  he  eat  a large  portion,  and  lay  down  once 
more  to  fleep.  I now  left  him,  and  carried  to  the  prince 
a prefent  of  cloth,  beads,  and  other  articles,  which  I had 
brought  with  me  from  the  ill  ip  for  the  purpofe.  There 
was  a fufficient  quantity  of  cloth  to  make  him  a complete 
fuit ; and  he  was  immediately  decked  out  with  it.  Proud 
of  his  drefs,  he  iiril  went  to  fhew  himfelf  to  his  father ; 
and  then  conducted  me  to  his  mother ; with  whom  were 
about  ten  or  a dozen  other  women  of  a refpeftable  ap- 
pearance. Here  the  prince  changed  his  apparel,  and  made 
me  a prefent  of  two  pieces  of  the  cloth  manufadlured  in  the 
ifland.  By  this  time,  it  was  pail  noon,  when,  by  appoint- 
ment, I repaired  to  the  palace  to  dinner.  Several  of  our 
gentlemen  had  returned,  this  morning,  from  the  fliips  ; and 
we  were  all  invited  to  the  feail,  which  was  prefently  ferved 
up,  and  coniiiled  of  two  pigs  and  yam^s.  I roufed  the  drowfy 
monarch,  to  partake  of  what  he  had  provided  for  our  enter- 
tainment. In  the  mean  time,  two  mullets,  and  fome  iliell- 
iiili,  were  brought  to  him,  as  I fuppofed,  for  his  feparate 
lx)rtion.  But  he  joined  it  to  our  fare,  fat  down  with  us, 
and  made  a hearty  meal. 

When  dinner  was  over,  we  were  told  that  the  ceremony 
would  foon  begin ; and  were  ilridlly  enjoined  not  to  walk 
out.  I had  relblved,  however,  to  peep  no  longer  from 
behind  the  curtain,  but  to  mix  with  the  actors  themfelves, 

VoL.  I.  y y if 


346 


A VOYAGE  TO 


if  poilible.  With  this  view,  I hole  out  from  the  planta- 
tion, and  walked  toward  the  morai^  the  fcene  of  the  folem- 
nity.  I was,  feveral  times,  delired  to  go  back,  by  people 
whom  I met ; but  I paid  no  regard  to  them  ; and  they  buf- 
fered me  to  pafs  on.  When  1 arrived  at  the  morai^  I found 
a number  of  men  feated  on  the  fide  of  the  area,  on  each 
lide  of  the  road  that  leads  up  to  it.  A few  were  fitting  on 
the  oppofite  fide  of  the  area  ; and  two  men  in  the  middle  of 
it,  with  their  faces  turned  to  the  moral.  When  I got  into 
the  midfl  of  the  firfl  company,  I was  defired  to  fit  down ; 
which  I accordingly  did.  Where  1 fat,  there  were  lying  a 
number  of  fmall  bundles  or  parcels,  compofed  of  cocoa-nut 
leaves,  and  tied  to  flicks  made  into  the  form  of  hand- 
barrows.  All  the  information  I could  get  about  them  was, 
that  they  were  taboo.  Our  number  kept  continually  in- 
creafing ; every  one  coming  from  the  fame  quarter.  From 
time  to  time,  one  or  another  of  the  company  turned  him- 
felf  to  thofe  who  were  coming  to  join  us,  and  made  a 
fhort  fpeech ; in  which  I could  remark  that  the  word 
arekee.^  that  is  King,  was  generally  mentioned.  One  man 
faid  fomething  that  produced  burfts  of  hearty  laughter 
from  all  the  crowd ; others,  of  the  fpeakers,  met  with 
public  applaufe.  I was,  feveral  times,  defired  to  leave  the 
place  ; and,  at  lafl,  when  they  found  that  I would  not  llir, 
after  fome  feeming  confultation,  they  applied  to  me  to 
uncover  my  fhoulders  as  theirs  were.  With  this  requefl 
I complied  ; and  then  they  feemed  to  be  no  longer  imeafy 
at  my  prefence. 

I fat  a full  hour,  without  any  thing  more  going  forward, 
befide  what  I have  mentioned.  At  length  the  prince,  the 
women,  and  the  king,  all  came  in,  as  they  had  done  the  day 
before.  The  prince,  being  placed  under  the  died,  after 

his 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN, 


347 


his  father’s  arrival,  two  men,  each  carrying  a piece  of  mat, 
came,  repeating  fomething  ferioully,  and  put  them  about 
him.  The  aflembled  people  now  began  their  operations ; 
and  firft,  three  companies  ran  backward  and  forward  acrofs 
the  area,  as  defcribed  in  the  account  of  the  proceedings  of 
the  former  day.  Soon  after,  the  two  men,  who  fat  in  the 
middle  of  the  area,  made  a fliort  fpeech  or  prayer;  and 
then  the  whole  body,  amongft  whom  I had  my  place,  ftart- 
ed  up,  and  ran  and  feated  themfelves  before  the  Ihed  under 
which  the  prince,  and  three  or  four  men,  were  fitting.  I 
was  now  partly  under  the  management  of  one  of  the  com- 
pany, who  feemed  very  affiduous  to  ferve  me.  By  his 
means,  I was  placed  in  fuch  a fituation,  that,  if  I had  been 
allowed  to  make  ufe  of  my  eyes,  nothing  that  paffed  could 
have  efcaped  me.  But  it  was  neceffary  to  fit  with  down- 
cafl  looks,  and  demure  as  maids. 

Soon  after,  the  proceflion  came  in,  as  on  the  day  before  ; 
each  two  perfons  bearing  on  their  flioulders  a pole,  round 
the  middle  of  which,  a cocoa-nut  leaf  was  plaited.  Thefe 
were  depofited  with  ceremonies  fimilar  to  thofe  obferved 
on  the  preceding  day.  This  firft  proceflion  was  followed 
by  a fecond ; the  men  compofing  which,  brought  bafkets, 
fuch  as  are  ufually  employed  by  this  people  to  carry  provi- 
fions  in,  and  made  of  palm  leaves.  Thefe  were  followed  by 
a third  proceflion,  in  which  were  brought  different  kinds 
of  fmall  fifli ; each  fixed  at  the  end  of  a forked  flick.  The 
bafkets  were  carried  up  to  an  old  man,  whom  I took  to  be 
the  Chief  Priefl,  and  who  fat  on  the  prince’s  right-hand, 
without  the  filed.  He  held  each  in  his  hand,  while  he  made 
a fliort  fpeech  or  prayer  ; then  laid  it  down,  and  called  for 
another,  repeating  the  fame  words  as  before  ; and  thus  he 
went  through  the  whole  number  of  bafkets.  The  fifli  were 

Y y 2 prefented. 


1777. 

July. 


348 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  prefeiited,  one  by  one,  on  the  forked  flicks,  as  they  came 
in,  to  two  men,  who  fat  on  the  left ; and  who,  till  now, 
held  green  branches  in  their  hands.  The  firft  fifh  they  laid 
down  on  their  right,  and  the  fecond  on  their  left.  When 
the  third  was  prefented,  a flout  looking  man,  who  fat  be- 
hind the  other  two,  reached  his  arm  over  between  them, 
and  made  a fnatch  at  it ; as  alfo  did  the  other  two,  at  the 
very  fame  time.  Thus  they  feemed  to  contend  for  every 
fifli  that  was  prefented ; but  as  there  were  two  hands  againft 
one,  befides  the  advantage  of  fituation,  the  man  behind  got 
nothing  but  pieces  ; for  he  never  quitted  his  hold,  till  the 
fifli  was  torn  out  of  his  hand  ; and  what  little  remained  in 
it,  he  fliook  out  behind  him.  The  others  laid  what  they 
got,  on  the  right  and  left  alternately.  At  length,  either  by 
accident  or  defign,  the  man  behind  got  pofTeflion  of  a whole 
fifla,  without  either  of  the  other  two  fo  much  as  touching 
it.  .At  this,  the  word  mareeal.,  which  fignifies  very  good^  or 
well  done^  was  uttered  in  a low  voice  throughout  the  whole 
crowd.  It  feemed,  that  he  had  performed  now  all  that  was. 
expedled  from  him ; for  he  made  no  attempt  upon  the  few 
fifli  that  came  after.  Thefe  fifli,  as  alfo  the  bafkets,  were 
all  delivered,  by  the  perfons  who  brought  them  in,  fit- 
ting ; and,  in  the  fame  order  and  manner,  the  fmall  poles, 
which  the  firfl  proceflioii  carried,  had  been  laid  upon  the 
ground. 

The  lafl  proceffion  being  clofed,  there  was  fome  fpeak- 
ing  or  praying,  by  different  perfons.  Then,  on  fome  fignal 
being  given,  we  all  flarted  up,  ran  feveral  paces  to  the  left, 
and  fat  down  with  our  backs  to  the  prince,  and  the  few 
who  remained  with  him.  I was  defired  not  to  look  behind 
me.  However,  neither  this  injuncftion,  nor  the  remem- 
brance of  Lot’s  \fife,  difcouraged  me  from  facing  about.. 

I now 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


349 


I now  faw  that  the  prince  had  turned  his  face  to  the  -morai. 
But  this  laft  movement  had  brought  fo  many  people  be- 
tween him  and  me,  that  I could  not  perceive  what  was 
doing.  I was  afterward  affured,  that,  at  this  very  time,  the 
prince  was  admitted  to  the  high  honour  of  eating  with  his 
father  ; which,  till  now,  had  never  been  permitted  to  him ; 
a piece  of  roalfed  yam  being  prefented  to  each  of  them  for 
this  purpofe.  This  was  the  more  probable,  as  we  had  been 
told,  before-hand,  that  this  was  to  happen  during  the  fo- 
lemnity ; and  as  all  the  people  turned  their  backs  to  them, 
at  this  time,  which  they  always  do  when  their  monarch 
eats. 


1777. 

July. 


After  fome  little  time,  we  all  faced  about,  and  formed  a 
femicircle  before  the  prince,  leaving  a large  open  fpace  be- 
tween us.  Prefently  there  appeared  fome  men  coming  to- 
ward us,  two  and  two,  bearing  large  fticks,  or  poles,  upon 
their  fhoulders,  making  a noife  that  might  be  called  ling- 
ing,  and  waving  their  hands  as  they  advanced.  When  they 
had  got  clofe  up  to  us,  they  made  a fhew  of  walking  very 
fall,  without  proceeding  a lingle  ftep.  Immediately  after, 
three  or  four  men  Ifarted  up  from  the  crowd,  with  large 
fticks  in  their  hands,  who  ran  toward  thofe  new-comers. 
The  latter  inftantly  threw  down  the  poles  from  their  flioul- 
ders,  and  fcampered  oft';  and  the  others  attacked  the  poles  ;• 
and,  having  beat  them  moft  unmercifully,  returned  to  their 
places.  As  the  pole-bearers  ran  off,  they  gave  the  challenge 
that  is  ufual  here  in  wreftling ; and,  not  long  after,  a num- 
ber of  ftout  fellows  came  from  the  fame  quarter,  repeating 
the  challenge  as  they  advanced.  Thefe  were  oppofed  by  a 
party,  who  came  from  the  oppoftte  ftde  almoft  at  the  fame 
inftant.  The  two  parties  paraded  aboitt  the  area  for  a few 
minutes,  and  then  retired,  each  to  their  own  ftde.  After 

thisj. 


350 


A VOYAGE  TO 


this,  there  were  wreftling  and  boxing-matches  for  about 
half  an  hour.  Then  two  men  feated  themfelves  before  the 
prince,  and  made  fpeeches,  addrefled,  as  I thought,  en- 
tirely to  him.  With  this  the  folemnity  ended,  and  the 
whole  affembly  broke  up. 

I now  went  and  examined  the  feveral  bafkets  which  had 
been  prefented ; a curiolity  that  I was  not  allowed  before 
to  indulge ; becaufe  every  thing  was  then  taboo.  But  the 
folemnity  being  now  over,  they  became,  fimply,  what  I 
found  them  to  be,  empty  bafkets.  So  that,  whatever  they 
were  fuppofed  to  contain,  was  emblematically  reprefented. 
And  fo,  indeed,  was  every  other  thing  which  had  been 
brought  in  procellion,  except  the  fifli. 

We  endeavoured,  in  vain,  to  find  out  the  meaning,  not 
only  of  the  ceremony  in  general,  which  is  called  Natche, 
but  of  its  different  parts.  We  feldom  got  any  other  anfwer 
to  our  inquiries,  but  taboo ; a word,  which,  I have  before 
obferved,  is  applied  to  many  other  things.  But,  as  the 
prince  was,  evidently,  the  principal  perfon  concerned  in 
it ; and  as  we  had  been  told  by  the  king,  ten  days  before 
the  celebration  of  the  Natche,  that  the  people  would  bring 
in  yams  for  him  and  his  fon  to  eat  together ; and  as  he 
even  defcribed  fome  part  of  the  ceremony,  we  concluded, 
from  what  he  had  then  faid,  and  from  what  we  now  faw, 
that  an  oath  of  allegiance,  if  I may  fo  exprefs  myfelf,  or 
folemn  promife,  was,  on  this  occafion,  made  to  the  prince, 
as  the  immediate  fucceffor  to  the  regal  dignity,  to  Hand  by 
him,  and  to  furnifli  him  with  the  feveral  articles  that  were 
here  emblematically  reprefented.  This  feems  the  more 
probable,  as  all  the  principal  people  of  the  ifland,  whom 
we  had  ever  feen,  affiffed  in  the  proceflions.  But,  be  this 
«is  it  may,  the  whole  was  conducfted  with  a great  deal  of 

myfterious 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


351 


myfterious  folemnity ; and,  that  there  was  a mixture  of 
religion  in  the  inifitution,  was  evident,  not  only  from  the 
place  where  it  was  performed,  but  from  the  manner  of 
performing  it.  Our  drefs  and  deportment  had  never  been 
called  in  queftion,  upon  any  former  occalion , whatever. 
Now,  it  was  expelled  that  we  fliould  be  uncovered  as  low 
jts  the  waift ; that  our  hair  fliould  be  loofe,  and  flowing 
over  our  flioulders  ; that  we  fliould,  like  themfelves,  lit 
crofs-legged ; and,  at  times,  in  the  mod;  humble  pofture, 
with  down-caft  eyes,  and  hands  locked  together  ; all  which 
requilites  were  moft  devoutly  obferved  by  the  whole  af- 
fembly.  And,  lalfly,  every  one  was  excluded  from  the  fo- 
lemnity, but  the  principal  people,  and  thofe  who  affifled 
in  the  celebration.  All  thefe  circumftances  were  to  me  a 
fufficient  teftiniony,  that,  upon  this  occalion,  they  conli- 
dered  themfelves  as  a6ting  under  the  immediate  iiifpechioii 
of  a Supreme  Being. 

The  prefent  Natche  may  be  conlidered,  from  the  above 
account  of  it,  as  merely  figurative.  For  the  fmall  quantity 
of  yams,  which  we  faw  the  lirfl  day,  could  not  be  intended 
as  a general  contribution  ; and,  indeed,  we  were  given  to 
underhand,  that  they  were  a portion  confecrated  to  the 
Otooa,  or  Divinity.  But  we  were  informed,  that,  in  about 
three  months,  there  would  be  performed,  on  the  fame  ac- 
count, a far  more  important  and  grander  folemnity ; on 
which  occalion,  not  only  the  tribute  of  Tongataboo,  but 
that  of  Hapaee,  Vavaoo,  and  of  all  the  other  illands,  would 
be  brought  to  the  Chief,  and  confirmed  more  awfully,  by 
facrificing  ten  human  victims  from  amongft  the  inferior 
fort  of  people.  A horrid  folemnity  indeed  ! and  which  is 
a moft  lignificant  inftance  of  the  influence  of  gloomy  and 
ignorant  fiq^erftition,  over  the  minds  of  one  of  the  moft 

benevolent 


A VOYAGE  TO 


352 

1777.  benevolent  and  humane  nations  upon  earth.  On  inquiring 
into  the  reafons  of  fo  barbarous  a practice,  they  only  faid, 
that  it  was  a necelTary  part  of  the  Natche ; and  that,  if 
they  omitted  it,  the  Deity  would  certainly  deftroy  their 
king. 

Before  the  affembly  broke  up,  the  day  was  far  fpent ; and 
as  we  were  at  fome  diftance  from  the  fliips,  and  had  an  in- 
tricate navigation  to  go  through,  we  were  in  hafte  to  fet  out 
from  Mooa.  When  I took  leave  of  Poulaho,  he  preffed  me 
much  to  If  ay  till  the  next  day,  to  be  prefent  at  a funeral  ce- 
remony. The  wife  of  Mareewagee,  who  was  mother-in-law 
to  the  king,  had  lately  died  ; and  her  corpfe  had,  on  account 
of  the  Natcbe,  been  carried  on  board  a canoe  that  lay  in 
the  lagoon.  Poulaho  told  me,  that,  as  foon  as  he  had  paid  the 
laft  offices  to  her,  he  would  attend  me  to  Eooa ; but,  if  I did 
not  wait,  that  he  would  follow  me  thither.  I underftood, 
at  the  fame  time,  that,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  death  of 
this  woman,  mofl  of  the  Chiefs  would  have  accompanied  us 
to  that  ifland  ; where,  it  feems,  all  of  them  have  poffeffions. 
I would  gladly  have  waited  to  fee  this  ceremony  alfo,  had 
not  the  tide  been  -now  favourable  for  the  fhips  to  get 
through  the  narrows.  The  wind,  befides,  which,  for  feve- 
ral  days  paft,  had  been  very  boifterous,  was  now  mode- 
rate and  fettled ; and  to  have  lofl  this  opportunity,  might 
have  detained  us  a fortnight  longer.  But  what  was  deci- 
five  againft  my  waiting,  we  underflood  that  the  funeral  ce- 
remonies would  lafl  five  days,  which  was  too  long  a time, 
as  the  fhips  lay  in  fuch  a lituation,  that  I could  not  get  to 
fea  at  pleafure.  I,  however,  affured  the  king,  that,  if  we 
did  not  fail,  I fliould  certainly  vifit  him  again  the  next  day. 
And  fo  we  all  took  leave  of  him,  and  fet  out  for  the  fliips, 
where  we  arrived  about  eight  o’clock  in  the  evening. 


I had 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


353 


I had  forgot  to  mention,  that  Omai  was  prefent  at  this  fe-  1777. 
cond  day’s  ceremony  as  well  as  myfelf ; but  we  were  not  . , 

together ; nor  did  I know  that  he  was  there,  till  it  was  al- 
moft  over.  He  afterward  told  me,  that,  as  foon  as  the 
king  faw  that  I had  ftolen  out  from  the  plantation,  he  fent 
feveral  people,  one  after  another,  to  defire  me  to  come  back. 
Probably,  thefe  melTengers  were  not  admitted  to  the  place 
where  I was ; for  I faw  nothing  of  them.  At  laft,  intelli- 
gence was  brought  to  the  Chief,  that  I had  adtually  drip- 
ped, in  conformity  to  their  cuftom ; and  then  he  told  Omai, 
that  he  might  be  prefent  alfo,  if  he  would  comply  with  all 
the  neceffary  forms.  Omai  had  no  objedlion,  as  nothing 
was  required  of  him,  but  to  conform  to  the  cuftom  of  his 
own  country.  Accordingly,  he  was  furnifhed  with  a proper 
drefs,  and  appeared  at  the  ceremony  as  one  of  the  natives. 

It  is  likely,  that  one  reafon  of  our  being  excluded  at  firft, 
was  an  apprehenfion,  that  we  would  not  fubmit  to  the  re- 
quifites  to  qualify  us  to  aflift. 

While  I was  attending  the  Natche  at  Mooa,  I ordered  the 
horfes,  bull  and  cow,  and  goats,  to  be  brought  thither; 
thinking  that  they  would  be  fafer  there,  under  the  eyes  of 
the  Chiefs,  than  at  a place  that  would  be,  in  a manner,  de- 
ferred, the  moment  after  our  departure.  Befides  the  above- 
mentioned  animals,  we  left  with  our  friends  here,  a young 
boar,  and  three  young  fows,  of  the  Englifli  breed.  They 
were  exceedingly  defirous  of  them,  judging,  no  doubt,  that 
they  would  greatly  improve  their  own  breed,  w^hich  is  ra- 
ther fmall.  Feenou  alfo  got  from  us  two  rabbits,  a buck 
and  a doe  ; and,  before  we  failed,  we  were  told,  that  young 
ones  had  been  already  produced.  If  the  cattle  fucceed,  of 
which  I make  no  doubt,  it  will  be  a vaft  acquifttion  to  thefe 
VoL.  I.  Z z iflands ; 


354 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  iflands ; and,  as  Tongataboo  is  a fine  level  country,  the 

. . horfes  cannot  but  be  ufefuL 

Thurfdayio.  On  the  loth,  at  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  we  weighed 
anchor,  and,  with  a heady  gale  at  South  Eah,  turned 
through  the  channel,  between  the  fmall  illes  called  Makka- 
haa  and  Monooafai ; it  being  much  wider  than  the  channel 
between  the  lall  mentioned  illand  and  Pangimodoo.  The 
flood  fet  flrong  in  our  favour,  till  we  were  the  length  of  the 
channel  leading  up  to  the  lagoon^  where  the  flood  from  the 
Eaftward  meets  that  from  the  Weft.  This,  together  with 
the  indraught  of  the  lagoon^  and  of  the  fhoals  before  it, 
caufeth  ftrong  ripplings  and  whirlpools.  To  add  to  thefe 
dangers,  the  depth  of  water  in  the  channel  exceeds  the 
length  of  a cable ; fo  that  there  is  no  anchorage,  except 
clofe  to  the  rocks,  where  we.  meet  with  forty  and  forty-five 
fathoms,  over  a bottom  of  dark  fand.  But  then,  here,  a 
fliip  would  be  expofed  to  the  whirlpools.  This  fruftrated 
the  deftgn  which  I had  formed,  of  coming  to  an  anchor,  as 
foon  as  we  were  through  the  narrows,  and  of  making  an 
excurflon  to  fee  the  funeral.  I chofe  rather  to  lofe  that  ce- 
remony, than  to  leave  the  fliips  in  a fltuation,  in  which  I 
did  not  think  them  fafe.  We  continued  to  ply  to  windward, 
between  the  two  tides,  without  either  gaining  or  lofing  an 
inch,  till  near  high  water,  when,  by  a favourable  flant,  we 
got  into  the  Eaftern  tide’s  influence.  We  expected,  there,  to 
find  the  ebb  to  run  ftrong  to  the  Eaftward  in  our  favour ; 
but  it  proved  fo  inconliderable,  that,  at  any  other  time,  it 
would  not  have  been  noticed.  This  informed  us,  that  moft 
of  the  water,  which  flows  into  the  lagoon.)  comes  from  the 
North  Weft,  and  returns  the  fame  way.  About  five  in  the 
afternoon,  finding  that  we  could  not  get  to  fea  before  it  w as 

dark, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


355 


dark,  I came  to  an  anchor,  under  the  fliore  of  Tongataboo,  1777. 
in  forty-five  fathoms  water ; and  about  two  cables  length  . 
from  the  reef,  that  runs  along  that  fide  of  the  illand.  The 
Difcovery  dropped  anchor  under  our  ftern  ; but  before  the 
anchor  took  hold,  flie  drove  off  the  bank,  and  did  not  reco- 
ver it  till  after  midnight. 

We  remained  at  this  ftation,  till  eleven  o’clock,  the  next  Friday  u, 
day,  when  we  weighed,  and  plyed  to  the  Eaftward.  But  it 
was  ten  at  night,  before  we  weathered  the  Eafi:  end  of  the 
illand,  and  were  enabled  to  ftretch  away  for  Middleburg,  or 
Eooa  (as  it  is  called  by  the  inhabitants),  where  we  anchored, 
at  eight  o’clock,  the  next  morning,  in  forty  fathoms  water,  Saturday  12. 
over  a bottom  of  fand,  interfperfed  with  coral  rocks ; the 
extremes  of  the  illand  extending,  from  North,  40°  Eafi,  to 
South,  22°  Weft;  the  high  land  of  Eooa,  South,  45°Eaft;, 
and  Tongataboo,  from  North,  70°  Weft,  to  North,  19°  Weft ; 
diftant  about  half  a mile  from  the  lliore ; being  nearly  the 
fame  place  where  I had  my  ftation  in  1773,  then  named 
by  me,  'Englijh  Road, 

We  had  no  fooner  anchored,  than  Taoofa  the  Chief,  and 
feveral  other  natives,  vifited  us  on  board,  and  feemed  to  re- 
joice much  at  our  arrival.  This  Taoofa had  been  my  Tayo<f 
when  I was  here,  during  my  laft  voyage ; confequently,  we 
were  not  ftrangers  to  each  other.  In  a little  time,  I went 
alhore  with  him,  in  fearch  of  frelli  water ; the  procuring 
of  which,  was  the  chief  objecft  that  brought  me  to  Eooa.  I 
had  been  told,  at  Tongataboo,  that  there  was  here  a ftream, 
running  from  the  hills  into  the  fea ; but  this  was  not  the 
cafe  now.  I was  firft  condu6ted  to  a brackilh  fpring,  be- 
tween low  and  high  water  mark,  amongft  rocks,  in  the 

* In  the  account  of  Captain  Cook’s  former  voyage,  he  calls  the  only  Chief  he  then 
met  with,  at  this  place,  Tioony.  See  Vol.  i.  p.  192. 

Z Z 2 


cove 


356 


A VOYAGE  TO 


>777- 

July. 


cove  where  we  landed,  and  where  no  one  would  ever  have 
thought  of  looking  for  what  we  wanted.  However,  1 be- 
lieve the  water  of  this  fpring  might  be  good,  were  it  pof- 
hble  to  take  it  up  before  the  tide  mixes  with  it.  Finding 
that  we  did  not  like  this,  our  friends  took  us  a little  way 
into  the  illand ; where,  in  a deep  chafm,  we  found  very 
good  water ; which,  at  the  expence  of  fome  time  and 
trouble,  might  be  conveyed  down  to  the  fliore,  by  means  of 
fpouts  or  troughs,  that  could  be  made  with  plantain  leaves, 
and  the  Item  of  the  tree.  But,  rather  than  to  undertake 
that  tedious  tafk,  1 refolved  to  reft  contented  with  the  fupply 
the  fliips  had  got  at  Tongataboo. 

Before  1 returned  on  board,  I fet  on  foot  a trade  for  hogs 
and  yams.  Of  the  former,  we  could  procure  but  few ; but, 
of  the  latter,  plenty.  I put  afliore,  at  this  illand,  the  ram 
and  two  ewes,  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  breed  of  llieep ; 
intrufting  them  to  the  care  of  Taoofa,  who  feemed  proud 
of  his  charge.  It  was  fortunate,  perhaps,  that  Mareewa- 
gee,  to  whom  I had  given  them,  as  before-mentioned, 
llighted  the  prefent.  Eooa,  not  having,  as  yet,  got  any  dogs 
upon  it,  feems  to  be  a properer  place  than  Tongataboo  for 
the  rearing  of  flieep. 

As  we  lay  at  anchor,  this  ifland  bore  a very  different 
afpe6t  from  any  we  had  lately  feen,  and  formed  a moft 
beautiful  landfcape.  It  is  higher  than  any  we  had  paffed, 
ftnce  leaving  New  Zealand  (as  Kao  may  juftly  be  reckoned 
an  immenfe  rock),  and  from  its  top,  which  is  almoft  flat, 
declines  very  gently  toward  the  fea.  As  the  other  illes,  of 
this  clufter,  are  level,  the  eye  can  difcover  nothing  but  the 
trees  that  cover  them  ; but  here  the  land,  rifing  gently  up- 
ward, prefents  us  with  an  extenftve  profpecft,  where  groves 
of  trees  are  only  interfperfed  at  irregular  diftances,  in 

beautiful 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


357 


beautiful  diforder,  and  the  reft  covered  with  grafs.  Near  1777. 
the  fliore,  again,  it  is  quite  ftiaded  with  various  trees,  ^ f 
amongft  which  are  the  habitations  of  the  natives ; and  to 
the  right  of  our  ftation,  was  one  of  the  moft^extenftve 
groves  of  cocoa-palms  we  had  ever  feen. 

The  13th,  in  the  afternoon,  a party  of  us  made  an  excur-  Sunday  13. 
fton  to  the  higheft  part  of  the  illand,  which  was  a little  to 
the  right  of  our  fliips,  in  order  to  have  a full  view  of  the 
country.  About  half  way  up,  we  crofted  a deep  valley,  the 
bottom  and  ftdes  of  which,  though  compofed  of  hardly  any 
thing  but  coral  rock,  were  clothed  with  trees.  We  were 
now  about  two  or  three  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
fea,  and  yet,  even  here,  the  coral  was  perforated  into  all  the 
holes  and  inequalities,  which  ufually  diverfify  the  furface 
of  this  fubftance  within  the  reach  of  the  tide.  Indeed,  we 
found  the  fame  coral,  till  we  began  to  approach  the  fum- 
mits  of  the  higheft  hills ; and,  it  was  remarkable,  that 
thefe  were  chiefly  compofed  of  a yeUowifh,  foft,  fandy 
ftone.  The  foil,  there,  is,  in  general,  a reddifti  clay ; which, 
in  many  places,  feemed  to  be  very  deep.  On  the  moft  ele- 
vated part  of  the  whole  ifland,  we  found  a round  platform, 
or  mount  of  earth,  fupported  by  a waU  of  coral  ftones  ; to 
bring  which,  to  fuch  a height,  muft  have  coft  much  labour. 

Our  guides  told  us,  that  this  mount  had  been  ere6ted  by 
order  of  their  Chief ; and  that  they,  fometimes,  met  there 
to  drink  kava.  They  called  it  Etchee ; by  which  name,  an 
ere<ftion,  which  we  had  feen  at  Tongataboo,  as  already 
mentioned,  was  diftinguiflied.  Not  many  paces  from  it, 
was  a fpring  of  excellent  water ; and,  about  a mile  lower 
down,  a running  ftream,  which,  we  were  told,  found  its 
way  to  the  fea,  when  the  rains  were  copious.  We  alfo  met 

with. 


358 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  with  water,  in  many  little  holes;  and,  no  doubt,  great 
. . plenty  might  be  found,  by  digging. 

From  the  elevation,  to  which  we  had  afcended,  we  had 
a full  view  of  the  whole  illand,  except  a part  of  the  South 
point.  The  South  Eaft  fide,  from  which  the  higheft  hills, 
we  were  now  upon,  are  not  far  diftant,  rifes  with  ve.  y great 
inequalities,  immediately  from  the  fea;  fo  that  the  plains 
and  meadow  s,  of  w^hich  there  are  here  fome  of  great  extent, 
lie  all  on  the  North  Weft  fide;  and,  as  they  are  adorned 
with  tufts  of  trees,  intermixed  with  plantations,  they  form 
a very  beautiful  landfcape,  in  every  point  of  view.  While 
I was  furveying  this  delightful  profpecft,  I could  not  help 
flattering  myfelf  with  the  pleaflng  idea,  that  fome  future 
navigator  may,  from  the  fame  ftation,  behold  thefe  mea- 
dows flocked  with  cattle,  brought  to  thefe  iflands  by  the 
fliips  of  England ; and  that  the  completion  of  this  Angle 
benevolent  purpofe,  independently  of  all  other  conAdera- 
tions,  would  fufliciently  mark  to  pofterity,  that  our  voyages 
had  not  been  ufelefs  to  the  general  interefts  of  humanity. 
BeAdes  the  plants  common  on  the  other  neighbouring 
iflands,  we  found,  on  the  height,  a fpecies  of  acrojiicumy 
melaftoma^  and  fern  tree ; with  a few  other  ferns  and 
plants,  not  common  lower  down. 

Our  guides  informed  us,  that  all,  or  moft  of  the  land,  on 
this  ifland,  belonged  to  the  great  Chiefs  of  Tongataboo; 
and  that  the  inhabitants  were  only  tenants,  or  vaflals,  to 
them.  Indeed,  this  feemed  to  be  the  cafe  at  all  the  other 
neighbouring  ifles,  except  Annamooka,  where  there  were 
fome  Chiefs,  who  feemed  to  a6t  with  fome  kind  of  inde- 
pendence. Omai,  who  was  a great  favourite  wdth  Feenou, 
and  thefe  people  in  general,  was  tempted  with  the  offer  of 

being 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


359 


being  made  Chief  of  this  illand,  if  he  would  have  ftaid  1777. 
amongft  them ; and  it  is  not  clear  to  me,  that  he  would  . 
not  have  been  glad  to  ftay,  if  the  fcheme  had  met  with  my 
approbation.  I own,  I did  difapprove  of  it ; but  not  be- 
caufe  I thought  that  Omai  would  do  better  for  himfelf  in 
his  own  native  ille. 

On  returning  from  my  country  expedition,  we  were 
informed  that  a party  of  the  natives  had,  in  the  circle 
where  our  people  traded,  ftruck  one  of  their  own  country- 
men with  a club,  which  laid  bare,  or,  as  others  faid,  frac- 
tured his  fkull,  and  then  broke  his  thigh  with  the  fame ; 
when  our  men  interpofed.  He  had  no  figns  of  life,  when 
carried  to  a neighbouring  houfe ; but  afterward  recovered 
a little.  On  my  afking  the  reafon  of  fo  fevere  a treat- 
ment, we  were  informed,  that  he  had  been  difcovered 
in  a lituation  rather  indehcate,  with  a woman  who  was 
taboo'd.  We,  however,  underftood,  that  fire  was  no 
otherwife  taboo'd.,  than  by  belonging  to  another  perfon, 
and  rather  fuperior  in  rank  to  her  gallant.  From  this 
circumftance,  we  had  an  opportunity  of  obferving,  how 
thefe  people  treat  fuch  infidelities.  But  the  female  finner 
has,  by  far,  the  fmaller  fhare  of  punhhment  for  her  mif- 
demeanor ; as  they  told  us,  that  fhe  would  only  receive  a 
flight  beating. 

The  next  morning,  I planted  a pine-apple,  and  fowed  Monday  14, 
the  feeds  of  melons,  and  other  vegetables  in  the  Chief’s 
plantation.  I had  fome  encouragement,  indeed,  to  flatter 
myfelf,  that  my  endeavours  of  this  kind  would  not  be 
fruitlefs ; for,  this  day,  there  was  ferved  up  at  my  dinner, 
a difli  of  turnips,  being  the  produce  of  the  feeds  1 had  left 
here  during  my  laft  voyage. 

I had  fixed  upon  the  15th  for  failing,  till  Taoofa  prefTed  Tuefday  ij. 

me 


36o 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  me  to  flay  a day  or  two  longer,  to  receive  a prefent  he  had 

1 . prepared  for  me.  This  reafon,  and  the  daily  expectation  of 

feeing  fome  of  our  friends  from  Tongataboo,  induced  me 
to  defer  my  dep^^rture. 

Wednef.  16.  Accordingly,  the  next  day,  I received  the  Chief’s  pre- 
fent ; confining  of  two  fmall  heaps  of  yams,  and  fome  fruit, 
which  feemed  to  be  collected  by  a kind  of  contribution, 
as  at  the  other  ifles.  On  this  occafion,  mofl  of  the  people 
of  the  ifland  had  affembled  at  the  place;  and,  as  we  had 
experienced  on  fuch  numerous  meetings  amongfl  their 
neighbours,  gave  us  not  a little  trouble  to  prevent  them 
from  pilfering  whatever  they  could  lay  their  hands  upon. 
W e were  entertained  with  cudgelling,  wreftling,  and  box- 
ing-matches ; and  in  the  latter,  both  male  and  female 
combatants  exhibited.  It  was  intended  to  have  finiflied  the 
fhew  with  the  bomai^  or  night-dance ; but  an  accident 
either  put  a total  flop  to  it,  or,  at  leaft,  prevented  any  of  us 
from  flaying  afliore  to  fee  it.  One  of  my  people,  walk- 
ing a very  little  way,  was  furrounded  by  twenty  or  thirty 
of  the  natives,  who  knocked  him  down,  and  ftripped  him 
of  every  thing  he  had  on  his  back.  On  hearing  of  this, 
I immediately  feized  two  canoes,  and  a large  hog;  and 
infilled  on  Taoofa’s  cauling  the  clothes  to  be  relfored, 
and  on  the  offenders  being  delivered  up  to  me.  The 
Chief  feemed  much  concerned  at  what  had  happened ; 
and  forthwith  took  the  neceffary  fleps  to  fatisfy  me.  This 
affair  fo  alarmed  the  affembled  people,  that  mofl  of  them 
fled.  However,  when  they  found  that  I took  no  other 
meafures  to  revenge  the  infult,  they  returned.  It  was  not 
long  before  one  of  the  offenders  was  delivered  up  to 
me,  and  a fliirt  and  a pair  of  trowfers  reflored.  The  re- 
mainder of  the  flolen  goods  not  coming  in  before  night, 

I was 


$ 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 

I was  under  a neceflity  of  leaving  them  to  go  aboard ; for 
the  fea  run  fo  high,  that  it  was  with  the  greateft  difficulty 
the  boats  could  get  out  of  the  creek  with  day-light,  much 
lefs  in  the  dark. 

The  next  morning,  I landed  again,  having  provided  my- 
felf  with  a prefent  for  Taoofa,  in  return  for  what  he  had 
given  me.  As  it  was  early,  there  were  but  few  people  at 
the  landing-place,  and  thofe  few  not  without  their  fears. 
But  on  my  deliring  Omai  to  affiure  them,  that  we  meant  no 
harm;  and,  in  confirmation  of  this  aflurance,  having  re- 
ftored  the  canoes,  and  releafed  the  offender,  whom  they  had 
dehvered  up  to  me,  they  refumed  their  ufual  gaiety  ; and, 
prefently,  a large  circle  was  formed,  in  which  the  Chief, 
and  all  the  principal  men  of  the  illand,  took  their  places. 
The  remainder  of  the  clothes  were  now  brought  in  ; but, 
as  they  had  been  torn  off  the  man’s  back,  by  pieces,  they 
were  not  worth  carrying  on  board.  Taoofa,  on  receiving 
my  prefent,  fliared  it  with  three  or  four  other  Chiefs,  keep- 
ing only  a fmall  part  for  himfelf.  This  prefent  exceeded 
their  expedfation  fo  greatly,  that  one  of  the  Chiefs,  a vene- 
rable old  man,  told  me,  that  they  did  not  deferve  it,  con- 
fidering  how  little  they  had  given  to  me,  and  the  ill  treat- 
ment one  of  my  people  had  met  with.  I remained  with 
them  till  they  had  finiflied  their  bowl  of  kava ; and 
having  then  paid  for  the  hog,  which  I had  taken  the  day 
before,  returned  on  board,  with  Taoofa,  and  one  of 
Poulaho’s  fervants,  by  whom  I fent,  as  a parting  mark 
of  my  efteem  and  regard  for  that  Chief,  a piece  of  bar 
iron ; being  as  valuable  a prefent  as  any  I could  make  to 
him. 

Soon  after,  we  weighed,  and  with  a light  breeze  at 
South  Eaft,  ftood  out  to  fea ; and  then  Taoofa,  and  a 

VoL.  I.  3 A few 


361 


1777. 

July. 

— y ^ 


Thurfday  17. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


36a 

1777.  few  other  natives,  that  were  in  the  fliip,  left  ns.  On 
. . heaving  up  the  anchor,  we  found,  that  the  cable  had 

fuffered  confiderably  by  the  rocks  ; fo  that  the  bottom,  in 
this  road,  is  not  to  be  depended  upon.  Belides  this,  we  ex- 
perienced, that  a prodigious  fwell  rolls  in  there  from  the 
South  Weft. 

We  had  not  been  long  under  fail,  before  we  obferved 
a failing  canoe  coming  from  Tongataboo,  and  entering 
the  creek  before  which  we  had  anchored.  Some  hours 
after,  a fmall  canoe,  condudled  by  four  men,  came  off  to 
us.  For,  as  we  had  but  little  wind,  we  were,  ftill,  at  no 
great  diftance  from  the  land.  Thefe  men  told  us,  that 
the  failing  canoe,  which  we  had  feen  arrive  from  Ton- 
gataboo, had  brought  orders  to  the  people  of  Eooa,  to 
furnifli  us  with  a certain  number  of  hogs ; and  that,  in 
two  days,  the  king,  and  other  Chiefs,  would  be  with  us. 
They,  therefore,  deftred  we  would  return  to  our  former 
ftation.  There  was  no  reafon  to  doubt  the  truth  of  what 
thefe  men  told  us.  Two  of  them  had  actually  come  from 
Tongataboo,  in  the  failing  canoe ; and  they  had  no  view 
in  coming  off  to  us,  but  to  give  this  intelligence.  How- 
ever, as  we  were  now  clear  of  the  land,  it  was  not  a 
fufficient  inducement  to  bring  me  back ; efpecially  as  we 
had,  already,  on  board,  a ftock  of  frefli  provifions,  fuf- 
ficient, in  all  probability,  to  laft  during  our  paffage  to 
Otaheite.  Befides  Taoofa’s  prefent,  we  had  got  a good 
quantity  of  yams  at  Eooa,  in  exchange  chiefly  for  fmall 
nails.  Our  fupply  of  hogs  was  alfo  confiderably  increafed 
there  ; though,  doubtlefs,  we  fhould  have  got  many  more, 
if  the  Chiefs  of  Tongataboo  had  been  with  us,  whofe  pro- 
perty they  moftly  were.  At  the  approach  of  night,  thefe 
men,  finding  that  we  would  not  return,  left  us  ; as  alfo 

fome 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


363 


fome  others,  who  had  come  oflF  in  two  canoes,  with  a few  1777. 
cocoa-nuts,  and  fliaddocks,  to  exchange  them  for  what  they 
could  get ; the  eagernefs  of  thefe  people  to  get  into  their 
pofleflion  more  of  our  commodities,  inducing  them  to  fol- 
low the  fliips  out  to  fea,  and  to  continue  their  intercourfe 
with  us  to  the  laft  moment. 


3 A 2 


CHAP. 


34 


A VOYAGE  TO 


CHAP.  X. 

Advantages  derived  from  vijiting  the  Friendly  IJlands. — Bejl 
Articles  for  traffic, — Refrejhments  that  may  be  procured, — 
The  Number  of  the  IJlands^  and  their  Names. — KeppePs 
and  Bofcawen's  IJlands  belong  to  them.  — Account  of 
Vavaoo — of  Hamoa — ofFeejee. — Voyages  of  the  Natives  in 
their  Canoes. — Difficulty  of  procuring  exaSi  Information. — 
Perfons  of  the  Inhabitants  of  both  Sexes. — Their  Colour. — 
Difeafes. — Their  general  CharaBer. — Manner  of  wearing 
their  Hair-^of  punBuring  their  Bodies. — Their  Clothing 
and  Ornaments. — Perfonal  Cleanlinefs . 

*777-  f A 'HUS  we  took  leave  of  the  Friendly  Illands,  and  their 
A inhabitants,  after  a flay  of  between  two  and  three 
months ; during  which  time,  we  lived  together  in  the  moft 
cordial  friendfliip.  Some  accidental  differences,  it  is  true, 
now  and  then  happened,  owing  to  their  great  propenfity  to 
thieving ; but,  too  often,  encouraged  by  the  negligence  of 
our  own  people.  But  thefe  differences  were  never  attended 
with  any  fatal  confequences  ; to  prevent  which,  all  my 
meafures  were  directed ; and,  I believe,  feAV,  on  board  our 
fliips,  left  our  friends  here  without  fome  regret.  The  time, 
employed  amongft  them,  was  not  thrown  away.  We  ex- 
pended very  little  of  our  fea  provifions  ; fubfifting,  in  ge- 
neral, upon  the  produce  of  the  iflands,  while  we  flaid ; and 
carrying  away  with  us  a quantity  of  refrefliments  fufficient 

to 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


365 


to  laft  till  our  arrival  at  another  flation,  Vvhere  we  could 
depend  upon  a frefli  fupply.  I was  not  forry,  belides,  to 
have  had  an  opportunity  of  bettering  the  condition  of  thefe 
good  people,  by  leaving  the  ufeful  animals,  before-men- 
tioned, among  them ; and,  at  the  fame  time,  thofe  deligned 
for  Otaheite,  received  frefh  ftrength  in  the  paftures  of  Ton- 
gataboo.  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  the  advantages  we 
received,  by  touching  here,  were  very  great ; and  I had  the 
additional  fatisfadlion  to  refledf,  that  they  were  received, 
without  retarding,  one  moment,  the  profecution  of  the 
great  objedf  of  our  voyage ; the  feafon,  for  proceeding  to  the 
North,  being,  as  has  been  already  obferved,  loft,  before  I 
took  the  refolution  of  bearing  away  for  thefe  illands. 

But,  belides  the  immediate  advantages,  which  both  the 
natives  of  the  Friendly  Illands,  and  ourfelves,  received  by 
this  vilit,  future  navigators  from  Europe,  if  any  fuch  lliould 
ever  tread  our  Heps,  will  profit  by  the  knowledge  I acquired 
of  the  geography  of  this  part  of  the  Pacific  Ocean ; and  the 
more  philofophical  reader,  who  loves  to  view  human  nature 
in  new  lituations,  and  to  fpeculate  on  lingular,  but  faithful 
reprefentations  of  the  perfons,  the  cuftoms,  the  arts,  the 
religion,  the  government,  and  the  language  of  uncultivated 
man,  in  remote  and  frefli  difcovered  quarters  of  the  globe, 
will,  perhaps,  find  matter  of  amufement,  if  not  of  inftruc- 
tion,  in  the  information  which  I have  been  enabled  to  con- 
vey to  him,  concerning  the  inhabitants  of  this  Archipelago. 
I lliall  fufpend  my  narrative,  of  the  progrefs  of  the  voyage, 
while  I faithfully  relate  what  I had  opportunities  of  collect- 
ing on  thefe  feveral  topics. 

We  found,  by  our  experience,  that  the  belt  articles  for 
traffic,  at  thefe  illands,  are  iron  tools  in  general.  Axes  and 
hatchets ; nails,  from  the  largell  fpike  down  to  tenpenay 

ones; 


1777- 
July. 

L.. — V — j 


366 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  ones;  rafps ; files;  and  knives,  are  much  fought  after. 

. Red  cloth ; and  linen,  both  white  and  coloured ; looking- 
glaffes,  and  beads,  are  alfo  in  eflimation ; but,  of  the  latter, 
thofe  that  are  blue,  are  preferred  to  all  others ; and  white 
ones  are  thought  the  leaft  valuable.  A firing  of  large  blue 
beads  would,  at  any  time,  purchafe  a hog.  But  it  muft  be 
obferved,  that  fuch  articles  as  are  merely  ornaments,  may 
be  highly  efleemed  at  one  time,  and  not  fo  at  another. 
When  we  firfl  arrived  at  Annamooka,  the  people  there 
would  hardly  take  them  in  exchange  even  for  fruit;  but 
when  Feenou  came,  this  great  man  fet  the  fafliion,  and 
brought  them  into  vogue,  till  they  rofe  in  their  value  to 
what  I have  juft  mentioned. 

In  return  for  the  favourite  commodities  which  I have 
enumerated,  all  the  refrefliments  may  be  procured  that  the 
iflands  produce.  Thefe  are,  hogs,  fowls,  fifh,  yams,  bread- 
fruit, plantains,  cocoa-nuts,  fugar-cane,  and,  in  general, 
every  fuch  fupply  as  can  be  met  with  at  Otaheite,  or  any  of 
the  Society  Illands.  The  yams  of  the  Friendly  Illands  are  ex- 
cellent, and,  w^hen  grown  to  perfe6lion,  keep  very  well  at  fea. 
But  their  pork,  bread-fruit,  and  plantains,  though  far  from 
defpicable,  are,  neverthelefs,  much  inferior  in  quality  to  the 
fame  articles  at  Otaheite,  and  in  its  neighbourhood. 

Good  water,  which  ftiips,  on  long  voyages,  ftand  fo  much 
in  need  of,  is  fcarce  at  thefe  iflands.  It  may  be  found,  it  is 
true,  on  them  all;  but,  ftiU,  either  in  too  inconfiderable 
quantities,  or  in  fituations  too  inconvenient,  to  ferve  the 
purpofes  of  navigators.  However,  as  the  illands  afford 
plenty  of  proviftons,  and  particularly  of  cocoa-nuts,  fliips 
may  make  a tolerable  fhift  with  fuch  water  as  is  to  be  got ; 
and  if  one  is  not  over-nice,  there  will  be  no  want.  While 
we  lay  at  anchor,  under  Kotoo,  on  our  return  from  Hapaee, 

fome 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


367 


fome  people,  from  Kao,  informed  us,  that  there  was  a ftream  1777. 

of  water  there,  which,  pouring  down  from  the  mountain,  . 
runs  into  the  fea,  on  the  South  Weft  fide  of  the  ifland; 
that  is,  on  the  lide  that  faces  Toofoa,  another  illand  re- 
markable for  its  height,  as  alfo  for  having  a confiderable 
volcano  in  it,  which,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  burnt 
violently  all  the  time  that  we  were  in  its  neighbourhood.  It 
may  be  worth  while  for  future  navigators,  to  attend  to  this 
intelligence  about  the  ftream  of  water  at  Kao ; efpecially  as 
we  learned  that  there  was  anchorage  on  that  part  of  the 
coaft.  The  black  ftone,  of  which  the  natives  of  the  Friendly 
Iflands  make  their  hatchets,  and  other  tools,  we  were  in- 
formed, is  the  production  of  Toofoa. 

Under  the  denomination  of  Friendly  Iflands,  we  muft  in- 
clude, not  only  the  group  at  Hapaee,  which  I vifited,  but 
alfo  all  thofe  illands,  that  have  been  difcovered  nearly 
under  the  fame  meridian,  to  the  North,  as  well  as  fome 
others  that  have  never  been  feen,  hitherto,  by  any  Euro- 
pean navigators ; but  are  under  the  dominion  of  Tongata- 
boo,  which,  though  not  the  largeft,  is  the  capital,  and  feat 
of  government. 

According  to  the  information  that  we  received  there,  this 
Archijrelago  is  very  extenftve.  Above' onc^  hundred  and 
fifty  illands  were  reckoned  up  to  us  by  the  natives,  who 
made  ufe  of  bits  of  leaves  to  afcertain  their  number ; and 
Mr.  Anderfon,  with  his  ufual  diligence,  even  procured 
all  their  names.  Fifteen  of  them  are  faid  to  be  high,  or 
hilly,  fuch  as  Toofoa,  and  Eooa;  and  thirty-five  of  them 
large.  Of  thefe,  only  three  were  feen  this  voyage ; Hapaee 
(which  is  confidered  by  the  natives  as  one  illand),  Ton- 
gataboo,  and  Eooa : of  the  fize  of  the  unexplored  thirty- 
two,  nothing  more  can  be  mentioned,  but  that  they  muft 

be 


363 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777-  be  all  larger  than  Annamooka ; which  thofe,  from  whom 
i we  had  our  information,  ranked  amongft  the  fmaller  iiles. 
Some,  or  indeed  feveral,  of  this  latter  denomination,  are 
mere  fpots,  without  inhabitants.  Sixty-one  of  thefe  illands 
have  their  proper  places  and  names  marked  upon  our  chart 
of  the  Friendly  Illands,  and  upon  the  Iketch  of  the  harbour 
of  Tongataboo,  to  both  which  I refer  the  reader.  But  it 
muft  be  left  to  future  navigators,  to  introduce  into  the 
geography  of  this  part  of  the  South  Pacific  Ocean,  the 
exadl  fituation  and  fize  of  near  a hundred  more  illands  in 
this  neighbourhood,  which  we  had  not  an  opportunity  to 
explore ; and  whofe  exiftence  we  only  learnt  from  the  tefti- 
mony  of  our  friends,  as  above-mentioned.  On  their  autho- 
rity, the  following  lift  of  them  was  made ; and  it  may  ferve 
as  a ground-w^ork  for  farther  inveftigation. 

Names  of  the  Friendly  Ijlands,  and  others,  in  that  Neigh- 
bourhood,  mentioned  by  the  Inhabitants  of  Annamooka, 
Hapaee,  and  I’ongataboo'^K 


Koniooefeeva, 
Kollalona, 

F elongaboonga, 
Kovereetoa, 
Fonogooeatta, 
Modooanoogoo  noo 
goo, 

Tongooa, 

Koooa, 

Fonooa  eeka. 


Noogoofaeeou, 

Koreemou, 

Failemaia, 

Koweeka, 

Konookoonama, 

Kooonoogoo, 

Geenageena, 

Kowourogoheefo, 

Kottejeea, 

Kokabba, 


Novababoo, 

Golabbe, 

Vagaeetoo, 

Gowakka, 

Goofoo, 

Mafanna, 

Kolloooa, 

T abanna, 
Motooha, 
Looakabba, 


* Thofe  iflands,  which  the  natives  reprefented  as  large  ones,  are  diftinguiftied  in 
Italics. 


Favaoo, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


369 


Favaoo^ 

Boloa, 

ToofanaetoUo, 

Koloa, 

Toofagga, 

Toofanaelaa, 

F afeene. 

Loogoobahanga, 

Kogoopoloo, 

Taoonga, 

T aoola. 

Havaeeeeke^ 

Kobakeemotoo, 

Maneeneeta, 

Tootooeelay 

Kongahoonoho, 

Fonooaooma, 

Manooka, 

Komalla, 

F onooonneonne, 

Lejhaingay 

Konoababoo, 

Wegaffa, 

Pappataiay 

Konnetalle, 

Fooamotoo, 

Loubattay 

Komongoraffa, 

Fonooalaiee,  ' 

OlOOy 

Kotoolooa, 

T attahoi. 

Fakounovey 

Kologobeele, 

Latte, 

Kopaooy 

Kollokolahee, 

Neuafo, 

Kovooeeay 

Matageefaia, 

Feejee, 

Ko  n gair.eekeey 

Mallajee, 

Oowaia, 

Tafeedoowaiay 

Mallalahee, 

Kongaiarahoiy 

Hamoay 

Gonoogoolaiee, 

Kotoobooo, 

Neeootabootaboo 

Toonabai, 

Komotte, 

FotoonUy 

Konnevy, 

Komoarra^ 

Vytoobooy 

Konnevao, 

Kolaiva^ 

Fotoomay 

Moggodoo, 

Kofoona^ 

Foggelaoy 

Looamoggo, 

Konnagillelaivoo^ 

Falava. 

I have  not  the  leaft  doubt,  that  Prince  William’s  Illands, 
difcovered,  and  fo  named  by  Tafman,  are  included  in  the 
foregoing  lift.  For  while  we  lay  at  Hapaee,  one  of  the  na- 
tives told  me,  that,  three  or  four  days  fail  from  thence,  to 
the  North  Weft,  there  was  a clufter  of  fmall  iflands,  conftft- 
ing  of  upward  of  forty.  This  lituation  correfponds  very  well 
with  that  afligned,  in  the  accounts  we  have  of  Tafman’s 
voyage,  to  his  Prince  William’s  Illands  "’b 

* Tafman  faw  eighteen  or  twenty  of  thefe  fmall  iflands,  every  one  of  which  was  fur- 
rounded  with  fands,  fhoals,  and  rocks.  They  are  alfo  called,  in  fome  charts,  Heemfkirk’s 
VoL.  I.  - 3 B Banks. 


‘777- 

July. 


V. 


V* 


J 


370 


A VOYAGE  TO 


W e have  alfo  very  good  authority  to  believe,  that  Kep- 
pel’s  and  Bofcawen’s  Illands,  two  of  Captain  Wallis’s  difco- 
veries  in  1765,  are  comprehended  in  our  lift  ; and  that  they 
are  not  only  well  known  to  thefe  people,  but  are  under  the 
fame  fovereign.  The  following  information  feemed  to  me 
deciftve  as  to  this.  Upon  my  inquiring,  one  day,  of  Pou- 
laho,  the  king,  in  what  manner  the  inhabitants  of  Tongata- 
boo  had  acquired  the  knowledge  of  iron,  and  from  what 
quarter  they  had  procured  a fmall  iron  tool,  which  I had 
feen  amongft  them,  when  I firft  viftted  their  illand,  during 
my  former  voyage,  he  informed  me,  that  they  had  received 
this  iron  from  an  illand,  which  he  called  Neeootabootaboo. 
Carrying  my  inquiries  further,  I then  defired  to  know, 
whether  he  had  ever  been  informed,  from  whom  the 
people  of  Neeootabootaboo  had  got  it.  I found  him  per- 
fedlly  acquainted  with  its  hiftory.  He  faid,  that  one  of 
thofe  iflanders  fold  a club,  for  five  nails,  to  a fliip  which 
had  touched  there;  and  that  thefe  five  nails  afterward 
were  fent  to  Tongataboo.  He  added,  that  this  was  the  firft 
iron  known  amongft  them ; fo  that,  what  Tafman  left  of 
that  metal,  muft  have  been  worn  out,  and  forgot  long  ago. 
I was  very  particular  in  my  inquiries  about  the  fituation, 
lize,  and  form  of  the  illand ; exprefling  my  delire  to  know 
when  this  fhip  had  touched  there  ; how  long  flie  ftaid ; 
and  whether  any  more  were  in  company.  The  leading 
fa(fts  appeared  to  be  frefli  in  his  memory.  He  faid,  that 
there  was  but  one  fliip ; that  flie  did  not  come  to  an  an- 
chor, but  left  the  illand  after  her  boat  had  been  on  fliore. 
And  from  many  circumftances,  which  he  mentioned,  it 
could  not  be  many  years  lince  this  had  happened.  Ac- 

Banks.  See  Dalrymple’s  Collection  of  Voyages  to  the  South  Pacific  Ocean,  Vol.  ii. 
p.  83.  5 and  Campbell’s  edition  of  Harris’s,  Vol.  i.  p.  325. 

cording 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


371 


cording  to  his  information,  there  are  two  illands  near  each 
other,  which  he  himfelf  had  been  at.  The  one  he  defcribed 
as  high,  and  peaked  like  Kao,  and  he  called  it  Kootahee ; 
the  other,  where  the  people  of  the  111  ip  landed,  called 
Neeootabootaboo,  he  reprefeiited  as  much  lower.  He  add- 
ed, that  the  natives  of  both  are  the  fame  fort  of  people 
with  thofe  of  Tongataboo  ; built  their  canoes  in  the  fame 
manner ; that  their  illands  had  hogs  and  fowls  ; and,  in  ge- 
neral, the  fame  vegetable  produ6lions.  The  lliip,  fo  point- 
edly referred  to  in  this  converfation,  could  be  no  other 
than  the  Dolphin;  the  only  fngle  fhip  from  Europe,  as 
far  as  we  have  ever  learned,  that  had  touched,  of  late 
years,  at  any  ifland  in  this  part  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  prior 
to  my  former  vifit  of  the  Friendly  Illands 

But  the  molt  confiderable  illands  in  this  neighbourhood, 
that  we  now  heard  of  (and  we  heard  a great  deal  about 
them),  are  Hamoa,  Vavaoo,  and  Feejee.  Each  of  thefe  was 
reprefeiited  to  us  as  larger  than  Tongataboo.  No  European, 
that  we  know  of,  has,  as  yet,  feen  any  one  of  them.  Taf- 
man,  indeed,  lays  down  in  his  chart,  an  illand  nearly  in 
the  fituation  where  I fuppofe  Vavaoo  to  be;  that  is,  about 
the  latitude  of  19°  t.  But,  then,  that  illand  is  there  marked 

as 

* See  Captain  Wallis’s  Voyage,  in  Hawkcfworth’s  Colledlion,  Vol.  i.  p.  492 — 494. 
Captain  Wallis  there  calls  both  thefe  iflands  high  ones.  But  the  fuperior  height  of  one  of 
them  may  be  inferred,  from  his  faying,  that  it  appears  like  a fugar-loaf.  This  ftrongly 
marks  its  refemblance  to  Kao.  From  comparing  Poulaho’s  intelligence  to  Captain 
Cook,  with  Captain  Wallis’s  account,  it  feems  to  be  part  all  doubt,  that  Bofcawen’s 
Ifland  is  our  Kootahee,  and  Keppel’s  Ifland  our  Neeootabootaboo.  The  laft  is  one  of 
tlie  large  iflands  marked  in  the  foregoing  lift.  The  reader,  who  has  been  already  apprized 
of  the  variations  of  our  people  in  writing  down  what  the  natives  pronounced,  will  hardly 
doubt  that  Kottejeea  and  Kootahee  are  the  fame. 

+ Neither  Dalrymple  nor  Campbell,  in  their  accounts  of  Tafman’s  voyage,  take  any 
particular  notice  of  his  having  feen  fuch  an  ifland.  The  chart  here  referred  to,  by  Cap- 

3 B 2 


>777- 

July. 


372 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  as  a very  fmall  one ; whereas  Vavaoo,  according  to  the 
, . united  teftimony  of  all  our  friends  at  Tongataboo,  exceeds 

the  lize  of  their  own  ill  and,  and  has  high  mountains.  I 
fhould  certainly  have  vihted  it ; and  have  accompanied  Fee- 
nou  from  Hapaee,  if  he  had  not  then  difcouraged  me,  by 
reprefenting  it  to  be  very  inconliderable,  and  without  any 
harbour.  But  Poulaho,  the  king,  afterward  alTured  me,  that 
it  was  a large  illand ; and  that  it  not  only  produced  every 
thing  in  common  with  Tongataboo,  but  had  the  peculiar 
advantage  of  polTeffing  feveral  ftreams  of  frelli  water,  with 
as  good  a harbour  as  that  which  we  found  at  his  capital 
ifland.  He  offered  to  attend  me,  if  T would  vilit  it ; adding, 
that,  if  I did  not  find  every  thing  agreeing  with  his  repre- 
fentation,  I might  kill  him.  I had  not  the  leaft  doubt  of 
the  truth  of  his  intelligence;  and  was  fatisfied  that  Fee- 
nou,  from  fome  interefled  view,  attempted  to  deceive 
me. 

Hamoa,  which  is  alfo  under  the  dominion  of  Tongataboo, 
lies  two  days  fail  North  Well  from  Vavaoo.  It  was  defcribed 
to  me,  as  the  largefl  of  all  their  illands  ; as  affording  har- 
bours and  good  water ; and  as  producing,  in  abundance, 
every  article  of  refrefhment  found  at  the  places  we  vifited. 
Poulaho,  himfelf,  frequently  refides  there.  It  fliould  feem, 
that  the  people  of  this  illand  are  in  high  eflimation  at  Ton- 
gataboo; for  we  were  told,  that  fome  of  the  fongs  and 
dances,  with  which  we  were  entertained,  had  been  copied 
from  theirs ; and  we  faw  fome  houfes,  faid  to  be  built  after 
their  falhion.  Mr.  Anderfon,  always  inquifitive  about  fuch 


tain  Cook,  is,  probably,  Mr.  Dalrymple’s,  in  his  Colle£tion  of  V oyages,  where  T afman’s 
trail  is  marked  accurately  j and  feveral  very  fmall  fpots  of  land  are  laid  down  in  the  fitua- 
tion  here  mentioned. 


matters. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


373 


matters,  learnt  the  three  following  words  of  the  dialect  of 
Hainoa. 

'Tamolao  *■,  a chief  man. 

I’amaety-i  a chief  woman. 

Solle^  a common  man. 

Feejee, 

* In  two  or  three  preceding  notes,  extradls  have  been  made  from  the  Lettres  Edi- 
Jiantes  et  Curieufes,  as  marking  a ftrong  refemblance  between  fome  of  the  cuftoms  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Caroline  Iflands,  and  thofe  which  Captain  Cook  defcribes  as  prevail- 
ing at  an  immenfe  diftance,  in  the  iflands  which  he  vifited  in  the  South  Pacific  Ocean. 
Poflibly,  however,  the  prefumption,  arifing  from  this  refemblance,  that  all  thefe  iflands 
were  peopled  by  the  fame  nation,  or  tribe,  may  be  refilled,  under  the  plaufible  pretence, 
that  cuftoms  very  fimilar  prevail  amongft  very  diftant  people,  without  inferring  any  other 
common  fource,  befides  the  general  principles  of  human  nature,  the  fame  in  all  ages,  and 
every  part  of  the  globe.  The  reader,  perhaps,  will  not  think  this  pretence  applicable  to 
the  matter  before  us,  if  he  attends  to  the  following  very  obvious  diftindlion : Thofe  cuf- 
toms which  have  their  foundation  in  wants  that  are  common  to  the  whole  human  fpecies, 
and  which  are  confined  to  the  contrivance  of  means  to  relieve  thofe  wants,  may  well  be 
fuppofed  to  bear  a ftrong  refemblance,  without  warranting  the  conclufion,  that  they  who 
ufe  them  have  copied  each  other,  or  have  derived  them  from  one  common  fource ; human 
fagacity  being  the  fame  every  where,  and  tlie  means  adapted  to  the  relief  of  any  parti- 
cular natural  want,  efpecially  in  countries  fimilarly  uncultivated,  being  but  few.  Thus 
the  moll  diftant  tribes,  as  widely  feparated  as  the  Kamtfchadales  are  from  the  Brazilians, 
may  produce  their  fire,  by  rubbing  two  Hicks  upon  each  other,  without  giving  us  the  leaft 
foundation  for  fuppofing,  that  either  of  them  imitated  the  other,  or  derived  the  invention 
from  a fource  of  inftrudlion  common  to  both.  But  this  feems  not  to  be  the  cafe,  with 
regard  to  thofe  cuftoms  to  which  no  general  principle  of  human  nature  has  given  birth, 
and  which  have  their  eftablilhment  folely  from  the  endlefs  varieties  of  local  whim,  and 
national  falhion.  Of  this  latter  kind,  thofe  cuftoms  obvioufly  are,  that  belong  both 
to  the  North,  and  to  the  South  Pacific  Iflands,  from  which  we  would  infer,  that  they 
were  originally  one  nation  ; and  the  men  of  Mangeea,  and  the  men  of  the  New  Philip- 
pines, who  pay  their  refpedls  to  a perfon  whom  they  mean  to  honour,  by  rubbing  his 
hand  over  their  faces,  bid  fair  to  have  learnt  their  mode  of  falutation  in  the  fame  fcho<J. 
But  if  this  obfervation  Ihould  not  have  removed  the  doubts  of  the  fceptical  refiner,  pro- 
bably he  will  hardly  venture  to  perfift  in  denying  the  identity  of  race,  contended  for  in  the 
prefent  inftance,  when  he  lhall  obferv'e,  that,  to  the  proof  drawn  from  affinity  of  cuftoms, 
we  have  it  in  our  power  to  add  that  moll  unexceptionable  one,  drawn  from  affinity  of 
language.  Tamoloa^  we  now  know,  is  the  word  ufed  at  Hamoa,  one  of  the  Friendly  Iflands, 
.to  fignify  a Chief  5 and  whoever  looks  into  the  LeUres  EdifianUs  et  Curieufes^  will  fee,  that 

this 


^777' 

July. 


374 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777- 

July. 


Feejee,  as  we  were  told,  lies  three  days  fail  from  Tonga- 
taboo,  in  the  dire<fl;ion  of  North  Weft  by  Weft.  It  was  de- 
fcribed  to  ns  as  a high,  but  very  fruitful  ifland ; abounding 
with  hogs,  dogs,  fowls,  and  all  the  kinds  of  fruit  and  roots 
that  are  found  in  any  of  the  others ; and  as  much  larger 
than  Tongataboo;  to  the  dominion  of  which,  as  was  re- 
prefented  to  us,  it  is  not  fubjedl,  as  the  other  illands  of  this 
archipelago  are.  On  the  contrary,  Feejee  and  Tongataboo 
frequently  make  war  upon  each  other.  And  it  appeared, 
from  feveral  circumftances,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  lat- 
ter are  much  afraid  of  this  enemy.  They  ufed  to  exprefs 
their  fenfe  of  their  own  inferiority  to  the  Feejee  men,  by 
bending  the  body  forward,  and  covering  the  face  with  their 
hands.  And  it  is  no  wonder,  that  they  fliould  be  under 
this  dread;  for  thofe  of  Feejee  are  formidable  on  account 
of  the  dexterity  with  which  they  ufe  their  bows  and  llings; 
but  much  more  fo,  on  account  of  the  favage  practice  to 
which  they  are  addidfed,  like  thofe  of  New  Zealand,  of 
eating  their  enemies,  whom  they  kill  in  battle.  We  were 
fatisfied,  that  this  was  not  a mifreprefentation.  For  we  met 
with  feveral  Feejee  people  at  Tongataboo,  and,  on  inquir- 
ing of  them,  they  did  not  deny  the  charge. 

Now,  that  I am  again  led  to  fpeak  of  cannibals,  let  me 
afk  thofe  who  maintain,  that  the  want  of  food  firft  brings 
men  to  feed  on  human  flefli.  What  is  it  that  induceth  the 
Feejee  people  to  keep  it  up,  in  the  midft  of  plenty  ? This 

this  is  the  very  name  by  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  Caroline  Iflands  diftinguifti  their  prin- 
cipal men.  We  have,  in  two  preceding  notes,  inferted  palTages  from  Father  Cantova’s 
account  of  them,  where  their  Tamoles  are  fpoken  of;  and  he  repeats  the  word  at  leaft  a dozen 
times,  in  the  courfe  of  a few  pages.  But  I cannot  avoid  tranfcribing,  from  him,  the  fol- 
lowing very  decifive  teftimony,  which  renders  any  other  quotation  fuperfluous.  “ L’auto- 
“ ritie  du  Gouvernement  fe  partage  entre  plufieurs  families  nobles,  dont  les  Chefs  s’ap- 
“ pellent  Tamoles.  II  y a outre  cela,  dans  chaque  province,  un  principale  Tamole.,  auquel 
“ tous  les  autres  font  foumis.”  Lettres  Edifiantes  et  Curieufes^  Tom.  xv.  p.  312. 

practice 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


375 


pracftice  is  detelled,  very  much,  by  thofe  of  Tongataboo, 
who  cidtivate  the  friendfliip  of  their  favage  neighbours  of  ^ 
Feejee,  apparently  out  of  fear;  though  they  fometimes  ven- 
ture to  Ikirmidi  with  them,  on  their  own  ground;  and 
carry  off  red  feathers,  as  their  booty,  which  are  in  great 
plenty  there,  and,  as  has  been  frequently  mentioned,  are 
in  great  eftimation  amongft  our  Friendly  Illanders.  When 
the  two  iilands  are  at  peace,  the  intercourfe  between  them 
feems  to  be  pretty  frequent ; though  they  have,  doubtlefs, 
been  but  lately  know  n to  each  other ; or  we  may  fuppofe, 
that  Tongataboo,  and  its  adjoining  iflands,  would  have  been 
fupplied,  before  this,  with  a breed  of  dogs,  which  abound 
at  Feejee,  and  had  not  been  introduced  at  Tongataboo,  fo 
late  as  1773,  when  I firft  viiited  it.  The  natives  of  Feejee, 
whom  w'e  met  wdth  here,  w^ere  of  a colour  that  w^as  a full 
Ihade  darker,  than  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Friendly 
Iflands  in  general.  One  of  them  had  his  left  ear  flit,  and 
the  lobe  was  fo  diftended,  that  it  almoft  reached  his 
flioulder;  which  lingularity  I had  met  with  at  other  iflands 
of  the  South  Sea,  during  my  fecond  voyage.  It  appeared 
to  me,  that  the  Feejee  men,  whom  w^e  now  faw,  were  much 
refpedled  here ; not  only,  perhaps,  from  the  power,  and 
cruel  manner  of  their  nation’s  going  to  war,  but,  alfo,  from 
their  ingenuity.  For  they  feem  to  excel  the  inhabitants  of 
Tongataboo  in  that  refpedt,  if  we  might  judge  from  feve- 
ral  fpecimens  of  their  fkill  in  workmanfhip,  which  we  faw ; 
fuch  as  clubs  and  fpears,  which  were  carved  in  a very 
mafterly  manner ; cloth  beautifully  chequered ; variegated 
mats ; earthen  pots  ; and  fome  other  articles  ; all  which 
had  a call  of  fuperiority  in  the  execution. 

I have  mentioned,  that  Feejee  lies  three  days  fail  from 
Tongataboo,  becaufe  thefe  people  have  no  other  method  of 

meafuring 


376 


A VOYAGE  TO 


yj7-  meafuring  the  diftance  from  ifland  to  ifland,  but  by  exprelf- 

V- ing  the  time  required  to  make  the  voyage,  in  one  of  their 

canoes.  In  order  to  afcertain  this,  with  fome  precifion,  or, 
at  leaft,  to  form  fome  judgment,  how  far  thefe  canoes  can 
fail,  in  a moderate  gale,  in  any  given  time,  I went  on  board 
one  of  them,  when  under  fail,  and,  by  feveral  trials  with 
the  log,  found  that  flie  went  feven  knots,  or  miles,  in  an 
hour,  clofe  hauled,  in  a gentle  gale.  From  this  I judge, 
that  they  will  fail,  on  a medium,  with  fuch  breezes  as  ge- 
nerally blow  in  their  fea,  about  feven  or  eight  miles  in  an 
hour.  But  the  length  of  each  day  is  not  to  be  reckoned  at 
twenty-four  hours.  For  when  they  fpeak  of  one  day’s  fail, 
they  mean  no  more  than  from  the  morning  to  the  evening 
of  the  fame  day ; that  is,  ten  or  twelve  hours  at  moft.  And 
two  days  fail,  with  them,  hgnifies  from  the  morning  of 
the  firft  day,  to  the  evening  of  the  fecond ; and  fo  for 
any  other  number. of  days.  In  thefe  navigations,  the  fun 
is  their  guide  by  day,  and  the  Bars  by  night.  When  thefe 
are  obfcured,  they  have  recourfe  to  the  points  from  whence 
the  winds  and  the  waves  came  upon  the  veffel.  If,  during 
the  obfcuration,  both  the  wind  and  the  waves  lliould  fhift 
(which,  within  the  limits  of  the  trade-wind,  feldom  happens 
at  any  other  time),  they  are  then  bewildered,  frequently 
mifs  their  intended  port,  and  are  never  heard  of  more.  The 
hiftory  of  Omai’s  countrymen,  who  were  driven  to  Wa- 
teeoo,  leads  us  to  infer,  that  thofe  not  heard  of,  are  not 
always  loft. 

Of  all  the  harbours  and  anchoring  places  I have  met  with 
amongft  thefe  illands,  that  of  Tongataboo  is,  by  far,  the 
heft ; not  only  on  account  of  its  great  fecurity,  but  of  its 
capacity,  and  of  the  goodnefs  of  its  bottom.  The  rilk  that 
we  ran,  in  entering  it  from  the  North,  ought  to  be  a fuffi- 

cient 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


377 


cient  caution,  to  every  future  Commander,  not  to  attempt  1777. 
that  palTage  again  with  a fliip  of  burden  ; fince  the  other,  . . 

by  which  w'e  left  it,  is  fo  much  more  eafy  and  fafe.  To 
fail  into  it,  by  this  Eaftern  channel,  fteer  in  for  the  North 
Eaft  point  of  the  ill  and,  and  keep  along  the  North  lliore, 
w'ith  the  fmall  illes  on  your  ftarboard,  till  you  are  the  length 
of  the  Eaft  point  of  the  entrance  into  the  lagoon  ; then  edge 
over  for  the  reef  of  the  fmall  illes ; and,  on  following  its 
direction,  it  will  condu6t  you  through  between  Makkahaa 
and  Monooafai,  or  the  fourth  and  fifth  illes,  which  you  will 
perceive  to  lie  off  the  Weft  point  of  the  lagoon.  Or  you  may 
go  between  the  third  and  fourth  illands,  that  is,  between 
Pangimodoo  and  Monooafai ; but  this  channel  is  much 
narrower  than  the  other.  There  runs  a very  ftrong  tide  in 
both.  The  flood,  as  I have  obferved  before,  comes  in  from 
the  North  Weft,  and  the  ebb  returns  the  fame  way ; but  I 
fliall  fpeak  of  the  tides  in  another  place.  As  foon  as  you 
are  through  either  of  thefe  channels,  haul  in  for  the  fliore 
of  Tongataboo,  and  anchor  between  it  and  Pangimodoo, 
before  a creek  leading  into  the  lagoon ; into  which  boats 
can  go  at  half  flood. 

Although  Tongataboo  has  the  bell  harbour,  Annamooka 
furniflies  the  beft  water ; and  yet,  it  cannot  be  called  good. 
HoAvever,  by  digging  holes  near  the  fide  of  the  pond,  we 
can  get  what  may  be  called  tolerable.  This  ifland,  too,  is 
the  beft  fituated  for  drawing  refrefliments  from  all  the 
others,  as  being  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  whole  group. 

Befides  the  road  in  w’hich  we  anchored,  and  the  harbour 
within  the  South  Weft  point,  there  is  a creek  in  the  reef, 
before  the  Eaftern  fandy  cove,  on  the  North  fide  of  the 
ifland,  in  which  two  or  three  fliips  may  lie  very  fecurely, 

VoL.  I.  3 C by 


378 


A VOYAGE  TO 


J777- 

July. 

V.— 


by  mooring  head  and  ftern,  with  their  anchors  or  moorings 
faft  to  the  rocks. 

I have  already  defcribed  the  Hapaee  illands  ; and  lhall 
only  add  to  that  defcription,  by  mentioning,  that  they  ex- 
tend South  Weft  by  South,  and  North  Eaft  by  North?  about 
nineteen  miles.  The  North  end  lies  in  the  latitude  of  19° 
39"  South,  and  33"  of  longitude  to  the  Eaft  of  Annamooka. 
Between  them,  are  a great  many  fmall  illands,  fand-banks, 
and  breakers  ; fo  that  the  fafeft  way  to  arrive  at  Hapaee,  is 
either  by  the  courfe  I held,  or  round  by  the  North ; accord^ 
ing  to  the  fttuation  of  the  fhip  bound  thither.  Lefboga,  oft' 
which  we  anchored,  is  the  moft  fertile  ifle  of  thofe  that  are 
called  Hapaee;  and,  confequently,  is  the  heft  inhabited. 
There  is  anchorage  along  the  North  Weft  fide  of  this  ifland  ; 
but  it  will  be  necelTary  to  examine  the  ground  well  before 
you  moor.  For,  although  the  lead  may  bring  up  fine  fand, 
there  are,  neverthelefs,  fome  lharp  coral  rocks,  that  would 
foon  deftroy  the  cables. 

They  who  want  a more  particular  defcription  of  the 
Friendly  Iflands,  muft  have  recourfe  to  the  chart  that  we 
conftrucfted.  There,  every  thing  is  delineated  with  as  much 
accuracy  as  circumftances  would  permit.  Recourfe  muft, 
alfo,  be  had,  to  the  fame  chart,  for  the  better  tracing  the 
feveral  ftations  of  the  fhips,  and  their  route  from  the  one 
illand  to  the  other.  To  have  fwelled  my  journal  with  a 
minute  account  of  bearings,  tackings,  and  the  like,  would 
neither  have  been  entertaining  nor  inftm6live. 

What  has  been  here  omitted,  concerning  the  geography 
of  thefe  iflands,  will  be  found  in  the  narrative  of  my 
laft  voyage  To  that  narrative  I muft  alfo  refer  t,  for 

* Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol,  i.  p.  2l l.  213.  J-  Ibid.  p.  213.  225. 

fuch 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


379 


fuch  particulars  concerning  the  inhabitants,  their  manners,  1777. 
and  arts,  as  I had  obferved  then,  and  about  which  I faw  no 
reafon  to  change  my  judgment.  At  prefent,  I lliall  confine 
myfelf  to  fuch  intereliing  particulars,  as  either  were  not 
mentioned  in  that  narrative,  or  were  imperfectly  and  incor- 
rectly reprefented  there ; and  to  fuch  as  may  ferve  to  ex- 
plain fome  pafiages  in  the  foregoing  account  of  our  tranf- 
aCtions  with  the  natives. 

It  may,  indeed,  be  expeCted,  that,  after  fpending  between 
two  and  three  months  amongft  them,  I fliould  be  enabled 
to  clear  up  every  difficulty,  and  to  give  a tolerably  fatisfac- 
tory  account  of  their  cufloms,  opinions,  and  inftitutions, 
both  civil  and  religious  ; efpecially  as  we  had  a perfon  on 
board,  who  might  be  fuppofed  qualified  to  aCt  the  part  of 
an  interpreter,  by  underftanding  their  language  and  ours. 

But  poor  Omai  was  very  deficient.  For  unlefs  the  objeCl  or 
thing  we  wanted  to  inquire  about,  was  aClually  before  us, 
we  found  it  difficult  to  gain  a tolerable  knowledge  of  it, 
from  information  only,  without  falling  into  a hundred 
miftakes  ; and  to  fuch  miftakes  Omai  was  more  liable  than 
we  were.  For,  having  no  curiofity,  he  never  gave  himfelf 
the  trouble  to  make  remarks  for  himfelf ; and,  when  he 
was  difpofed  to  explain  matters  to  us,  his  ideas  appeared  to 
be  fo  limited,  and,  perhaps,  fo  different  from  ours,  that  his 
accounts  were  often  fo  confufed,  as  to  perplex,  inftead  of 
inftmCting  us.  Add  to  this,  that  it  was  very  rare  that  we 
found,  amongft  the  natives,  a perfon,  who  united  the  abi- 
lity and  the  inclination  to  give  us  the  information  we 
wanted ; and,  we  found,  that  moft  of  them  hated  to  be 
troubled  with  what  they,  probably,  thought  idle  queftions. 

Our  fituation  at  Tongataboo,  where  we  remained  the  long- 
eft,  was,  likewife,  unfavourable.  It  was  in  a part  of  the 

3 C 2 country, 


38o 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  country,  where  there  were  few  inhabitants,  except  fifhers. 

. It  was  always  holiday  with  our  viliters,  as  well  as  with  thofe 
we  vifited ; fo  that  we  had  but  few  opportunities  of  obferv- 
ing,  what  was  really  the  domeftic  way  of  living  of  the  na- 
tives. Under  thefe  difad  vantages,  it  is  not  furprizing,  that 
we  fhould  not  be  able  to  bring  away  with  us  fatisfadfory 
accounts  of  many  things  ; but  fome  of  us  endeavoured  to 
remedy  thofe  difadvantages,  by  dihgent  obfervation  ; and  I 
am  indebted  to  Mr.  Anderfon  for  a conliderable  fliare  of 
what  follows,  in  this  and  in  the  following  chapter.  In  other 
matters,  I have  only  exprefled,  nearly  in  his  words,  remarks 
that  coincided  with  mine ; but  what  relates  to  the  religion 
and  language  of  thefe  people,  is  entirely  his  own. 

The  natives  of  the  Friendly  Iflands  feldom  exceed  the 
common  ftature  (though  we  have  meafured  fome,  who 
w^ere  above  fix  feet)  ; but  are  very  flrong,  and  well  made ; 
efpeciahy  as  to  their  limbs.  They  are  generally  broad 
about  the  flioulders  ; and  though  the  mufcular  difpofition 
of  the  men,  which  feems  a confequence  of  much  adtion, 
rather  conveys  the  appearance  of  ftrength  than  of  beauty, 
there  are  feveral  to  be  feen,  who  are  really  handfome. 
Their  features  are  very  various  ; infomuch,  that  it  is 
fcarcely  poflible  to  fix  on  any  general  likenefs,  by  which  to 
characterize  them,  unlefs  it  be  a fullnefs  at  the  point  of  the 
nofe,  which  is  very  common.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
met  with  hundreds  of  truly  European  faces,  and  many  ge- 
nuine Roman  nofes,  amongfl;  them.  Their  eyes  and  teeth 
are  good ; but  the  lafl:  neither  fo  remarkably  white,  nor  fo 
well  fet  as  is  often  found  amongfl  Indian  nations  ; though, 
to  balance  that,  few  of  them  have  any  uncommon  thick- 
nefs  about  the  lips,  a defeCt  as  frequent  as  the  other  per- 
fection. 


The 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


381 


The  women  are  not  fo  much  diftinguifhed  from  the  men  1777. 
by  their  features  as  by  their  general  form,  which  is,  for  the  . 
moft  part,  deftitute  of  that  ftrong  flefliy  firmnefs  that  ap- 
pears in  the  latter.  Though  the  features  of  fome  are  fo 
delicate,  as  not  only  to  be  a true  index  of  their  fex,  but  to 
lay  claim  to  a conhderable  fhare  of  beauty  and  exprelhon, 
the  rule  is,  by  no  means,  fo  general  as  in  many  other  coun- 
tries. But,  at  the  fame  time,  this  is  frequently  the  moft 
exceptionable  part ; for  the  bodies  and  limbs  of  moft  of  the 
females  are  well  proportioned  ; and  fome,  abfolutely,  per- 
fect models  of  a beautiful  figure.  But  the  moft  remarkable 
diftindtion  in  the  women,  is  the  uncommon  fmallnefs  and 
delicacy  of  their  fingers,  which  may  be  put  in  competition 
with  the  fineft  in  Europe. 

The  general  colour  is  a call  deeper  than  the  copper 
brown ; but  fever al  of  the  men  and  women  have  a true 
olive  complexion ; and  fome  of  the  laft  are  even  a great 
deal  fairer ; which  is  probably  the  effecft  of  being  lefs  ex- 
pofed  to  the  fun  ; as  a tendency  to  corpulence,  in  a few  of 
the  principal  people,  feems  to  be  the  confequence  of  a more 
indolent  life.  It  is  alfo  amongft  the  laft,  that  a foft  clear 
fkin  is  moft  frequently  obferved.  Amongft  the  bulk  of 
the  people,  the  Ikin  is,  more  commonly,  of  a dull  hue,  with 
fome  degree  of  roughnefs,  efpecially  the  parts  that  are 
not  covered ; which,  perhaps,  may  be  occafioned  by  fome 
cutaneous  difeafe.  We  faw  a man  and  boy  at  Hapaee,  and 
a child  at  Annamooka,  perfe6tly  white.  Such  have  been 
found  amongft  all  black  nations  ; but  I apprehend  that 
their  colour  is  rather  a difeafe,  than  a natural  phaeno- 
menon. 

There  are,  neverthelefs,  upon  the  whole,  few  natural 
defeats  or  deformities  to  be  found  amongft  them  ; though 

w^e 


382 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777..  we  faw  two  or  three  with  their  feet  bent  inward  ; and  fome 
I — / afflicted  with  a fort  of  blindnefs,  occafioned  by  a difeafe  of 
the  cornea.  Neither  are  they  exempt  from  fome  other  dif- 
eafes.  The  mod:  common  of  which  is  the  tetter,  or  ring- 
worm, that  feems  to  affe6l  almoft  one  half  of  them,  and 
leaves  whitifli  ferpentine  marks,  every  where,  behind  it. 
But  this  is  of  lefs  confequence  than  another  difeafe,  which 
is  very  frequent,  and  appears  on  every  part  of  the  body,  in 
large  broad  ulcers  with  thick  white  edges,  difcharging  a 
thin,  clear  matter;  fome  of  which  had  a very  virulent 
appearance,  particularly  thofe  on  the  face,  which  were 
(hocking  to  look  at.  And  yet  we  met  with  fome  who 
feemed  to  be  cured  of  it,  and  others  in  a fair  way  of  be- 
ing cured ; but  this  was  not  effedfed  without  the  lofs  of 
the  nofe,  or  of  the  heft  part  of  it.  As  we  know  for  a cer- 
tainty (and  the  fa6l  is  acknowledged  by  themfelves),  that 
the  people  of  thefe  illands  were  fubjedt  to  this  loathfome 
difeafe  before  the  Englifli  firft  viiited  them,  notwithftand- 
ing  the  (imilarity  of  fymptoms,  it  cannot  be  the  effedf  of 
the  venereal  contagion  ; unlefs  we  adopt  a fuppolition, 
which  I could  whli  had  fufficient  foundation  in  truth,  that 
the  venereal  diforder  was  not  introduced  here  from  Eu- 
rope, by  our  (liips  in  1773.  It,  alfuredly,  was  now  found 
to  exift  amongft  them ; for  we  had  not  been  long  there, 
before  fome  of  our  people  received  the  infedfion ; and  I 
had  the  mortification  to  learn  from  thence,  that  all  the 
care  I took,  when  I firft  viiited  thefe  illands,  to  prevent  this 
dreadful  difeafe  from  being  communicated  to  their  inha- 
bitants, had  proved  ineffectual.  What  is  extraordinary, 

* See  Vol.  ii.  p.  20.  of  Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  where  he  gives  a particular  account 
of  meeting  with  a perfon  afflifted  with  this  difeafe,  at  Annamooka,  on  his  landing  there 
in  1773. 

they 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


383 


they  do  not  feem  to  regard  it  much ; and  as  we  faw  few  1777. 
ligns  of  its  dellroying  effeils,  probably  the  climate,  and  the  , 
way  of  living  of  thefe  people,  greatly  abate  its  virulence. 

There  are  two  other  difeafes  frequent  amongft  them  ; one 
of  which  is  an  indolent  firm  fwelling,  which  affedfs  the  legs 
and  arms,  and  increafes  them  to  an  extraordinary  fize  in 
their  whole  length.  The  other  is  a tumour  of  the  fame 
fort,  in  the  tefticles,  which  fometimes  exceed  the  fize  of 
the  two  fills.  But,  in  other  refpedls,  they  may  be  confidered 
as  uncommonly  healthy ; not  a fingle  perfon  having  been 
feen,  during  our  ftay,  confined  to  the  houfe,  by  ficknefs  of 
any  kind.  On  the  contrary,  their  ftrength  and  adlivity  are, 
every  way,  anfwerable  to  their  mufcular  appearance ; and 
they  exert  both,  in  their  ufual  employment,  and  in  their 
diverfions,  in  fuch  a manner,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of 
their  being,  as  yet,  little  debilitated  by  the  numerous  dif- 
eafes that  are  the  confequence  of  indolence,  and  an  unna- 
tural method  of  life. 

The  graceful  air  and  firm  ftep  with  which  thefe  people 
walk,  are  not  the  leafi;  obvious  proof  of  their  perfonal 
accomplifliments.  They  confider  this  as  a thing  fo  na- 
tural, or  fo  necelfary  to  be  acquired,  that  nothing  ufed 
to  excite  their  laughter  fooner,  than  to  fee  us  frequently 
Humbling  upon  the  roots  of  trees,  or  other  inequalities  of 
the  ground. 

Their  countenances  very  remarkably  exprefs  the  abun- 
dant mildnefs,  or  good-nature,  which  they  polfefs ; and  are 
entirely  free  from  that  favage  keennefs  which  marks  na- 
tions in  a barbarous  ftate.  One  would,  indeed,  be  apt  to 
fancy  that  they  had  been  bred  up  under  the  fevereft  re- 
ftridlions,  to  acquire  an  afpedf  fo  fettled,  and  fuch  a com- 
mand of  their  paflions,  as  well  as  fieadinefs  in  condu^Sl. 

But 


3^4 


A VOYAGE  TO 


,777.  But  they  are,  at  the  fame  time,  frank,  cheerful,  and  good- 
, humoured ; though,  fometimes,  in  the  prefence  of  their 
Chiefs,  they  put  on  a degree  of  gravity,  and  fuch  a ferious 
air  as  becomes  ftiff  and  awkward,  and  has  an  appearance 
of  referve. 

Their  peaceable  difpohtion  is  fufficiently  evinced,  from 
the  friendly  reception  all  ftrangers  have  met  with,  who  have 
vilited  them.  Inftead  of  offering  to  attack  them  openly,  or 
clandelfinely,  as  has  been  the  cafe  with  moft  of  the  inha- 
bitants of  thefe  feas,  they  have  never  appeared,  in  the 
fmalleft  degree,  holtile ; but,  on  the  contrary,  like  the  moll 
civilized  people,  have  courted  an  intercourfe  with  their  vi- 
liters,  by  bartering,  which  is  the  only  medium  that  unites 
all  nations  in  a fort  of  friendlhip.  They  underhand  barter 
(which  they  call  fukkatou)  fo  perfe6tly,  that,  at  firll,  we 
imagined  they  might  have  acquired  this  knowledge  of  it  by 
commercial  intercourfe  with  the  neighbouring  illands  ; but 
we  were  afterward  alfured,  that  they  had  little  or  no  traffic, 
except  with  Feejee,  from  which  they  get  the  red  feathers, 
and  the  few  other  articles,  mentioned  before.  Perhaps,  no 
nation  in  the  world  traffic  with  more  honelly  and  lefs 
dillrull.  We  could  always  fafely  permit  them  to  examine 
our  goods,  and  to  hand  them  about,  one  to  another ; and 
they  put  the  fame  confidence  in  us.  If  either  party  repent- 
ed of  the  bargain,  the  goods  were  re-exchanged  with  mu- 
tual confent  and  good-humour.  Upon  the  whole,  they 
feem  polfelfed  of  many  of  the  moll  excellent  qualities  that 
adorn  the  human  mind  ; fuch  as  indufiry,  ingenuity,  per- 
feverance,  affability,  and,  perhaps,  other  virtues  which  our 
fliort  ftay  with  them  might  prevent  our  obferving. 

The  only  defeff  fullying  their  character,  that  we  know 
of,  is  a propenfity  to  thieving ; to  which,  we  found,  thofe 

of 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


385 


of  all  ages,  and  both  fexes,  addidled;  and  to  an  uncommon  1777. 
degree.  It  fliould,  however,  he  conlidered,  that  this  excep- 
tionable  part  of  their  condudl  feemed  to  exih  merely  with 
refpedf  to  ns  ; for,  in  their  general  intercourfe  with  one  an- 
other, I had  reafon  to  be  of  opinion,  that  thefts  do  not 
happen  more  frequently  (perhaps  lefs  fo)  than  in  other 
countries,  the  dillioneft  pradfices  of  whofe  worthlefs  indi- 
viduals are  not  fuppofed  to  authorize  any  indifcriminate 
cenfure  on  the  whole  body  of  the  people.  Great  allow- 
ances fliould  be  made  for  the  foibles  of  thefe  poor  natives 
of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  whofe  minds  we  overpowered  with 
the  glare  of  obje6ls,  equally  new  to  them,  as  they  were  cap- 
tivating. Stealing,  amongft  the  civilized  and  enlightened 
nations  of  the  world,  may  well  be  confidered  as  denoting  a 
character  deeply  ftained  with  moral  turpitude,  with  avarice 
unreftrained  by  the  known  rules  of  right,  and  with  profli- 
gacy producing  extreme  indigence,  and  negle6fing  the 
means  of  relieving  it.  But  at  the  Friendly  and  other  illands 
which  we  vifited,  the  thefts,  fo  frequently  committed  by 
the  natives,  of  what  we  had  brought  along  with  us,  may 
be  fairly  traced  to  lefs  culpable  motives.  They  feemed 
to  arife,  folely,  from  an  intenfe  curiofity  or  defire  to  poffefs 
fomething  which  they  had  not  been  accuflomed  to  before, 
and  belonging  to  a fort  of  people  fo  different  from  them- 
felves.  And,  perhaps,  if  it  were  poflible,  that  a fet  of  be-- 
ings,  feemingly  as  fuperior  in  our  judgment,  as  we  are  in 
theirs,  fliould  appear  amongfl;  us,  it  might  be  doubted, 
whether  our  natural  regard  to  juftice  would  be  able  to  re- 
flrain  many  from  falling  into  the  fame  error.  That  I have 
affigned  the  true  motive  for  their  propenfity  to  this  pradtice, 
appears  from  their  ftealing  every  thing  indifcriminately  at 
firll  fight,  before  they  could  have  the  le aft  conception  of 
VoL.  I.  3D  converting 


386 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  converting  their  prize  to  any  one  nreful  purpofe.  But,  I 
. believe,  with  us,  no  perfon  would  forfeit  his  reputation,  or 
expofe  himfelf  to  punifhment,  without  knowing,  before 
hand,  how  to  employ  the  ftolen  goods.  Upon  the  whole, 
the  pilfering  difpolition  of  thefe  iflanders,  though  certainly 
difagreeable  and  troublefome  to  ftrangers,  was  the  means 
of  affording  us  fome  information  as  to  the  quicknefs  of 
their  intelledfs.  For  their  fmall  thefts  were  committed  with 
much  dexterity ; and  thofe  of  greater  confequence  with  a 
plan  or  fcheme  fuited  to  the  importance  of  the  objedts.  An 
extraordinary  inftance  of  the  laft  fort,  their  attempts  to 
carry  away  one  of  the  Difcovery’s  anchors,  at  mid-day, 
has  been  already  related. 

Their  hair  is,  in  general,  ftraight,  thick,  and  ftrong; 
though  a few  have  it  bufhy  or  frizzled.  The  natural  co- 
lour, I believe,  almoft  without  exception,  is  black ; but  the 
greateft  part  of  the  men,  and  fome  of  the  women,  have  it 
Ifained  of  a brown,  or  purple  colour;  and  a few  of  an 
orange  caft.  The  firft  colour  is  produced  by  applying  a 
fort  of  plafter  of  burnt  coral,  mixed  with  water;  the  fe- 
cond,  by  the  rafpings  of  a reddifh  wood,  which  is  made  up 
with  water  into  a poultice,  and  laid  over  the  hair ; and  the 
third  is,  I believe,  the  effedl  of  turmeric  root. 

When  I firft  vifited  thefe  iflands,  I thought  it  had  been 
an  univerfal  cuftom  for  both  men  and  women  to  wear  the 
hair  ftiort ; but,  during  our  prefent  longer  ftay,  we  faw  a 
great  many  exceptions.  Indeed,  they  are  fo  whimfical  in 
their  faftiions  of  wearing  it,  that  it  is  hard  to  tell  which  is 
moft  in  vogue.  Some  have  it  cut  off  from  one  fide  of  the 
head,  while  that  on  the  other  fide  remains  long ; fome  have 
only  a portion  of  it  cut  fhort,  or,  perhaps,  fliaved ; others 
have  it  entirely  cut  off,  except  a fingle  lock,  which  is  left 

commonly 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


387 


commonly  on  one  fide ; or,  it  is  fulFered  to  grow  to  its  full 
length,  without  any  of  thefe  mutilations.  The  women,  in 
general,  wear  it  fliort.  The  men  have  their  beards  cut  fhort ; 
and  both  men  and  women  ftrip  the  hair  from  their  arm- 
pits.  The  operation  by  which  this  is  performed  has  been 
already  defcribed.  The  men  are  ftained  from  about  the 
middle  of  the  belly,  to  about  half  way  down  the  thighs, 
with  a deep  blue  colour.  This  is  done  with  a flat  bone  in- 
ftrument,  cut  full  of  fine  teeth,  which,  being  dipped  in  the 
flaining  mixture,  prepared  from  the  juice  of  the  dooe  dooe,  is 
ftruck  into  the  fkin  with  a bit  of  flick ; and,  by  that  means, 
indelible  marks  are  made.  In  this  manner  they  trace  lines 
and  figures,  which,  in  fome,  are  very  elegant,  both  from 
the  variety,  and  from  the  arrangement.  The  women  have 
only  a few  fmall  lines  or  fpots,  thus  imprinted,  on  the  infide 
of  their  hands.  Their  kings,  as  a mark  of  diflin(Slion,  are 
exempted  from  this  cuflom,  as  alfo  from  inflicfling  on 
themfelves  any  of  thofe  bloody  marks  of  mourning,  which 
fliall  be  mentioned  in  another  place. 

The  men  are  all  circumcifed,  or  rather  fupercifed;  as 
the  operation  confifls  in  cutting  off  only  a fmall  piece  of 
the  forefkin,  at  the  upper  part ; which,  by  that  means,  is 
rendered  incapable,  ever  after,  of  covering  the  glans.  This 
is  all  they  aim  at ; as  they  fay,  the  operation  is  pracflifed 
from  a notion  of  cleanlinefs. 

The  drefs  of  both  men  and  women  is  the  fame;  and 
confifls  of  a piece  of  cloth  or  matting  (but  moflly  the 
former),  about  two  yards  wide,  and  two  and  a half  long ; 
at  leafl,  fo  long  as  to  go  once  and  a half  round  the  waifl, 
to  which  it  is  confined  by  a girdle  or  cord.  It  is  double 
before,  and  hangs  down,  like  a petticoat,  as  low  as  the 
middle  of  the  leg.  The  upper  part  of  the  garment,  above 

3 D 2 the 


383 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  the  girdle,  is  plaited  into  feveral  folds;  fo  that,  when  nn- 
. , folded,  there  is  cloth  fufficient  to  draw  up  and  wrap  round 

the  llioulders;  which  is  very  feldom  done.  This,  as  to 
form,  is  the  general  drefs ; but  large  pieces  of  cloth,  and 
fine  matting,  are  worn  only  by  the  fuperior  people.  The 
inferior  fort  are  fatisfied  with  fmall  pieces  ; and,  very  often, 
wear  nothing  but  a covering  made  of  leaves  of  plants,  or 
the  maro^  which  is  a narrow  piece  of  cloth,  or  matting,  like 
a fadi.  This  they  pafs  between  the  thighs,  and  wrap 
round  the  waift;  but  the  ufe  of  it  is  chiefly  confined  to 
the  men.  In  their  great  haivas,  or  entertainments,  they 
have  various  drefles  made  for  the  purpofe  ; but  the  form 
is  always  the  fame ; and  the  richeft  drefles  are  covered, 
more  or  lefs,  with  red  feathers.  On  what  particular  occa- 
flon  their  Chiefs  wear  their  large  red  feather-caps,  I could 
not  learn.  Both  men  and  women  fometimes  fliade  their 
faces  from  the  fun  with  little  bonnets,  made  of  various 
materials. 

As  the  clothing,  fo  are  the  ornaments,  worn  by  thofe 
of  both  fexes,  the  fame.  The  moft  common  of  thefe  are 
necklaces,  made  of  the  fruit  of  the  pandanus^  and  various 
fweet-fmelling  flowers,  which  go  under  the  general  name 
of  hahulla.  Others  are  compofed  of  fmall  fir  ells,  the  wing 
and  leg-bones  of  birds,  fliark’s  teeth,  and  other  things  ; aU 
which  hang  loofe  upon  the  breaft.  In  the  fame  manner, 
they  often  wear  a mother-of-pearl  fhell,  neatly  pohflred, 
or  a ring  of  the  fame  fubftance  carved,  on  the  upper  part 
of  the  arm ; rings  of  tortoife-fhell  on  the  fingers ; and  a 
number  of  thefe,  joined  together,  as  bracelets  on  the 
wrifts. 

The  lobes  of  the  ears  (though,  moft  frequently,  only 
one)  are  perforated  with  two  holes,,  in  which  they  wear 

cylindrical 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


389 


cylindrical  bits  of  ivory,  about  three  inches  long,  intro- 
dticed  at  one  hole,  and  brought  out  of  the  other ; or  bits  ^ 
of  reed  of  the  fame  fize,  filled  with  a yellow  pigment.  This 
feems  to  be  a fine  powder  of  turmeric^  with  which  the  wo- 
men rub  themfelves  all  over,  in  the  fame  manner  as  our 
ladies  ufe  their  dry  rouge  upon  the  cheeks. 

Nothing  appears  to  give  them  greater  pleafure  than  per- 
fonal  cleanlinefs ; to  produce  which,  they  frequently  bathe 
in  the  ponds,  which  feem  to  ferve  no  other  purpofe 
Though  the  water  in  moft  of  them  ftinks  intolerably,  they 
prefer  them  to  the  fea ; and  they  are  fo  fenfible  that  fait 
water  hurts  their  fkin,  that,  when  neceflity  obliges  them  to 
bathe  in  the  fea,  they  commonly  have  fome  cocoa-nut  fhells, 
filled  with  frefli  water,  poured  over  them,  to  wafli  it  off. 
They  are  immoderately  fond  of  cocoa-nut  oil  for  the  fame 
reafon ; a great  quantity  of  which  they  not  only  pour  upon 
their  head  and  fhoulders,  but  rub  the  body  all  over,  brifkly, 
with  a fmaller  quantity.  And  none  but  thofe  who  have 
feen  this  pradlice,  can  eafily  conceive  how  the  appearance 
of  the  fkin  is  improved  by  it.  This  oil,  however,  is  not  to 
be  procured  by  every  one ; and  the  inferior  fort  of  people, 
doubtlefs,  appear  lefs  fmooth  for  want  of  it. 

♦ So  at  the  Caroline  Iflands.  “ Ils  font  accoutemes  a fe  baigner  trois  fois,  le  jour,  le 
matin,  a midi,  et  fur  le  foir.”  Lettres  Edifiantes  et  Curieufes^  Tom.  xv.  p.  314. 


1777. 

July. 

-V— » 


CHAP. 


A VOYAGE  TO 


390 


CHAP.  XI. 


Employments  of  the  IVomen,  at  the  Friendly  IJlands. — Of  the 
Men. — Agriculture. — ConftruBion  of  their  Houfes. — Eheir 
working  Fools. — Cordage^  andfifoing  Implements. — Mufical 
Inflruments. — JVeapons. — Food.,  and  Cookery. — Amufe- 
ments. — Marriage. — Mourning  Ceremonies  for  the  Dead. — 
Fheir  Divinities . — Notions  about  the  Soul.,  and  a future 
State. — Fheir  Places  of  JVorfhip. — Government. — Ma?iner 
of  paying  Obeifance  to  the  King. — Account  of  the  Royal 
Family. — Remarks  on  their  Language,  and  a Specimen  of 
it. — Nautical,  and  other  Obfervations. 


1777- 

July. 


' I 'HEIR  domeftic  life  is  of  that  middle  kind,  neither 
A fo  laborious  as  to  be  difagreeable,  nor  fo  vacant  as  to 
fuffer  them  to  degenerate  into  indolence.  Nature  has  done 
fo  much  for  their  country,  that  the  firft  can  hardly  occur, 
and  their  difpofition  feems  to  be  a pretty  good  bar  to  the 
laft.  By  this  happy  combination  of  circumftances,  their 
neceffary  labour  feems  to  yield,  in  its  turn,  to  their  recrea- 
tions, in  fnch  a manner,  that  the  latter  are  never  interrupt- 
ed by  the  thoughts  of  being  obliged  to  recur  to  the  former, 
till  fatiety  makes  them  wifli  for  fuch  a tranhtion. 

The  employment  of  the  women  is  of  the  eafy  kind,  and, 
for  the  mod:  part,  fuch  as  may  be  executed  in  the  houfe. 
The  manufadturing  their  cloth,  is  wholly  configned  to  their 
care.  Having  already  defcribed  the  procefs,  I fliall  only 
add,  that  they  have  this  cloth  of  different  degrees  of  fine- 

nefs. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


391 


nefs.  The  coarfer  fort,  of  which  they  make  very  large 
pieces,  does  not  receive  the  impreffion  of  any  pattern.  Of 
the  finer  fort,  they  have  fome  that  is  ftriped,  and  chequered, 
and  of  other  patterns  differently  coloured.  But  how  thefe 
colours  are  laid  on,  I cannot  fay,  as  I never  faw  any  of  this 
fort  made.  The  cloth,  in  general,  will  refift  water,  for 
fome  time ; but  that  which  has  the  ftrongeft  glaze  will  re- 
fift longeft. 

The  manufa6ture  next  in  confequence,  and  alfo  within 
the  department  of  the  women,  is  that  of  their  mats,  which 
excel  every  thing  I have  feen  at  any  other  place,  both  as 
to  their  texture  and  their  beauty.  In  particular,  many  of 
them  are  fo  fuperior  to  thofe  made  at  Otaheite,  that  they 
are  not  a bad  article  to  carry  thither,  by  way  of  trade.  Of 
thefe  mats,  they  have  feven  or  eight  different  forts,  for  the 
purpofes  of  wearing  or  lleeping  upon ; and  many  are  merely 
ornamental.  The  laft  are  chiefly  made  from  the  tough, 
membraneous  part  of  the  ftock  of  the  plantain  tree ; thofe 
that  they  wear,  from  pandanus,  cultivated  for  that  pur- 
pofe,  and  never  fuffered  to  fhoot  into  a trunk ; and  the 
coarfer  fort,  which  they  fleep  upon,  from  a plant  called 
evarra.  There  are  many  other  articles  of  lefs  note,  that 
employ  the  fpare  time  of  their  females  ; as  combs,  of  which 
they  make  vaft  numbers  ; and  little  balkets  made  of  the 
fame  fubftance  as  the  mats,  and  others  of  the  fibrous  cocoa- 
nut  hufk,  either  plain,  or  interwoven  with  fmaU  beads ; 
but  all,  finiftied  with  fuch  neatnefs  and  tafte  in  the  difpofi- 
tion  of  the  various  parts,  that  a ftranger  cannot  help  ad- 
miring their  alfiduity  and  dexterity. 

The  province  allotted  to  the  men  is,  as  might  be  expected, 
far  more  laborious  and  extenfive  than  that  of  the  women. 
Agriculture,  architecture,  boat-building,  fifliing,  and  other 

things 


1777- 

July. 

— 'y— 


39^ 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777. 

July. 


things  that  relate  to  navigation,  are  the  objects  of  their 
j care'-'b  Cultivated  roots  and  fruits  being  their  principal 
fupport,  this  requires  their  conftant  attention  to  agricul- 
ture, which  they  purfue  very  diligently,  and  feem  to  have 
brought  almoft  to  as  great  perfedtion  as  circumftances  will 
permit.  The  large  extent  of  the  plantain  fields  has  been 
taken  notice  of  already ; and  the  fame  may  be  faid  of  the 
yams  ; thefe  two  together,  being,  at  leaft,  as  ten  to  one, 
with  refpecl:  to  all  the  other  articles.  In  planting  both 
thefe,  they  dig  fmall  holes  for  their  reception,  and,  after- 
ward, root  up  the  furrounding  grafs,  which,  in  this  hot 
country,  is  quickly  deprived  of  its  vegetating  power,  and, 
foon  rotting,  becomes  a good  manure.  The  inftruments 
they  ufe  for  this  purpofe,  which  they  call  hooo^  are  nothing 
more  than  pickets  or  ftakes  of  different  lengths,  according 
to  the  depth  they  have  to  dig.  Thefe  are  flattened  and 
lharpened  to  an  edge  at  one  end ; and  the  largefl:  have  a 
fliort  piece  fixed  tranfverfely,  for  prefling  it  into  the 
ground  with  the  foot.  With  thefe,  though  they  are  not 
more  than  from  two  to  four  inches  broad,  they  dig  and 
plant  ground  of  many  acres  in  extent.  In  planting  the 
plantains  and  yams,  they  obferve  fo  much  exacfinefs,  that, 
whichever  way  you  look,  the  rows  prefent  themfelves  re- 
gular and  complete. 

The  coco?^-nut  and  bread-fruit  trees  are  fcattered  about 
without  any  order,  and  feem  to  give  them  no  trouble,  after 

* How  remarkably  does  Captain  Cook’s  account  of  the  employments  of  the  women 
and  men  here,  agree  with  Father  Cantova’s,  of  die  Caroline  Iflanders? — “La  principale 
“ occupation  des  hommes,  eft  de  conftruire  des  barques,  de  pecher,  et  de  cultiver  la  terre. 
“ L’affaire  des  femmes  eft  de  faire  la  cuifine,  et  de  mettre  en  oeuvre  un  efpece  de  plante 
“ fauvage,  et  un  arbre, — pour  en  faire  de  la  toile.”  Lettres  Edifiantes  et  Curicufes.y  Tom. 
xv.  p.  313- 


they 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


they  have  attained  a certain  height.  The  fame  may  be  faid  1777. 
of  another  large  tree,  which  produces  great  numbers  of  a . 
large,  roundilh,  compreffed  nut,  called  eeefee ; and  of  a 
fmaller  tree,  that  bears  a rounded  oval  nut,  two  inches  long, 
with  two  or  three  triangular  kernels,  tough  and  inlipid, 
called  mabba^  moft  frequently  planted  near  their  houfes. 

The  kappe  is,  commonly,  regularly  planted,  and  in  pretty 
large  fpots ; but  the  mawhaha  is  interfperfed  amongft  other 
things,  as  the  jeejee  TcvAyams  are  ; the  laft  of  which,  I have 
frequently  feen  in  the  interfpaces  of  the  plantain  trees,  at 
their  common  diftance.  Sugar-cane  is  commonly  in  fmall 
fpots,  crowded  clofely  together ; and  the  mulberry,  of 
which  the  cloth  is  made,  though  without  order,  has  fufli- 
cient  room  allowed  for  it,  and  is  kept  very  clean.  The 
only  other  plant,  that  they  cultivate  for  their  manufac- 
tures, is  the  pandanus ; which  is  generally  planted  in  a 
row,  clofe  together,  at  the  fides  of  the  other  fields ; and 
they  confider  it  as  a thing  fo  diftincSl  in  this  ftate,  that 
they  have  a different  name  for  it ; which  fhews,  that  they 
are  very  fenfible  of  the  great  changes  brought  about  by 
cultivation. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  thefe  people,  who,  in  many 
things,  Ihew  much  tafte  and  ingenuity,  fhould  fhew  little 
of  either  in  building  their  houfes ; though  the  defecSl  is  ra- 
ther in  the  defign,  than  in  the  execution.  Thofe  of  the 
lower  people  are  poor  huts,  fcarcely  fufficient  to  defend 
them  from  the  weather,  and  very  fmall.  Thofe  of  the 
better  fort,  are  larger  and  more  comfortable  ; but  not  what 
one  might  expert.  The  dimenfions  of  one  of  a middling 
fize,  are  about  thirty  feet  long,  twenty  broad,  and  twelve 
high.  Their  houfe  is,  properly  fpeaking,  a thatched  roof 
or  filed,  fupported  by  polls  and  rafters,  difpofed  in  a very 
VoL.  I.  3 E judicious 


394 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  judicious  manner.  The  floor  is  raifed  with  earth  fmoothed, 
t . and  covered  with  ftrong,  thick  matting,  and  kept  very- 

clean.  The  moft  of  them  are  clofed  on  the  weather  flde 
(and  fome  more  than  two-thirds  round),  with  ftrong  mats, 
or  with  branches  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  plaited  or  woven 
into  each  other.  Thefe  they  fix  up  edge  wife,  reaching 
from  the  eaves  to  the  ground ; and  thus  they  anfwer  the 
purpofe  of  a wall.  A thick,  ftrong  mat,  about  two  and 
one  half  or  three  feet  broad,  bent  into  the  form  of  a femi- 
circle,  and  fet  upon  its  edge,  with  the  ends  touching  the 
flde  of  the  houfe,  in  fhape  refembling  the  fender  of  a Are 
hearth,  inclofes  a fpace  for  the  mafter  and  miftrefs  of  the 
family  to  fleep  in.  The  lady,  indeed,  fpends  moft  of  her 
time,  during  the  day,^vithin  it.  The  reft  of  the  family 
fleep  upon  the  floor,  wherever  they  pleafe  to  lie  down ; the 
unmarried  men  and  women  apart  from  each  other.  Or, 
if  the  family  be  large,  there  are  fmall  huts  adjoining,  to 
which  the  fervants  retire  in  the  night ; fo  that  privacy  is  as 
much  obferved  here,  as  one  could  expedl.  They  have 
mats  made  on  purpofe  for  fleeping  on ; and  the  clothes 
that  they  wear  in  the  day,  ferve  for  their  covering  in  the 
night.  Their  whole  furniture  conflfts  of  a howl  or  two, 
in  which  they  make  kava ; a few  gourds ; cocoa-nut  fliells ; 
fome  fmall  wooden  ftools,  which  ferve  them  for  pillows ; 
and,  perhaps,  a large  ftool  for  the  Chief,  or  Mafter,  of  the 
family  to  fit  upon. 

The  only  probable  reafon  I can  alflgn  for  their  negledf  of 
ornamental  architedlure,  in  the  conftrucftion  of  their  houfes, 
is  their  being  fond  of  living  much  in  the  open  air.  Indeed, 
they  feem  to  confider  their  houfes,  within  which  they  fel- 
dom  eat,  as  of  little  ufe  but  to  fleep  in,  and  to  retire  to  in 
bad  weather.  And  the  lower  fort  of  people,  who  Ipend  a 

great 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


395 


great  part  of  their  time  in  clofe  attendance  upon  the  Chiefs,  • 
can  have  little  ufe  for  their  own  houfes,  but  in  the  laft 
cafe. 

They  make  amends  for  the  defedls  of  their  houfes,  by 
their  great  attention  to,  and  dexterity  in,  naval  archi- 
tedlure,  if  I may  he  allowed  to  give  it  that  name.  But  I 
refer  to  the  narrative  of  my  laft  voyage,  for  an  account  of 
their  canoes,  and  their  manner  of  building  and  navigating 
them 

The  only  tools  which  they  ufe,  to  conftrudl  thefe  boats, 
are  hatchets,  or  rather  thick  adzes,  of  a fmooth  black  ftone 
that  abounds  at  Toofoa ; augers,  made  of  fli ark’s  teeth, 
fixed  on  fmall  handles  ; and  rafps,  uf  a rough  ftcin  of  a fifh, 
faftened  on  flat  pieces  of  wood,  thinner  on  one  fide,  which 
alfo  have  handles.  The  labour  and  time  employed  in  fi- 
nilhing  their  canoes,  which  are  the  moft  perfe6l  of  their 
mechanical  productions,  wiU  account  for  their  being  very 
careful  of  them.  For  they  are  built  and  preferved  under 
flieds ; or  they  cover  the  decked  part  of  them  with  cocoa- 
leaves,  when  they  are  hauled  on  fhore,  to  prevent  their 
being  hurt  by  the  fun. 

The  fame  tools  are  all  they  have  for  other  works ; if  we 
except  different  Ihells,  which  they  ufe  as  knives.  But  there 
are  few  of  their  productions  that  require  thefe,  unlefs  it  be 
fome  of  their  weapons ; the  other  articles  being  chiefly 
their  fiftiing  materials,  and  cordage. 

The  cordage  is  made  from  the  fibres  of  the  cocoa-nut 
hulk,  which,  though  not  more  than  nine  or  ten  inches  long, 
they  plait,  about  the  fize  of  a quill,  or  lefs,  to  any  length 

* Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  215,  216.  The  reader,  by  comparing  that  account, 
with  what  Cantova  fays  of  the  fea-boats  of  the  Caroline  Iflands,  will  find,  in  this  inftance, 
alfo,  the  greateft  fimilarity.  See  Lettres  Edifiantes  et  Curieufes^  p.  286. 

3 E 2 


1777- 

July. 


that 


39^ 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  that  they  pleafe,  and  roll  it  up  in  balls ; from  which  the 
. larger  ropes  are  made,  by  twilling  feveral  of  thefe  together. 
The  lines,  that  they  filh  with,  are  as  llrong  and  even  as  the 
bell  cord  we  make,  refembling  it  almoll  in  every  refpe6l. 
Their  other  filhing  implements,  are  large  and  fmall  hooks. 
The  lall  are  compofed  entirely  of  pearl-lhell ; but  the  firll 
are  only  covered  with  it  on  the  back;  and  the  points  of 
both,  commonly,  of  tortoife-lhell ; thofe  of  the  fmall  be- 
ing plain,  and  the  others  barbed.  With  the  large  ones,  they 
catch  bonnetos  and  albicores,  by  putting  them  to  a bamboo 
rod,  twelve  or  fourteen  feet  long,  with  a hne  of  the  fame 
length,  which  rells  in  a notch  of  a piece  of  wood,  fixed  in 
the  Hern  of  the  canoe  for  that  purpofe,  and  is  dragged  on 
the  furface  of  the  fea,  as  Ihe  rowes  along,  without  any 
other  bait  than  a tuft  of  flaxy  fluff  near  the  point.  They 
have  alfo  great  numbers  of  pretty  fmall  feines,  fome  of 
which  are  of  a very  delicate  texture.  Thefe  they  ufe  to 
catch  filh  with,  in  the  holes  on  the  reefs,  when  the  tide 
ebbs. 

The  other  manual  employments,  conlifl  chiefly  in  making 
mulical  reeds,  flutes,  warlike  weapons,  and  flools,  or  rather 
piUows,  to  fleep  on.  The  reeds  have  eight,  nine,  or  ten 
pieces  placed  parallel  to  each  other,  but  not  in  any  regular 
progreflion  ; having  the  longefl,  fometimes,  in  the  middle, 
and  feveral  of  the  fame  length ; fo  that  I have  feen  none 
with  more  than  lix  notes ; and  they  feem  incapable  of  play- 
ing any  mulic  on  them,  that  is  diflinguifhable  by  our  ears'^% 
The  flutes  are  a joint  of  bamboo,  clofe  at  both  ends,  with  a 
hole  near  each,  and  four  others ; two  of  which,  and  one  of 
the  firll  only,  are  ufed  in  playing.  They  apply  the  thumb 

* See  a drawing  of  one  of  thefe  mufical  reeds,  in  Captain  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i. 
p.  221.  Plate  XXI. 

of 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


397 


of  the  left  hand,  to  clofe  the  left  noftril,  and  blow  into 
the  hole  at  one  end,  with  the  other.  The  middle  finger  of 
the  left  hand  is  applied  to  the  firfi:  hole  on  the  left,  and  the 
fore-finger  of  the  right,  to  the  loweft  hole  on  that  fide. 
In  this  manner,  though  the  notes  are  only  three,  they 
produce  a pleafing,  yet  fimple,  mufic,  which  they  vary 
much  more  than  one  would  think  poflible,  with  fo  imper- 
fedl  an  inftrument.  Their  being  accuftomed  to  a mufic 
which  confifis  of  fo  few  notes,  is,  perhaps,  the  re^fon  why 
they  do  not  feem  to  relifli  any  of  ours,  which  is  fo  com- 
plex. But  they  can  tafle  what  is  more  deficient  than  their 
own ; for,  we  obferved,  that  they  ufed  to  be  well  pleafed 
with  hearing  the  chant  of  our  two  young  New  Zealanders, 
which  confified  rather  in  mere  ftrength,  than  in  melody 
of  expreflion. 

The  weapons,  which  they  make,  are  clubs  of  different 
forts  (in  the  ornamenting  of  which  they  fpend  much  time), 
fpears,  and  darts.  They  have  alfo  bows  and  arrows  ; but 
thefe  feemed  to  be  defigned  only  for  amufement,  fuch  as 
fhooting  at  birds,  and  not  for  military  purpofes.  The 
ftools  are  about  two  feet  long,  but  only  four  or  five  inches 
high,  and  near  four  broad,  bending  downward  in  the 
middle,  with  four  ftrong  legs,  and  circular  feet ; the  whole 
made  of  one  piece  of  black  or  brown  wood,  neatly  po- 
lifhed,  and  fometimes  inlaid  with  bits  of  ivory.  They  alfo 
inlay  the  handles  of  fly-flaps  with  ivory,  after  being  neatly 
carved ; and  they  fhape  bones  into  fmall  figures  of  men, 
birds,  and  other  things,  which  muft  be  very  difficult,  as 
their  carving  inftrument  is  only  a fliark’s  tooth. 

Yams,  plantains,  and  cocoa-nuts,  compofe  the  greateft 
part  of  their  vegetable  diet.  Of  their  animal  food,  the  chief 
articles  are  hogs,  fowls,  fifli,  and  all  forts  of  fhell-fifh ; but 

the 


398 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  the  lower  people  eat  rats.  The  two  firft  vegetable  articles, 

. . with  bread-fruit,  are,  what  may  be  called,  the  balls  of 

their  food,  at  different  times  of  the  year,  with  fllh  and 
lliell-fillr ; for  hogs,  fowls,  and  turtle,  feem  only  to  be 
occalional  dainties,  referved  for  their  Chiefs*  The  inter- 
vals between  the  feafons  of  thefe  vegetable  produ6tions 
muft  be,  fometimes,  conhderable,  as  they  prepare  a fort  of 
artificial  bread  from  plantains,  which  they  put  under  ground 
before  ripe,  and  fuffer  them  to  remain  till  they  ferment, 
when  they  are  taken  out,  and  made  up  into  fmall  balls ; 
but  fo  four  and  indifferent,  that  they  often  faid  our  bread 
was  preferable,  though  fomewhat  muffy- 

Their  food  is,  generally,  dreffed  by  baking,  in  the  fame 
manner  as  at  Otaheite  ; and  they  have  the  art  of  making, 
from  different  kinds  of  fruit,  feveral  diflies,  which  moft 
of  us  efleemed  very  good.  . I never  faw  them  make  ufe 
of  any  kind  of  fauce ; nor  drink  any  thing  at  their  meals 
but  water,  or  the  juice  of  the  cocoa-nut ; for  the  kava 
is  only  their  morning  draught.  I cannot  fay,  that  they 
are  cleanly  either  in  their  cookery,  or  manner  of  eating. 
The  generality  of  them  will  lay  their  vidluals  upon  the 
firft  leaf  they  meet  with,  however  dirty  it  may  be ; but 
when  food  is  ferved  up  to  the  Chiefs,  it  is,  commonly, 
laid  upon  green  plantain  leaves.  When  the  king  made  a 
meal,  he  was,  for  the  moft  part,  attended  upon  by  three 
or  four  perfons.  One  cut  large  pieces  of  the  joint,  or  of 
the  fiflr ; another  divided  it  into  mouthfuls  ; and  others 
ftood  by  wdth  cocoa-nuts,  and  whatever  elfe  he  might 
want.  I never  faw  a large  company  fit  down  to  what  w'e 
Ihould  call  a fociable  meal,  by  eating  from  the  fame  difli. 
The  food,  be  what  it  will,  is  always  divided  into  portions, 
each  to  ferve  a certain  number ; thefe  portions  are  again 

fubdivided ; 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


399 


fubdivided  ; fo  that  one  feldom  fees  above  two  or  three  1777- 
perfons  eating  together.  The  women  are  not  excluded  . . 

from  eating  with  the  men ; but  there  are  certain  ranks  or 
orders  amongft  them,  that  can  neither  eat  nor  drink  to- 
gether. This  diftin6Iion  begins  with  the  king  ; but  where 
it  ends,  I cannot  fay. 

They  feem  to  have  no  fet  time  for  meals ; though  it 
fhould  he  obferved,  that,  during  our  ftay  amongft  them, 
their  domeftic  ceconomy  was  much  difturbed  by  their  con- 
ftant  attention  to  us.  As  far  as  we  could  remark,  thofe  of 
the  fuperior  rank,  only  drink  kava  in  the  forenoon,  and  the 
others  eat,  perhaps,  a bit  of  yam ; but  we  commonly  faw 
all  of  them  eat  fomething  in  the  afternoon.  It  is  probable 
that  the  practice  of  making  a meal  in  the  night  is  pretty 
common,  and  their  reft  being  thus  interrupted,  they  fre- 
quently lleep  in  the  day.  They  go  to  bed  as  foon  as  it  is 
dark,  and  rife  with  the  dawn  in  the  morning 

They  are  very  fond  of  alTociating  together  ; fo  that  it  is 
common  to  find  feveral  houfes  empty,  and  the  owners  of 
them  convened  in  fome  other  one,  or,  rather,  upon  a con- 
venient fpot  in  the  neighbourhood,  where  they  recreate 
themfelves  by  converfing,  and  other  amufements.  Their 
private  diverfions  are  chiefly  finging,  dancing,  and  mufic 
performed  by  the  women.  When  two  or  three  women  fing 
in  concert,  and  fnap  their  fingers,  it  is  called  oobat ; but 
when  there  is  a greater  number,  they  divide  into  feveral 
parties,  each  of  which  fings  on  a different  key,  which  makes 
a very  agreeable  mufic,  and  is  called  heeva^  or  haiva.  In  the 
fame  manner,  they  vary  the  mufic  of  their  flutes,  by  play- 


* Cantova  fays  of  his  iflanders,  “ Ils  prennent  leur  repos  des  que  le  foleil  eft  couche, 
“ et  ils  fe  levent  avec  I’aurore.”  Lettm  EdifianUs  et  Curieufes^  Tom.  xv.  p.  314. 


S 


ing 


400 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  ing  on  thofe  of  a different  fize ; but  their  dancing  is  much 
. the  fame  as  when  they  perform  publickly.  The  dancing 
of  the  men  (if  it  is  to  be  called  dancing),  although  it  does 
not  confift  much  in  moving  the  feet,  as  we  do,  has  a thou- 
fand  different  motions  with  the  hands,  to  which  we  are 
entire  flrangers  ; and  they  are  performed  with  an  eafe  and 
grace  which  are  not  to  be  defcribed,  nor  even  conceived, 
but  by  thofe  who  have  feen  them.  But  1 need  add  nothing 
to  what  has  been  already  faid  on  this  fubjedf,  in  the  account 
of  the  incidents  that  happened  during  our  flay  at  the 
illands 

* If,  to  the  copious  defcriptions  that  occur  in  the  preceding  pages,  of  the  particular 
entertainments  exhibited  in  Hapaee  and  Tongataboo,  we  add  the  general  view  of  the 
ufual  amufements  of  the  inhabitants  of  thefe  iflands,  contained  in  this  paragraph,  and 
compare  it  with  the  quotation  from  the  Jefuit’s  Letters,  in  a former  note  (p.  255.))  we 
(hall  be  ftill  more  forcibly  ftruck  with  the  reafonablenefs  of  tracing  fuch  fmgularly  re- 
fembling  cuftoms  to  one  common  fource.  The  argument,  in  confirmation  of  this, 
drawn  from  indentity  of  language,  has  been  already  illuftrated,  by  obferving  the  remark- 
able coincidence  of  the  name,  by  which  the  Chiefs  at  the  Caroline  Iflands,  and  thofe  at 
Hamao,  one  of  the  Friendly  ones,  are  diftinguiftied.  But  the  argument  does  not  reft 
on  a Angle  inftance,  though  that  happens  to  be  a very  ftriking  one.  Anotlier  of  the 
very  few  fpecimens  of  the  dialed!  of  the  North  Pacific  Iflanders,  preferved  by  father  Can- 
tova,  furnifties  an  additional  proof.  Immediately  after  the  paflage  above  referred  to,  he 
proceeds  thus  ; “ Ce  divertiflement  s’appelle,  en  leur  langue,  tanger  ifaifil ; qui  veut  dire, 
“ la  plainte  des  femmes.”  Lettres  Edifiantes  et  Curieufes^  Tom.  xv.  p.  315*  Now  it  is 
very  remarkable,  that  we  learn  from  Mr.  Anderfon’s  colledlion  of  words,  which  will 
appear  in  this  chapter,  that  la  plainte  des  femmes^  or,  in  Englifti,  the  7nournful  fang  of  the 
women^  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  Caroline  Iflands  exprefs  in  their  language  tanger 
ifaifil^  would,  by  thofe  of  Tongataboo,  be  expreflfed  tangee  vefaine. 

If  any  one  ftiould  ftill  doubt,  in  fpite  of  this  evidence,  it  may  be  recommended  to  his 
confideration,  that  long  feparation,  and  other  caufes,  have  introduced  greater  variations 
in  the  mode  of  pronouncing  thefe  two  words,  at  places  confefledly  inhabited  by  the  fame 
race,  than  fubfift  in  the  fpecimen  juft  given.  It  appears,  from  Mr.  Anderfon’s  voca- 
bulary, printed  in  Captain  Cook’s  fecond  voyage,  that  what  is  pronounced  tangee  at  the 
Friendly  Iflands,  is  taee  at  Otaheite  5 and  the  vefaine  of  the  former,  is  the  waheine  of  the 
latter. 


Whether 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


401 


Whether  their  marriages  be  made  lafting  by  any  kind  1777. 
of  folemn  contract,  we  could  not  determine  with  precifion  ; . 
but  it  is  certain,  that  the  bulk  of  the  people  fatisfied  them- 
felves  with  one  wife.  The  Chiefs,  however,  have,  com- 
monly, feveral  women  ; though  fome  of  us  were  of  opi- 
nion, that  there  was  only  one  that  was  looked  upon  as  the 
milfrefs  of  the  family. 

As  female  chaftity,  at  firft  light,  feemed  to  be  held  in 
no  great  eftimation,  we  expedled  to  have  found  frequent 
breaches  of  their  conjugal  fidelity  ; but  we  did  them  great 
injuftice.  I do  not  know  that  a fingle  inftance  happened 
during  our  whole  fiiay  t.  Neither  are  thofe  of  the  better 
fort,  that  are  unmarried,  more  free  of  their  favours.  It  is 
true,  there  was  no  want  of  thofe  of  a different  charadter ; 
and,  perhaps,  fuch  are  more  frequently  met  with  here,  in 
proportion  to  the  number  of  people,  than  in  many  other 
countries.  But  it  appeared  to  me,  that  the  moft,  if  not  all 
of  them,  were  of  the  lowefi:  clafs  ; and  fuch  of  them  as  per- 
mitted familiarities  to  our  people,  were  proftitutes  by  pro- 
fellion. 

Nothing  can  be  a greater  proof  of  the  humanity  of  thefe 
people,  than  the  concern  they  fhew  for  the  dead  |.  To  ufe 
a common  expreflion,  their  mourning  is  not  in  words  but 
deeds.  For,  befides  the  tooge  mentioned  before,  and  burnt 
circles  and  fears,  they  beat  the  teeth  with  ftones,  ftrike  a 

* Cantova  fays  of  his  Caroline  iilanders,  “ La  pluralite  des  femmes  eft  non  feulement 
“ permife  a tons  ces  infulaires,  elle  eft  encore  une  marque  d’honneur  et  de  diftinftion. 

“ Le  Tamole  de  I’ifle  d’Huogoleu  en  a neuf.”  Lettres  Edijiantes  et  Curieufes.y  Tom.  xv. 
p.  310. 

t At  the  Caroline  Iflands,  “ Ils  ont  horreur  de  I’adultere,  comme  d’une  grand 
“ peche.”  Ibid.  Tom.  xv.  p.  310. 

How  die  inhabitants  of  the  Caroline  Iflands  exprefs  their  grief  on  fuch  occafions, 
may  be  feen,  Ibid,  Tom.  xv.  p.  308. 

VoL.  I.  3 F fliark’s 


402 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777- 

July. 


fliark’s  tooth  into  the  head  until  the  blood  flows  in  ftreams, 
and  thruft  fpears  into  the  inner  part  of  the  thigh,  into  their 
fldes  below  the  arm-pits,  and  through  the  cheeks  into  the 
mouth.  All  thefe  operations  convey  an  idea  of  fuch  ri- 
gorous difcipline,  as  muft  require  either  an  uncommon 
degree  of  affection,  or  the  grofleft  fuperftition,  to  exa6l. 
I will  not  fay,  that  the  laft  has  no  fliare  in  it ; for,  fome- 
times,  it  is  fo  univerfal,  that  many  could  not  have  any 
knowledge  of  the  perfon  for  whom  the  concern  is  ex- 
prefled.  Thus  we  faw  the  people  of  Tongataboo  mourn- 
ing the  death  of  a Chief  at  Vavaoo;  and  other  fimilar 
inflances  occurred  during  our  flay.  It  fliould  be  obferved, 
however,  that  the  more  painful  operations  are  only  prac- 
tifed  on  account  of  the  death  of  thofe  moft  nearly  con- 
ne61ed  with  the  mourners.  When  a perfon  dies,  he  is 
buried,  after  being  wrapped  up  in  mats  and  cloth,  much 
after  our  manner.  The  Chiefs  feem  to  havd  the  Jiatookas 
appropriated  to  them  as  their  burial-places  ; but  the  com- 
mon people  are  interred  in  no  particular  fpot^^^  What 
part  of  the  mourning  ceremony  follows,  immediately  after, 
is  uncertain  ; but,  that  there  is  fomething  belides  the  ge- 
neral one,  which  is  continued  for  a confiderable  length 
of  time,  we  could  infer,  from  being  informed,  that  the 
funeral  of  Mareewagee’s  wife,  as  mentioned  before,  was  to 
be  attended  with  ceremonies  that  were  to  laft  five  days  ; 
and  in  which  all  the  principal  people  were  to  commemo- 
rate her. 


* Cantova’s  account  of  the  praftice  of  the  Caroline  Iflands  is  as  follows  : “ Lorfqu’il 
“ meurt  quelque  perfonne  d’un  rang  diftingue,  ou  qui  leur  eft  chere  par  d’autres  endroits, 
“ fes  obfeques  fe  font  av^c  pompe.  II  y en  a qui  renferment  le  corps  du  defundl  dans 
“ un  petit  edifice  de  pierre,  qu’ils  gardent  au-dedans  de  leur  maifons.  D’autres  les 
“ enterrent  loin  de  leurs  habitations.”  Lettres  Edifiantes  et  Curieujes^  Tom.  xv. 
p.  308,  309. 


Their 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


403 


Their  long  and  general  mourning,  proves  that  they  con-  177 

lidel’  death  as  a very  great  evil.  And  this  is  confirmed  by  , 

a very  odd  cuftom  which  they  pra6tife  to  avert  it.  When  I 
firfi;  vifited  thefe  iflands,  during  my  lafi;  voyage,  I obferved 
that  many  of  the  inhabitants  had  one  or  both  of  their  little 
fingers  cut  off ; and  we  could  not  then  receive  any  fatisfac- 
tory  account  of  the  reafon  of  this  mutilation  But  we 
now  learned,  that  this  operation  is  performed  when  they 
labour  under  fome  grievous  difeafe,  and  think  themfelves 
in  danger  of  dying.  They  fuppofe,  that  the  Deity  will  ac- 
cept of  the  little  finger,  as  a fort  of  facrifice  efficacious 
enough  to  procure  the  recovery  of  their  health.  They  cut 
it  off  with  one  of  their  ftone  hatchets.  There  was  fcarcely 
one  in  ten  of  them  whom  we  did  not  find  thus  mutilated, 
in  one  or  both  hands;  which  has  a difagreeable  effecff; 
efpecially  as  they  fometimes  cut  fo  clofe,  that  they  encroach 
upon  the  bone  of  the  hand  which  joins  to  the  amputated 
finger  f. 

From  the  rigid  feverity  with  which  fome  of  thefe  mourn- 
ing and  religious  ceremonies  are  executed,  one  would  ex- 
pert to  find,  that  they  meant  thereby  to  fecure  to  them- 
felves felicity  beyond  the  grave ; but  their  principal  obje6t 
relates  to  things  merely  temporal.  For  they  feem  to  have 
little  conception  of  future  punifhment  for  faults  com- 
mitted in  this  fife.  They  believe,  however,  that  they  are 
juffly  punifhed  upon  earth ; and,  confequently,  ufe  every 
method  to  render  their  divinities  propitious.  The  Supreme 
Author  of  moft  things  they  call  Kallafootonga  ; who,  they 

* See  Cook’s  Voyage,  Vol.  i.  p.  222. 

t It  may  be  proper  to  mention  here,  on  the  authority  of  Captain  King,  that  it  is  com- 
mon for  the  inferior  people  to  cut  off  a joint  of  their  little  finger,  on  account  of  the  fick- 
ncfs  of  the  Chiefs  to  whom  they  belong. 


3 F 2 


404  A V O Y A G E T O 

1777.  fay,  is  a female,  reliding  in  the  fky,  and  directing  the 
. thunder,  wind,  rain  ; and,  in  general,  all  the  changes  of 
weather.  They  believe,  that  when  fhe  is  angry  with 
them,  the  produdtions  of  the  earth  are  blafted  ; that  many 
things  are  deftroyed  by  lightning ; and  that  they  them- 
felves  are  afflidted  with  ficknefs  and  death,  as  well  as  their 
hogs  and  other  animals.  When  this  anger  abates,  they 
fuppofe  that  every  thing  is  reftored  to  its  natural  order; 
and  it  fliould  feem,  that  they  have  a great  reliance  on  the 
efficacy  of  their  endeavours  to  appeafe  their  offended  di- 
vinity. They  alfo  admit  a plurality  of  deities,  though 
all  inferior  to  Kallafootonga.  Amongff  them,  they  men- 
tion Toofooa-boolootoo,  God  of  the  clouds  and  fog;  Talk- 
teboo,  and  fome  others,  refiding  in  the  heavens.  The  firft 
in  rank  and  power,  who  has  the  government  of  the  fea, 
and  its  produdtions,  is  called  Futtafaibe,  or,  as  it  was  fome- 
times  pronounced,  Footafooa ; who,  they  fay,  is  a male, 
and  has  for  his  wife  Fykava  kajeea  : and  here,  as  in  hea- 
ven, there  are  feveral  inferior  potentates,  fuch  as  Vahaa 
fonooa^  Tareeava,  Mat  tab  a,  Evaroo,  and  others.  The  fame 
religious  fyflem,  however,  does  not  extend  all  over  the 
duller  of  the  Friendly  Hies ; for  the  fupreme  God  of 
Hapaee,  for  inftance,  is  called  Alo  Alo  ; and  other  illes  have 
two  or  three,  of  different  names.  But  their  notions  of  the 
power,  and  other  attributes  of  thefe  beings,  are  fo  very 
abfurd,  that  they  fuppofe  they  have  no  farther  concern 
with  them  after  death. 

They  have,  however,  very  proper  fentiments  about  the 
immateriality  and  the  immortality  of  the  foul.  They  call 
it  life,  the  living  principle,  or,  what  is  more  agreeable  to 
their  notions  of  it,  an  Otooa ; that  is,  a divinity,  or  invilible 
being.  They  fay,  that  immediately  upon  death,  the  fouls 

of 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


405 


of  their  Chiefs  feparate  from  their  bodies,  and  go  to  a place  1777. 
called  JBoolootoo;  the  Chief,  or  god,  of  which,  is  Gooleho.  . . 

This  Gooleho  feems  to  be  a perfonification  of  death ; for  they 
nfed  to  fay  to  us,  “ You,  and  the  men  of  Feejee  (by  this 
“ junction  meaning  to  pay  a compliment,  expreffive  of 
“ their  confeflion  of  our  fuperiority  over  themfelves),  are 
“ alfo  fubjedl  to  the  power  and  dominion  of  Gooleho T His 
country,  the  general  receptacle  of  the  dead,  according  to 
their  mythology,  was  never  feen  by  any  perfon ; and  yet, 
it  feems,  they  know  that  it  lies  to  the  Weft  ward  of  Feejee ; 
and  that  they  who  are  once  tranfported  thither,  live  for 
ever;  or,  to  ufc  their  own  expreflion,  are  not  fubjecft  to 
death  again ; but  feaft  upon  all  the  favourite  products  of 
their  own  country,  with  which  this  everlafting  abode  is 
fuppofed  to  abound.  As  to  the  fouls  of  the  lower  fort  of 
people,  they  undergo  a fort  of  tranfmigration ; or,  as  they 
fay,  are  eat  by  a bird  called  loata^  which  walks  upon  their 
graves  for  that  purpofe. 

I think  I may  venture  to  alfert,  that  they  do  not  worfliip 
any  thing  that  is  the  work  of  their  own  hands,  or  any  vi- 
fible  part  of  the  creation.  They  do  not  make  offerings  of 
hogs,  dogs,  and  fruit,  as  at  Otaheite,  unlefs  it  be  emblem- 
atically; for  their  morals  were  perfedlly  free  from  every 
thing  of  the  kind.  But  that  they  offer  real  human  facri- 
fices,  is,  with  me,  beyond  a doubt.  Their  morals^  or  Jiatookas 
(for  they  are  called  by  both  names,  but  moftly  by  the 
latter),  are,  as  at  Otaheite,  and  many  other  parts  of  the 
world,  burying-grounds,  and  places  of  worfliip;  though 
fome  of  them  feemed  to  be  only  appropriated  to  the  firft 
purpofe ; but  thefe  were  fmall,  and,  in  every  other  refpedf, 
inferior  to  the  others. 

Of  the  nature  of  their  government,  we  know  no  more  than 

the 


4o6 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  the  general  outline.  A fubordination  is  eftabliflied  among 
. . them,  that  refembles  the  feudal  fyftem  of  our  progenitors 

in  Europe.  But  of  its  fubdivifions,  of  the  conftituent  parts, 
and  in  what  manner  they  are  conne(fled,  fo  as  to  form  a 
' body  politic,  I confefs  myfelf  totally  ignorant.  Some  of 
them  told  us,  that  the  power  of  the  king  is  unlimited,  and 
that  the  life  and  property  of  the  fubje6t  is  at  his  difpofal. 
But  the  few  circumftances  that  fell  under  our  obfervation, 
rather  contradidled  than  confirmed  the  idea  of  a defpotic 
government.  Mareewagee,  old  Toobou,  and  Feenou,  acSled 
each  like  petty  fovereigns,  and  frequently  thwarted  the  mea- 
fures  of  the  king ; of  which  he  often  complained.  Neither 
was  his  court  more  fplendid  than  thofe  of  the  two  firft , who 
are  the  moft  powerful  Chiefs  in  the  iflands ; and,  next  to 
them,  Feenou,  Mareewagee’s  fon,  feemed  to  hand  higheft 
in  authority.  But,  however  independent  on  the  defpotic 
power  of  the  king  the  great  men  may  be,  we  faw  inftances 
enough  to  prove,  that  the  lower  order  of  people  have  no 
property,  nor  fafety  for  their  perfons,  but  at  the  wiU  of  the 
Chiefs  to  whom  they  refpecStively  belong. 

Tongatahoo  is  divided  into  many  difi:ri61:s;  of  above  thirty 
of  which  we  learned  the  names.  Each  of  thefe  has  its  par- 
ticular Chief,  who  decides  difihrences,  and  difiributes  jufiice 
within  his  own  diftricfi;.  But  we  could  not  form  any  fatis- 
fadtory  judgment  about  the  extent  of  their  power  in  gene- 
ral, or  their  mode  of  proportioning  punifiiments  to  crimes. 
Moll:  of  thefe  Chiefs  have  pofiefiions  in  other  illands,  from 
whence  they  draw  fupplies.  At  leafi,  we  know  this  is  fo 
with  refpe6t  to  the  king,  who,  at  certain  eftablifhed  times, 
receives  the  product  of  his  difiant  domains  at  Tongatahoo; 
which  is  not  only  the  principal  place  of  his  refidence,  hut, 
feemingiy,  of  all  the  people  of  confequence  amongfi:  thefe 

illes. 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


407 


ifles.  Its  inhabitants,  in  common  converfation,  call  it  the  , 1777. 
Land  of  Chiefs  ; while  the  fubordinate  ifles  are  diftinguifh-  , 
ed  by  the  appellation  of  Lands  of  Servants. 

Thefe  Chiefs  are,  by  the  people,  ftyled  not  only  Lords  of 
the  Earth,  but  of  the  Sun  and  Sky ; and  the  king’s  family 
alTume  the  name  of  Futtafaihe,  from  the  God  fo  called,  who 
is  probably  their  tutelary  patron,  and  perhaps  their  com- 
mon ancellor.  The  fovereign’s  peculiar  earthly  title  is, 
however,  limply  I’ooee  "Tonga. 

There  is  a decorum  obferved  in  the  prefence  of  their 
principal  men,  and  particularly  of  their  king,  that  is  truly 
admirable.  Whenever  he  fits  down,  whether  it  be  in  an 
houfe,  or  without,  all  the  attendants  feat  themfelves,  at  the 
fame  time,  in  a femicircle  before  him;  leaving  always  a 
convenient  fpace  between  him  and  them,  into  which  no 
one  attempts  to  come,  unlefs  he  has  fome  particular  buli- 
nefs.  Neither  is  any  one  allowed  to  pafs,  or  lit,  behind  him, 
nor  even  near  him,  without  his  order  or  permillion  ; fo  that 
our  having  been  indulged  with  this  privilege,  was  a ligni- 
licant  proof  of  the  great  refpe<St  that  was  paid  us.  When 
any  one  wants  to  fpeak  with  the  king,  he  advances  and  lits 
down  before  him ; delivers  what  he  has  to  fay  in  a few 
words ; and,  having  received  his  anfwer,  retires  again  to 
the  circle.  But  if  the  king  fpeaks  to  any  one,  that  perfon 
anfwers  from  his  feat,  unlefs  he  is  to  receive  fome  order;  in 
which  cafe  he  gets  up  from  his  place,  and  lits  down  before 
the  Chief  with  his  legs  acrofs  ; which  is  a polture  to  which 
they  are  fo  much  accuftomed,  that  any  other  mode  of  fit- 
ting is  difagreeable  to  them  To  fpeak  to  the  king  Hand- 
ing, would  be  accounted  here  as  a llriking  mark  of  rudenefs, 

* This  is  peculiar  to  the  men ; the  women  always  fitting  with  both  legs  thrown  a 
little  on  one  Ade.  We  owe  this  remark  to  Captain  King. 


as 


A VOYAGE  TO 


408 

1777.  as  it  would  be,  with  us,  for  one  to  fit  down  and  put  on  his 
> '•^"1^'  . hat,  when  he  addrelTes  himfelf  to  his  fuperior,  and  that 
fuperior  on  his  feet,  and  uncovered. 

It  does  not,  indeed,  appear,  that  any  of  the  moft  civil- 
ized nations,  have  ever  exceeded  this  people,  in  the  great 
order  obferved,  on  all  occafions  ; in  ready  compliance  with 
the  commands  of  their  Chiefs ; and  in  the  harmony  that 
fubfifts  throughout  all  ranks,  and  unites  them,  as  if  they 
were  all  one  man,  informed  with,  and  dire<£l:ed  by,  the  fame 
principle.  Such  a behaviour  is  remarkably  obvious,  when- 
ever it  is  requifite  that  their  Chiefs  flrould  harangue  any 
body  of  them  coUedted  together,  which  is  frequently  done. 
The  moft  profound  filence  and  attention  is  obferved  during 
the  harangue,  even  to  a much  greater  degree  than  is  prac- 
tifed  amongft  us,  on  the  moft  interefting  and  ferious  deli- 
berations of  our  moft  refpecftable  aflemblies.  And,  what- 
ever might  have  been  the  fubje6t  of  the  fpeech  delivered, 
we  never  faw  an  inftance,  when  any  individual  prefent, 
fliewed  ftgns  of  his  being  difpleafed,  or  that  indicated  the 
leaft  inclination  to  difpute  the  declared  will  of  a perfon  who 
had  a right  to  command.  Nay,  fuch  is  the  force  of  thefe 
verbal  laws,  as  I may  call  them,  that  I have  feen  one  of 
their  Chiefs  exprefs  his  being  aftoniflied,  at  a perfon’s  bav- 
in adled  contrary  to  fuch  orders ; though  it  appeared,  that 
the  poor  man  could  not  poflibly  have  been  informed,  in 
time,  to  have  obferved  them 

Though  fome  of  the  more  potent  Chiefs  my  vie  with  the 
king  in  point  of  actual  pofleflions,  they  fall  very  fhort  in 
rank,  and  in  certain  marks  of  refpe(ft,  which  the  colleftive 

* Cantova  gives  us  the  fame  account  of  the  profound  fubmillion  of  the  Caroline  Ifland- 
ers,  to  the  orders  of  the  Tamale.  “ Ils  re^oivent  fes  ordres  avec  le  plus  profond  refpedl. 
“ Ses  paroles  fopt  autant  d’oraoles,  qu’on  revere.”  Lettres  Edifiantes  ft  Curieufes^  7'ojn.  xv. 
p.  312. 


body 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


409 


body  have  agreed  to  pay  the  monarch.  It  is  a particular 
privilege  annexed  to  his  fovereignty,  not  to  be  pun61;ured, 
nor  circumcifed,  as  all  his  fubje6ts  ’ are.  Whenever  he 
walks  out,  every  one  whom  he  meets  muft  lit  down  till  he 
has  paired.  No  one  is  allowed  to  be  over  his  head  ; on  the 
contrary,  all  mull  come  under  his  feet ; for  there  cannot 
be  a greater  outward  mark  of  fubmillion,  than  that  which 
is  paid  to  the  fovereign,  and  other  great  people  of  thefe 
illands,  by  their  inferiors.  The  method  is  this  ; the  perfon 
who  is  to  pay  obeifance,  fquats  down  before  the  Chief, 
and  bows  the  head  to  the  foie  of  his  foot ; which,  when  he 
lits,  is  fo  placed,  that  it  can  be  ealily  come  at ; and,  having 
tapped,  or  touched  it  with  the  under  and  upper  lide  of  the 
fingers  of  both  hands,  he  rifes  up,  and  retires.  It  fliould 
feem,  that  the  king  cannot  refufe  any  one  who  choofes  to 
pay  him  this  homage,  which  is  called  moe  moea ; for  the 
common  people  would  frequently  take  it  into  their  heads  to 
do  it  when  he  w'as  walking ; and  he  was  alw  ays  obliged  to 
Hop,  and  hold  up  one  of  his  feet  behind  him,  till  they  had 
performed  the  ceremony.  This,  to  a heavy  unwieldy  man, 
like  Poulaho,  mull  be  attended  with  fome  trouble  and  pain ; 
and  I have,  fometimes,  feen  him  make  a run,  though  very 
unable,  to  get  out  of  the  way,  or  to  reach  a place  where  he 
might  conveniently  lit  down.  The  hands,  after  this  appli- 
cation of  them  to  the  Chief’s  feet,  are,  in  fome  cafes,  ren- 
dered ufelefs  for  a time ; for,  until  they  be  wallied,  they 
mull  not  touch  any  kind  of  food.  This  interdi6lion,  in  a 
country  where  water  is  fo  fcarce,  w^ould  feem  to  be  attend- 
ed with  fome  inconvenience ; but  they  are  never  at  a lofs 
for  a fuccedaneum  ; and  a piece  of  any  juicy  plant,  which 
they  can  eafdy  procure  immediately,  being  rubbed  upon 
them,  this  ferves  for  the  purpofe  of  purification,  as  well  as 
VoL.  I.  3 G walliing 


1777- 

July. 


410 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  wafliing  them  with  water.  When  the  hands  are  in  this  ftate, 
. they  call  it  taboo  rema.  ^aboo,  in  general,  llgnifies  forbid- 

den ; and  rema  is  their  word  for  hand. 

When  the  taboo  is  incurred,  by  paying  obeifance  to  a great 
perfonage,  it  is  thus  eafily  wailied  off.  But,  in  fome  other 
cafes,  it  muft  neceffarily  continue  for  a certain  time.  We 
have  frequently  feen  women,  who  have  been  taboo  rema^  fed 
by  others.  At  the  expiration  of  the  time,  the  interdidled 
perfon  wadies  herfelf  in  one  of  their  baths,  which  are  dirty 
holes,  for  the  mod  part,  of  brackifh  water.  She  then  waits 
upon  the  king,  and,  after  making  her  obeifance  in  the  ufual 
way,  lays  hold  of  his  foot  and  applies  it  to  her  bread, 
fhoulders,  and  other  parts  of  her  body.  He  then  embraces 
her  on  each  dioulder ; after  which  die  retires,  purided  from 
her  uncleannefs.  I do  not  know  that  it  is  always  necedary 
to  come  to  the  king  for  this  purpofe  ; though  Omai  adured 
me  it  was.  If  this  be  fo,  it  may  be  one  reafon  why  he  is, 
for  the  mod  part,  travelling  from  idand  to  idand.  I faw 
this  ceremony  performed,  by  him,  two  or  three  times ; and 
once  by  Feenou,  to  one  of  his  own  women;  but  as  Omai 
was  not  then  with  me,  I could  not  alk  the  occadon. 

‘TaboOy  as  I have  before  obferved,  is  a word  of  an  extendve 
dgnideation.  Human  facridces  are  called  tangata  taboo  ; and 
when  any  thing  is  forbidden  to  be  eat,  or  made  ufe  of,  they 
fay,  that  it  is  taboo.  They  tell  us,  that,  if  the  king  diould 
happen  to  go  into  a houfe  belonging  to  a fubjedl,  that 
houfe  would  be  taboo^  and  could  never  more  be  inhabited  by 
the  owner ; fo  that,  wherever  he  travels,  there  are  particu- 
lar houfes  for  his  reception.  Old  Toobou,  at  this  time, 
predded  over  the  taboo ; that  is,  if  Omai  comprehended  the 
matter  rightly,  he  and  his  deputies  infpe6led  all  the  pro- 
duce of  the  idand  ; taking  care  that  every  man  fhould  cul- 
tivate 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


411 


tivate  and  plant  his  quota ; and  ordering  what  fliould  be 
eat,  and  what  not.  By  this  wife  regulation,  they  efFe<51;ually 
guard  againft  a famine ; a fufficient  quantity  of  ground  is 
employed  in  railing  provifions ; and  every  article,  thus 
raifed,  is  fecured  from  unnecelfary  wafte. 

By  another  prudent  regulation,  in  their  government, 
they  have  an  officer  over  the  police ; or  fomething  like  it. 
This  department,  wffien  we  were  amongft  them,  was  admi- 
nillered  by  Feenou ; whofe  bufinefs,  we  were  told,  it  was,  to 
puniffi  all  offenders,  whether  againft  the  ftate,  or  againft  in- 
dividuals. He  was  alfo  Generaliffimo,  and  commanded  the 
warriors,  when  called  out  upon  fervice  ; but,  by  all  ac- 
counts, this  is  very  feldom.  The  king,  frequently,  took 
fome  pains  to  inform  us  of  Feenou’s  office;  and,  among 
other  things,  told  us,  that  if  he  himfelf  ffiould  become  a bad 
man,  Feenou  would  kill  him.  What  I underllood,  by  this 
expreffion  of  being  a bad  man,  was,  that,  if  he  did  not  go- 
vern according  to  law,  or  cuftom,  Feenou  would  be  ordered, 
by  the  other  great  men,  or  by  the  people  at  large,  to  put 
him  to  death.  There  ffiould  feem  to  be  no  doubt,  that  a 
Sovereign,  thus  liable  to  be  controuled,  and  puniffied  for  an 
abufe  of  power,  cannot  be  called  a defpotic  monarch. 

When  we  conhder  the  number  of  illands  that  compofe 
this  httle  ftate,  and  the  diftance  at  which  fome  of  them  lie 
from  the  feat  of  government,  attempts  to  throw  off  the 
yoke,  and  to  acquire  independency,  it  ffiould  feem,  might 
be  apprehended.  But  they  tell  us,  that  this  never  happens. 
One  reafon  why  they  are  not  thus  difturbed,  by  domeftic 
quarrels,  may  be  this  : That  all  the  powerful  Chiefs,  as  we 
have  already  mentioned,  reftde  at  Tongataboo.  They  alfo 
fecure  the  dependence  of  the  other  iflands,  by  the  celerity 
of  their  operations ; for  if,  at  any  time,  a troublefome  and 

3 G 2 popular 


41^ 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  popular  man  iliould  ftart  up,  in  any  of  them,  Feenou,  or 
, . Avhoever  holds  his  office,  is  immediately  difpatched  thither 

to  kill  him.  By  this  means,  they  cruffi  a rebellion  in  its 
very  infancy. 

The  orders,  or  daffies,  amongft  their  Chiefs,  or  thofe  who 
call  themfelves  fuch,  feemed  to  be  almoft  as  numerous  as 
amongft  us;  but  there  are  few,  in  comparifon^  that  are 
lords  of  large  diftrids  of  territory ; the  reft  holding  their 
lands  under  thofe  principal  barons,  as  they  may  be  called. 

I was,  indeed,  told,  that  when  a man  of  property  dies, 
every  thing  he  leaves  behind  him  falls  to  the  king;  but  that 
it  is  ufual  to  give  it  to  the  eldeft  fon  of  the  deceafed,  with 
an  obligation  to  make  a pruvifion,  out  of  it,  for  the  reft  of 
the  children.  It  is  not  the  cuftom  here,  as  at  Otaheite,  for  • 
the  fon,  the  moment  he  is  born,  to  take  from  the  father  the 
homage  and  title ; but  he  fucceeds  to  them,  at  his  deceafe  ; 
fo  that  their  form  of  government  is  not  only  monarchical, 
but  hereditary. 

The  order  of  fucceffion  to  the  crown,  has  not  been  of  late 
interrupted  ; for  we  know,  from  a particular  circumftance, 
that  the  Futtafaihes  (Poulaho  being  only  an  addition,  to  dif- 
tinguifli  the  king  from  the  reft  of  the  family)  have  reign- 
ed, in  a dired  line,  for,  at  leaft,  one  hundred  and  thirty-five 
years.  Upon  inquiring,  whether  any  account  had  been 
preferved  amongft  them,  of  the  arrival  of  Tafinan’s  ffiips, 
we  found,  that  this  hiftory  had  been  handed  down  to  them, 
from  their  anceftors,  with  an  accuracy  which  marks,  that 
oral  tradition  may  fometimes  be  depended  upon.  For  they 
defcribed  the  two  fliips,  as  refembling  ours ; mentioning 
the  place  where  they  had  anchored ; their  having  ft  aid  but 
a few  days ; and  their  moving  from  that  ftation  to  Anna- 
mooka.  And,  by  way  of  informing  us  how  long  ago  this 

had 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


413 


had  happened,  they  told  us  the  name  of  the  Futtafaihe  who 
was  then  king,  and  of  thofe  who  had  fucceeded,  down  to  ^ 
Poulaho,  who  is  the  fifth  fince  that  period ; the  firfi:  being 
an  old  man,  at  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  fhips. 

From  what  has  been  faid  of  the  prefent  king,  it  would  be 
natural  to  fuppofe,  that  he  had  the  higheft  rank  of  any  per- 
fon  in  the  iflands.  But,  to  our  great  furpri^e,  we  found  it 
is  not  fo;  for  Latoolibooloo,  the  perfon  who  was  pointed  out 
to  me  as  king,  when  I firfi:  vifited  Tongataboo,  and  three 
women,  are,  in  fome  refpe6ts,  fuperior  to  Poulaho  himfelf. 
On  our  inquiring,  who  thefe  extraordinary  perfonages  were, 
whom  they  difi:inguifh  by  the  name  and  title  of  T’ammaha'-^^'t 
we  were  told,  that  the  late  king,  Poulaho’s  father,  had  a 
filler  of  equal  rank,  and  elder  than  himfelf;  that  fire,  by  a 
man  who  came  from  the  ifland  of  Feejee,  had  a fon  and 
two  daughters ; and  that  thefe  three  perfons,  as  well  as 
their  mother,  rank  above  Futtafaihe  the  king.  We  endea- 
voured, in  vain,  to  trace  the  reafon  of  this  fingular  pre- 
eminence of  the  T^ammahas'^  for  we  could  learn  nothing 
befides  this  account  of  their  pedigree.  The  mother,  and 
one  of  the  daughters,  called  Tooeela-kaipa,  live  at  Vavaoo. 
Latoolibooloo,  the  fon,  and  the  other  daughter,  whofe  name 
is  Moungoula-kaipa,  refide  at  Tongataboo.  The  latter,  is 
the  woman  who  is  mentioned  to  have  dined  with  me  on  the 
21ft:  of  June.  This  gave  occafion  to  our  difcovering  her  fu- 
periority  over  the  king,  who  would  not  eat  in  her  prefence, 
though  fhe  made  no  fcruple  to  do  fo  before  him,  and  re- 
ceived from  him  the  cuftomary  obeifance,  by  touching  her 
foot.  We  never  had  an  opportunity  of  feeing  him  pay  this 

* The  reader  need  not  be  reminded  that  Tamoha^  which  fignifies  a Chief,  in  the  dia- 
led of  Hamao,  and  Tummaha^  become  the  fame  word,  by  the  change  of  a fingle  letter,  the 
articulation  of  which  is  not  very  ftrongly  marked. 


1777. 

July- 

' 


mark 


414 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  mark  of  refpecft  to  Latoolibooloo ; but  we  have  obferved 
t . him  leave  off  eating,  and  have  his  victuals  put  afide,  when 

the  latter  came  into  the  fame  houfe.  Latoolibooloo  affumed 
the  privilege  of  taking  any  thing  from  the  people,  even  if 
it  belonged  to  the  king ; and  yet,  in  the  ceremony  called 
Natcbe,  he  affiiled  only  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  other 
principal  men.  He  was  looked  upon,  by  his  countrymen, 
as  a madman ; and  many  of  his  adlions  feemed  to  confirm 
this  judgment.  At  Eooa,  they  fliewed  me  a good  deal  of 
land,  faid  to  belong  to  him  ; and  I faw  there  a fon  of  his, 
a child,  whom  they  diftinguiflied  by  the  fame  title  as  his 
father.  The  fon  of  the  greateft:  Prince  in  Europe  could 
not  be  more  humoured  and  carefied  than  this  little  T am- 
maha  was. 

The  language  of  the  Friendly  Iflands,  has  the  greateft 
affinity  imaginable  to  that  of  New  Zealand,  of  Wateeoo, 
and  Mangeea ; and,  confequently,  to  that  of  Otaheite,  and 
the  Society  lllands.  There  are  alfo  many  of  their  words 
the  fame  with  thofe  ufed  by  the  natives  of  Cocos  Illand,  as 
appears  from  the  vocabulary  collected  there  by  Le  Maire 
and  Schouten  The  mode  of  pronunciation  differs,  indeed, 
confiderably,  in  many  inftances,  from  that  both  of  New 

* See  this  vocabulary,  at  tlie  end  of  Vol.  ii.  of  Dalrymple’s  Colle£lion  of  Voyages. 
And  yet,  though  Tafman’s  people  ufed  the  words  of  this  vocabulary,  in  fpeaking  to 
the  natives  of  Tongataboo  (his  Amfterdam),  we  are  told,  in  the  accounts  of  his  voyage, 
that  they  did  not  underftand  one  another.  A circumllance  worth  obferving,  as  it 
fhews  how  cautious  we  fhould  be,  upon  the  fcanty  evidence  afforded  by  fuch  tranfient 
vifits  as  Tafman’s,  and,  indeed,  as  thofe  of  moft  of  the  fubfequent  navigators  of  the  Pa- 
cific Ocean,  to  found  any  argument  about  the  affinity,  or  want  of  affinity,  of  the  languages 
of  the  different  iflands.  No  one,  now,  will  venture  to  fay,  that  a Cocos  man,  and  one 
of  Tongataboo,  could  not  underftand  each  other.  Some  of  the  words  of  Horn  Ifland, 
another  of  Schouten’s  difcoveries,  alfo  belong  to  the  dialeil  of  T ongataboo.  See  Dal- 
rymple^  as  above. 

Zealand, 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


415 


Zealand,  and  Otaheite ; but,  Hill,  a great  number  of  words 
are  either  exadlly  the  fame,  or  fo  little  changed,  that  their 
common  original  may  be  fatisfadlorily  traced.  The  lan- 
guage, as  fpoken  at  the  Friendly  I Hands,  is  fufhciently  co- 
pious, for  all  the  ideas  of  the  people ; and  we  had  many 
proofs  of  its  being  ealily  adapted  to  all  mulical  purpofes, 
both  in  fong  and  in  recitative  ; befides  being  harmonious 
enough  in  common  converfation.  Its  component  parts,  as 
far  as  our  fcanty  acquaintance  with  it  enabled  us  to  judge, 
are  not  numerous  ; and,  in  fome  of  its  rules,  it  agrees 
with  other  known  languages.  As,  for  inftance,  we  could 
ealily  difcern  the  feveral  degrees  of  comparifon,  as  ufed 
in  the  Latin ; but  none  of  the  infie6lions  of  nouns  and 
verbs. 

We  were  able  to  coUedf  feveral  hundreds  of  the  words ; 
and,  amongft  thefe,  are  terms  that  exprefs  numbers  as  far 
as  a hundred  thoufand  ; beyond  which  they  never  would 
reckon.  It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  they  are  not  able  to  go 
farther ; for,  after  having  got  thus  far,  we  obferved,  that 
they  commonly  ufed  a word  which  exprelfes  an  indefinite 
number.  A fliort  fpecimen,  felecTed  from  the  larger  voca- 
bulary, is  here  inferted,  with  the  correfponding  words,  of 
the  fame  fignification,  as  ufed  at  Otaheite,  on  the  oppofite 
column  ; which,  while  it  will  give,  as  we  may  fay,  ocular 
demonftration  of  their  being  dialects  of  the  fame  language, 
will,  at  the  fame  time,  point  out  the  particular  letters,  by 
the  infertion,  omiflion,  or  alteration  of  "vt^hich,  the  varia- 
tions of  the  two  dialects,  from  each  other,  have  been 
elFed;ed. 

It  mull  be  obferved,  however,  that  our  vocabularies,  of 
this  fort,  muft  necelTarily  be  liable  to  great  miftakes.  The 
ideas  of  thofe,  from  whom  we  were  to  learn  the  words, 


>777- 

July. 


were 


A VOYAGE  TO 


were  fo  different  from  ours,  that  it  was  difficult  to  fix  them 
to  the  objech  of  inquiry.  Or,  if  this  could  be  obtained,  to 
learn  an  unknown  tongue,  from  an  inftru^lor  who  did  not 
know  a fingle  word  of  any  language  that  his  fcholar  was 
converfant  with,  could  not  promife  to  produce  much.  But 
even,  when  thefe  difficulties  were  furmounted,  there  ftill 
remained  a fruitful  fource  of  miflake.  I mean,  inaccuracy 
in  catching,  exactly,  the  true  found  of  a word,  to  which 
our  ears  had  never  been  accuflomed,  from  perfons  whofe 
mode  of  pronunciation  was,  in  general,  fo  indiflindl,  that  it 
feldom  happened  that  any  two  of  us,  in  writing  down  the 
fivme  word,  from  the  fame  mouth,  made  ufe  of  the  fame 
vowels,  in  reprefenting  it.  Nay,  we  even,  very  commonly, 
differed  about  confonants,  the  founds  of  which  are  leaf!;  lia- 
ble to  ambiguity.  Befides  all  this,  we  found,  by  experience, 
that  we  had  been  led  into  flrange  corruptions  of  fome  of  the 
mofl  common  words,  either  from  the  natives  endeavouring 
to  imitate  us,  or  from  our  having  mifunderftood  them. 
Thus,  cheeto  was  univerfally  ufed  by  us,  to  exprefs  a thief, 
though  totally  different  from  the  real  word,  in  the  language 
of  Tongataboo.  The  miflake  arofe  from  a prior  one,  into 
which  we  had  run,  when  at  New  Zealand.  For  though  the 
word  that  fignifies  thief  there,  be  abfolutely  the  fame  that 
belongs  to  the  dialedl  of  the  Friendly  Iflands  (being  kaeehaa 
at  both  places),  yet,  by  fome  blunder,  we  had  ufed  the  word 
teete^  firfl  at  New  Zealand,  and,  afterward,  at  Tongataboo, 
on  our  arrival  there.  The  natives,  endeavouring  to  imitate 
us,  as  nearly  as  they  could,  and  fo  fabricating  the  word 
cheeto^  this,  by  a complication  of  miftakes,  was  adopted  by 
us  as  their  own.  Great  care  has  been  taken  to  make  the 
following  table  as  correal  as  poffible  : 


Engliffi. 


417 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


Englifli. 

Friendly  IJlands. 

Otaheite, 

fun-, 

Elaa, 

Eraa. 

Fire, 

Eafoi, 

Eahoi. 

Fbunder, 

Fatoore, 

Pateere. 

Rain, 

Ooha, 

Eooa. 

'The  wind. 

Matangee, 

Mataee. 

Warm, 

Mafanna, 

Mahanna. 

The  clouds. 

Ao, 

Eao. 

Land, 

Fonooa, 

Fenooa. 

Water, 

Avy, 

Evy. 

Sleep,  ' 

Mohe, 

Moe. 

A man. 

Tangata, 

Taata. 

A woman. 

Vefaine, 

Waheine. 

A young  girl. 

Taheine, 

Toonea. 

A fervant,  or  perfon  of) 
mean  rank,  J 

Toutou,  or  teou. 

The  dawn,  or  day-break,  Aho, 

Aou. 

The  hair. 

Fooroo, 

Eroroo. 

The  tongue, 

Elelo, 

Erero. 

The  ear. 

Tareenga, 

Tareea. 

The  beard. 

Koomoo, 

Ooma. 

The  fea. 

Tahee, 

Taee. 

A boat,  or  canoe. 

Wakka, 

Evaa. 

Black, 

Oole, 

Ere. 

Red, 

Goola, 

Oora,  oora. 

A lance,  or  /pear. 

Tao, 

Tao. 

A parent. 

Motooa, 

Madooa. 

What  is  that  f 

Kohaeea  ? 

Y ahaeea  ? 

T 0 hold  faji. 

Amou, 

Mou. 

To  wipe,  or  clean 
thing. 

Horoee. 

‘777- 

July. 


VOL.  I. 


3 H 


Englifti. 

I 


4i8 


A 


VOYAGE  TO 


1777. 

July. 

Vw  — y— ^ 


people,  I fliall  take  my  final  leave  of  them,  after  giving 
fome  account  of  the  aftronomical  and  nautical  obfervations 
that  were  made  during  our  flay. 

And,  firfl,  I muff  take  notice,  that  the  difference  of  lon- 
gitude, between  Annamooka  and  Tongataboo,  is  fomewhat 
lefs  than  was  marked  in  the  chart  and  narrative  of  my  laft 
voyage.  This  error  might  eafily  arife,  as  the  longitude  of 
each  was  then  found  without  any  connection  with  the 
other.  But,  now,  the  diftance  between  them  is  determined 
to  a degree  of  precilion,  that  excludes  all  poffibility  of 
miftake ; which  the  following  table  will  illuftrate  : 

The  latitude  of  the  obfervatory  at 
Tongataboo,  by  the  mean  of  fe- 
veral  obfervations,  - - - 21°  S'  ig"  South. 

The  longitude,  by  the  mean  of  one 
hundred  and  thirty-one  fets  of 
lunar  obfervations,  amomiting  to 
above  a thoufand  obferved  dif- 
tances,  between  the  moon,  fun, 
and  bars,  - - - -184  55  18  Eaft. 

The 


Englifh. 
To  rife  up. 


Tes, 

No, 

Tou, 

ly 

Ten, 


Friendly  IJlands^  Otaheite. 


Etoo, 

Atoo. 

Tangee, 

Taee. 

Eky, 

Ey. 

Ai, 

Ai. 

Kaee, 

Aee. 

Koe, 

Oe. 

Ou, 

Wou. 

Ongofooroo, 

Ahooroo. 

Having  now  concluded  my  remarks  on  thefe  iflands  and 


THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN. 


419 


The  difference  of  longitude,  made 
by  the  time-keeper,  between  the 
above  obfervatory,  and  that  at 


Annamooka,  - - - 0° 

Hence,  the  longitude  of  Annamo- 

iff 

0^^ 

ka  is 

- 18s 

II 

18  Eaft. 

By  the  time-  C 

Greenwich  rate,  - 186 

12 

27 

keeper  it  is,  X 

New  Zealand  rate,  184 

37 

0 

Its  latitude 

- 20 

15 

0 

»777- 

July. 


N.  B.  The  obfervatory  at  Tongataboo  was  near  the 
middle  of  the  North  fide  of  the  illand ; and  that  at  Anna- 
mooka,  on  its  Weft  ftde ; but  the  chdiL  will  elucidate  this. 

The  time-keeper  was  too  flow  for  mean  time  at  Green- 
wich, on  the  firft  of  July  at  noon,  by  11!'  34”' 33', 2;  and 
her  daily  rate,  at  that  time,  was  loflng,  on  mean  time, 
i%783  per  day.  This  rate  will  now  be  ufed  for  finding  the 
longitude  by  the  time-keeper;  and  184°  55'  18''^,  or  12''  19"' 
41',  2,  will  be  taken  as  the  true  longitude  of  Tongataboo, 
Eaft  from  Greenwich. 

By  the  mean  of  feveral  obfervations,  the  South  end  of  the 
needle  was  found  to  dip 

C Lefooga,  one  of  the  Hapaee  iflands,  36°  55' 
t Tongataboo  - - - 39  i|. 

The  variation  of  the  compafs  was  found  to  be 


At  I 


r Annamooka,  on  board. 
Anchor  off  Kotoo,  between  1 
Annamooka  and  Hapaee,  J 
Anchor  off  Lefooga, 
Tongataboo,  on  board, 

I Ditto,  on  fliore, 

3 H 2 


- 8°  30'  3F^Eaft. 

- 8 12  291 


10 

9 

10 


11  40 

44  5^ 

12  58 


I can 


420 


A VOYAGE  TO 


1777.  I can  affign  no  reafon  why  the  variation  is  fo  much  lefs 
. . at,  and  near,  Annamooka,  than  at  either  of  the  other  two 

places.  I can  only  fay,  that  there  is  no  fault  in  the  ob- 
fervations  ; and  that  the  variation  ought  to  be  more  at  An- 
namooka than  the  above,  as  it  has  been  found  to  be  fo  to 
the  Northward,  Southward,  Eaftward,  and  Weftward  of  it. 
But  difagreements  in  the  variation,  greater  than  this,  even 
in  the  fame  needle,  have  been  often  obferved.  And  I fhould 
not  have  taken  notice  of  this  inftance,  but  from  a belief 
that  the  caufe,  whatever  it  is,  exifts  in  the  place,  and  not 
in  the  needles ; for  Mr.  Bayly  found  the  fame,  or  rather 
more  difference. 

The  tides  are  more  conliderable  at  thefe  iflands,  than  at 
any  other  of  my  difcoveries  in  this  ocean,  that  lie  within 
the  tropics.  At  Annamooka  it  is  high  water,  on  the 
full  and  change  days,  nearly  at  fix  o’clock ; and  the  tide 
rifes  and  falls  there,  upon  a perpendicular,  about  fix  feet. 
In  the  harbour  of  Tongataboo,  it  is  high  water,  on  the 
full  and  change  days,  at  fifty  minutes  paft  fix.  The  tide 
rifes  and  falls,  on  thofe  days,  four  feet  nine  inches ; and 
three  feet  fix  inches  at  the  Quadratures.  In  the  channels 
between  the  iflands,  which  lie  in  this  harbour,  it  flow's  near 
tide  and  half  tide ; that  is,  the  flood  continues  to  run  up 
near  three  hours,  after  it  is  high  water  by  the  fhore  ; and 
the  ebb  continues  to  run  down,  after  it  is  flood  by  the 
fhore.  It  is  only  in  thefe  channels,  and  in  a few  other 
places  near  the  fliores,  that  the  motion  of  the  water  or 
tide  is  perceiveable ; fo  that  I can  only  guefs  at  the  quarter 
from  which  the  flood  comes.  In  the  road  of  Annamooka, 
it  fets  Weft  South  Weft,  and  the  ebb  the  contrary ; but  it 
falls  into  the  harbour  of  Tongataboo  from  the  North  Weft, 

pafles 


•THE  PACIFIC  OCEAN, 


421 


paffes  through  the  two  narrow  channels,  on  each  fide  of  1777 
Hoolaiva,  where  it  runs  with  confiderable  rapidity,  and  . 
then  fpends  itfelf  in  the  lagoon.  The  ebb  returns  the  fame 
way,  and  runs  with  rather  greater  force.  The  North  Weft 
tide  is  met,  at  the  entrance  of  the  lagoon.^  by  one  from  the 
Eaft ; but  this,  as  I have  before  obferved,  Avas  found  to  be 
very  inconfiderable. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


4 


5 ':;. 


: . •"■*?!>■ 


»■ 


■'.'tii 


tv  y' 


X ■ 

/ 


jr'V 


v-'t. 


-.f- 


■.••  • ' ' ':  •>■-  ■;  ' 


; -•  '■  '> 

.M  /Ch  D o'  o i H I o Ai  an  t ^ 

* * ^ \ , 

V:  '>  * 


*> , tibrr^'^  . orf^h  O'r^l^f  K^.wcrifft 

W***  * . . **.  ^ ..’^  'k  ^ >h. 


'■  ■ ■‘'-  ■;-‘t  ■ '‘’;  ■ • ■' lino A7r -Vi: ' • 

:.^'.  i lirVS^^  V's  ' , '■  , ^.  ,.  ^f.  ,.^i,  ,. 


'<P,\ 

■S  * 


. ,1 


■ •*=>.•  1 
. ' j'. 


:li 


■ 


* -M'.T 

:R3 


w 

V . ’*  " 

X 


'1 


' 4 

r; 


J o-v 

•f- 


■ v"*^  '^'  '-1 
^ •* 


'.A' XI  ,a 


si 


. Hr  • 


r 


■±  1^7'  ■-. 

■<''^-  >iv 


^4;'. 


‘ ■ '.V'.  '.'  ' > 

'iJTV,:  rf'’-'  : '■  i 


#’  Y *.  ' 

, • .1'/ 

, S'",  ■• 


■'■.  :'.'  ’.  ' f 

V 


H'/  . . 

,;:i^ 

^ " '.jP- 


V ' . '••''''■  ■ .'  U' 
