From Religion to Philosophy (F. M. Cornford, 1912)
==========================================================
How Greek philosophy grew from religious ritual; the Cambridge school's philosophical charter. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (in.ernet.dli.2015.179784).

FROM RELIGION 
TO PHILOSOPHY 


A STUDY IN THE ORIGINS 
OF WESTERN SPECULATION 


BY 


FRANCIS MACDONALD CORNFORD 


FELLOW AND LECTURER OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 


ταράσσει τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, οὐ τὰ πράγματα, 
ἀλλὰ τὰ περὶ τῶν πραγμάτων δόγματα 


NEW YORK 
LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO. 
LONDON: EDWARD ARNOLD 
1912 


All rights reserved 


ΤΟ 
FRANCIS DARWIN 


PREFACE 


THE words, Religion and Philosophy, perhaps suggest to most 
people two distinct provinces of thought, between which, if 
(like the Greeks) we include Science under Philosophy, there 
is commonly held to be some sort of border warfare. It is, 
however, also possible to think of them as two successive phases, 
or modes, of the expression of man’s feelings and beliefs about 
the world ; and the title of this book implies that our attention 
will be fixed on that period, in the history of the western mind, 
which marks the passage from the one to the other. It is gener- 
ally agreed that the decisive step was taken by the Greeks about 
six centuries before our era. At that moment, a new spirit of 
rational inquiry asserted its claim to pronounce upon ultimate 
things which had hitherto been objects of traditional belief. 
What I wish to prove, however, is that the advent of this spirit 
did not mean a sudden and complete breach with the older 
ways of thought. 

There is a real continuity between the earliest rational specula- 
tion and the religious representation that lay behind it ; and this 
is no mere matter of superficial analogies, such as the allegorical 
equation of the elements with the Gods of popular belief. Philo- 
sophy inherited from religion certain great conceptions—for 
instance, the ideas of ‘ God,’ ‘Soul,’ ‘ Destiny,’ ‘ Law ’—which 
continued to circumscribe the movements of rational thought 
and to determine their main directions. Religion expresses 
itself in poetical symbols and in terms of mythical personalities ; 
Philosophy prefers the language of dry abstraction, and speaks 
of substance, cause, matter, and so forth. But the outward 
difference only disguises an inward and substantial affinity 
between these two successive products of the same consciousness. 
The modes of thought that attain to clear definition and explicit 
statement in philosophy were already implicit in the unreasoned 


intuitions of mythology. 
vii 


Vill FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Diogenes Laertius groups the philosophers in two successions, 
Ionian and Italiote, headed by Anaximander and Pythagoras, 
as if the Greeks themselves had divined that two tendencies 
had been at work in shaping their systems of thought. This 
instinct, as I shall try to show, was right: there were, in fact, 
two traditions, which may be called ἡ scientific ’ and ‘ mystical,’ 
moved by two distinguishable impulses along lines diverging, 
more and more widely, towards opposite conclusions. These 
impulses are still operative in our own speculation, for the simple 
reason that they correspond to two permanent needs of human 
nature, and characterise two familiar types of human temperament. 

In our own time, the scientific tendency has been the more 
easily understood and interpreted, because it falls in with 
the habit of thought of a scientific age. Driven by a deep- 
lying need to master the world by understanding it, science 
works steadily towards its goal—a perfectly clear conceptual 
model of reality, adapted to explain all phenomena by the 
simplest formula that can be found. Malheur au vague ; mieux 

“vaut le fauc! In the Ionian schools of Eastern Greece, science 
comes to its fulfilment in Atomism. When we contemplate 
the finished result, we see that, in banishing ‘ the vague,’ it has 
swept away everything in which another type of mind finds all 
the value and significance of the world. The Gods have dis- 
appeared ; the Soul is reduced to a dust of material particles ; 
in a word, Life has gone out of Nature. Such is the predestined 
conclusion of a science inspired by the ideal lucidity of geometry, 
and neglectful of biology. Admirable as a tool of research into 
inorganic nature, it strikes a chill of horror into men of an 
opposite temperament, who will not seek the living among the 
dead. 

The mystical spirit, prompted by a different need, works 
along other lines. To Pythagoras, philosophy was not an 
engine of curiosity, but a way of life and death. The Western 
schools, overshadowed by Pythagoreanism, are rooted in certain 
beliefs about the nature of the divine and the destiny of the 
human soul. Upon those beliefs their philosophy of nature is 
built. Holding, no less strongly than the scientific tradition, 
to the charactenstically Greek conviction that the world must 
be rational, these western philosophies present themselves aa a 


PREFACE ix 


series of attempts to justify faith to reason. Parmenides boldly 
condemns the sensible world to unreality, when it seems to 
conflict with the logical consequences of religious preconception. 
Empedocles expends 8 wealth of ingenuity in devising a recon- 
ciliation with science. Plato sinks in the Titanic effort to stand 
with feet on earth and uphold the sky. What most concerns 
all three is summed up in the words ‘ God ’ and ‘ Soul ’—those 
very terms which science so complacently dispensed with. 

Now, the two tendencies, or temperaments, which, in the series 
of philosophical systems, have left so plain a record of their 
characteristic aspirations and visions of life and nature, did not 
suddenly spring into being in the century of Anaximander and 
Pythagoras. The philosophic Muse is not a motherless Athena : 
if the individual intellect is her father, her older and more 
august parent is Religion. Behind Anaximander stands the 
Tonian Homer, with his troop of luminous Olympians ; behind 
Pythagoras we discern the troubled shapes of Orpheus and 
Dionysus. It is natural to suppose that the two philosophic 
traditions are severally related to the types of Greek religion— 
Olympian and Dionysian—in which the same contrasted tem- 
peraments had framed mythical symbols, to express what 
they felt towards the life of nature and the life of man. 

Beginning with the scientific tradition, I shall try to prove 
that real thread of continuity can be traced back from the 
final achievement of science—the representation of a world of 
individual atoms, governed by Necessity or Chance—to the 
final achievement of Olympianism, mirrored in Homer’s super- 
natural world of individual Gods, subordinate to Destiny 
(Mowa). This subjection of all individual powers, divine and 
human, to Moira is the profoundest, and (at first sight) the 
most baffling, dogma in this type of religion. In the first chap- 
ter, I shall attempt an analysis of Moira, working backwards 
from Anaximander to Homer and Hesiod, with a view to estab- 
lishing the persistence of this conception, right on through the 
course of Greek science, in which it holds the place now occupied 
by Natural Law. 

When we have gone back to Homer, most scholars will think 
that we have touched the pillars of Hercules, and that we had 
better not pry into the prehistoric darkness, which the accidents 


x FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of tradition have left blank. But the problem, why the Greeks 
believed that the Gods themselves were subject to the moral, 
and yet impersonal and purposeless, ordinance of Destiny, is 
too fascinating to be abandoned, and lures us to push out into 
the misty ocean of hypothesis. The second chapter is the record 
of this rash excursion. For our guide we take the theorem, 
maintained by the new French school of sociologists, that the 
key to religious representation lies in the social structure of the 
community which elaborates it. To Professor Emile Durkheim 
and his colleagues of the Année Soctologique 1 I owe the solution 
offered of this fundamental problem of Olympian religion. I 
seem to myself, also, to have here found light thrown upon 
certain singularly abstract schemes of conception, which persist 
throughout ancient philosophy—for instance, the grouping of 
the four elements, and the separation and reunion of pairs of 
contrary qualities. These particular applications of the main 
theorem are put forward, not as results established with any 
certainty, but rather as illustrations that may suggest to 
students with a fuller ethnological and psychological equipment 
a line of research hitherto neglected. 

One great philosophico-religious concept remains, and that 
the most fundamental of all—the concept of the ‘nature of 
things,’ Physis. The object called by this name in Greek philo- 
sophy is concrete: it is a material continuum, which is also 
alive and divine, Soul and God—a substance, therefore, invested 
with mythical properties. This substance, rather than the 
manifold phenomena which Nature presents to us through our 
senses, is the primary object of early speculation; and from 
its inherent properties, as material, living, and divine, the 
various systems can be deduced, according as one or another 
interpretation is put upon what those properties imply. I have 

1 In particular, Professor Durkheim, ‘ Représentations individuelles et 
représentations collectives,’ Revue de Metaph. et de Morale, vi. (1898), 
p. 273; ‘Sociologie religieuse et théorie de la connaissance,’ shed. xvu). 
(1909); De la division du travail social, ed. 3 (1911); MM. Durkheim 
and Mauss, ‘Classifications primitives,’ Année Soctologique, vi.; MM. 
Hubert and Mauss, ‘Théorie générale de la magie,’ Ann. Soc. vii. A 
convenient account of Professor Durkheim’s work is given by G. Davy, ‘ La 
sociologie de M. Durkheim,’ Revue Philosophigue, xxxvi. (1911), pp. 42-71 


and 160-195. I am also indebted to Professor L. Lévy-Bruhl’s Les 
Sonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférsewres, 1910. 


PREFACE xi 


called it the Datum of Philosophy, to mark that it was not 
invented by the philosophers, but derived from a representa- 
tion which underlies all the shapes and symbols of religious 
thought. The third chapter traces its origin from a magical 
stage, older than religion itself, and follows out the process of 
its differentiation into the several categories of Greek poly- 
theism, especially the contrasted figures of the Mystery God 
and the Olympian. The significance of that contrast, between 
the religion whose most illustrious symbol was Apollo, and the 
mystic faith of the suffering Dionysus, was, by sheer power of 
imagination, divined by Friedrich Nietzsche, from a direct 
study of the phenomenon of Greek Tragedy. From him we 
learnt, in the sphere of art, why it is that Dionysus and Apollo 
shared the heights of Parnassus; but, since his day, fresh 
knowledge has been gained, with respect to the problems of 
historical genesis. A clear advance in the study of the earlier 
phases, not only of Greek religion, but of religion in general, 
is marked by the publication of Miss Jane Harrison’s Themis 
(Cambridge, 1912). I have had the great advantage of going 
over all the main points with the author, and I have adopted 
many of her conclusions. It is thus possible for me to treat 
very briefly a number of points connected with the development 
of Greek religion, referring the reader to the source from which 
my own knowledge is derived. Miss Harrison’s help has also 
been of much value in the revision of this book, which may be 
regarded as carrying on the same principles of interpretation 
into the domain of philosophy. 

From the standpoint reached in the third chapter, we seem 
able to make out that Philosophy, when she puts aside the 
. finshed products of religion and returns to the ‘ nature of things,’ 
really goes back to that original representation out of which 
mythology itself had gathered shape. If we now call it ‘ meta- 
physical,’ instead of ‘supernatural,’ the thing itself has not 
essentially changed its character. What has changed is, rather, 
man’s attitude towards it, which, from being active and 
emotional, has become intellectual and speculative. His earlier, 
emotional reaction gave birth to the symbols of myth, to objects 
of faith ; his new procedure of critical analysis dissects it into 
concepts, from which it deduces various types of systematic 


xii FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


theory. But in shaping these systems, the standards of value 
characteristic of the two opposed temperaments continue to 
exercise their unconscious influence, dividing the stream of 
thought into those two channels whose cause we shall trace in 
the two concluding chapters. 


For the convenience of the English reader, I have frequently 
referred to the second edition of Professor Burnet’s Early 
Greek Philosophy (E.G.P.*); and I have freely borrowed from 
the excellent translation of the fragments which it contains. 
For the fragments themselves references are given to Diels’ 
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, ed. 2, Berlin, 1906 (D.F.V.°). 


This book is dedicated to a man of science, with the hope that 
he may find in it some saving touch of the spirit associated with 


the name he worthily bears. 
F. M. CORNFORD 


TRINITY COLLEGE, 
CAMBRIDGE, 
Apri 1912. 


pod, 


10. 


11. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I 
DESTINY AND LAW 


. The Problem. The origin of philosophy cannot be understood 


without a study of representations—such as Destiny, God, 
Soul, Nature—which philosophy inherits from religion, 


. The Cosmology of Anaximander. The separation of the Elements 


out of the primary Stuff (or ‘ Limitless Thing ’) into regions, 


. The Provinces of the Elements. These form a moral cas 


ordained by Destiny and Justice, . 


. Moira above the Gods. The subordination of the Homeric Gods 


to Destiny is the religious es bial cee to 
Anaximander’s, . : 


. Mowa as moral. As in Anaximander, so in Homer, the 


ordinance of Destiny is a moral, as well as a necessary, 
disposition, . "a 8 


. Moira as a system of provinces. Moira represents the appoint- 


ment to each God of his province or sae — oe 18 
spatial in character, . 


. The Division of the World vn Hesvod. The separation of the 


elemental provinces, in Hesiod’s cosmogony, precedes the 
birth of the Gods, who arise out of those provinces. Moira 
thus is prior to both Elements and Gods, ‘ 


. Motra ts umpersonal, without intelligence or design. Her whole 


content is a representation of the ὝΕΣ and Justice of 
the elemental disposition, 


. The Dasmos of the Gods. Already in Hesiod, the will of personal 


Gods begins to ere the ee gees of 
Destiny, ἱ 


The Great Oath of the Gods. Styx, as the Horkos iii is 
a representation of the taboo which ai the limits of 
the Geds’ provinces, : 


The supremacy of Zeus conferred by oe The ΠΡ of 
provinces passes to the supreme God, whose aoe takes 
the place of the ordinance of Destiny, : 


xiii 


PAGE 


10 


12 


13 


15 


17 


19 


21 


23 


25 


xIV FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


12. Zeus as Lawgwer. eens as the redistribution of pro- 


13. 


14, 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 
20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


vinces (nomot), 


Law as a Dispensation. Nomos fn nemein, ‘to dnp i 
synonymous with moira, 


Nemos and Nemests. Nemos, as ei sacred on and 
Nemesis, as avenger of i but also ΠΕΡῚ οἱ 


blessings, 


The Dispensation of Reason in Plato. In ere Reason 
takes the place of Zeus, as Zeus had superseded Moira, 


The primitive reliquous representation in Greek polytheism. A 
system of departments (movrat), separated by taboo, and each 
pervaded by a power which resents encroachment. This 
framework of the primitive polydaemonism described by 
Herodotus persists as the fundamental representation in 
Anaximander’s cosmology, 


II 
THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 


How did the representation of Mora arise? Can the import- 
ance ascribed, by Greek religion and philosophy, to the 
departmental order of the Elements be accounted for ἢ. 


The change from Religion to Philosophy. The expurgation of 
the supernatural left the world order still with a moral 
or sacred character, RB? Ses os 


The moral order of the world as a collective representatron, 


The nature of collectwwe representations. In what sense Anaxi- 
mander’s cosmological scheme was collective, though not 
obligatorily imposed as imatter of faith, 


How collective representations are vmposed. The emotional 
charge which gives a sacred character to moral and religious 
beliefs, as contrasted with private speculative opinions, 


The order of Nature ‘sacred,’ because once continuous with 
hwman society, The supremacy of Moira explained by 
primitive continuity of world order with structural grouping 
of tribe, 


Classification based on tribal structure. baum from totemic 
and other societies, 


Moira α projection of Nomos. Behind ΤῊΝ lies social 
custom, the structure and institutions of the human group. 
This structure, projected into Nature, is Moira, . : 


PAGE 


26 


29 


31 


35 


37 


40 


4] 
48 


48 


40 


δ] 


54 


26. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 


36. 
37. 


38. 


39. 


CONTENTS 


Totemism. This projection is an essential principle in the 
totemic phase of society, and underlies systems of magic, 


Solidarity of the Totemic Group. The clan and its totem-species 
are very closely united, the supposed common blood of a 
totem-ancestor being the material substrate of this kinship, 


The primacy of the group. The group, not the individual, is 
the unitary factor. Society as a system of moirai, each 
with its group-functions (nomot), . 


The social structure projected to wnclude the order of Nature. 
The human groups are extended to include all ner in the 
universe, os 


Survivals in Greek cosmology. This hypothesis explains the 
recognition (a) of four elements ; (Ὁ) of pairs of contrary 
qualities, 


(a) The Four Elements. Anaximander’s cosmogonica]l process 
reflects the segmentation of a primary homogeneous group 
into a complex organisation of the totemic type, . 


The Phalia and Nevkos of Empedocles, The two "Ὸ το forces 
of solidarity and segmentation, 


(Ὁ) The Segregation of pairs of Contraries. The war and union 
of pairs of contraries is a fundamental conception throughout 
philosophy, . 


Sex the prototype of Contrariety. All becoming was originally 
conceived as birth, and as resulting from marriage, 


The Separation of Sky and Earth. The primal marriage is pre- 
ceded by separation, out of an original unity of form, ὸ 


Social origin of this representation. The separation of Sky and 
Earth reflects the exogamous grouping of society, . 


The Pythagorean Table of Contraries, 


Eros and the Marriage of Opposites. The union of contraries 
gives birth to individual things, . 


Summary, 


Il 
NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 


Nature and Custom in the sais dia sense. Nomos as ie 
behaviour, 


PAGE 


56 


58 


59 


61 


63 


63 


65 


66 


68 
69 


70 
71 


73 


xvi FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


4]. 


49. 


45. 


46. 
47. 


48. 


49. 


50. 


δ]. 
52. 


53. 


54, 
55. 


Primitive wdentity of Nature and Custom. The nature or 
essence of a group is its ii Gira in which lies its 
social importance, ς ae 


Primary Sympathetic Magic. The magical functions are 
sympathetic and co-operative, common to the human and 
non-human members of the group, 


Collective emotion and desire, 


. Primary Magic needs no representation, and is pre-religious. 


The magical group is complete without any God, 


The first representation needed. The collective consciousness, as 
the only superindividual moral power, will be the content 
of the first religious representation, o ae an & 


The Sympathetic Continuwm as the representation of the collective 
consciousness. The only possible form in which the social 
consciousness could be conceived, is that of a material con- 
tinuum, the substrate of kinship and the vehicle of sympa- 
thetic interaction within the group, 


Summary. Characteristics of this primary representation, 


The differentiation of ‘God’ and ‘Soul.’ The ideas of God and 
Soul arise out of the sympathetic continuum, : 


From Primary Magic to Religion. The breaking down of the 
original continuity of the magical group, 


Corresponding change in representation: the two pools. When 
the magical energy of the human group is distmguished 
from that of the species or natural department formerly 
identified with it, the second stage of magic opens, and the 
making of a God is begun. Totemic structure breaks down, 


Blood-kin and Magical Socvety differentiated. Regrouping of 
society on basis of real kinship, es 


Magical Societves. Survivals in Greece, 


The Group-Soul. The ‘Soul’ consists of social functions, and 
takes the outline of the group, og ge oe 


The Daemon of the Magical Society. The group-soul con- 
sidered as superhuman or ‘divine,’ : 


The Daemon of the Gens. The group-soul of the blood-kin, 


Daemons of natural departments. The supernatural energy 
of a natural object is the raw material of the elemental 
daemon or God, the eee of the ie cma pai 
of the magical group, 


PAGE 


74 


75 
17 


78 


80 


83 


88 


56. 


57. 


58. 


59. 


60. 


61. 


62. 


63. 


64. 


65. 
66. 


67. 


68, 


69. 


70, 


11. 


12. 


CONTENTS 


Local Good Daemons of Fertility. Undifferentiated local — 
of pre-Olympian Greek religion, . 


Polydaemonism in China. sea 8 ee arrested at the 
daemonic stage, ‘ 


From Polydaemonism to Polytheism. Four types of Daemon 
develop into four types of divine individual—King, Hero, 
Mystery God, Olympian, 

From impersonal daemon to individual soul and personal God. 
The effect of the growth of individual self-consciousness, 


The emergence of the Chief, or King. The King as the first 
individual, the depositary of social authority, 


The King as Arch-magician. Magical, as well as repressive, 
power is vested in the King, who supersedes the magical 
society, Ὁ: 4g 


The Eponymous Hero. Individualisation of the daemon of 
the gens, a ὡς ὦ ἃς ἐπξ ἡ re 


Hero-worship. The Hero blended with the local Good Spirit, . 


The Individual Soul and I Pane The blood-soul and the 
etdolon, . νον 


The formation of personal Gods, Mystic and Olympian, 


The Mystery God. His province, a human group or church, 
which maintains communion with its daemon, and the 
participation of the Many in the One, . 


The Olympran God. Lacking communion with a group, the 
Olympian drifts away from his province and deserts Nature, 


The Gods and the Elements. The elements retain the super- 
natural energy left behind by the Gods, ae “ἢ 


The Olympian God cut off from man. His ao a 
humanised version of the doctrine of Moira, 


Olympian and Mystic doctrines of Eros. Eros condemned by 
Olympianism, is, for Ὁ aoe the bond os God and 
the world, ; : io τὰ 


From Olympianism to Ionian Philosophy. The philosophy of 
Moira is spatial, pluralistic, materialistic, mechanical, . 


Physis. The ‘nature of things’ is the primitive living and 
divine substance, revived by philosophy, . . .. 
b 


100 


101 


102 


104 


106 
107 


108 
110 


111 


114 


116 


118 


119 


122 


123 - 


xviii FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


73. 
74. 


82. 


83. 


IV 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 


Recapitulation, . 


Philosophy as the analysis of peas materval. Philosophy 
distinguishes properties confused in religious representation, 
and deduces diverging conclusions, : 


. Physis as Substance, Soul, Divine. Importance of these pre- 


dicates, 


. Physis as Soul, . 

. Soul as Moving, ae. «ἡ 

. Soul as Knowing. ‘ Like knows like,’ 

. Physis as the Divine, 

. The treatment of Physis by the dies 

. The causes of philosophic systems, not to be confused with 


arguments of philosophers, . 


The Screntific Tendency; explanations and causes. The first 
conception of causality spatial rather than temporal, 


Ionian Science and Olympianism, the product of the same 
temperament, 


Vv 


THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 


. The course of Science, leading to Atomism, 

. The Milesian School ; ANAXIMANDER, 

. ANAXIMENES. Simplification by eliminating quality, 

. EMPEDOCLES as man of sctence. Motion caused mechani- 


cally by two soul-substances, leaving matter lifeless, 
ANAXAGORAS, 


. The Atomism of LEUKIPPUS. Moira aes the Gods ; 


Soul reduced to material particles, and life to motion in space, 


. Contrast with the Mystical Tradition. Science supersedes 


theology ; mystical philosophy is ee ee by 
religious faith, 


PAGE 


124 


125 


127 
129 
181 
132 
134 
136 


138 


139 


143 


158 


91. 


92. 


93. 
94. 


95. 


96. 


98, a. os «ἃ 
. The heavenly origin and fall of the Soul. The wheel of rebirth 


100, 


10]. 


102. 
103. 


104, 
105. 


106. 
107. 


108. 


CONTENTS 


VI 
THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 


The representation of Time penis in peat Dike 
in place of Moira, ; 
The Cycle of Reincarnation. The continuous naval of 


a limited quantity of soul-stuff in a wheel of birth: at first 
a non-moral doctrine, . ; . : 


Grades of Initiation. The ideas of peer and dada 
added to reincarnation, . 


The Cycle of all Lafe in Nature. The oi of τὰ as the 
basis of transmigration, 


The correspondence of Works and Days. acy παρῆν 
between man’s works and the course of Nature, ie ees: 
the notion of Right (Dike), 


Heaven-worship. The Wheel of Drke is also the Wheel of 
Time, and associated with the revolution of the ia 
bodies, . 


. Tao, Rta, and Asha. Dike as the ae of Beh illustrated 


from China, India, and Persia, 


Orphic revival of Heaven-worship, . 


combined with astral doctrine of the Great Year. ee 
insistence on the individual soul, . . 


Mystical morality. The Way of Righteousness ἰδέ 
with Olympian doctrine of Moira. seas view of Nomos 
and Dike, : 


HERACLEITUS. Fundamental saan the Wheel of 
Time and rebirth. His condemnation of Science, 

Soul and Logos, 

The Way of Justice. ire Logs i identified with the inl 


of Justice, 


The Harmony of ἜΡΜΟ All booming ἬΝ the viol 
tion of Movra, 


The Common Reason. angus Heracleitus τον ἀν] 
with Pythagoras, . 


PYTHAGORAS. The Italian philosophy and Dionysiae aie 


The Orphic Revival, Orphism ἃ reformation and revival of 
Dionysiac religion. Inconsistent views of Soul, 


The Pythagorean reformation of Orphism. Intellectual lee of 
Life substituted for orgiastic cult, : 


xix 


PAGE 


160 


162 


164 


165 


167 


170 


172 
177 


178 


181 


184 
187 


188 
190 


191 
194 


195 


198 


xx 


109. 
110, 
111. 


112. 
113. 
114. 


115. 
116. 


117. 
118. 


~J 


119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 


124. 


125, 
126. 


127. 
128. 
129. 
130. 
131. 


132. 


133. 
134. 


135, 


FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Pythagoras as Daemon of his School, 
The Tetractys, . 


The Procession of Numbers. The cosmogonical movement of 
Life, symbolised in the tetractys, 


Pythagorean Ethics, 
Pythagorean Science, modelled on the procession of numbers, . 


Number Atomism. Advance from eu τω monism towards 
spatial pluralism, . 


PARMENIDES. Journey to Dike in the underworld, . 


The Way of Truth, deduced from the raed and ae of 
Physis, . 


The Way of Opinion. Degradation from Light to Deba. 


EMPEDOCLES. The alleged τορι of his ais 
and scientific beliefs, ; 


The Purifications. Proems of the two poems πε δῶν : 

The Exrle of the Soul. Oracle of Necessity, ; 

The World Period, Adaptation of Anaximander’s cosmogony, 
The Hemispheres of Day and Night, 


The Sphere and the Retgn of Love. Love as divine soul- 
substance and harmony, : 


The breaking up of the Sphere and the Fall Pr the soul Gis 
spondence of the physical theory with the religious, 


The consistency of Empedocles, 


PLATO: the Socratic and Mystic ΓΗ The aan of 
Ideas and belief in immortality, τς, πῶς tS 


Immortality ὧν the Apology, . 
Ideas and Souls in the Phaedo, 
Plato’s conversion to Pythagoreanism, 
Ideas as Soul-substances, . 


Two grades of supersensible existence. Both Ideas and Souls 
may be on either grade, 


The Idea as Daemon and the nature of ‘ : Participation? The 
relation of Idea to particular ἃ mystical conception, 


The problem of ‘ Partwipation.’ Difficulties of the relation, 


The Olympranisation of the Ideas. The Ideas become a hier- 
archy of concepts, leaving existence unexplained, . 


The Flight of the Philosopher, . 


Index of Citations, . 
General Index, 


PAGE 


201 
204 


207 
211 
212 


212 
214 


216 
218 


224 
226 
228 
230 
232 


233 


236 
240 


242 
244 
246 
247 
249 


250 


253 
254 


258 
261 


265 
271 


I 
DESTINY AND LAW 


1. The Problem 


THE origin of Greek philosophy is a problem which not only is 
of extraordinary interest, but seems at first sight peculiarly 
hopeful of solution. In the case of most questions of origins, 
history fails us; the earlier links of the tradition we seek to 
account for are hidden in prehistoric darkness. The Homeric 
Epos, for instance, comes before us as a finished product, and 
not a single scrap of documentary evidence records the stages 
which preceded the earliest parts of the Jad. But it is gener- 
ally acknowledged that the beginnings of philosophy lie well 
within the field of history. Ever since the school of Aristotle 
set about compiling the first histories of philosophy, it has been 
agreed to date systematic speculation of a scientific character 
from the Milesian school, whose activity about covers the 
sixth century B.c.! Of the work of the philosophers in the 
two centuries from Thales to Plato we have some direct know- 
ledge from the surviving fragments of their writings; we have 
also a doxographic tradition, derived from the Peripatetics, 
which records their ‘ opinions’ on what were held to be the 
most important topics of speculation. It is thus possible to 
construct some sort of history, based on documents, of Greek 
philosophy from its beginning to its end; and when we take it 
as a phenomenon to be accounted for and set in relation to 
other activities and products of the Greek mind, we start at 
least with the great advantage of knowing something, however 
little, of the first stages of its career. 

In spite of this advantage, the question how this speculation 

1 The first certain date is given by an eclipse of the sun in the year 585, 


which Thales, the founder of that school, is said to have predicted. 
A 


2 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


arose, and why it took its peculiar course, has not been satis- 
factorily answered. Inquiry has failed in some measure because, 
when the problem was first formulated, it was set in the wrong 
light. The sources of Greek philosophy were supposed to be a 
matter of ‘borrowing’ and of ‘influence.’ More than one 
attempt was made in the nineteenth century to show that the 
Greeks ‘ borrowed’ the wisdom of the East; but, when it was 
seen that this fascinating theory led its advocates beyond all 
bounds of historic possibility, the Orientalists were crushed in a 
sort of antisemite reaction, and they are only now beginning to 
lift their heads again.) The notion of ‘ borrowing ’ having been 
dismissed, there remained the view that philosophy was ‘ in- 
fluenced’ by religious doctrines; but against this account it 
was rightly urged that the current forms οἱ religion could 
hardly be said to have any ‘doctrines’ at all; and it was 
certainly difficult to point to any definite dogma of theology 
which was actually built into the systems known to us. So 
students fell back into thinking of the early philosophers as 
singularly isolated and independent. 


The most recent historian, Professor Deussen,? in his opening 
remarks upon the general characteristics of Greek thought, 
repeats an observation which, in one form or another, figures 
in all books upon this subject. As the fundamental trait of 
Hellenism he takes that peculiar freedom, both in thought and 
action, which the Greek enjoyed, standing in the presence of 
Nature. The Greek, he says, was not encumbered by any early 
implanted delusion, nor constrained by any close dogmatic 
system, but could take in the nature of things with untroubled 
eyes and with senses open to accept its revelations. 

Now, it is true that the Greek philosophers were exceptionally 
untrammelled by dogmatic prejudice and priestly persecution ; 
they were fortunate enough to be born into a state of society 
which was satisfied, n the main, with an outward conformity, 
and allowed reason to pursue her inward task of seeking the 
truth which makes us free. But, when we dwell upon this 
liberty of thought, we must not be misled into putting another 


1 See Eisler, Weltenmantel und Himmelszeli, Munich, 1910. 
3 Allgesmesne Geschichte d. Philos., τι. i. (1911) p. 3. 


DESTINY AND LAW 3 


construction upon it, and imagining that Thales or Anaximander 
was like Adam on the day of his creation, with no tradition 
behind him, no inherited scheme of things, opening his innocent 
eyes on a world of pure sense impressions not as yet co-ordinated 
into any conceptual structure. It is very easy to fall into an 
error of this sort, especially if we begin our history of Greek 
thought, as Professor Deussen does, by dividing the sources of 
human knowledge into two classes: the outer experience, 
which, by means of the senses, comes to us from the material 
world in space; and the inner experience of our own thoughts 
and will and feelings. The object of outer experience is evidently 
Nature ; the most remarkable object of inner experience is ‘the 
moral phenomenon ’—our feeling of freedom, our consciousness 
of responsibility, our impulse to do or to avoid what we have 
learnt to regard as right or wrong. We then proceed to consider 
what construction the earlier consciousness of Greece has put 
upon these two classes of object in pre-scientific representation— 
the cosmogonies which account for outer Nature, and the ethical 
reflection which has dealt with the inner self and its relation to 
the world outside. When we approach the subject in this way, 
the surviving fragments of cosmogony and ethical reflection 
will soon be dismissed, because they do not, upon examination, 
seem to throw much light on the work of the philosophers. 
So, with a sense of relief, we dismiss the obscure question of 
origins, and embark upon the descriptive history, based on 
extant documents, of the several systems. We try to recon- 
struct each in turn, and to trace its dependence on those that 
went before and its influence on those that came after. But the 
whole concatenation, so reconstructed and interrelated, is left, 
as a whole, an unexplained, and even portentous, phenomenon. 


The primary error in this method of procedure is the pre- 
supposition that the first objects of speculation, the materials 
upon which it sets to work, are the inner and outer experience 
of the individual standing in presence of Nature. At first sight 
this seems a truism; for what other materials can there be, 
what else is there to speculate about? We picture the philo- 
sopher in his study. Inside him there is his consciousness, 
his thoughts and feelings, awaiting his introspective analysis. 


4 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Outside, there is the world, the data of sense-perception, lying 
ready to be observed and explained. It seems as if he had 
only to make his choice between psychology on the one side 
and natural science on the other, and set to work. 

That this picture is not complete, the following pages are 
intended to show. If it were complete, the course taken by 
Greek speculation would have been utterly different. We should 
find the first philosophers attempting to analyse their own 
consciousness, and to draw some rude distinctions between 
thought and perception, or feeling and will. Or, if they turned 
to the outer world, we should find them taking the elementary— 
and, as it seems to us, obvious—precaution of looking at Nature, 
and trying to observe and record her ways, before they ventured 
upon generalisation and hypothesis. They would, in fact, 
have begun by occupying the more accessible fields of natural 
science, and feeling their way towards the laws of psychology, 
biology, or what not. But every one knows that they did 
nothing of the sort. The father of western philosophy, Thales 
of Miletus, immediately announces that the ultimate ‘ nature ’ 
of all things is water, and that the universe is alive—‘ has soul 
in it’ (€uxpuyov)—and is full of spirits or Gods. A little reflection 
will convince us that these propositions do not simply formulate 
the data of Thales’ inward experience or of his outward observa- 
tion of natural phenomena. They are not results likely to be 
reached, at the outset, by our imaginary philosopher sitting 
alone with himself and the sensible world. 

These doctrines of Thales, which are almost all that survives to 
us of his opinions about the general nature of the world, contain 
three conceptions which are the principal subject of the following 
pages : the ‘ nature’ of things —physis, rerum natura (declared 
by Thales to be water); ‘God’ or ‘Spirit’; and‘ Soul.’ Here 
at once, in the very first utterance of philosophy, we encounter 
conceptions which have a long history, as religious representa- 
tions, before philosophy begins. Unless we have some grasp of 
that history we are not likely to understand the speculation, 


1 Professor Burnet, Harly Greek Philos.*, p. 12, points out that φύσις was 
used in this sense by the early cosmologists. He holds that ἀρχή is only 
an Aristotelian term, not used by the earlier writers to mean ‘primary 
substance.’ 


DESTINY AND LAW 5 


which, however scientific its spirit may be, constantly operates 
with these religious ideas, and is to a large extent confined in its 
movement within the limits already traced by them. 


Besides the notions of God and Soul, we shall find that philo- 
sophy also inherits from religion the governing conception of ἃ 
certain order of Nature, variously regarded as a dominion of 
Destiny, of Justice, or of Law. The character and origin of this 
order, within which the life of Nature is confined, will be one of 
the main subjects of our inquiry. It will soon appear that the 
reign of Necessity is also and equally a moral rule, a kingdom of 
Justice. 

The first religious poet of Greece, Hesiod,! states in simple 
form his conviction that the course of Nature is anything but 
careless of right and wrong. He tells us that when men do justice, 
and do not go aside from the straight path of right, their city 
flourishes and they are free from war and famine. ‘For them 
the earth brings forth food in plenty, and on the hills the oak 
tree bears acorns at the top and bees in the middle; their sheep 
have heavy fleeces, their wives bear children that are like their 
parents,’ * and so on. This is a clear statement that there is 
(as it were) a sympathetic relation between human conduct and 
the behaviour of Nature: if man keeps straight upon his path of 
right, then her orderly processes of seed-time and harvest will 
go forward too, and reward justice with the fruits of the earth. 

So, on the other hand, when a sin has been committed—such 
as the unconscious incest of Oedipus *—all Nature is poisoned 
by the offence of man. The land of Thebes 


‘ Wasteth in the fruitless buds of earth, 
In parchéd herds, and travail without birth 
Of dying women.’ 


How did this belief arise: that Nature 1s moral, so that her 
order is disturbed by the sins of man? It is obviously not a 
result of direct, unbiassed observation. When a king or a 


1 Hes. Hrga, 225. 

3. J.e. not monstrous births (τέρατα) ; cf. Aeschin, in Cres. 111, μήτε γῆν 
καρποὺς φέρειν μήτε γυναῖκας τέκνα τίκτειν γονεῦσιν ἐοικότα, ἀλλὰ τέρατα, μήτε 
βοσκήματα κατὰ φύσιν γονὰς ποιεῖσθαι. 


8 Soph. Qed. Rez, trans. G. Murray. Jebb compares Herod. vi. 139. 


6 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


nation commits an act of wrong, it is not true that the harvest 
18 blighted and famine and plague follow. We have here to 
do with one of those ancient, traditional beliefs which defy the 
constant refutation of experience. As we shall see in a moment, 
the earliest Greek philosophers express this conviction—that the 
order of Nature is a moral order—as an obvious, unchallengeable 
truth, and, indeed, the most important truth about the world. 
It governs their conception of the process by which the world 
came into being and will perish again. And, once established in 
philosophy, it influences and colours the whole course of specula- 
tion both about Nature and about morals and politics. Thus 
the problem, how this belief first arose, and through what forms 
it passed before it became the heritage of rational speculation, 
is one of the central problems of the history of human thought. 
It is the main subject of our first two chapters. 


In the third chapter the investigation of the concept of 
‘Nature ’ (physts) will lead us on to the other two conceptions 
we found in Thales’ saying, ‘the All has soul in it and is full 
of spirits.’ We shall try to show how the ideas of Spirit or God 
and of Soul grew up out of ‘ Nature,’ and passed into the inhenit- 
ance of philosophic, as well as religious, thought. The argument 
cannot be anticipated here. The point that now concerns us is 
simply this: that these three conceptions—Nature, God, and 
Soul—had all of them a long history which lay behind the first 
utterance of philosophy, and of which we must form some idea 
before we can place ourselves at the point from which philosophy 
starts. The last three chapters will contain a sketch of the 
course of Greek philosophy, designed to show that, if we take the 
starting-point so defined, the development of thought can be 
better understood. 

We shall begin with an explicit statement, made by Anaxi- 
mander of Miletus, about the nature and order of the world. 
We shall see that, considered as a result of innocent and un- 
biassed observation of Nature, this statement is paradoxical, 
absurd, even unintelligible. Then we shall try to show that, 
when we take it as a restatement in rational terms of a pre- 
scientific view of the world, and trace that view again back to 
its origin, it becomes simple, natural, intelligible. The view in 


DESTINY AND LAW 7 


question is of fundamental importance for all Greek cosmology, 
and it pervades political and ethical speculation as well. The 
train of thought, whose earlier links we hope to reconstitute, 
leads on into Plato and Aristotle, and through them into the 
main current of European philosophy. 


2. The Cosmology of Anaximander 


Anaximander was the second and greatest of the three Milesians 
who presided in succession over the first school of Greek philo- 
sophers. The chief object of speculation for all of them was, 
not man or human society, but ‘ Nature ’ (physis). Philosophical 
writings of the sixth and fifth centuries were commonly entitled 
Concerning Nature (Περὶ Φύσεως). 

“Nature "—the nature of things—was the name they gave to 
the one ultimate stuff, from which, as they held, the world of 
things we see has arisen and into which it will perish again. 
It is at once apparent that we have no satisfactory rendering 
for physis. “Primary substance’ is charged with Aristotelian 
and scholastic associations; ‘matter’ suggests something 
contrasted with mind or life, whereas the primary meaning of 
physis is ‘ growth,’ and its first associations are of life and 
motion, not of stillness and death. The mere use of this term 
already implies the famous doctrine which has earned for the 
Milesian school the designation ‘ Hylozoist "— the doctrine that 
‘the All is alive.’ The universe ‘has soul in it,’ in the same 
sense (whatever that may be) that there is a ‘soul’ in the 
animal body. We must not forget that the meaning of physis, 
at this stage, is nearer to ‘life’ than to ‘matter’; itis quite as 
much ‘moving’ as “material ’—self-moving, because alive. 

Into the earlier, pre-scientific history of this living source of 
all things we must inquire ἰδίου. For the present we shall be 
more concerned with the forms or limits imposed upon its 
spontaneous activity—the twin conceptions of Destiny and Law. 

Thales, the first of the school, identified the living and self- 
changing world-stuff with water. Anaximenes, the third, held 
that it was ‘ air’ or mist. Anaximander called it the ‘ indefinite’ 
or ‘limitless thing’ (τὸ ἄπειρον). Anaximander it was who 

1 Chap. I. 


8 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


first stated a systematic theory of the Nature of the world— 
not only of the stuff it is made of, but also of the process of its 
growth out of the ‘ limitless thing ’ into the manifold of definite 
things. We are not concerned with the details, but only with 
the most general conception of this process of growth, as it is 
described in what is almost the sole surviving fragment of 
Anaximander’s writings : 

‘Things perish into those things out of which they have thew 
birth, according to that which is ordained ; for they give reparation 
to one another and pay the penalty of their injustice according to 
the disposition of time.’ 1 

Otto Gilbert 2 has explained this utterance as follows. We 
have to do with three grades of existence. 

First, there are ‘ things ’ (6vra)—the multiplicity of individual 
things we see around us. These are declared to perish into those 
things out of which they came into existence. What, then, are 
these secondary things, out of which natural objects came into 
being ? 

They are the primitive elements? of which all bodies are 
composed—earth, air, water, fire. These elements were recog- 
nised long before philosophy began. The visible world groups 
itself mto masses of comparatively homogeneous stuffs, each 
occupying a region of its own. There is first the great lump of 
earth ; above it, and perhaps beneath it also, the waters ; then 
the space of wind and mist and cloud; and beyond that, the 
blazing fire of heaven, the aether. These elements are the 
secondary stuffs out of which individual things were born and 
into which they are resolved again. 

But the elements themselves are not everlasting; nor is the 
separation of them into distinct regions more than a transient 


1D. F.V*, i. p. 18: ἐξ ὧν δὲ ἡ γένεσίς ἐστι τοῖς οὖσι καὶ τὴν φθορὰν els 
ταῦτα γίνεσθαι κατὰ τὸ χρεών᾽ διδόναι γὰρ αὐτὰ δίκην καὶ τίσιν ἀλλήλοις τῆς ἀδικίας 
κατὰ τὴν τοῦ χρόνον τάξιν. 

? In a valuable article, ‘Spekulation u. Volksglaube in d. ionischen Philo- 
sophie,’ Arch. f. Religionswiss., xiii. 306 ff. 

* I use the term ‘elements’ in a vague sense to denote earth, air, water, 
and fire, which were popularly recognised (as Gilbert has shown, Meteoro- 
logtsche Theorien d. griech. Altertuma, chap. i.) long before they were 
introduced into science. The conception of ‘elements’ (στοιχεῖα) in the 
narrower sense of primary and unalterable bodies dates from Empedocles 
(cf. Burnet, H. G. P.?, p. 56). 


DESTINY AND LAW 9 


arrangement. They themselves are destined to return into that 
from which they came—the third and ultimate stage of exist- 
ence, the ‘ limitless thing,’ which alone is called by Anaximander 
“incorruptible and undying.’ 

To sum up the process of growth : the formless indefinite stuff 
separates first into the elemental forms, distributed in their 
appointed regions; and then these again give birth to things, 
and, when they die, receive them back again. 

The first important fact about the elements is that they are 
limited ; the second is that they are grouped in pairs of opposites 
or ‘ contraries’: air is cold, fire hot, water moist, earth dry. 
These contraries are at perpetual war with one another, each 
seeking to encroach upon the domain of its antagonist. This 
fact itself seems to have been used by Anaximander as a proof 
that the elements must each be limited, for ‘if any one of them 
were infinite, the rest would have ceased to be by this time,’ 
for they would have been eaten up and destroyed.” 

The separation of the elements into their several regions was 
caused by the ‘eternal motion ’—which perhaps we should 
conceive as a ‘ whirling’ motion (δίνη) of the whole universe, 
which sifts out the opposites from the primary, indiscriminate 
or “limitless ’ mixture, in which they will again be all merged 
and confused when they perish into that from which they 
arose.® 

This cosmology thus contains three main factors or repre- 
sentations : (1) ἃ primary stuff (physts) ; (2) an order, disposition, 
or structure into which this stuff is distributed ; (3) the process 
by which this order arose. In the present chapter we shall be 
chiefly concerned with the second of these representations—the 
scheme of order, which includes all the universe in a simple 
primary classification. The point we hope to bring out is that 
this scheme was not invented by Anaximander, but taken over 
by him from pre-scientific representation, and that this fact 


1 Arist. Phys. y4, 203b 6 ff.: καὶ τοῦτ᾽ εἶναι τὸ θεῖον" ἀθάνατον yap καὶ 
ἀνώλεθρον, ὡς φησιν ὁ ᾿Ἀναξίμανδρος. 

3 Arist. Phys. y5, 204b 22; see Burnet, H. G. .3, p. 55. 

7 On this subject see Heidel, ‘Qualitative Change in Pre-Socratic Philo- 
sophy,’ Arch. f. Geach. ἃ, Philos., xix. 313 ff. I am unconvinced by Professor 
Burnet’s objection to this view of the ‘eternal motion’ (HZ. G. P.%, p. 61). 
But the question will be further discussed below, p. 146. 


10 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


explains those of its characteristics which seem most obscure 
and gratuitous. 


3. The Provinces of the Elements 


What especially strikes us in Anaximander’s statement is 
that the secular process of birth and perishing is described in 
moral language. The passing away of things into the elements 
is called ‘making reparation,’ ‘ paying the penalty of injustice.’ 
The words imply that injustice was committed in the very fact 
of their birth into separate existence. The manifold world, 
in Anaximander’s view, can arise only by robbery and mis- 
appropriation. 

Consider, for instance, the animal body. Its proper substance 
is earth ;1 but for its formation it misappropriates portions of 
the other elements: water for its blood, air for its breath, fire 
for warmth. The dissolution of death repays these robberies : 
each stolen portion rejoins its like—water to water, air to air, 
fire to fire. Or take the clouds. To shape them, air draws 
water to itself and plunders the rivers and seas. Then the 
clouds dissolve in rain, which returns to the place of the waters. 

We see, then, that the general scheme of the growth of the 
world is this : the one primary stuff, called ‘ Nature,’ is segregated 
into provinces, each the domain of one element. And this is a 
moral order, in the sense that transgression of its boundaries, 
the plundering of one element by another to make an individual 
thing, is injustice, unrighteousness. The penalty is death and 
dissolution. No single thing can begin to exist without an 
infraction of this destined order. Birth is a crime, and growth 
an aggravated robbery. 

This is a strange, and to us a paradoxical, view of individual 
existence. We are disposed to think of the ever-increasing 
complexity of the world as an intricate order formed out of 
primitive disorder or chaos, Anaximander may almost be said 
to reverse this conception. To him order comes into being not 
last, but first—the order, namely, which is established when 
the four elements are sifted by the eternal motion into their 


1 See Ο. Gilbert, ‘Spekulation u. Volkaglaube,’ Arch. f. Rel., xiii. 306 ff. ; 
and Meteorologische Theorien d. griech. Altertums, p. 22. 


DESTINY AND LAW 11 


distinct regions. If this separation were ever complete, there 
would be perfect order, and no individual things would exist at 
all. Every step from that simple disposition of elemental 
provinces towards the multiplicity of particular things, is a 
breaking of bounds, an advance towards disorder, a declension 
into the welter of injustice, Tapine, and war. 

And every step of this pilgrimage of wrong must be retraced 

according to what is ordained’ (κατὰ τὸ ypewr). In this word 
are united the conceptions of Fate and of Right; it means a 
power which ordains both what must be and what ought to be. 
This principle of Destiny and Justice has set the bounds of the 
original elemental order, and it waits to exact the penalty of 
every transgression. The power which presides over the physical 
order is moral. 

Like Anaximander, most of the early philosophers, as we shall 
see later, regard the order of the world as moral or just. We 
have called Anaximander’s conception strange and paradoxical. 
The more we think about it, the more preposterous it seems. 
But, it must be remembered that Anaximander was not a 
paradox-monger. He was a man of a very sane and bold 
scientific imagination, trying to state the most reasonable theory 
of the origin and structure of the world, in straightforward terms 
that would recommend it to the enlightened intellects of his time. 
As 8 reasonable theory, and not as an absurd paradox, it was 
received (we may conclude) by those enlightened intellects. 
Yet the conception is one that could never occur to innocent 
scientific curiosity, looking out with uncoloured vision upon the 
world our senses show us. It is certain that both Anaximander 
and his readers had already in their minds some traditional 
representation of the order of Nature, as familiar to them as it 18 
strange tous, which the new theory only restated in rational terms. 

That traditional representation it will be our next business 
to discover and explain. What especially calls for explanation 
is that moral character of the cosmos, upon which we have 
insisted. The actual grouping of the four elements is an apparent 
fact; but why is this fact, of all others, taken as the key to the 
making of the world, and why should it be associated with 
Justice ? Neither its peculiar significance nor its moral char- 
acter is ἃ sense-datum. The emphasis thrown upon it can only 


12 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


be accounted for by showing that it was already emphasised in 
religious representation ; and when that point is established, we 
shall still have to look for the causes which led to its importance 
in religion. 


4. Moira above the Gods 


We turn, then, from the first philosophers back to the eldest 
poets of Greece, Homer and Hesiod, in the expectation of 
finding some representation of the order of the world correspond- 
ing to that which we have seen in Anaximander. We are not 
disappointed. For Anaximander, as we saw, the elements are 
ordered and assigned to their provinces ‘ according to what is 
ordained’ (κατὰ τὸ ypewv)—a conception in which Necessity 
and Right are united. So in Homer the Gods are subordinate to 
a remote power, which is both primary—older than the Gods 
themselves—and moral. It is called Moira, Destiny. 

The subjection of the Gods to Fate is a belief that has passed 
out of modern thought, or at least taken a quite different 
form. With the origin of the conception of Destiny we shall 
be concerned in the next chapter; our present business is to 
define the notion at the stage at which we meet with it in Homer. 

The Gods of Homer are limited.1_ They are indeed exempt 
from age and death; but they are not eternal. They are 
younger than the world, into which they were born. Nor are 
they almighty, though man is powerless against them. What 
limits their power, however, is not what we call natural law: 
on the contrary, miracles are their peculiar function. They are 
limited by Destiny (Moira), which they did not make and 
against which they cannot stand. 

The Gods cannot save even ἃ man whom they love when the 
“dread fate of death’ lays hold upon him.? Zeus himself 
laments that it is ‘fate’ that his son, Sarpedon, dearest to 
him of all men, must die at the hands of Patroclus.2 He ‘ does 
not venture to undo what fate decrees.’4 “It is impossible even 

1 On this subject see Gruppe, Gr. Myth. u. Rel., p. 989 ff. 

2 Od. iii. 236: οὐδὲ θεοί περ | καὶ φίλῳ ἀνδρὶ δύνανται ἀλαλκέμεν, ὁππότε κεν 
δὴ | μοῖρ᾽ ὁλοὴ καθέλῃσι τανηλεγέος θανάτοιο. 

δ Il. xvi. 433: & μοι ἐγών, ὅ τέ μοι Σαρπηδόνα, φίλτατον ἀνδρῶν, | μοῖρ᾽ ὑπὸ 


Πατρόκλοιο Μενοιτιάδαο δαμῆναι. 
4 Pind. Paean. vi. 94 : μόρσιμ᾽ ἀναλύεν Ζεὺς ὁ θεῶν σκοπὸς οὐ τόλμα. 


DESTINY AND LAW 18 


for a God to avoid the fate that is ordained.’1 “What is or- 
dained,’ says Athena in Euripides,? using Anaximander’s word 
(τὸ χρεών), ‘is master of the Gods and thee.’ Prometheus tells 
the Okeanids that the Moirai and Erinyes hold the tiller of 
Necessity, and that Zeus, if not weaker than they, cannot escape 
what is decreed by fate.® 


5. Moira as moral 


Further, as in the Ionian philosopher, so in Homer, the 
ordinance of Fate is not a mere blind and senseless barrier of 
impossibility : it is a moral decree—the boundary of right and 
wrong. We may even say that the two notions of Destiny and 
Right are hardly distinguished. This comes out in the phrase 
‘beyond what is ordained,’ ‘beyond fate’ (ὑπὲρ μόρον, ὑπὲρ 
αἶσαν), which in Homer halts between the two meanings : 
‘beyond what is destined, and so must be,’ and‘ beyond what 
is right, and so ought to be.’ 

Thus, when the first sense—destiny—is uppermost, it is 
denied that God or man can make anything happen ‘ beyond 
fate.’4 But elsewhere we find on the contrary that things do 
happen ‘ beyond fate.’ In the Ilad® the Achaeans prevail for 
a time in battle ὑπὲρ aicar. ‘ Alack,’ cries Zeus in the Odyssey,® 


1 Herod. i. 91: τὴν πεπρωμένην μοῖραν ἀδύνατον ἐστὶ ἀποφεύγειν καὶ θεῷ. 
This passage is of great interest, as apparently stating the view of Delphic 
theology. The Pythia explains that Apollo tried to persuade the Moirai 
to postpone the vengeance hanging over Croesus’ house till after Croesus’ 
death. The Moirai would not concede more than a delay of three years 
later than was ordained (ὕστερον τῆς κεπρωμένηβ). 

2 J. T., 1486: αἰνῶ" τὸ yap χρεὼν σοῦ τε καὶ θεῶν κρατεῖ. 

8. Aesch. P.V., 531: Χο. τίς οὖν ἀνάγκης ἐστὶν οἰακοστρόφος ; 

IIp. Μοῖραι τρίμορφοι μνήμονές τ᾽ ᾿Ερωύες. 
Χο. τούτων ἄρα Ζεύς ἐστιν ἀσθενέστερος ; 
Πρ. οὔκουν ἂν ἐκφύγοι γε τὴν πεπρωμένην. 

‘ For instance, Jl. vi. 487: οὐ γάρ τίς μ' ὑπὲρ αἶσαν ἀνὴρ “Acdk προϊάψει" 
μοῖραν δ᾽ οὔ τινά φημι πεφυγμένον ἔμμεναι ἀνδρῶν, | οὐ κακόν, οὐδὲ μὲν ἐσθλόν, 
ἐπὴν τὰ πρῶτα γένηται. Cf. Pind. Pyth. xii. 30: τὸ μόρσιμον οὐ παρφυκτόν. 
frag. 232 (256), τὸ πεπρωμένον οὐ πῦρ, οὐ σιδάρεον σχήσει τεῖχος. 

5 xvi. 780: καὶ τότε δή ῥ᾽ ὑπὲρ αἶσαν ᾿Αχαιοὶ φέρτεροι ἦσαν. 

: i. 32: ὦ πόποι, οἷον δή νυ θεοὺς βροτοὶ αἰτιόωνται. 

ἐξ ἡμέων γάρ φασι κάκ᾽ ἔμμεναι" οἱ δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ 
σφῇσιν ἀτασθαλίῃσιν ὑπὲρ μόρον ἄλγε᾽ ἔχουσιν, 
ὡς καὶ νῦν Αἴγισθος ὑπὲρ μόρον ᾿Ατρείδαο 

γῆμ᾽ ἄλοχον μνηστήν. 


14 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


“see now how mortal men lay blame upon theGods! For they 
say it is from us that evil comes; and all the while they them- 
selves, by their own naughtiness, have trouble beyond what is 
ordained, even as now Aegisthus, beyond what 18 ordained, has 
married the wedded wife of the son of Atreus.’ Here, it is evi- 
dent, the moral sense is uppermost. The offenders went beyond, 
not their fate, but the bounds of morality. Hence in such cases 
the balance is redressed by swiftly following vengeance, which 
itself is “ beyond what is ordained ἡ in the sense that the sinners 
brought it upon themselves by their own wickedness, so that 
they, and not Fate, are responsible (αἴτιοι). 
The truest account, perhaps, is that the clear notion of absolute 
impossibility is wanting in Homer. The «dvyator, which we 
render ‘the impossible,’ is rather that which lies beyond one’s 
power (δύναμις); it may lie beyond the power even of a God, 
for, as we have seen, no God is all-powerful. But it is not abso- 
lutely and strictly impossible; power may be stretched for a 
moment beyond its due and normal limits, so that Gods, and even 
men, may achieve the impossible. But there is a strong sense 
that such feats are undesirable and dangerous. For Gods and 
men alike there are certain destined bounds which normally 
and rightly circumscribe their power. It is just possible to 
exceed them; but only at the cost of provoking an instant nemesis, 

Thus in Homer, and in Ionian thought generally, we find a 
‘ profound belief in Destiny (Mozra) as an ordinance which limits 
all individual powers, whether human or divine; and we see, 
moreover, that this ordinance is even more a decree of moral 
obligation than a barrier of sheer physical impossibility. 

Our next question must be: How came this power called 
Moira to be supreme above both men and Gods? What does 
Moira mean? The conception and the view of the world 
which it carries with it were no more the invention of ‘Homer ’ 
than they were of Anaximander. When we have succeeded in 
defining Movra more clearly, we shall be in a position to recon- 
struct the still earlier history of the idea. 

1 Compare the Croesus passage (Herod. i. 9] above, p. 13, n. 1), in which 


Apollo ends by throwing the responsibility on Croesus’ pride (ἑωυτὸν αἴτιον 
ἀποφαινέτω), and Croesus acknowledges it. 


DESTINY AND LAW 15 


6. Moira as a system of provinces 


Some scholars! ask us to believe that Movra is a personification 
generalised from the individual lot or fate attached to each man 
from the cradle to the grave. Against this view a single con- 
sideration is decisive. It is inconceivable that an abstraction 
generalised from the fates of individual men, and inapplicable to 
the Gods, should ever have been erected into a power superior to 
the Gods themselves. The notion of the individual lot or fate, 
as we shall try to show later, comes last, not first, in the order 


of development. We must seek the original meaning of Mozra 
elsewhere. 


In the fifteenth Ziad Zeus awakes one day to find the Trojans 
hard pressed in battle by the Achaeans, assisted by Poseidon. 
After a sordid outburst against Hera, who, however, swears by 
Styx that Poseidon is acting of his own will and not upon her 
instigation, Zeus sends Iris with a threatening message, com- 
manding Poseidon to cease from war and battle, and to with- 
draw among the tribes of the gods or into the bright sea. Posei- 
don is very angry and protests (1.186). “Alack,’ he says, ‘ strong 
though he be, these words are past all bearing, if he will constrain 
me by violence against my will, though I am his equal in rank 
(ouoreuos). For we are three brothers, born of Kronos and 
Rhea, Zeus, and I, and Hades is the third, the lord of the dead. 
And in three lots are all things divided, and each took his appointed 
domain (or privilege, status). When we shook the lots, to 
me fell the hoary sea, that I should dwell therein for ever ; 
and Hades drew the misty darkness, and Zeus the broad heaven 
among the acther and the clouds: the earth and high Olympus 
are yet common to all. Therefore never will I hve according 
to the mind of Zeus; no, masterful though he be, let hum stay 
quiet in his own thord part (ἔκηλος. .. μενέτω τριτάτῃ ἐνὶ 
μοιρῃ). Zeus may give orders to his own sons and daughters, 
who, as inferiors, are bound to obey him. 

Iris recommends submission, reminding Poseidon that the 
spirits of vengeance, the Erinyes, are always in attendance upon 
the elder-born. Poseidon gives way; but declares that it is a 
bitter pain ‘when any one chides with angry words one to whom 


1 For instance, Weizsacker in Roscher’s Lexicon, s.v. ‘Moira,’ ool. 3084. 
51, 189: τριχϑὰ δὲ πάντα δέδασται, ἕκαστος δ᾽ ἔμμορε τιμῆς. 


16 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


an equal portion and a like lot are ordavned.’1 However, though 
he feels resentment (nemesis), he yields, and retires to the sea, 
his own undisputed element.? 

In this curious passage the original sense of Moira is clearly 
apparent. Moira simply means ‘part,’ ‘allotted portion’ ; 
from that primary meaning it is agreed that the meaning 
‘destiny ’ is derived. Poseidon’s protestation shows how it is 
that the Gods, as well as men, have moirat. Hach God has his 
own allotted portion or province—a certain department of nature 
or field of activity. This may also be regarded as his status 
(τιμή); it gives him a determined position in a social system. 
Sometimes it is called his ‘ privilege’ (γέρας). Within his own 
domain his supremacy is not to be challenged ; but he must not 
transgress its frontiers, and he will feel resentment (nemesis) at 
any encroachment by another. 

It is this conception, not that of the individual human fate, 
that is generalised in Destiny, Moira. She represents the 
apportionment to each God of his province, status, or privilege. 
It is at once plain why she is above any or all of the Gods, and 
how the limits she sets to their powers can be thought of as moral 
limits. Hesiod definitely says that the Moirai, daughters of 
Night, pursue the transgressions, not only of men, but of Gods.® 

The original conception of Moira thus turns out to be spatial, 


11, 209: ὁππότ᾽ ἂν ἱσόμορον καὶ ὑμῇ πεπρωμένον αἴσῃ 

νεικείειν ἐθέλῃσι χολωτοῖσιν ἐπέεσσι. 

5. For the three divisions, Earth, Sea, Sky, cf. Ji. xviii. 483: Hephaestos, 
making the Shield, ἐν μὲν γαῖαν ἕτευξ', ἐν δ᾽ οὐρανόν, ἐν δὲ θάλασσαν ; Od. xii. 
31 : γαῖαν---πόντον---οὐρανόθεν ; Hymn to Dem. 13: οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς ὕπερθε γαῖά 
τε πᾶσα καὶ ἁλμυρὸν οἷδμα θαλάσσης. See O. Gilbert, Met. Theor., 975. 
Poseidon in the above passage takes a somewhat different view, according 
to which Heaven (Olympos) and Earth, as parents of ali the gods (see 
below, p. 18), are ‘common to all’; the three divisions included in the 
δασμός are Aether (the fiery οὐρανός), Sea, and Darkness (Air)—a conception 
which is nearer to the ‘elements’ (see below, p. 116). 

8 Theog. 220: al τ᾽ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε παραιβασίας épérovow. After 
writing the above, I discovered that Walter Headlam had clearly stated 
this view of Moira in his edition of Aesch. Agam. p. 234, note on v. 1007. 
He says: ‘The Μοῖραι are personifications of these μοῖραι or diavopal (Hum. 
726), apportionments or dispensations, provinces allotted to the various 
divinities and severally administered by them. ...’ ‘There exist in the 
system over which Zeus presides certain ‘vested interests” or “spheres 
of influence” assigned by Dispensation (Motpa).’ Headlam adduces some 
interesting evidence, 


DESTINY AND LAW 17 


rather than temporal. We are to think of a system of provinces: 
coexisting side by side, with clearly marked boundaries. The 
conception has been obscured by the—in our opinion, later— 
mode of conceiving the three Fates as corresponding to divisions 
of time—Past, Present, and Future. The spatial character of 
Moira will turn outin the sequel to be of fundamental importance, 
as a representation which, persisting into Ionian science, governs 
its whole course. 


7. The Division of the World in Hesiod 


If we turn now to the cosmogony of Hesiod, we shall find there 
that very division of the world into provinces to which we have 
traced back the original sense of Moira. Further, the supremacy 
of Moira over the Gods is there reflected in a temporal form ; 
that is to say, the separation of the world into elemental provinces 
is older in time than the birth of the Gods. 

The cosmogony begins (Theog. 116) with the coming into 
being of ‘Chaos,’ Karth, and Eros; then out of Chaos arose 
Darkness and Night, and of them were born blazing Fire (αἰθήρ) 
and Daylight. This opening act we shall discuss later. Next 
follows (1. 124) the division of the world into three parts—Earth, 
Sky, and Sea. 

“Earth (Gaza) first of all gave being to one equal to herself, 
the starry Heaven (Ouranos), that he might enfold her all round, 
that there might be for the blessed Gods a seat secure for ever. 
And she brought forth the high mountains wherein the Gods 
delight to inhabit. And she gave birth also to the waste Ocean, 
swelling with rage, the Sea ’ (Pontos). 

Here, then, we find, as a distinct stage in cosmogony, a 
division of the world into three portions (movraz), just as in 
Homer ΄ all things were divided in three,’ and the three provinces 
were assigned to Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades. The starry 
Heaven is for Zeus, the Sea for Poseidon; for Hades remains 
either the ‘misty darkness —that is, the Air—or the Earth, 
according as it is believed that the dead, whose lord he is, dwell 
in the western darkness beyond the sunset, or underground. 

This triple division into the Sky, the dry Earth, and the Sea, 
takes place, be it noted, ‘ without love or the attraction of 

B 


18 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


desire’ (ἄτερ φιλότητος ἐφιμέρου, 1. 182). It was not, that is 
to say, an act of marriage and consequent birth, but of division, 
repulsion, ‘strife’ (Νεῖκος), as Empedocles would say. Only 
afterwards the sundered Sky and Earth were reunited in marriage 
by Eros, and of that marrage the eldest Gods were born. So 
Hesiod, by making the triple division older in time than the Gods 
—cosmogony older than theogony—marks by temporal sequence 
the supremacy of Movra—the dimly personified principle of that 
division—over the later-born divinities. 

In Hesiod’s view the Gods arose out of the several provinces 
of Nature—the four elements and those other features of the 
world, such as mountains and rivers, in which mysterious 
powers and forces are felt to reside. His prelude 1 ends with an 
invocation of the Muses, who are to sing of the race of the 
immortals, ‘ born of Earth and of the starry Heaven, of murky 
Night and of the salt Sea.’ ‘Say, how first the Gods and Earth 
came into bemg, and the rivers and the limitless Sea, swelling 
with rage, and the shining stars and the wide Heaven above, and 
the Gods that were born out of these, the givers of blessing ; how 
they parted among them their wealth and drstributed their honours,? 
and how first they took possession of Olympus.’ 

In Earth and the fiery Heaven, Night and the Sea, we 
recognise the four elements. Three of them speak for them- 
selves; the fourth, ‘murky Night, cvidently 1epresents the 
Air, which the Greeks regularly regaided as dark.’ Accordingly, 
when some of the sixth-century thinkers—Pherekydes, for in- 
stance, or Theagenes of Rhegium—equated the elements with 
the Gods,! this was no mere play of allegonising fancy. Some at 
least of the provinces assigned by Moura to the Gods were nothing 


1 Theoy. 104. 

2 vy. 112: ὥς τ᾽ ἄφενος δάσσαντο καὶ ws τιμὰς διέλοντο. This dasmos, held by 
the Gods themselves, will be discussed below, § 9. 

3 Cf. Plut. de promo frigido, 9488: ὅτι δ᾽ ἀὴρ τὸ πρώτως σκοτεινόν ἐστιν, 
οὐδὲ τοὺς ποιητὰς λέληθεν ἀέρα γὰρ τὸ σκότος καλοῦσιν" “ ἀὴρ γὰρ rapa νηυσὶ βαθεῖ" 
ἣν οὐδὲ σελήνη οὐρανόθεν προὔφαινε᾽ (Od. x. 148). καὶ πάλιν " ἠέρα ἑσσάμενοι 
πᾶσαν φοιτῶσιν ἐπ᾽ αἴαν᾽ (Hes. Erga, 356), «.7.d. Cf. Plut. Js, e¢ Os. 384 3, ©, 
and Ji xv. 191 (above quoted, p 15), where Hades takes the ‘misty dark- 
ness’ (ζόφον ἠερδεντα). 

“See O Gilbert, ‘Spekulation und Volksglaube, us.w., Arch. Κ Relig. 
xiii p. 317. For Theagenes see D.F.V.°, p. 511; Pherekydes, ibid p. 507 
Note especially Pherekydes’ use of μοῖρα. κείνης δὲ τῆς μοίρας ἔνερθέν ἐστιν ἡ 
ταρταρίη μοῖρα (frag. 5). 


DESTINY AND LAW 19 


but these elements, and out of them, as Hesiod very truly says, 
the Gods themselves had come into being. The status of the 
elements in cosmogony is precisely parallel to the status of the 
Gods in Homeric theology. Both have their appointed regions 
and departments ; both are subject to Mowra. 

Thus we have found a departmental ordering of the world 
established in religious representation long before it is affirmed 
by philosophy. Further, in religion and philosophy alike, this 
disposition is both primary and moral. The physical order 1s 
guarded by the same powers that punish moral transgression— 
those ministers of Justice or Erinyes, the Morac in their darkest 
aspect, who, ‘if the sun should overstep his measures, would 
find him out.’! This conception of the primary world-order 
is taken over by Anaximander with its main outline unchanged ; 
and, above all, its moral character unquestioningly retained. 
The mutual aggression of the elements in their perpetual strife 
is an ‘injustice —an infringement of moral boundaries.? So 
far the philosophic representation is identical with the religious ; 
where Anaximander innovates is in making the primary order 
partly the effect of a mechanical cause—the ‘eternal motion,’ 
and in eliminating the Gods, whose place is taken by the elements, 
out of which, according to Hesiod, the Gods had arisen. The 
significance of these innovations will become clear to us later. 

Meanwhile, we have to examine the religious representation 
more closely. As presented by Hesiod, it is not a simple and 
consistent scheme; we can detect in it several layers superim- 
posed on one another, which correspond to distinct stages of 
religious development. We must accordingly attempt an analysis 
which will bring out the successive phases. 


8. Mora is impersonal, without intelligence or design 


Let us note, in the first place, that a thoroughgoing polytheism 
has the singular merit of allowing the order of the world, the 
cosmos, to come into being without the intervention of any 


1 Heracleitus, frag. 94 (Diels): ἥλιος γὰρ οὐχ ὑπερβήσεται μέτρα" εἰ δὲ μή, 
᾿Ερινύες μιν Δίκης ἐπίκουροι ἐξευρήσουσιν. 

3 Theagenes of Rhegium emphasised exactly this point, allegorising the 
battles of the Gods in Homer as the ἐναντίωσις of the elements (Gilbert, loc. 
cit.). Cf. Pherekydes, frag. 4 (D.F. V.*, p. 508). 


20 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


purposeful intelligence. All the Gods being merely departmental 
powers, no one of them can at first claim to have designed and 
created the whole disposition of things by an arbitrary, if bene- 
volent, act of will. Such a claim will only gradually come to be 
advanced on behalf of a supreme God, as polytheism gives way to 
monotheism. In Greek religion this was fortunately a very 
late development, partly owing to the fact that in the oldest 
writers the tradition was firmly established that Zeus, the God 
who reigns supreme in the present age of the world, was not 
even one of the eldest-born divinities, but head of a later dynasty. 
Behind him lay the age of Kronos and those vague Titanic deities 
whose reign filled an interval of indefinite length separating the 
birth of the world from the birth of Zeus in the island of Crete. 
This representation was too clear and fixed to be overridden 
until the religious consciousness had become so thoroughly 
uncomfortable about the less edifying aspects of polytheism 
‘that a monarchical revolution in the divine world was felt as an 
imperative necessity. But this movement did not triumph till 
a time when philosophy or science had already secured an inde- 
pendent foothold. The spirited satire of Xenophanes is later 
than the foundation of the Milesian School; and, besides, 
. philosophic monotheism tended at first rather to declare that the 
universe itself was the one God, than to make it the work of a 
creator distinct from itself. If we are to dwell on the freedom 
of Greek thought from dogmatic prejudice, we cannot be too 
grateful for the absence of this particular belief in a divine 
creator. No hypothesis is more facile and supe; nothing is 
so likely to stupefy and lull to slumber that wonder which is the 
parent of philosophy, than an explanation which will account 
with equal readiness for every feature of the world, whether good 
or bad, ascribing what is good to the transparent benevolence, 
and what is bad to the inscrutable wisdom, of omnipotence. 
Moira, it is true, was a moral power ; but no one had to pretend 
that she was exclusively benevolent, or that she had any respect 
for the parochial interests and wishes of mankind. Further— 
and this is the most important point—she was not credited with 
foresight, purpose, design; these belong to man and to the 
humanised Gods. Moira is the blind, automatic force which 
leaves their subordinate purposes and wills free play within 


DESTINY AND LAW 21 


their own legitimate spheres, but recoils in certain Vengeance | 
upon them the moment that they cross her boundaries. 

Moira, then, though we speak of her as a ‘ personification,’ 
has not the most important element of personality—individual 
purpose. She stands for the provincial ordering of the world ; 
but she is not a deity who by an act of will designed and created 
that order. She is a representation which states a truth about 
the disposition of Nature, and to the statement of that truth adds 
nothing except that the disposition is both necessary and just. 
Considered in abstraction from the natural fact itself, Moira 18 
a representation of the Necessity and Justice (Must and Ought) 
of the elemental disposition. That is the whole content of the 
notion of Destiny. 

Such, then, was the ultimate power in the universe as con- 
ceived by Greek polytheism. But for its moral character, it 
could hardly be said to be religious rather than scientific; it 
would be a conception of the same order as the notion of Natural 
Law, which has taken its place in modern thought. That is 
partly the reason why it is reinstated by nascent science in the 
system of Anaximander. But what now concerns us 1s to 
realise that this was a reinstatement—the restoration to Movra 
of a supremacy which, as religion developed, had been impaired, 
and almost overthrown, by the growing power of the Gods, 


9. The Dasmos of the Gods 


Just because Mowa was at first an impersonal power, an 
opening was left for advancing theology to reverse the position, 
and ascribe her ordinance of necessity and right to the will of 
personal Gods, which formerly had been overridden by it. Thus 
the Gods, who at first were younger than Moira and subject to 
her, might now set up a claim to be the originators of the world- 
order, substituting their individual will for her impersonal 
decree. Hesiod himself shows us the stages of this process, and 
combines, in his simple religious way, the two inconsistent 
representations. On the one hand, as we have seen, the order of 
Hesiod’s cosmogony implies that the departmental division of 
the world was older in time than the Gods, and he also declares 
that the Gods took shape within its several provinces and arose 


22 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


out of the elements themselves. On the other hand, in the same 
breath he calls upon his Muse to describe how the Gods ‘ parted 
among them their wealth and distributed their honours ’—as if 
this disposition were not, after all, the work of Destiny, but 8 
distribution (Sacos) voluntarily carried out by the Gods them- 
selves. The will of the Gods is beginning to assert its claims 
against the inevitable appointment of Fate. 

It is, however, curious to observe how the two views are 
reconciled in the only possible compromise. In the fifteenth 
Thad, as we saw above (p. 15), the Gods, confronted by the 
problem of distribution, acknowledge the supremacy of Fate 
exactly as men would do on a similar occasion. They arrange 
the matter by drawing lots. In other words, the three sons of 
Kronos voluntarily surrender their volition, and abide by the 
appomtment of Moira, as the Lady of the Lots, Lachesis. 

In this Homeric passage Lachesis is not mentioned ; but in 
Pindar’s description} of the division of the earth among the 
Gods she presides in person. ‘The ancient legends tell how 
that, when Zeus and the immortals were dividing (δατέοντο) 
among them the earth, Rhodes had not yet appeared upon the 
surface of the ocean, but the island lay hidden in the salt depths. 
Helios was not there, so that no one designated a lot for him, 
and they left the holy God without an allotted land. When 
Zeus was reminded, he was about to order a fresh drawing of lots ; 
but Helios would not suffer him, because he said that his own 
eye saw within the grey sea, growing up from the bottom, a land 
that would feed a multitude of men and be kindly to flocks. 
And immediately he bade Lachesis of the golden frontlet hold 
up her hands and not gainsay the Great Oath of the Gods, but 
rather with the son of Kronos affirm,” that when the island 
should be sent up into the open light of day, it should be a seat 
reserved to him (γέρας) for the time to come.’ 

Here, in spite of the polite deference to the son of Kronos, it 


1 Ql. vii. 54. This dasmos of the surface of the earth into seats of 
worship is, as we shall see later (p. 38), an older representation, on which 
the dasmos of the elemental provinces between the three sons of Kronos is 
modelled. 

21, 64: ᾿Εκέλευσεν δ᾽ αὐτίκα χρυσάμπυκα μὲν Λάχεσιν 

χεῖρας ἀντεῖγαι, θεῶν δ᾽ ὅρκον μέγαν 
μὴ παρφάμεν, ἀλλὰ Κρόνον σὺν παιδὶ νεῦσαι. . . . 


DESTINY AND LAW 23 


is evident that Lachesis herself presides, and that Zeus can do 
no more than confirm her decision with his nod. 


10. The Great Oath of the Gods 


Besides the appointment of Lachesis and the confirmatory 
nod of Zeus, the distribution in this Pindaric passage is also 
sanctioned by the Great Oath of the Gods (θεῶν ὅρκος μέγας). 
The importance of this conception is that it opens another 
avenue by which the will of the Gods can assert its claim to 
supersede Destiny. An oath may come to be regarded as ἃ 
contract voluntarily entered upon; and through this notion of 
contractual obligation we may pass to conceiving the depart- 
mental ordering of the universe as a system of constitutional 
law—an aspect under which we shall presently consider it. 
But meanwhile we must dwell for a moment on this notion of 
the Great Oath and its connection with the dasmos.? 

The regular formula of the Great Oath will be found, for 
instance, at the beginning of the fifteenth Zhad, where Hera 
swears to Zeus that she has not been instigating Poseidon to go 
beyond his moira. She swears by ‘ Earth and the broad Heaven 
above and the dripping water of Styx, which is the greatest 
and most dreadful Oath for the blessed Gods.’ In the same 
form—by Gaia, Ouranos, and Styx—Leto, in the Homeric 
Hymn to Apollo (83), swears to Delos that her island shall 
always be the seat of Apollo's worship—another case where the 
Oath confirms the assignment of a divine province. In the 
Great; Oath, then, the Gods swear by the two great primary 
divisions of the universe, Earth and Heaven, and by Styx. 
What is the significance of Styx ? 


1 It must be remembered, however, that originally the oath which 
sanctions law is not a contract, but a curse. This may be visibly embodied 
in a substance, such as the blood of a ‘sacred’ animal, which is charged 
with sanctity, and so with that dangerous force which recoils upon a breach 
of taboo. Cf. the oath-ritual in Plato’s Atlantis (Kritias, 119p), where the 
bull was to be killed ‘against the top of the column’ on which the laws 
were engraved, so that his blood ran down over the inscription. On the 
column was also a “Opxos invoking maledictions on the disobedient. See 
J. E. Harrison, Themss, 1912, p. 163 ff. 

2 We shall see later that the Great Oath reappears in ἃ curious way in the 
system of Empedocles (p. 237). 


24 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


In the Theogony Hesiod describes in detail how the cold 
water of Styx is administered to the Gods as an ordeal for perjury 
and lying. When one of the Olympians is suspected of false- 
hood, Zeus sends Iris to bring, in a golden phial, some of this 
freezing stream, which falls from a black precipice of rock. 
The God convicted of perjury lies for a Great Year breathless, 
dumb, and paralysed by the chill draught of this ancient river, 
which ‘ traverses that desolate place where are the sources and 
limits of the Earth and Tartarus, of the Sea and of the starry 
Heaven.’! Styx is one of ten branches of the heaven-stream, 
Okeanos ; the other nine roll round the earth and the sea, but 
Styx falls from its rock to be the great penalty of the Gods.? 

It is impossible to get from Hesiod’s account any clear idea of 
the position of Styx; but it seems that this river is vaguely 
conceived as a barrier which either encloses the world or separates 
one division of it from another. It is placed in Tartarus, where 
are the ‘ roots and fountains ’ of the four elemental provinces— 
earth, misty Tartarus, sea, and sky—and those ‘limits whose 
dankness strikes a shuddering chill even into Gods.’ ὃ 

Now, when we remember that Horkos, Oath, is the same word 
as herkos, ‘fence,’ * we can understand why Styx is the Great 
Oath of the Gods. An oath is a fence which can be visibly 
symbolised in ritual, when he who takes an oath stands between 
the pieces of the divided victim, surrounding himself on all 
sides by the sacred thing, charged with the dangerous, inviolable 
power of sanctity. Styx is the ‘shuddering chill,’ the awful 
horror which is the negative, forbidding aspect of Power. Zeus, 
on the eve of that quarrel with Poseidon we have already noticed, 
concludes his angry message to his brother thus: ‘I declare 
that I am much greater than he in might (βίη) and his elder in 
birth : but his heart fears not to call himself equal to me whom 
the other Gods hold in shuddering awe (στυγέουσι) This 


11, 736. 

51. 790. The tenth branch is simply invented in order to reconcile the 
two views that Styx is a ninefold stream running all round the world 
(noviens Styx interfusa coercet, Verg. Georg. iv. 480) and also an actual 
stream which does run down a black rock in Arcadia. The Great Oath is 
evidently not this stream, but the ninefold barrier. 

δ πείρατα ἀργαλέ᾽ εὐρώεντα, τά Te στυγέουσι θεοί περ, T'heog. 738. 

4 Οὐ. Murray, Rise of the Greek Hpic?, p. 338, 

δ fl, xv. 165, 


DESTINY AND LAW 25 


phrase makes it clear why it is that Styx is specially associated 
with the dasmos—the apportionment of provinces, each the 
domain of some God’s ‘ mastery’ (κράτος) and limited by a 
frontier ofinviolablesanctity. Styx isa representation of Taboo. 


11. The supremacy of Zeus conferred by Styx 


When Zeus declares that the other Gods hold him in shuddering 
awe (στυγέουσι), he means that his might has the effect which the 
waters of Styx used to produce upon the Gods who violated the 
Oath. When we understand that Styx, the shuddering chill of 
taboo, is nothing but the recoil, or negative aspect, of power, 
we see in a new light that strange passage in the Theogony, where 
it is said that the supreme power or mastery (κράτος) of Zeus 
came to him, after his conquest of the Titans, ‘ by the counsel of 
Styx.’ 2 , The whole passage is instructive, because it seems to 
describe how the supremacy passed from an impersonal power 
to the will of the personal God. 

Styx and Pallas had four children, Zelos, Nike, Kratos, and Bia. 
“No house nor seat of Zeus is without these ; no path is there, 
upon which the God does not lead them, but they are established 
for ever beside Zeus, the Thunderer. For such was the counsel 
of Styx, the immortal daughter of Ocean.’ This endowment of 
Zeus with supreme power occurred on that day when, summoning 
all the Gods to Olympus, Zeus declared that no God who had 
fought on his side against the Titans should be deprived of his 
privileges (γεράων), but each should keep that status (τιμήν) 
which he had before enjoyed. Further, all who had no privilege 
or status under the ruleof Kronosshould now enter into possession 
of them. Then it was that Styx, with her children, was the first 
to arrive at Olympus ; and Zeus honoured her with gifts above 
all else. He ordained that she should be the Great Oath of the 
Gods, and that her children should dwell with him for ever. 
In the same way he fulfilled his promises to all the rest in turn ; 
but the supreme power and lordship are his own. 


1 This view of Styx in relation to Kratos and Bia ($11) is due to Miss 
J. E. Harrison (7 λοπιῖβ, p. 72). For taboo as negative mana, seo R. R. 
Marett, Threshold of Religion, chap. iii. The notion will become clearer as 
we go on. 

? Hesiod, Theog. 383 ff, See J. E. Harrison, loc. cit, 


26 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


This passage shows the same inconsistency that we have 
before noted. At the beginning it 1s Styx who confers on Zeus 
his newly won power ; she is only another form of Moira, who 
apportions to each God his province. At the end the situation 
is reversed : it is Zeus who confers on Styx her privilege, that she 
should be the Great Oath of the Gods. It is he who ordains that 
her children, Mastery and Force, shall dwell with him for ever ; 
and in fact he becomes the power which authorises the whole 
distribution of divine provinces. These are no longer apportioned 
by all the Gods among themselves, according to the fall of the 
lots, but Zeus distributes them, keeping the supreme sovereignty 
for himself. Thus, at this third and last stage, the distribution 
which was originally an ultimate fact in the constitution of 
Nature—the fact represented as Movra—comes to be thought of 
as enacted by the sole will of a supreme personal God. In other 
words, it becomes an act of legislation (νομοθεσία). 

In Homer, again, this same transition is marked by the odd 
phrases, ‘ fate of Zeus,’ ‘ destiny of God’ (Διὸς αἶσα, θεοῦ μοῖρα 
etc.), where the original sense of ‘apportionment’ or ΄ destiny,’ 
not personal will (βουλή), is still the primary conception, and 
of Zeus,’ ‘ of God,’ is at first hardly more than a pious addition. 
Thus in the seventeenth had (321) the Argives would have 
prevailed by their own might and strength, ‘even beyond the 
apportionment of Zeus’ (καὶ ὑπὲρ Διὸς αἶσαν), had not Apollo 
gone to rouse Aeneas and tell him that Zeus ‘ wills’ (βούλεται) 
the victory of the Trojans. Here we find exactly the same con- 
ception as before—the might (xparos) of men going “beyond 
what is ordained’ (ὑπὲρ aioav): but Διός is slipped in, as if 
Zeus, and not Moura, were the source of this apportionment.' 


12. Zeus as Lawgiver 


Zeus, then, comes at last to be regarded as the dispenser of 
fate and the upholder of that system of provinces in which at 


1 Cf. also Pindar, Nem. iv. 61, τὸ μόρσιμον Διόθεν πεπρωμένον, as contrasted 
with Paean. vi. 94, μόρσιμ᾽ ἀναλύεν Ζεὺς ov τόλμα. Oldenberg (Die Relig. des 
Veda, p. 199) points out that the same phenomenon occurs in Vedic theology. 
The world-order called Ria, at first supreme over the Gods, comes to be 
represented as the ordinance of Varuna and the Adityas. The notion of 
Ria will be further discussed below, p. 175. Aesch. Sept. 485: Ζεὺς Neuérup. 


DESTINY AND LAW 27 


one time he had had only a third part for his domain. As 
Nausikaa says to Odysseus:! ‘It is Olympian Zeus himself 
who distributes prosperity to mankind, good or bad, to 
each one according as he wills’; and similarly it is Zeus 
who apportions to the Gods their wealth and honours.? 
Prometheus ὃ describes the first act of Zeus upon his accession 
in terms similar to Hesiod’s. “As soon as ever he had 
taken his seat upon his father’s throne, at once he dispensed 
to the deities their several privileges, and ordained the 
hierarchy of his kingdom.’ This dispensation involved, as 
we saw in Hesiod, the confirmation of old rights and honours 
which had formed the constitutional system of Kronos, and 
the supplementing of this system by the granting of new 
privileges to those deities who had previously had none. 
The word used for this act by Aeschylus is nemein, to ἡ dispense’ 
—the word from which Nomos, Law, is derived. Zeus was doing 
precisely the office of a lawgiver, nomothetes, one who ‘ establishes 
nomor.’ 

Lawgiving, to the Greek mind, was not the progressive occupa- 
tion of a deliberative assembly, but the work, done once for all, 
of a single person of extraordinary wisdom, a Solon or a Lycurgus. 
The nomor of a state are its written constitution—a thing 
sacrosanct, to be touched or altered only with the gravest 
precaution. It appears, too, that the act of lawgiving was 
especially conceived as a redistribution of provinces and powers, 
a fresh assignment of portions, whether of land or of political 
status. We may take, for instance, Dionysius’ description of 
Numa’s lawgiving at Rome. Quarrels had arisen among the 
patricians ‘about fairness and inequality’ (περὶ τοῦ πλείονος 

1 Od. vi. 188: 

Ζεὺς δ᾽ αὐτὸς νέμει ὄλβον ᾽Ολύμτπιος ἀνθρώποισι 
ἐσθλοῖς ἠδὲ κακοῖσιν, ὅπως ἐθέλῃσιν, ἑκάστῳ. 
® Hesiod, T'heog. 71: ὁ δ᾽ οὐρανῷ ἐμβασιλεύει 
αὐτὸς ἔχων βροντὴν ἠδ᾽ αἰθαλόεντα κεραυνόν, 
κάρτει νικήσας πατέρα Kpdvov’ εὖ δὲ ἕκαστα 
ἀθανάτοις διέταξεν ὁμῶς καὶ ἐπέφραδε τιμάς. 
885 : ὁ δὲ τοῖσιν ἑὰς διεδάσσατο τιμάς. 
δ᾽ Aesch, P.V. 244: 
ὅπως τάχιστα τὸν πατρῷον ἐς θρόνον 
καθέζετ᾽, εὐθὺς δαίμοσιν νέμει γέρα 
ἄλλοισιν ἄλλα καὶ διεστοιχίζετο 
ἀρχήν eae 


28 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


re καὶ ἴσον). Some of the plebeians were unsettled, ‘ having 
received no portion of land (γῆς μοῖραν) nor other advan- 
tages.’ Numa, by distributing (διανείμας) land to them, 
and giving a new status (τιμάς) to settlers, put an end to 
dissension.? 

Now, in this redistribution the Gods, quite as much as men, 
had their share. There was also an ‘ ordering of sacred things ’ 
(ἡ περὶ τὰ θεῖα διακόσμησις). Exactly as Zeus in Hesiod 
accepted the constitution of Kronos and only supplied its defici- 
encies, 80 we are told that Numa ‘ took over all the arrangements 
of Romulus in respect of customs and laws, and left them un- 
touched’; but he made good the omissions, “in many cases 
appointing precincts for those Gods who had not yet obtained a 
recognised position (τοῖς μήπω τιμῶν τυγχάνουσι θεοῖς); in 
other cases founding altars and temples, assigning (ἀπονέμων) 
to each his festival, and legislating (νομοθετῶν) about their 
services and honours (τιμάς).᾿ 3 

The parallel could not be more exact. If we are right in 
thinking that Moira ultimately meant the division of the universe 
into distinct provinces, it is clear that this division, as soon as it 
comes to be the work of a personal God, can be conceived as a 
nomothesia—a laying down or fixing of ποιοῖ; and that this 
process 18 simply a redistribution to Gods and men of their 
domains, privileges, and honours.* Like other such redistribu- 
tions, the lawgiving of Zeus for a long time wore the aspect of an 
act of usurpation. It was not soon forgotten that the cosmic 
order had not really been initiated by Zeus. Throughout the 
Eumenules of Aeschylus,’ until the final scene of reconciliation, 
rises the protest of the ancient Movraz against the younger Gods 
who have ‘ridden down the old Jaws,’ and taken from them 
their status and functions (τιμαί). They are only appeased 
when Athena promises them a new ‘seat’ and ‘ function,’ 


1 Dion. H. Ané. 1i. 62. 
2 Cf. also the language used by Plato in describing the division of the 
territory of the State in Laws, 745 8 ff. 
3 Cf. Ath. Pol. 11: ὁ μὲν yap δῆμος Gero πάντ᾽ ἀνάδαστα ποιήσειν αὐτόν (Σόλωνα). 
1.0.1. 181: ἰὼ θεοὶ νεώτεροι παλαιοὺς νόμους 
καθιππάσασθε---κἀκ χερῶν εἵλεσθέ μον. .. 
ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἄτιμος, κιτ.λ. 
καθιππάζεσθαι, ‘to overrun territory with horse’ (τὴν χώρην καθιππ., Herod. 
ix. 14), revives the old spatial sense of νόμος presently to be considered, 


DESTINY AND LAW 29 


and makes them ‘portioners in the land, with honours all 
entire.” 1 


13. Law as a Dispensation 


The connection of Nomos (Law) with the verb nemein, to 
‘ distribute ’ or ἡ dispense,’ was clearly felt by the Greeks. Take, 
for instance, the following passage in the pseudo-Platonic dialogue 
Minos, which discusses the notion of law (317 Ὁ) : 

“Who is it that Imows how to dispense (διανεῖμαι) the seed 
over the soil ? 

‘The farmer. 

‘And the farmer dispenses (διανέμει) to each soil the seed it 
deserves ἢ 

‘Yes. 

‘ The farmer, then, is a good dispenser (νομεύς) of these things, 
and for these matters his laws and dispensations (νόμοι καὶ 
διανομαί) are right.’ 

In this passage ‘laws’ and ‘dispensings’ are clearly synony- 
mous. We find the same conjunction in the Humenides. In one 
place * the Chorus accuse Apollo of ‘ abolishing ancient dispensa- 
tions’ (διανομάς), when he tricked the Movraz into releasing a 
mortal from death ; in another and parallel passage 3 the same 
God is accused of ‘ breaking the law (νόμον) of the Gods, by 
respecting the cause of man and abolishing the ancient apportion- 
ments (μοίρας). These passages show that the notion of 
dispensation * links together Moira and Nomos, with either of 

11. 891: ΑΘ. ἔξεστι γάρ σοι τῆσδε γαμόρῳ" χθονὸς 

εἶναι δικαίως ἐς τὸ way τιμωμένῃ. 
ΧΟ. ἀνασσ᾽ ᾿Αθάνα, τίνα με φὴς ἕξειν ἕδραν ; 
ΑΘ. πάσης ἀπήμον᾽ οἰζύος" δέχου δὲ σύ. 


ΧΟ. καὶ δὴ δέδεγμαι" τίς δέ μοι τιμὴ μένει; 
ΑΘ. ὡς μή τιν᾽ οἶκον εὐθενεῖν ἄνεν σέθεν. 


2 1, 730: σύ τοι παλαιὰς διαγομὰς καταφθίσας 
οἴνῳ παρηπάτησας ἀρχαίας θεάς. 
81.172: παρὰ νόμον θεῶν βρότεα μὲν τίων, 


παλαιγενεῖς δὲ μοίρας φθίσας. 
See W. Headlam on Agam., 1007; and cf. Joh. Diac., εἰς Ἡσιοδ. Θεογ. ἀλλη- 
γορίαι 886 ἕτι δὲ καὶ τὰς Μοίρας ἀπὸ τῆς Θέμιδος Ζεὺς γεννᾷ, παρόσον ἐν ταῖς 
θεμιστείαις διανομαί τινες καὶ μερισ μοὶ προσήκοντες γίνονται, Schol. ad Plat. 
Legg. 625 a, πολιτείας τῆς μιᾶς ζωῆς τῆς ὅλης πόλεως, νόμων δὲ τῶν διανεμόντων 
τὰ μέρη ἐξ ὧν ἡ πόλις. Aesch. Supp. 403, Ζεὺς γέμων ἄδικα μὲν κακοῖς, ὅσια 
δ᾽ évydmocs. 


re 


1 So Dobree ; Τήδεγ᾽ ἀμοίρου codd. ἕμμοιρον, ἐμμοίρῳ are also conjectured. 


90 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


which the word διανομή is synonymous. In Pindar,! again, the 
word nomos itself denotes the act of dispensing: Cheiron, the 
wise centaur, taught Asclepios ‘ the dispensing of medicines with 
gentle hand ᾿--φαρμάκων ἐδίδαξε μαλακόχειρα νόμον. 

Another derivative, νομεύς, which in the extract from the 
Minos means ‘ dispenser,’ is of course more commonly used of 
shepherds who take their flock to feed on their allotted pasture— 
their νομός or νομή, both of which substantives denote both 
“pasturage ’ or ‘ feeding-place ’ and secondarily ‘ dwelling-place,’ 
“ quarters.’ Perhaps the nearest equivalent is ‘ range.’ 3 

Hence the compound adjective ἔννομος, which later means 
“keeping within the law,’ ‘law-abiding,’ has the older sense of 
‘ quartered ’ or ‘ dwelling ’ in a country, which is, as it were, the 
legitimate range of its habitants. 

We have dwelt upon these details in order to bring out the 
fact that behind the familiar sense of Nomos, ‘ custom,’ ‘ use,’ 
‘law,’ lie traces of an older spatial significance—the notion of a 
range or province, within which defined powers may be legiti- 
mately exercised—what the Romans meant by a provncia.* 
This aspect of the idea has become obscured to us owing to the 
prevalence of the scientific notion of Law, which has become 
associated with causal sequences in time and has lost its old 
connection with space. For the understanding of the Greek 
word, it is necessary to grasp that Nomos does not suggest uni- 

.formity of temporal sequence, but exercise of power within 
spatial or departmental boundaries. We must think of Law as 
a dispensation or system of provinces, within which all the 
activities of a community are parcelled out and coordinated. 
The plural nomoz can mean a social order so constituted ; as when, 
for instance, Pindar ὃ speaks of the monstrous child of Ixion and 
the Cloud as ‘having no status among men, nor yet in the social 

' Nem. ini. δῦ. 

2 νομός is early used metaphorically : ‘ Wide is the range of words’ —éméwy 
πολὺς νομὸς ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα, Il. xx. 249; cf. Hesiod, Hrga, 403: ἀχρήιος δ᾽ ἔσται 
ἐπέων νομός. Procl. in Plat. Tim. 2] Ἑ, p. 800, ὁ μὲν νομὸς (Egyptian nome) 
ἀπὸ τοῦ νενεμῆσθαι τὴν γῆν. 

3 Aesch. Suppl. 565: βροτοὶ of γᾶς τότ᾽ ἦσαν ἔννομοι. Pind. P. ix. 69: 
ἵνα of χθονὸς αἷσαν . . . ἔννομον δωρήσεται. 

4ΟΥ J. L. Myres, ‘ Herodotus and Anthropology’ in Anthropology and the 


Classics (Oxford, 1908), p. 157. I owe much to this valuable essay, and 
especially to Professor Myres’ remarks on Φύσις and νόμο. 5 Pyth. ii. 43. 


DESTINY AND LAW 31 


order of the Gods ’—ovr’ ἐν ἀνδράσι γερασφύρον, οὔτ' ἐν θεῶν 
νόμοις. The portentous thing had no proper province in the 
divine or the human order: it was an ‘outlaw’ from the 
classified structure of Nature and of society. Or again when 
the same poet! speaks of the spirit of power of the infant 
Herakles, strangling the snakes in his cradle, the word he uses 
is ἐκνόμιος, where we should say ‘preternatural.’ The half- 
divine child outranged the normal sphere of an infant’s strength. 


14. Nemos and Nemesis 


With this conception clearly before us, we may find that it 
throws some light on two other cognates of Nomos and νέμειν : 
nemos and Nemesis. Nemos (the Latin nemus) is commonly 
translated by ‘grove’; but the word has no etymological 
connection with trees, and to account for it we must suppose 
that it did not at first mean simply a natural stretch of wood- 
land. There is reason to believe that a nemos was at first rather 
a sacred enclosure or clearing in a wood, perhaps a clearing 
round a sacred tree. 

Dr. Frazer,? dwelling on the practice of tree-worship by all 
the Aryan races of Europe, says: ‘ From an examination of the 
Teutonic words for “ temple ” Grimm has made it probable that 
amongst the Germans the oldest sanctuaries were natural woods. 
However this may be, tree-worship is well attested for all the 
great European families of the Aryan stock. Amongst the Celts 
the oak-worship of the Druids is familiar to every one, and 
their old word for sanctuary seems to be identical in origin and 
meaning with the Latin nemus, a grove or woodland glade, which 
still survives in the name of Nemi. . . . Proofs of the prevalence 
of tree-worship in ancient Greece and Italy are abundant.’ 

Varro, in his interesting discussion of the meaning of templum, 

1 Nem. i. 56. 

2 Golden Bough®, part. vol. ii. p. 8. Cf. Plin. Nat Hist. xii. 1: ‘Haec 
(1.6. trees) fuere numinum templs, priscoque ritu simplicia rura etiam nunc 
deo praecellentem arborem dicant, nec magis auro fulgentia atque ebore 
simulacra quam lucos et in iis silentia ipsa adoramus.’ Νηός (temple) has 
been derived from the same root (vaF-o) as vais (ship): both seem to have 
been hollow trees. Cf. O. Kern, ‘Zwe: Kultinschr. aus Klemasien’ in 


Beitr. z. Gesch. d. gr. Phil. ιν, Relig, p. 88. Berlin, 1895. 
3 Ling. Lat. vii. 6. 


, a 


32 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


brings out the fact that the two essentials of the augural templum 
are its fixed and oriented boundaries and the marking of these 
boundaries by trees. ‘A templum is a place whose limits are 
defined with a set formula for purposes of augury and auspices.’ 
He quotes the archaic formula for the templum in the Arz : 

Templa tescaque me (1.6. mt) ita sunto quoad ego caste lingua 
nuncupauero. 

Olla ueter arbos, quirquir est, quam me sentio dizisse, templum 
tescumque finito in sinistrum. 

Olla ueter arbos, quirquir est, quam me seniio diaisse, templum 
tescumque finito in dextrum. 

Inter ea conreguone, consprcione, cortumione, utque ea rectissime 
Senst. 

“In the making of this templum,’ Varro concludes, ‘ it is clear 
that trees are taken as its boundaries.’ The ancient word tesca, 
he tells us, is applied ‘to certain wild places which belong to 
some God.’ The augur also marked out with his official staff 
(ituus) a certain limited region of the sky, within which the 
desired sign was to appear.! In this augural templum, bounded 
by trees, we seem to have a survival of the sacred clearing 
In a grove, the ancient nemos sanctuary. It is a ‘range’ 
assigned for the peculiar working of a divine power.” 

What makes a place ‘sacred’? The presence in it of 8 
dangerous power which makes it, as the Greeks said, ‘not to 
be entered,’ ‘ not to be set foot on’ (ἄδυτον, ἄβατον) by the pro- 
fane—by persons, that is to say, who are not themselves sacred, 
sanctified, ceremonially brought into a state in which contact 
with the mysterious power is no longer dangerous. 

Now, one ancient title of the sacred presence inhabiting a 
grove or nemos is none other than Nemesis.2 Nemesis has 
commonly been held to be ἃ mere abstraction, ‘ Vengeance ’ 
or the Anger which avenges transgression. Mr. Cook, however, 
points out that her worship is not late (as we should expect with 

1 See the description of the augury taken to determine whether Numa 
should be king of Rome (Livy, 1. xviii. 6). 

2 Compare also Pindar’s description of Herakles founding Olympia (Οἱ. 
x. (xi.) 45). Herakles begins by ‘measuring out a grove’ (σταθμᾶτο ἄλσος 
and ‘staking it round’ (περιπάξαις ΓΑλτιν διέκρινε). 


3 I owe this interpretation of Nemesis entirely to Mr. A. B. Cook, who 
kindly allows me to anticipate its publication in his forthcoming Zeus. 


DESTINY AND LAW 3: 


a mere abstraction), but early, going back at least to the fifth 
and sixth centuries at Rhamnus and Smyrna. Further, hei 
attributes are not such as might be implements of vengeance. 
She is figured holding an apple-branch or an apple, and with 
miniature stags as ornaments in her hair. She is the Woodland 
Goddess, identical with Diana Nemorensis, Diana of the Woods. 
Her name Nemesis is derived from nemos, precisely as Lachesis 18 
derived from lachos (lot). 

How came the Woodland Goddess to be regarded as the 
abstraction ‘Avenging Anger’?! It is of course possible that 
the identity of the two names is a coincidence; that Nemesis 
meaning vengeance is derived from nemein by a different channel, 
and stands for ‘ retribution —the dispensing of penalties. But 
it seems not impossible that the Goddess of the Grove might 
wear this aspect. She was a Goddess of fertility, closely allied 
with Fortuna, the lady who ‘ bears,’ ‘ brings forth ’ (ferre, φέρειν) 
the fruits of the earth. But she who dispenses good things can 
withhold them, or dispense blights instead of blessings. The 
awful power which haunts the nemos may blast the profane 
invader of her sanctuary. In the far-off times, when a nemos was 
the typical sacred place, Nemesis might well have been the 
typical Avenger of trespass. In the same way figures of a fertility 
spirit, Priapus, were set up as boundary marks to scare tres- 
passers, And when the woodland enclosures fell into disuse, 
Nemesis might become the guardian of law, of nomos instead of 
nemos, losing all her ancient gift of fruitfulness—all but the apple- 
branch, which, in her character of Vengeance, she so inappropri- 
ately retains. 

It is perhaps something more than an odd coincidence that the 
great Roman lawgiver, Numa, before he gave his nomot, sought 
inspiration and counsel from the Goddess of the Woodland 
Nemus. And Rome herself, the centre from which law spread 
to the furthest bounds of Europe, had her beginning in a place 
of refuge which was nothing but a sacred grove, a woodland 
sanctuary for desperadoes and outlaws.? 


1 Mr. Cook is not responsible for the answer I suggest to this question. 

2 Livy, i. 8: ‘locum, qui nunc sceplus descendentibus inter duos lucos est, 
asylum aperit.’ Dion. H. Af. ii. 15: μεθόριον δυοῖν δρυμῶν. See Frazer, 
Totemiam, i. 96, and Golden Bough’, part 1. vol. in. p. 176. 

σ 


34 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Pindar, at any rate, does not forget that Nemesis, the Dis- 
penser, may give good things as well as harm. He ends the 
eighth Olympian! with a prayer for the victor’s family : ‘ that 
Zeus may make Nemesis not to be of two minds in the apportion- 
ment of blessings. Rather may he guide their life clear of harm, 
and give increase to them and to their city.’ The apportionment 
of blessings, the giving of increase, is the positive aspect of the 
dispensing power ; while its negative side is the vengeance which 
recoils upon trespass across its defined boundaries. Correspond- 
ing to these two aspects, Nomos and Moira, which, so long as 
we considered their purely spatial associations, seemed almost 
indistinguishable, tend to diverge. Moira, always static, a 
system rather than a force, leans toward the negative side: 
she limits and forbids. Nomos, on the contrary, is dynamic and 
inclines to the positive. Though implying the fixed limitation of 
a range or province, the word perhaps always meant also the 
normal behaviour prescribed and enjoined within a given province, 
and so custom. The word ethea seems to have a similar history. 
Its older sense is ‘ haunts,’ the country within which you range ; 
later it means ‘ customs, established behaviour, habits.’ Thus 
Moira stands for the limit of what you may do, and for what will 
happen if you exceed your limit.2 Nomos rather means what 
you must do withm your limits, the regular and rightful 
functions you must exercise or ‘ wield ’"—another sense of nemein, 
as in nemein kratos, ‘to wield authority,’ ‘to dispense power.’ 

But we may bear in mind that the positive and negative 
aspects are only the two sides of one power or force. The power 
which holds a certain field and is lawfully exercised within it 

1 Ol. viii. 86: εὔχομαι ἀμφὶ καλῶν μοίρᾳ Νέμεσιν διχόβουλον μὴ θέμεν" ἀλλ᾽ 
ἀπήμαντον ἄγων βίοτον αὐτούς τ᾽ ἀέξοι καὶ πόλιν. ἀπήμαντον, because πῆμα 18 
the more frequent gift of Νέμεσις : Hes. Theoy. 223. τίκτε δὲ καὶ Νέμεσιν, 
πῆμα θνητοῖσι βρότοισι. Cf. Theol. Arith. p. 32 (of Pythagoreans): Νέμεσιν 


καλοῦσι Thy πεντάδα" νέμει γοῦν προσηκόντως τά τε οὐράνια καὶ θεῖα καὶ φυσικὰ 
στοιχεῖα τοῖς πέντε. 

2 The old sense of ἦθος seems to survive in Empedocles, frag. 17, 1. 27, 
who says of the elements : 

ταῦτα yap lod τε πάντα καὶ ἥλικα γένναν ἔασι, 
τιμῆς δ᾽ ἄλλης ἄλλο μέδει, πάρα δ᾽ ἦθος ἑκάστῳ. 

* μοῖρα means ‘limit’ in Od. xix. 592 (one cannot always go without sleep), 
ἐπὶ γάρ τοι ἑκάστῳ μοῖραν ἔθηκαν ἀθάνατοι θνητοῖσι, and is almost equivalent to 
taboo in Hesiod, Erga, 144. 

μηδέ ror’ οἰνοχόην τιθέμεν κρητῆρος ὕπερθε 
πινόντων ὁλοὴ γὰρ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ μοῖρα τέτυκται. 


DESTINY AND LAW 35 


is also the power which recoils in anger upon an invading power 
from beyond its frontiers. 


15. The Dispensation of Reason in Plato 


This idea of a dispensation can be further illustrated from 
several ‘mythical’ passages in Plato which describe the con- 
stitutional order of divine government in the Golden Age of 
Kronos. In that age, according to the Stranger in the Politicus,! 
the revolution of the universe, under the guidance of God, went 
in the direction contrary to its present motion. ‘ All the parts 
of the ordered universe were divided amongst Gods appointed 
to rule over them, just as now Gods rule over various places. 
Moreover, living creatures according to their kinds were assigned 
to daemons, as it were flocks to divine shepherds (νομῆς), each 
daemon being sufficient in himself in all things for his own flock 
(οἷς αὐτὸς ἔνεμεν), so that there was then no savagery, no 
devouring of one another, no war nor strife of any sort among 
them.’ This last trait is taken from Hesiod ;? it marks the 
dominion of Justice in the Golden Age, with which the prevalence 
of injustice in our own Age of Iron is in melancholy contrast. 
For at the end of the Golden period, the Governor of the Universe 
let go the tiller and left the world to the reverse impulse of Fate 
and its own inborn desire. Then ‘all the Gods who in their 
several places had ruled together with the highest God, perceiving 
what was happening, in their turn left their divisions of the 
world-order without oversight.’ 3 

In the above passage the division of living creatures according 


1271 ἢ: ws νῦν κατὰ τόπους, ταὐτὸν τοῦτο ὑπὸ θεῶν ἀρχόντων πάντῃ τὰ τοῦ 
κόσμον μέρη διειλημμένα. καὶ δὴ καὶ τὰ ζῶα κατὰ γένη καὶ ἀγέλας οἷον νομῆς θεῖοι 
διειλήφεσαν δαίμονες, αὐταρκὴς εἰς πάντα ἕκαστος ἑκάστοις ὧν οἷς αὐτὸς ἔνεμεν, 
ὥστ᾽ οὔτ᾽ ἄγριον ἦν οὐδὲν οὔτε ἀλλήλων ἐδωδαί, πόλεμός τ᾽ οὐκ ἐνὴν οὐδὲ στάσις τὸ 
παράπαν. 

3 Krga, 2926: τόνδε γὰρ ἀνθρώποισι νόμον διέταξε Κρονίων, 

ἰχθύσι μὲν καὶ θηρσὶ καὶ οἰωνοῖς πετεηνοῖς 
ἐσθέμεν ἀλλήλους, ἐπεὶ οὐ δίκη ἐστὶν ἐν αὐτοῖς" 
ἀνθρώποισι δ᾽ ἔδωκε δίκην . .. 

Compare also Empedocles’ Reign of Love, below, p. 236. 

* Pol. 272 x. For Nemesis and the Daemons see Ps.-Timaens, π. ψυχᾶς 
κόσμω 104 Ε: ἅπαντα δὲ ταῦτα (about the soul-wandering) ἐν δευτέρᾳ περιόδῳ 
ἁ Νέμεσις συνδιέκρινε σὺν δαίμοσι παλαμναίοις χθονίοις τε, τοῖς ἐπόπταις τῶν 
ἀνθρωπίνων, οἷς ὁ πάντων ἁγεμὼν θεὸς ἐπέτρεψε διοίκησιν κόσμω. . .. 


36 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


to their natural kinds—that ‘original boundary (ὅρος) and law 
by which Zeus distinguished their several natures and set each 
kind apart ’ 1—is compared to the local distribution among the 
Gods of their several seats of worship. In the Kritias,® again, it 
is declared that the Gods divided among them the whole earth, 
place by place, not as the result of strife, but peacefully by draw- 
ing ‘the lotsof Justice ’ (δίκης κλήροις λαγχάνοντες); and making 
themselves at home in their several countries, ‘as shepherds 
(νομῆς) over their flocks, they fostered us, their creatures and 
nurslings,’ ruling us not by violence, but by persuasive reason. 
Our duty in this present age is to restore this ‘ dispensation of 
Reason’ (νοῦ διανομή), to which we shall give the name of ‘ Law’ 
(Νόμος). 

Thus, in his ‘mythical’ manner, Plato amplifies and re- 
interprets the famous doctrine of Anaxagoras: ‘ All things were 
confounded together, when Reason came and introduced distinc- 
tion and order.’ Reason takes the place of Zeus, as Zeus had 
taken the place of Moira. But the function of the supreme power 
remains the same—to ‘ introduce distinction and order,’ to effect 
ἃ diakosmesis—the very word that Dionysius, in his description 
above cited (p. 27) of the legislation of Numa, uses to denote 
the re-ordering of the cults of the Gods, the redistribution of 
precincts and seats of worship. 

What is interesting to note here is that philosophy seems to 
repeat, in its own way, the two stages we traced in pre-scientific, 
religious representation. Just as there we found the will of a 
personal God superseding Movra, and claiming to ordain by a 
legislative act what had before been simply the recognised fact 
of classified structure in the universe, so in philosophy the creative 
Mind makes a tardy appearance and claims to have designed a 
system which for Anaximander was produced by motion. 

The process itself, however, throughout all these stages 
remains in essence the same. It is a process of apportionment 
(μοῖρα), distinction (διάκρισις), dispensation (διανομή), lawgiving 
(νομοθεσία), ordering (διακόσμησις). The personal God of 


1 Plut. Mor. 964 p=Porph. de abet. i. 6, p. 88: οὐδὲ φάρμακον οὐδὲ ἴαμα τῆς 
4 τὸν βίον ἀναιρούσης ἀπορίας ἢ τὴν δικαιοσύνην ἔχομεν, ἂν μὴ τὸν ἀρχαῖον νόμον 
καὶ ὅρον φυλάττωμεν, ῳ καθ' ᾿Ησίοδον (loc. cit. eupra) ὁ Ζεὺς τὰς φύσεις διελὼν καὶ 
θέμενος ἰδίᾳ τῶν γενῶν ἑκάτερον “ἰχθύσι μέν, κ-τ.λ. 271094 ff. 

3 Laws, 713 Ὁ: τὴν τοῦ Not διανομὴν ἐπονομάζοντας Νόμον. 


DESTINY AND LAW 37 


religion and the impersonal Reason of philosophy merely re- 
enact as ‘dispensers (Νομῆς) that old arrangement called Mowa 
which, as we saw, was really older than the Gods themselves, 
and free from any implication of design or purpose. 


16. The primitive religious representation in Greek 
polytheism 


The main upshot of the foregoing analysis is that in Greek 
polytheism the departmental division of the world, vaguely 
represented as Moira, was the ultimate and primary fact—a 
scheme or order whose provinces were first occupied by impersonal 
powers, which later took the shape and attributes of individual 
personality. We may now observe that this view agrees with 
what the Greeks themselves believed about the development of 
their own religion. 

Herodotus ! learnt at Dodona that the Pelasgians worshipped 
nameless gods, whom they called simply theoz, because ‘ they had 
set all things in order (κόσμῳ θέντες), and all dispensations 
(νομάς) were in their hands.’ 

“It was only yesterday, so to speak, that they learnt of what 
parentage was each God, or whether they were all from everlasting, 
and what they were like in figure.? For, in my opinion, Homer 
and Hesiod lived not more than four hundred years before my 
time ; and it was they who composed a theogony for the Hellenes, 
gave the Gods their titles, apportioned to them their functions 
and arts, and made clear their figures,’ 

This is a very valuable piece of religious history. Behind the 
clear-cut and highly differentiated personalities of the Olympians, 
it shows us older figures far less distinct and hardly personal. 

The proper term for them in Greek is not theos, but daemon. 
Theos always suggests individuality, whereas these daemons had 
as yet no ‘ figures, and no peculiar functions or arts which 
differentiated one of them from another. We must give up the 


1 ii, 52. For the association of κοσμεῖν and νέμειν, cf. Plato, Protag. 3200: 
The Gods ordered Prometheus and Epimetheus κοσμῆσαι τε καὶ νεῖμαι δυνάμεις 
ἑκάστοις ws πρέτει ; and the rest of that myth. 

ὃ εἴδεα. For the meaning of εἶδος, see A. Εἰ. Taylor, Varia Socratica, 
i. 184 (Oxford, 1911), who shows that the word in ourrent usage means 
‘bodily form’ or physique. 


38 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


view, associated by Herodotus with his wrong derivation of 
theos, that these daemons ‘ set the universe in order.’ They were 
not cosmic powers, but local spirits, good spirits (aya0oi δαίμονες), 
each rooted to the portion of earth inhabited and cultivated by 
his worshippers. This was his motra, and within it all dispensa- 
tions (voyac) were in his hands. He was the sole guardian and 
saviour (φύλαξ, σωτήρ) of his people in war, and he also and above 
all gave them the fruits of earth in times of peace. These local 
spirits of fertility simply consisted of their functions; that was 
all there was of them. Beyond that they had no personality ; 
and they were only individuals in the sense that the power 
residing in one moira of earth was numerically different from the 
power residing in another.? 

We have had before us more than once two variant notions of 
the dasmos : first, the division of the elemental provinces among 
the three sons of Kronos ; second, the distribution of the surface 
of the earth into separate seats of worship. It is now apparent 
that the cosmic dasmos belongs to an advanced stage of Olympian 
theology. Not only is it based on a doctrine of the elements, 
but the Gods who take part in the division are known to have 
had local histories before they were generally recognised as cosmic 
powers. The old daemons of the type called Pelasgian by 
Herodotus can have no place in the elemental dasmos ; but they 
do fit into the other notion of a dasmos of earth into seats of 
local worship. The natural inference is that the cosmic dasmos 
is modelled upon this older one—adapted from it when a pan- 
hellenic theology was put together by the gathering of many 
local divinities to a common Olympus. We may therefore look 
back to the old dasmos of earth among these local spirits of 
earth’s fertility as the earlier conception. It gives us the 
framework of primitive religious representation in Greek poly- 
theism or polydaemonism. This is a system of departments 
(mowrar) clearly marked off from one another by boundaries of 
inviolable taboo, and each the seat of a potency which pervades 
that department, dispenses tis power within wt, and resists 

encroachment from without. 


1 The origin and nature of these local daemons, some of whom become 
personal Gods and acquire elemental provinces, will be further discussed 
in chap. iii, See also J. E. Harrison, Themis, chap. ix, From Daimon to 
Olympian. 


DESTINY AND LAW 39 


We find, in fact, that the basis and framework of Greek 
polytheism is an older form of that very order of Destiny and 
Justice which is reaffirmed by nascent science in the cosmology 
of Anaximander. Out of the provinces of that dispensation, 
the personal powers which had taken shape within them have 
disappeared again. The Gods have faded, and we are left with 
the elements from which Hesiod tells us that the Gods arose. 
Seen against the background of the destined order, the life of the 
Gods from first to last shows up as a mere episode. Nature— 
the living and self-moving stuff of all things that exist—and the 
primary forms in which her upspringing life is confined by the 
appointment of Destiny and Justice—these are older than the 
Gods and they outlast them. The course of philosophy starts 
from the same point from which, centuries earlier, religion took 
its departure on the way that led to the last and fatal ab- 
surdities of complete anthropomorphism. The history of this 
episode, called Olympian religion, we shall try to trace in the 
third chapter. Meanwhile, what we have called the primitive 
religious representation, to which our analysis has led us back, 
still remains to be accounted for. Our task in the next chapter 
will be to trace its yet remoter origin. 


Il 
THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 
17. How did the representation of Moira arise ? 


Our inquiry in the last chapter led us from an apparently 
paradoxical statement of the first systematic cosmologist, 
through an analysis of Destiny and Law, to the conclusion that 
for Greek religious representation, no less than for early philo- 
sophy, the most significant truth about the universe is that it is 
portioned out into a general scheme of allotted provinces or 
spheres of power. The elements came into possession of their 
fixed regions when the first limits were set up by the eternal 
motion within the primary undifferentiated mass, called by 
Anaximander ‘the limitless thing.’ The Gods had their pro- 
vinces by the impersonal appointment of Lachesis or Moura. 
The world, in fact, was from very early times regarded as the 
kingdom of Destiny and (in the sense we have defined) of Law. 
Necessity and Justice— must ’ and ‘ought "—meet together in 
this primary notion of Order—a notion which to Greek religious 
representation is ultimate and unexplained. 

Yet, if we reflect upon it, we shall see that some explanation is 
called for. Why was it that, in Greek theology, cosmogony, and 
philosophy alike, the primacy of Movra is so strikingly empha- 
sised ? The departmental distribution of the four elements, 
the segregation of pairs of ‘ contraries,’ hot and cold, wet and 
dry—these are not features of the universe which could instantly 
present themselves to innocent speculation as obviously the 
important guiding threads in the bewildering maze of sense-data. 
And if we accept the results of the last chapter and admit 
that such general conceptions are taken by philosophers from 
pre-scientific thought, we have only pushed the problem back 
one stage. If the departmental ordering of the elements is 
only the physical transcript of the departmental ordering of the 

“0 


THE, ORIGIN OF MOIRA 41 


divine powers by Moira, how did that representation itself 
arise ? No more than the cosmological application of it, is it 
a matter of simple common-sense, which would occur to any 
man who sat down, in presence of Nature, to invent a religion. 

The question that now confronts us is whether we can trace 
the notion back to a yet earlier stage. Hitherto we have been 
guided by survivals in Greek thought and linguistic usage, 
which gave us a sufficient basis for reconstruction. But at this 
point we must either fold our hands and rest content, like the 
Greeks themselves, in the contemplation of Movra as ἃ final and 
inexplicable fact, or we must have recourse to our knowledge of 
other religious systems of a type indisputably more primitive 
than any recorded for us in Greek sources. We must boldly 
enter the domain of hypothesis, taking for our guide the com- 
parative method. 


18. The change from Religion to Philosophy 


How does the cosmology of Anaximander differ from the 
cosmology of Homer or of Hesiod? We have seen that the 
philosopher and the poets have the same fundamental scheme in 
common. Why do we call Anaximander’s treatment philosophic 
or scientific, and Hesiod’s religious or mythical ? 

One obvious difference is that Anaximander has expurgated 
the supernatural, with a boldness and completeness to which 
many of his successors failed to attain. To be more precise, he 
has expurgated those features and factors, the supernatural or 
mythical character of which he was able to detect. He has 
eliminated Zeus and his fellow Olympians, and in so doing has 
struck out of his scheme of things the objects on which the 
religious consciousness of his time was, whether in name or reality, 
focussed. The effect, as we have seen, is that he restores the 
more ancient reign of Moira. The primary order is still said 
to be ‘ according to what is ordained ’ ; it is still a moral order 
in which Justice prevails; but the will of the personal God has 
disappeared, and its place is partly taken by a natural cause, 
the eternal motion. We seem to have left the supernatural 
behind and to have passed at one step into the shining air of 
reason. 


42 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


The Milesian School strikes a new note, unheard before. It 
has a fresh sense of the meaning of truth—a feeling for what 
might or might not be literally and prosaically true, and for the 
sort of thing it is reasonable to suppose. The hypothesis it 
characteristically deals in is concerned with the nature of the 
one primary stuff; and although we may be able to see that 
about this entity there still clung much that was of mythical 
origin, the Milesians seem to make a great conscious effort to 
get at something which really does exist. They strike us as 
throwing off the vast symbolic visions of mythology, and 
waking, clear-headed, to see and touch real things. If we have 
a rational temperament, we feel at once a refreshment. Here at 
last is a statement about the world which is meant and offered as 
true—a logos, not a mythos. 

It is perhaps the sudden pleasantness of this change of air that 
has caused us to draw too hard a line between religion and 
philosophy, and either to overlook the persistence of funda- 
mental conceptions, or to follow the matter-of-fact Peripatetic 
tradition and wave them aside as poetical metaphors.! We 
may easily attach more importance than it deserves to the dis- 
appearance of the Olympians from the framework of the world, 
and suppose that, when they went, they took with them the whole 
element of the mythical or supernatural. That is by no means 
true. Homer's Gods had drifted so far out of touch with Nature 
and with the demands of human morality that any man of 
intellect like Anaximander could run a pen through them and 
leave the world and the heart of man none the poorer. They 
had grown so personal and individual and human that nothing 
but a wide freedom of allegorical interpretation could keep the 
old idols on their bases. But when the Gods were eliminated, 
a moral or sacred character still clung to the framework of the 
world itself, that system of provinces within which the Gods had 
sprung up and developed, till they were overblown and died. 
The stuff of the world, the physis portioned out into those 
provinces, was also, as we shall see, a conception of mythical 


1 Cf. Simpl. Phys. 24, 13, who, after quoting Anaximander’s sentence 
about ‘paying the penalty for injustice,’ adds: ποιητικωτέροις οὕτως ὀνόμασιν 
αὐτὰ λέγων. Similarly, Aristotle dismisses Plato’s technical terms παράδειγμα 
and μετέχειν 88 ‘poetical metaphors’ (Met. a 9) instead of trying to under- 
stand them. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 43 


origin. In other words, when Anaximander thought he was 
getting to close quarters with Nature, this Nature was not 
simply the outer world presented to us through our senses, but a 
representation of the world-order, actually more primitive than 
the Gods themselves. This representation was, moreover, of a 
religious character; it was taken over by philosophy from 
religion, not independently deduced from observation of the 
world and its natural processes. 


19, The moral order of the world as a collective 
representation 


It would, perhaps, be generally assumed that to think of the 
world as moral through and through, as a kingdom of Justice, 
belongs to a late period of reflection. The assumption hangs 
together with that picture we drew at the outset, of the individual 
philosopher examining his inner and outer experience and 
drawing well-considered deductions from what he observed. 
It would be long indeed before anything presented to his un- 
biassed perceptions would lead him to suppose that Nature had 
any respect whatever for moral standards. Wherever and 
whenever a professed man of science upholds such an opinion, 
we may be certain that he is not formulating a description of 
observed facts, but turning his knowledge to the defence of a 
belief Which he has learnt, not direct from Nature, but at his 
mother’ s knee; in other words, a collective representation. And 
this particular representation is not the outcome of long ac- 
cumulated results of science and philosophy. On the contrary, 
the further back we trace it, the more firmly planted it appears ; 
and the daily contradiction of all experience has not yet up- 
rooted it from the popular mind. 


20. The nature of collective representations 


The term ‘ collective representation ’ has been made familiar 
to us by the modern French school of sociologists. It is roughly 
defined by one of them as follows : 

᾿ Representations called collective can be recognised by the 


Δ, Lévy-Bruhl, Fonctions mentales dans les sociéiés inférieures, 1910, p. 1. 


44 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


following marks: they are common to the members of a given 
social group, within which they are transmitted from generation 
to generation; they are imposed upon the individuals, and 
awaken in them, as the case may be, feelings of respect, fear, 
adoration, etc., towards their objects. They do not depend for 
their existence upon the individual; not that they imply a 
collective subject distinct from the individuals composing the 
social group, but in that they present themselves mith characters 
which cannot be accounted for merely by considering the in- 
dividuals as such. It is thus that a language, although, properly 
speaking, it exists only im the minds of the mdividuals who 
speak it, is none the less indubitably a social thing, founded on a 
mass of collective representations. It 1mposes itself on each of 
the individuals ; it exists before each of them and survives him. 

But, it may be objected, are we not here denying what we 
before admitted—that peculiar liberty of Greek thought from 
dogmatic imposition, which made posable the free development 
of ancient speculation? To meet this objection and define our 
meaning, we must make the notion of a collective representation, 
in so far as it concerns our subject, more precise. 

We do not mean that the Greek philosopher, at any rate in 
Tonia, was compelled by society to profess his belief that Zeus 
sat on a throne somewhere in the skv and controlled the course 
of natural events; or that he was liable to be burnt alive if he 
publicly denied that the sun goes round the earth. Such 
persecution, though not unknown in the pre-Chnistian world, 
was in the main characteristic of later ages and of religions 
which claimed to be universal. It was possible for a Greek to 
dispense with the supernatural, and even openly to attack the 
morality and the existence of the Gods of popular belief. Xeno- 
phanes of Kolophon, who criticised Homenc theology with 
unsparing plainness, hved to a good old age. The philosopher 
was not in this sense trammelled by dogma , and when we speak 
of collective representation, it 1s not dogma—a formulated creed 
or collection of final truths about the world and its governance— 
that we mean. 

But, when we have eliminated all such formulas and creeds 
and put aside the supernatural, there remains embedded in 
the very substance of all our thoughts about the world and 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 45 


about ourselves an inalienable and ineradicable framework 
of conception, which is not of our own making, but given to 
us ready-made by society—a whole apparatus of concepts 
and categories, within which and by means of which all our 
individual thinking, however original and daring, is com- 
pelled to move. This common inherited scheme of conception, 
which is all around us and comes to us as naturally and un- 
objectionably as our native air, is none the less imposed upon us 
and limits our intellectual movements in countless ways—all 
the more surely and irresistibly because, being inherent in the 
very language we must use to express the simplest meaning, it 
is adopted and assimilated before we can so much as begin to 
think for ourselves at all. This mass of collective representation 
is, of course, constantly undergoing gradual change, largely due 
to the critical efforts of individual thinkers, who from time to 
time succeed in introducing profound modifications. It is 
different for every age in history, for every well-marked group 
in the intellectual chart of mankind, and even within such 
groups, in a minor degree, for every nationality. Hence the 
error of supposing that human nature is much the same at all 
times, and that, since non-human nature 18 much the same too, 
the Greek philosopher of the sixth century B.c., studying his 
inner and outer experience, was confronted with the same 
problems seen in the same light as the English philosopher of 
to-day. The difference—the immense difference—between the 
two lies in their seygral inheritances of collective representation. 
It is a difference that comes home to any one who has to ‘ trans- 
late’ (as it is called) from Greek into English. He will soon 
discover that, when once we go beyond the names of objects like 
tables or trees and of simple actions such as running or eating, 
no Greek word has an exact equivalent in English, no important. 
abstract conception covers the same area or carries with it the 
same atmosphere of association. Translation from one language 
to another is impossible, 1 from an ancient to ἃ a modern language 
grotesquely ‘impossible, because of these 86 profound differences 
Qf collective representation, Which no ‘translation ” will ever 
ee _- 

~ Tt will now be clear in what sense Anaximander’s cosmological 
scheme may be said to embody a religious representation. We 


{ 46 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


do not mean that it is any longer obligatory 1—imposed as a 

matter of faith, either by society upon the philosopher, or by 

the philosopher upon his readers. But the representation itself 

is unchanged and still bears the marks of its collective origin ; 

the only difference is that for Hesiod it had been a matter of 
faith, while for Anaximander it is a theory. 


ἕ 


21. How collective representations are imposed 


But when we have classed the belief in Movra under the head 
of collective representation, the question still remains open : 
how did humanity first come by this particular belief? If it is 
not deduced by experience and observation, what is its origin ? 
The notion of a universal order in all Nature is strikingly general 
and abstract. Still more inexplicable, at first sight, seems the 
moral or sacred character attributed to this order. Let us first 
consider what we mean when we speak of it as ‘moral’ or 
‘ sacred.’ 

In primitive societies, as we shall presently see, the nature 
and order of the world, or certain specially important features 
of this order, are a mystery, in the sense of a received doctrine, 
revealed in many cases at the critical moment of adolescence, 
when the mind is most plastic and impressionable. The rites of 
initiation are of a terrifying character, often including protracted 
torture. They are well calculated to effect their object, which is 
to enforce these socially important representations with the 
strongest emotional colour and power. They are not to be pale 
intellectual opinions, at the option of the individual to take or 
leave upon his own estimate of their probability ; they are to be 
objects of indefeasible faith, charged with awful and tremendous 
feelings, fraught with associations of the most terrific experiences? 
If ‘morality touched with emotion ’ is a bad definition of religion, 
‘ custom touched with emotion ’ is a good definition of morality ; 


1 Obligatoriness is taken by Durkheim (‘ Définition des phénoménes re- 
ligieux,’ Année Sociol. ii. p. 1 ff.) as the essential characteristic of religious 
representations; and he points out that it is a sign of collective origin, since 
the group is the only moral power superior to the individual, aud capable 
of imposing beliefs and communicating to them that mysterious or ‘sacred’ 
character which marks the articles of religious faith. 

3. See Lévy-Bruhl, Les fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures, p. 29. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 47 


and in primitive initiation ceremonies the confirmatory touch of 
emotion is laid on with no light hand. 

But the terrors and tortures of initiation are only an occasional 
and specially lively enforcement of a power which pervades with 
permanent and imperceptible dominance any social group of 
mankind, This is the power now recognised by psychologists 
under the name of ‘ herd-suggestion.’ Until quite recently this 
factor of human psychology has been almost overlooked by 
students of the history of religion; yet it has had more to do 
with the making of religious dogma than anything else. We 
only begin to understand the meaning and origin of religious 
belief and of morality, when we give up the fallacy of supposing 
that these great fabrics are the work of autonomous individual 
intellects, facing the facts of nature and constructing quasi- 
rational hypotheses to account for them. This fallacy is by no. 
means yet abandoned ; even the scientific anthropologist some- 
times relapses into the assumption that his own attitude in the 
study of religion is the attitude of the social groups in whose 
consciousness religion took shape. We still are apt to take at 
least half seriously the ‘savage philosopher,’ imagined as pro- 
pounding hypotheses in much the same spirit as a Newton— 
hypotheses which have the misfortune to be absurd only because 
they are based on incorrect observation. This conception of the 
noble savage is excusable in Rousseau, because at the end of the 
eighteenth century no one had cared to inquire what savages 
were really like; but it must be abandoned now. Religious 
beliefs are not the clever inventions of individual minds, but 
imposed upon the individual from without. Or, to speak more 
strictly, we must for these purposes give up thinking of the 
individual as having any separate existence over against society, 
and rather conceive him as completely immersed in one continu- 
ous social mentality. " 

It is true, of course, that every human being, in respect of ἃ 
certain part of his mental life, exists in a world that is exclusively 
his own—a world of inner and outer sensation, and of move- 
ments directly connected with these states of the organism. 
This is the ‘ primary and inalienable basis of all individuality ’ 
and is independent of the state of society.1 But, for all that lies 


1 See Durkheim, Sur la division du travaid social’, p. 175. 


48 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


beyond the sphere of simple physical necessities on the plane 
of representations of a higher kind, the primitive consciousness 
seems to possess no individuality. Where the civilised man has 
private and original opinions, beliefs, and inspirations, the 
savage has no self-assertive individuality, no consciousness of 
himself in distinction from his group. To this higher plane, 
moreover, belongs the whole sphere of religion and morality. 
In respect of these, the savage has no independent beliefs—no 
faith or practice that are not also and equally shared by every 
other member of his group. Hence it is not even strictly correct 
to say that these beliefs and practices are ‘imposed ’ upon the 
individual. That is how it now seems to us, among whom at 
last individuality is beginning to lift its head and to be allowed 
a very restricted field of toleration. But it is not so with the 
savage, who in respect of this field of mentality can more truly 
be said not to exist as an individual at all. The social group is 
the compact unit ; it can no more be said to consist of individuals 
than the wine in a bottle can be said to consist of distinct drops. 
Religious and moral beliefs might be compared to the colour of 
this wine, pervading every part of it in continuous distribution. 
There is no question of this or that drop of wine holding out 
against the infusion, and having the colour forced upon it by 
other drops who have previously submitted. The liquid behaves 
as ἃ continuous and undivided whole: so also does the social 
group.! 

Further, we should be deluded indeed, if we fancied that we 
ourselves are in this respect very different from the savage. 
A host of notorious facts would spring up to refute us. Why is 
it that the religions of the world are geographically and socially 
distributed, so that you can poit to one area in which the 
enormous majority are Buddhists, to another in which they are 
Christians, to a third in which they are Mohammedans, and 80 


1 Cf. Durkheim, Sur la div. du trav. soc.*, p. 180: ‘Si lon a cru parfois 
que la contrainte avait été plus grande autrefois qu’aujourd’hu, c’est en 
vertu de cette illusion qui a fait attribuer 4 un régime coercitif la petite 
place faite 4 la liberté individuelle dans les sociétés inférieures. En réalité, 
la vie sociale, partout ot elle est normale, est spontanée; et si elle est 
anormale, elle ne peut pas durer. C'est spontanément que l’individu ab- 
dique ; et méme il n’est pas juste de parler d’abdication 1a oi 11 n'y a rien 
ἃ abdiquer.’ 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 49 


on? No one can suppose that in any one of these areas, by 
some miraculous dispensation, each individual has been led by an 
independent process of 7 ac accept the truth of the religion 
which happens to prevafl. Religions and moralities are epi- 
demic now as they have always been. They are transmitted 
contagiously by herd-suggestion, and each tends to spread over 
88 Wide an area as is covered by a type of mentality homogeneous 
enough to absorb that particular mode of belief. Hellenised 
Rome was easily converted to Hellenised Christianity ; easy too 
was the diffusion of the same religious system over Romanised © 
Europe. Anglicanism makes some advances in Anglicised India. 
But missionaries best know the obstacles which stand in their 
way, when they have to deal with a comparatively untouched 
civilisation, like the Chinese. Buddhism, on the other hand, 
was readily absorbed in China, because its ruling conception of 
Dharma (the order of the world and of morality) was practically 
identical with the Chinese Zao, and the same consciousness 
that was satisfied with the one conception assimilated the other 
without a struggle.? 

In our own country, perhaps the freest in the world, the heretic 
and the innovator in morals are no longer burnt at the stake ; 
but, like the Christian missionary in China, they alone are 
conscious of the full weight of that collective feeling which 
sanctions the creeds, and enforces the morality, of the herd. 
But even the orthodox, who is so immersed in the collective 
mind that he is no more aware of its pressure than a fish is 
aware of the pressure of the water im which it floats, can yet 
form some idea of what we mean, if he will attend for a moment 
to what he experiences in the presence of something he regards 
as ‘sacred ‘—let us say, a king at his coronation in Westminster 
Abbey. Or, let him isolate from all rational considerations the 
emotional element in his state of mind, when he contemplates 
committing some gross breach of social custom, which he person- 
ally does not consider to be bad or harmful. He will then be 
able to detect in himself the emotional charge communicated to 
ἃ collective representation by intense feeling diffused throughout 


1 De Groot, Religion of the Chinese, 1910, p. 2: ‘Buddhism eradicated 
nothing ; the religion of the Crescent is only at the beginning of its work ; 
that of the Cross has hardly pasted the threshold of China.’ See also p. 165. 

D 


50 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


his herd. Finally, let him imagine his emotion intensified a 
hundredfold and quite freed from rational control, and he will 
be in the way to understand the same force of suggestion in a 
primitive group, undisturbed by heresy and individualism. 
Now, it is precisely this emotional charge that makes a belief 
or 8 custom religious or moral. It is the fading out of it that 
marks the transition from faith to speculative opinion—from 
religion and morals to science and ethics. We have already 
noted, in another context, the refreshing effect of this change of 
atmosphere, which comes with the Milesian School. A repre- 
sentation of the world-order which had once been a mystery, 
fraught, in its earlier days, with awful emotion and serious 
practical consequences, is now put forward as a rational theory, 
which any one who can understand it is free to take or leave. 
In that sense, this representation has ceased to be religious, and 
become scientific: it is no longer imposed as a matter of faith, 
but offered for intellectual acceptance. On the other hand, the 
representation itseli—the view of the world so recommended—is 
still, through and through, a moral representation, in the sense that 
8 moral or sacred character is ascribed to the world-order itself. 


22, The order of Nature ‘ sacred,’ because once continuous 
with human society 


So, once more, we come back into presence of our problem, 
having learnt by the way something of what “ moral ’ or ἡ sacred ’ 
means. We are still faced by the question: How did it come 
about, in the first instance, that the disposition of the cosmos 
and of its parts was charged with those tremendous emotions 
which enforce human custom or morality ? How did it come to 
be a religious or moral representation at all ? 

We think we understand why positive laws of conduct are still 
enforced by those emotions. If we were called upon to defend 
them, we should urge that, in the main, they correspond to 
practical interests at all times important for the existence or 
wellbeing of socialised humanity. But why should the same 

1T do not imply that I think this account true. I accept Durkheim’s 
view : ‘Le seul caractére commun a tous les crimes, c’est qu’ils consistent 


- en des actes universellement réprouvés par les membres de chaque 
société’ (Sur la div. du trav. soc.*, p. 39). 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA δ] 


emotional sanction ever have become attached to beliefs about 
the order and structure of non-human nature; and this so 
firmly that, even when religion had decayed, it was long before 
science could vindicate them for her own domain, in which no 
belief is sacred, and all emotion, save curiosity, is out of place ? 

When the question is thrown into this shape, the answer lies 
near at hand. It is this: 


Moira came to be supreme in Nature over all the subordinate 
wills of men and Gods, because she was first supreme in human 
society, which was continuous with Nature. Here, too, we find 
the ultimate reason why Destiny is moral : she defines the limits 
of mores, of social custom. 


This continuity of the order of Nature with the grouping of 
society, foreign as it is to our modern ways of thinking, is 
abundantly evidenced from various parts of the world, where 
we shall find that the socia] structure is used as a framework, 
into which all classes of natural phenomena are fitted. 


23. Classification based on tribal structure 


Among the Zuiis, a totemistic tribe of North American Indians, 
we are told 1 that all natural objects, and even abstractions, are 
classified in one solid system, the parts of which are coordinated 
according to degrees of kinship. The principle, moreover, of 
this classification 18 the seven regions of space—north, south, 
east, west, zenith, nadir, and centre. To one or other of these 
seven regions everything in the universe falls. Hach region, too, 
has a certain colour, the centre having all colours at once.2 The 
social structure corresponds: three clans of the tribe are assigned 
to each region, except the centre, which has but one? The 


1 Durkheim et Mauss, ‘Classifications primitives,’ Ann. Sociol. vi. p. 34. 
Most of my evidence and, to a large extent, the theory based on it are taken 
from this essay. 

® Similarly colours are attributed to the zones by Eratosthenes, ap. Ach. 
Tat. and Heracl. Pont., quoted by Conington on Verg. Georg. i. 233: πέντε 
δέ οἱ ζῶναι περιειλάδες ἐσπείρηντο, al δύο μὲν γλανκοῖο κελαινοτέραι xvdvaco, 
ἡ δὲ μία ψαφαρή τε καὶ ἐκ πυρὸς οἷον ἐρυθρή. . .. 

δ᾽ See aleo Lévy-Bruhl, Les fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures, 
p. 33: ‘Les régions de l’espace, les directions (points cardinaux) ont leur 


δ2 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


two classifications are the same, in the sense that everything 
belongs to some ‘ oriented clan,’ though it is possible that the 
orientation comes later, and is superimposed on an original clan 
division. There are traces of an older scheme, with six regions ; 
and an older still, with only four—the cardinal points. To this 
fourfold classification is traced the belief, held by the Zuiis, 
that there are four elements, belonging to the four regions. 

It is held that orientation begins with the division of the 
round tribal camp into quarters, occupied by groups of clans, 
Among another tribe, the Ponkas of the Sioux Indians, we find 
the camp divided into two phratries and four quarters, and 
these quarters are respectively occupied by two clans of fire 
(thunder); two of water; two of wind; two of earth—the four 
elements. 

In China there are similar schemes, some more complex, some 
of a simple type, used as the basis for divination, astronomy, 
geomancy, and horoscopy. In one of them, there are five ele- 
ments—earth, water, wood, metal, fire—located in five regions 
of space, earth being at the centre. 

The aboriginal Mexicans, again, recognised four great Gods ; 
four quarters of the heavens, the four chambers of Tlaloc, each 
with its vessel containing a different species of rain; and four 
quarters of the pueblo of Mexico. Similarly in Peru we find four 
elements, four principal huacas (the Creator, Sun, Thunder, and 
Earth-mother), and the four quarters of Cuzco, ‘a division subse- 
quently extended to the Cuzco district between the Apurimac 
and Paucartampu rivers, and later still applied to the wide- 
stretching quarters of the Inca dominion.’ ἢ 

It seems clear that, in these and similar cases, the ultimate 
basis of classification is the grouping of the tribe. The seg- 
mentation of the tribe into two, or four, or however many 
subdivisions there may be, is the primary fact. It can be 
accounted for by causes such as the over-pressure of population 
in ἃ given area, leading to a fission like that which occurs in the 
signification mystique. Quand les indigénes se rassemblent en grand nombre 
en Australie, chaque tribu, et, dans chaque tribu, chaque groupe totémique, 
a une place qui lui est assignée par son affinité mystique avec telle ou telle 
région de l’espace. Des faits du méme genre sont signalés dans ]’Amérique 


du Nord.’ 
1 Payne, History of the New World, in. p. 263. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 53 


lowest types of biological organism. This segmentary structure 
is then reflected outwards upon the rest of the universe. The 
macrocosm was at first modelled upon the microcosm ; and the 
primitive microcosm is the tribe. We are reminded that the 
very word cosmos was a political term among the Dorians, before 
it was borrowed by philosophy to denote the universal order.’ 
In later days the situation is reversed, and the organisation of 
society, or of the individual, comes to be regarded as a miniature 
copy, in which the majestic order of the macrocosm is to be 
reproduced. 

The art of divination is employed to trace the area occupied 
for social purposes, in accordance with the outlines of the dis- 
position of nature. Thus, the Roman comiium was inaugurated 
as a templum. It was square in shape, and the four sides were 
oriented to the four quarters of the sky.? Plutarch preserves 
ἃ curious account of the founding of Rome, from which we 
learn that the boundary of the original comitium was actually 
called mundus — the Latin equivalent of cosmos. When 
Romulus founded the city, we are told that he sent for men 
of magical wisdom from Etruria. A circular trench was dug 
round what is now the Comitium, and in it were deposited 
specimen offerings (ἀπαρχαί) of all things esteemed good by 
custom or necessary by nature, and a portion of earth brought 
from the country from which each man came. ‘This ditch is 
called mundus—the same name as is given to the firmament 
(Ολυμπος). Then, taking this mundus as the centre, they 
marked out the circuit of the walls with a plough drawn by a 
bull anda cow. Where they planned to have a gate, they lifted 
the ploughshare to make a break in the furrow; so that the 
whole wall is sacred (or ‘taboo,’ tepov), except the gates. But 
for this precaution, they could not without fear of spirits (ἄνευ 
δεισιδαιμονίας) have carried in or out necessaries which were 
not pure.’ 


1 It is ἃ curious circumstance that Pindar (Οἱ. vii.) clearly suggests a 
parallel between the triple political division of Dorian Rhodes (which was 
settled ‘according to tribes,’ τριχθὰ δὲ ὥικηθεν καταφυλαδόν, Il. ii. 668) and 
the division of the world among the Gods, which he describes in the con- 
text. Kameiros, Ialyaos, and Lindos ἀπάτερϑε ἔχον, διὰ γαῖαν τρίχα δασσά. 
μενοι πατρωίαν, ἀστέων μοῖραν, κέκληνται δέ σφιν ἕδραι. Cf. above, 8 9. 

* Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Hncycl. s.v. ‘Comitium.’ 3 Plut. ΡΠ, Rom. xi. 


4 


1 


54 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


24, Moira a projection of Nomos 


Now if, in various widely sundered parts of the world, the 
separation of the four or more elements into the regions of 
space was based on the quartering of the tribal camp among the 
divisions of the social group, we here have tangible evidence of 
that social, and therefore moral and religious, emphasis which 
our hypothesis demanded to account for the prominence of this 
representation in the historic religion and philosophy of Greece. 
We can hardly resist the conclusion that it came down to Homer 
and Hesiod and Anaximander from a primitive stratum of 
thought, which we could never have reconstructed, had it not 
lain fossilised to this day, in the beliefs and institutions of existing 
races of mankind. 

Here we touch at last the bedrock. Behind philosophy lay 


‘religion; behind religion, as we now see, lies social custom— 
‘the structure and institutions of the human group.) In the 


first chapter, we divined that Moira, the supreme power in the 
universe, was very closely allied to Nomos, in the sense of 
constitutional order. Now it appears that Movra is simply a pro- 
jection, or extension, of Nomos from the tribal group to the ele- 
mental grouping of the cosmos. We can read a new sense into 
the apophthegm ascribed to Pythagoras,! that ‘ Themis in the 
realm of Zeus, and Dike in the world below, hold the same place 
and rank as Nomos in the cities of men ; so that he who does not 
justly perform his appointed duty, may appear as a violator of 
the whole order of the universe.’ The eternal laws, of which 
Antigone said that no one knew from whence they were pro- 
claimed, can now be seen to have been projected, as a sort of 
Brocken spectre, from those very laws of the state wth which 
she contrasts them.? 

1 Tambl. Vit. Pyth. ix. 46: τοὺς yap ἀνθρώπους εἰδύτας ὅτι τόπος ἅπας προσδεῖ- 
rat δικαιοσύνης μυθοποιεῖν τὴν αὐτὴν τάξιν ἔχειν παρὰ τῷ Διὶ τὴν θέμιν καὶ παρὰ 
τῷ Πλούτωνι τὴν Δίκην καὶ κατὰ Tas πόλεις τὸν Νόμον, ἵνα ὁ μὴ δικαίως ἐφ᾽ ἃ 
τέτακται ποιῶν ἅμα φαίνηται πάντα τὸν κύσμον συναδικῶν. The conception of 


Dike will be further discussed below in chap. vi. 
2 Soph. Ant. 449: 
KP. καὶ δῆτ᾽ ἔτολμας τούσδ' ὑπερβαίνειν νόμους ; 
AN. οὐ γάρ τί μοι Ζεὺς ἣν ὁ κηρύξας τάδε, 
οὐδ᾽ ἡ ξύνοικος τῶν κάτω θεῶν Δίκη 
τοιούσδ᾽ ἐν ἀνθρώποισιν ὥρισεν νόμους" 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 55 


We are now ina position to formulate the answer to our 
main question, as follows: 


Primitive beliefs about the nature of the world were sacred (religious 
or moral) beluefs, and the structure of the world was tself a moral 
or sacred order, because, in certain early phases of social develop- 
ment, the structure and behaviour of the world were held to be 
continuous wuh—a mere extension or projection of—the structure 
and behaviour of human society. The human group and the 
departments of Nature surrounding it were unified in one solid 
fabric of moirai—one comprehensive system of custom and taboo. 
The dwisions of Nature were limited by moral boundaries, because 
they were actually the same as the devisions of society. 


25. Totemism 


To make this point clearer, we shall examine certain features 
of the well-known early phase of social development called 
Totemism. The reason for selecting this phase is partly that 
a great mass of evidence has lately been put together in 
convenient shape by the magnificent industry of Dr. Frazer.’ 
But it especially suits our purpose because, as we shall see, 
its essential principle involves an extension of the structure 
and classification of human society to include the departments 
of the non-human universe In this phase, in fact, we shall find 
Moira and Nomos established in undisputed sway over regions 
from which, in the later ages of theology and philosophy, they 
were very slowly driven out. 

To guard against misapprehension, it must be clearly stated 
that we do not mean either to assert, or to assume, that totemism, 
in any complete form, lever prevailed among the remoter ancestors 

οὐδὲ σθένειν τοσοῦτον φόμην τὰ σὰ 


κηρύγμαθ᾽, ὥστ᾽ ἄγραπτα κἀσφαλῆ θεῶν 

γόμιμα δύνασθαι θνητὸν ὄνθ᾽ ὑπερδραμεῖν, κ.τ.λ. 
The significance of the view above put forward for the origin of the notion 
of the unwritten Law of Nature (cf Amst. Rhef.1. 13. 2) will be apparent, but 
it cannot here be followed out. We shall find, as we go on, the same con- 
ception pervading philosophic thought. Another instance of the idea in 
Sophocles is Qed. Tyr. 863 ; where note that the Chorus invoke Moira to be 
with them in the observance of these heavenly laws, and say that an evil 
moira will overtake him who breaks them and fears not Dske. 

1 Totemsem and Exogamy, τὰ four vols. Macmillan, 1910. 


56 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of the Greeks. It may have been so; certain facts seem to 
point in that direction ; but the question is open, and lies outside 
our argument. No one denies that the races who peopled Greece 
and Italy were, both in historic and in prehistoric times, given 
to the practice of magic. It will appear later that a great part 
of magical practice is essentially based on a certain relation of 
continuity between a human and a non-human group—a continu- 
ity which is said to amount to identity. This is all our thesis 
demands. Totemism is merely a social system in which this 
fundamental representation has hardened into a permanent 
framework, still extant for our observation. It 18, therefore, 
convenient to describe its institutions, just in so far as they 
embody the principle under consideration—a principle which 
appears to have been, at one time or another, the property of 
every division of mankind. 


26. Solidarity of the Totemic Group 

The first point to be noted about a society in the totemic 
stage is that it is an aggregate, not of dependent individuals, 
but of groups. As we have already said, it is the group, not the 
individual, that must be taken as unitary. These groups are 
externally marked off from one another by the sharpest dis- 
tinction, and internally united by the strongest solidarity. 
The bond which unites the group, however, is not family relation- 
ship, nor even blood-kinship (in our sense) at all. 

The totem-clan is defined by a peculiar relation, possessed in 
common by all its members and by them alone, to its particular 
totem. A totem is not an individual thing, but, like the clan, a 
group—a whole class of objects, ‘ generally a species of animals 
or of plants, more rarely a class of inanimate natural objects, 
very rarely a class of artificial objects.’ It must be remembered 
that the distinctions between these three classes of object, im- 
portant as they may seem to us, are much less obvious to the 
savage. ‘Animate and inanimate’ are not familiar categories 
to him; ‘natural and artificial’ is probably a distinction of 
little significance. Far more important than these distinctions 
which interest us, is the property which all these objects have in 
common, and which qualifies them to be totems. They must all 


1 Frazer, Totemsem, i. 4. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 57 


alike be of some social importance, in a sufficiently high degree 
to focus attention upon them. They are, all of them, things 
- whose existence and behaviour in some way matters to society. 
A great majority of them are connected with one of our most 
fundamental interests—food: they are either eatable species, 
or phenomena (such as wind, rain, sun) on which the food supply 
depends, or tools used in procuring food. 


The nature of the relation which unites the human clan and 
its totem-species perhaps defies exact analysis in our civilised 
terminology. It is certainly an exceedingly close relation, which 
some observers declare amounts to identity—or, since negative 
terms are safer, to the absence of any sense of distinction. The 
word totem itself is said to mean simply ‘ tribe’; and this fact 
marks that the totem rather is the social group, embracing 
human and non-human members alike, than an external badge, 
or attribute, or anything of that sort. We must, therefore, 
think of the totem-clan and its totem-species as forming one 
continuous social group, with the highest degree of solidarity ; 
and the less we distinguish between the clan and the species, 
the nearer we shall keep to the true point of view. 

The members of a totem-clan normally believe themselves 
to be descended from a totem-ancestor, who is often half human 
and half plant or animal—a mythical representation which 
significantly symbolises the identity of the clan and its totem- 
species. By virtue of this descent, they are of one blood; and 
we may conceive the blood as a continuous medium running 
through the whole group, as it were the material substrate of 
its solidarity. Through it, every part of the group is in vital 
sympathy with every other, so that in the blood-feud the group 
is collectively responsible, and in some cases a man cannot cut 
his own finger with his own knife without paying blood-money 
to his mother’s family. ‘ Being of their blood, he is not allowed 
to spill it without paying for it.’ Or, the blood may be thought 
of as the life of the totem—the one life derived from the common 
ancestor and immanent throughout the clan. 

Possibly derived from this continuity of the blood are two 
great taboos which go with totemic social classification. The 

1 Frazer, Totemtam, i. 53. 


δ8 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


full member of a totem-clan may not, in ordinary circumstances, 
eat his totem animal or plant; and he may not marry a woman 
of the same clan with himself! The latter prohibition normally 
involves the division of the tribe into two (or some multiple of 
two) phratries, within each of which all marriage is incestuous. 
This exogamous classification is combined with classification 
into totem-clans in various complex schemes—an exogamous 
group (phratry) often including several totem-clans, none of 
which may intermarry. 


27. The primacy of the group 


We have dwelt on these details with a view to making it clear 
that, in a society so organised, the unit is the group, not the in- 
dividual; and, whether or no the ancestors of the Greeks had 
a developed totemic system, we may be certain that, the further 
we go back into the prehistoric past of anv race of mankind, 
the less the individual will count, and the more his social group, 
however it may be defined, will be the unitary factor. As 
evidence of this, survivals are not wanting among the Greeks. 
Pindar makes us familiar with the daemon, or genius, of a clan, 
to whom, rather than to the individual competitor, the glory 
of success in the Great Games is ascribed in so many of his Odes 
of Victory.? In the tragedians, especially Aeschylus,’ we en- 
counter the notion of hereditary guilt—of those ‘taints and 
troubles which, arising from some ancient wrath, existed in 
certain families,’ 4 and were transmitted with the blood to the 
ruin of one descendant after another, who, in the view of ἃ later 
individualistic morality, were personally innocent. These and 

) The view that endogamy is taboo because marriage involves the shed- 
ding of blood is disputed ; but see Durkheim, ‘La prohibition de l’:nceste,’ 
Année Sociologique, i. p. 1 ff. 

7 See my chapter on the Olympic Games in J. E. Harrison, Themis, 
p. 257. 

5 The Agamemnon, 1451-1576 (Clytaemnestra and Chorus), brings out 
most of the important aspects of this deep-seated belief. In the course of 
it, Clytaemnestra successfully diverts the attention of the Chorus from her 
personal motive, sexual jealousy, to the δαίμων γέννης of the house of Tan- 
talus. By representing herself as an incarnation of this, she shifts responsi- 
bility from her individual self on to the collective soul of her clan. 

4 Plato, Phaedrus, 244 D: νόσων καὶ πόνων τῶν μεγίστων, ἃ δὴ παλαιῶν ἐκ 
μηνιμάτων ποθὲν ἕν τισι τῶν γενῶν ἦν, 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 59 


other such representations illustrate the persistence of the moral 
solidarity of the group. We may note, too, the implication of 
this solidarity : namely, that the circumference of the group 18, 
so to say, the moral frontier. Inside that frontier, the group 
as a whole has its proper duties, exercised in common, and its 
collective rights, diffused over the whole area. Outside the 
frontier are other groups, equally coherent and internally un- 
distinguished. And this frontier is the surface at which moral 
friction occurs. 

Society, in a word, is a system of moirat; and the boundaries 
of its groups are also the boundaries of morality. Within them 
lies Nomos—all that you ought to do and must do—the exercise 
of the group functions, the expression of its peculiar magical 
powers. Beyond them lies all you must not do—all that 18 
taboo.! The sentinel at the frontier is Death. It may be 
significant that moira is the counterpart of moros, death; and 
that the word moira itself easily passes from its sense of 
allotted portion to mean doom—‘ the grievous doom of death ’ 
(uotp odon θανάτοιο). 


28. The social structure projected to include 
the order of Nature 


Now, the totemic social system, involving as it does the 
identity of each human clan with a non-human species, rests, 
in its essential principle, on an extension of the structure of 
human society beyond what seem to us its natural limits, so as 
to include in one solid system the departments of Nature with 
which the clans are severally united. In the more advanced 
cases, the social system is thus projected until it becomes con- 
terminous with the visible universe, and every kind of natural 
object belongs to some social group. Thus, the whole universe 


1 T am of course speaking of a very early stage. Later, when individu- 
ality begins to assert itself in the moral area, repression of the individual 
by hisown group becomes necessary. But at first all taboos are imposed 
upon classes as such, not on individuals. 

2 Frazer, Totemism, i. 118: ‘There is something impressive, and almost 
grandiose, in the comprehensiveness, the completeness, the vaulting ambi- 
tion of this scheme, the creation of a crude and barbarous philosophy. All 
nature has been mapped out into departments; all men have been distri- 
buted into corresponding groups; and to each group of men has been 
assigned, with astounding audacity, the duty of controlling some one depart- 


60 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


is brought within the bounds of human morality, and portioned 
out into its provinces; for each department of nature must 
be subject to the same taboos, and bound to the observance of 
the same customs, as the human group with which it is identified. 
The positive side—observance of custom—we shall consider later, 
when we turn to magic. But on the negative side—the side 
of taboo—we find at last the explanation of our problem—the 
supremacy of Moira in the universe, human and non-human 
alike. The moral character of the physical order is finally 
accounted for, when we see that the primitive boundaries of 
Right are not the limits of the individual as against society, nor 
yet those of society as against nature, but radiate in unbroken 
lines from the centre of society to the circumference of the 
cosmos. This, in the last resort, is the reason why the dis- 
position of the elemental provinces persists, right into the age 
of rational speculation, as the important feature of the universe. 
The moral, or socially important, or sacred, force and colour, 
with which in earlier ages it had been charged, have not yet 
faded out of the imperious figures of Moira and Nomos. 


29. Survivals in Greek cosmology 


There are two outstanding features of the Greek philosophic 
cosmologies which seem to become intelligible in the light of 
our hypothesis. They are (a) the recognition of four elements, 
(b) the grouping of qualities in pazrs of contrarves. We will 
briefly consider them in turn. 

But first, to guard against misconception: our hypothesis 
does not imply that Homer and Hesiod, any more than Anaxi- 
mander, had ever heard of totemism and its peculiar institutions. 
All it comes to is this. In every age of mankind certain aspects 
of the world, certain features of the infinite manifold our senses 
show us, are specially significant, attended to, emphasised,studied. 
Further, the aspects and features dwelt upon by the early philo- 
ment of nature for the common good.’ Cf. sd. p. 134. The ‘audacity’ 
involved, however, is only apparent, if we recognise that the whole process 
wgs unconsciously and spontaneously effected by the collective mind, which 
tod& it all as the most obvious and simple representation of nature, and 
inde&si.did the whole thing, as we shall later see, before it felt the need of con- 
ceivinggbe ‘philosophy’ implicit in it. See also Lévy-Bruhl, Fonct. ment. 
p. 284. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 61 


sophers often strike us as by no means superficially obvious ; 
and—what is also important—they are remarkable for their 
generality and abstract character. Physical science, neglecting 
the task of accumulating detailed knowledge by observation, 
immediately on its first appearance, attacks the problem of the 
ultimate ‘nature’ of all things, Or again, it assumes, as an 
admitted a priori truth, a maxim so general as ‘ Like can only 
act on like.’ What we seek is the cause of this curious pheno- 
menon ; and we hold that the reason why the early philosophers 
attended to these ultimate problems, and presumed such uni- 
versal maxims, is that they were already emphasised in religious 
and popular representation. To take our present instance: 
the disposition of the elemental provinces—the importance 
attached to this can only be explained by supposing that it had 
once been of religious significance; and we saw in the last 
chapter that such, in fact, was the case. In the present chapter 
we have taken a further step, and made out that its religious 
significance probably points back to a stage when it was con- 
tinuous with the moral and social structure of the human group. 
What we suggest is that this line of investigation gives the clue 
to the early philosophers’ choice of objects to speculate about. 
They, one and all, constructed theories about the arrangement 
of the universe, and again about meteoric phenomena—sun 
and moon, shooting stars, thunder, earthquakes, etc.—because 
these were objects on which religion and magic had concentrated 
attention for uncounted ages.! 


30. (a) The Four Elements 


The totemistic organisation of society is complex, involving, 
as it does, the division of the tribe into a number of subordinate 
groups, each with specialised functions. We cannot suppose 
that a system which entails such a nicely adjusted division of 
labour is the primitive form of human society. Rather, there are 
good grounds for holding that the original society was a single 


1 Tannery, Pour (histoire de la science helléne, Ὁ. 20, enumerates the 
headings under which, in an order regularly observed, the doxographic 
tradition, derived from Theophrastus, records the ‘opinions’ of the various 
philosophers. They are: Principle, God, Universe, earth, sea, rivers, Nile, 
sturs, sun, moon, milky way, meteors, wind, rain, hail, snow, thunder, rain- 
bow, earthquakes, animals. 


62 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


group or tribe—a human herd, as yet undifferentiated and un- 
specialised. The breaking up of this group may have been, as 
biological analogy suggests, a simple process of segmentation, 
due to the mere mechanical cause of the increase of population 
in a given area. The primary homogeneous group was held 
together by a solidarity of a low mechanical type, which has 
much less binding force than the higher organic solidarity in- 
volved in the mutual dependence of specialised groups. As 
population grows, that mechanical solidarity is diffused over a 
continually widening area, and grows thinner and thinner until 
a trifling cause may make it snap. The tribe is like a pool of 
mercury : the larger it is, the slighter the shock that will scatter 
it into separate drops. Each of the new groups resulting from 
this segmentation, being smaller, will be more strongly united.? 

Such a process, however, would give only an aggregate of 
separate groups, each internally coherent, but not united to its 
neighbours. In the totemic system (however it may be caused) 
we find a structure of the higher type—an organism. Besides 
the strong solidarity of specialised function which holds together 
each clan, there is a looser, but very real, bond linking all the 
clans into one tribe. The older structure thus survives in the 
new, the organic groups being superimposed upon, but not 
altogether superseding, the primitive inorganic group. 

Now, if we take the cosmological scheme of Anaximander, 
and consider the relation of his one primary ‘ nature’ (τὸ ἄπειροι") 
to the four subordinate elements with their allotted moira, we 
observe that this type of cosmic structure corresponds to that 
of a totemic tribe containing four clans. The ‘ limitless thing,’ 
like the primitive herd, 18 continuous, homogeneous, undifferen- 
tiated, and so loosely united that a mechanical cause—the 
“eternal motion "—can make it fall asunder into smaller groups. 
The four elements, like the subordinate totemic clans, are 
differentiated and specialised, and each is drawn together into 
a coherent mass by the attraction of like to like—the solidarity 
of affinity. The elements, moreover, are not utterly distinct 
or indifferent to one another: there is also a repulsion between 
unlikes, a war and feud, to which, as we saw, all individual 


δ For this theory of the two kinds of solidarity and the cause of segmen- 
tation, see E. Durkheim, Sur la division du travat social. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 63 


existence was due. The cosmology is a transcript in represen- 
tation of an organic structure, such as we find in a totemic tribe, 
in which the primitive unitary tribal group and the organic 
nexus of clans reappear as two separate stages—the primary 
physis and the four elements separated out from it. 


31. The Philia and Neikos of Empedocles 


In the system of Empedocles, we find the two opposed prin- 
ciples of solidarity and repulsion actually distinguished as two 
‘elements,’ over and above the four fundamental forms of 
matter—earth, air, water, and fire—recognised in earlier systems. 
Empedocles made these four elements ultimate irreducible 
forms, the ‘ roots of all things,’ and reasserted their ‘ equality.’ 1 
Their complete mixture in a ‘ sphere ’ is one pole, their complete 
separation in four homogeneous masses is the other pole, of his 
two alternating hemicycles of existence.* 

If we press our analogy with the processes and factors of 
tribal organisation, the Love which draws all the elements into 
the indiscriminate mass, called the Sphere, corresponds to the 
solidarity of the whole tribe. Strife, or feud, is the disintegrating 
force, which causes segmentation into minor groups. Each 
group, like a clan, has a solidarity of its own, and an internal 
consistency. The separation of unlikes is the same fact as the 
coming together of likes—earth to earth, water to water, and so 
forth ; so that the action of Neikos can also be interpreted as 
the attraction of hke by hke—the cause of the differentiated, 
organic solidarity of groups within a larger group, of clans 
within a tribe.* 


32. (Ὁ) The segregation of pairs of Contraries 


We turn next to the process by which the elements come into 
possession of their provinces. In Anaximander’s scheme, this 
process is conceived as the ‘separating out’ (ἔκκρισις, ἀποκρισις) 
from the indeterminate One, of ‘contraries’ (ἐναντία). Two 

1 Anst. de Gen. εἰ Corr. 86, 333a 16. 

3 The details of the system are discussed below, pp. 224 ff. 

5 This interpretation of the Philia and Neikosa of Empedocles was first 


suggested to me by Miss Harrison. It will be shown later how these 
principles were inherent in what we shall call the datum of philosophy. 


64 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


pairs of contraries appear to be primary—the hot and the cold, 
the wet and the dry—and these are naturally identified with 
fire and air, water and earth. The elements are thus not merely 
separated into four distinct regions, but grouped in pairs. Two 
contraries must be conceived as equal in nature and power, 
neither of them the mere negation or absence of the other.! 
They are, like the three Homeric Gods,? equal in status or in lot 
(ἰσότιμοι or ἰσόμοροι). Empedocles 38 states this equality of the 
elements in very distinct terms : 

“For all of them are equal, and of equal birth. Each is lord 
of a different function, each has its wonted range,‘ and in turn 
they gain the mastery, as the cycle of time comes round.’ 

Between the two members of each pair of contraries there is 
antagonism, strife, feud. Each seeks to invade the province 
of the other, to overmaster it and usurp part of its domain. 
Out of this strife, as we have seen (ὃ 3), arises, according to 
Anaximander, all individual existence, which is the offspring 
of aggression and injustice. And, since the moral order of 
Nature demands that every injustice shall be atoned, every in- 
dividual thing must ‘pay the penalty’ and ‘ perish into that 
out of which it came into being.’ 

This war of antagonistic principles, on the other hand, though 
unjust, is not purely destructive ; in fact, it generates the whole 
world of things we see. In other systems we shall encounter 
the idea that not only all existence, but all goodness and per- 
fection in the visible world, involve a balance or harmony of 
opposed powers—a reconciliation in which the claims of both 
are, if only temporarily, adjusted. Besides War, there is also 
Peace; besides Hatred and Feud (Nezkos, Eris, etc.), there 
is also Love and Agreement (Phila, Harmonu, etc.). This 
general scheme of conception runs through all ancient physical 


1 For all this subject, see O. Gilbert, Met, T'heor. p. 28 ff. 
3 See above, p. 15. 
3 Frag. 17. 27: 
ταῦτα γὰρ loa re πάντα καὶ ἥλικα γένναν ἔασι, 
τιμῆς δ᾽ ἄλλης ἄλλο μέδει, πάρα δ᾽ ἦθος ἑκάστῳ, 
ἐν δὲ μέρει κρατέουσι περιπλομένοιο χρόνοιο. 
Sophocles, Ei. 86, follows Empedocles (Gilbert, Met. Theor. 35): ὦ φάος 


ἁγνὸν καὶ γῆς ἰσόμοιρ᾽ ἀήρ. 
4 For this mcaning of ἦθος, see above, p. 34. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 65 


speculation, and, after all that has gone before, we shall not be 
surprised to find it dominant in ethical speculation also. Its 
moral and social colour is no mere trapping of superficial meta- 
phor ; it is ingrained and essential. 

But—to go back to Anaximander’s scheme of cosmology—it 
is not only with the birth and perishing of individual things that 
we are concerned, but also with the previous stage, in which the 
“contraries ’ were sifted out by the eternal motion into their 
distinct regions—the first appearance of distinction within the 
limitless One. An examination of the pre-scientific cosmogonies 
will show that this extremely general and abstract conception 
can be traced further back to a very primitive social origin. 


33. Sex the prototype of Contrariety 


If we look more closely into this conception of pairs of con- 
traries, we find that Anaximander is more purely rational than 
many of his successors. In later systems—notably in those 
of Parmenides and Empedocles—mythical associations and 
implications, which he has expurgated, emerge again. In par- 
ticular, we can discern that the prototype of all opposition or 
contrariety is the contrariety of sez. 

The Eleatic Stranger in Plato’s Sophist notes this feature, 
in reviewing the early physical philosophers. He complains 
that they treat us like children, and put us off with fairy tales. 
One will tell us that there are three Beings, which ‘sometimes 
carry on a sort of warfare with one another, and then again 
become friends and go in for marriages and child-bearing and 
nursing up of their offspring.’ Another speaks of ἃ pair—Wet 
and Dry, or Hot and Cold—whom he ἡ marries off and makes them 
set up house together.’ The Eleatics base their wondrous tale 
on the doctrine that all things are really One. Then, certain 
inspired sources in Jonia (Heracleitus), and later in Sicily (Em- 
pedocles), saw that it was safest to combine both views and say 
that ‘ Being is both many and one, and is held together by Hatred 
and Love’; the sterner sort (Heracleitus) declaring that, ‘ being 

1 242.c: ὁ μὲν ὡς τρία τὰ ὄντα, πολεμεῖ δὲ ἀλλήλοις ἐνίοτε αὐτῶν ἄττα wy, τότε δὲ 
καὶ φίλα γιγνόμενα γάμους τε καὶ τόκους καὶ τροφὰς τῶν ἐκγόνων παρέχεται" δύο δὲ 


ἕτερος εἰπών, ὑγρὸν καὶ ξηρὸν ἣ θερμὸν καὶ ψνχρόν, συνοικίζει τε αὐτὰ καὶ ἐκδίδωσι. 
E 


66 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


drawn asunder always, it is always being drawn together’ ;* 
the softer (Empedocles) relaxing this * always,’ and saying that 
the All is one and many in turn, now in a state of Love through 
the power of Aphrodite, now at war with itself owing to a certain 
* Feud.’ 

Before cosmology were cosmogony and theogony. Becoming 
(γένεσις) was conceived as birth, and birth is the result of mar- 
riage. The primal marriage in the early cosmogonies is the 
union of Sky and Earth, represented in the anthropomorphic 
religion of historic times by the ritual marriage of Zeus, or 
Jupiter, and his female partner. 


84, The Separation of Sky and Earth 


But Sky and Earth cannot meetin fruitful marriage till they 
have first been sundered from their original unity of form. The 
cosmogonies open, not with the marriage, but with the separation 
of Earth and Sky. 

“First of all,’ says Hesiod,? ‘Chaos came into being; then, 
Harth with her broad breast, for all things a seat secure for 
ever, and misty Tartarus in the hollow of the wide-wayed arth, 
and Love, the fairest of the immortal Gods.’ 

“First of all, Chaos came into being ’"—what does that mean 2 
“Chaos ’ was not at first, as we conceive it, formless disorder. 
The word means simply the ‘yawning gap —the gap we now 
see, with its lower part filled with air and mist and cloud, 
between earth and the dome of heaven.? Originally Earth 


1 Cf. [Arist.] de Mundo, 5; ἴσως δὲ τῶν ἐναντίων ἡ φύσις γλίχεται καὶ ἐκ 
τούτων ἀποτελεῖ τὸ σύμφωνον. . . ὥσπερ ἀμέλει τὸ ἄρρεν συνήγαγε πρὸς τὸ θῆλυ 
καὶ οὐχ ἑκάτερον πρὸς τὸ ὁμόφυλον. Heracl. frag. 10 (Diels), 59 (Byw.), 
διαφερόμενον συμφέρεται x.7.d., is quoted in illustration. 

3 Theog. 116: ἢ τοι μὲν πρώτιστα Χάος yéver’, αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα 

Tai’ εὐρύστερνος, πάντων ἕδος ἀσφαλὲς αἰεί, 
Tdprapa τ᾽ ἠερόεντα μυχῷ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης 
no “Epos... . 

3 It is this gap that 1s filled with heat when Zeus makes his thunder- 
storm, T'heog. 700: καῦμα δὲ θεσπέσιον κάτεχεν χάος. Schol. ad v. 116: οἱ 
δὲ εἰρῆσθαι φασὶ χάος παρὰ τὸ χεῖσθαι, ὅ ἐστι χέεσθαι" οἱ δὲ φασὶν ἀπὸ τοῦ χαδεῖν, 
ὅ ἐστι χωρεῖν... ἣ οὖν εἰς τὰ στοιχεῖα διάκρισις καὶ διαχώρησις, χάος... . , 
AAAQE, χάος λέγει τὸν κεχυμένον ἀέρα, καὶ yap Ζηνόδοτος οὕτως φησί, Βακχυλίδης 
δὲ χάος τὸν ἀέρα ὠνόμασε, λέγων περὶ τοῦ ἀετοῦ" “ Νωμᾶται δ' ἐν arpvyéry χάει" 
(ἀτρύτῳ is the true reading, Bacch. v. 26). Cf. Ibycus, frag. 28: ποτᾶται δ᾽ 
ἐν ἀλλοτρίῳ xdcs. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 67 


and Heaven were one, as Melanippe the Wise, in Euripides,! 
had learnt from her half-divine mother : 


‘Tt is not my word, but my mother’s word, 
How Heaven and Earth were once one form ; but stirred, 
And strove, and dwelt asunder far away : 
And then, re-wedding, bore unto the day 
And light of life all things that are, the trees, 
Flowers, birds, and beasts, and them that breathe the seas, 
And mortal man, each in his kind and law.’ 


The Orphic cosmogony used by Apollonius Rhodius? tells 
the same tale. Orpheus sang ‘ how earth and sky and sea were 
at first joined together in one form, and then disparted, each 
from each, by grievous strife.’ 

This account of the beginning of the world is of enormous 
antiquity. A hymn in the Rig-Veda (vii. 86) says of Varuna, 
whom some scholars identify with Ouranos : 


‘Wise truly and great is his own nature, 
Who held asunder spacious Earth and Heaven. 
He pressed the sky, the broad and lofty, upward, 
Ay, spread the stars and spread the Earth out broadly.’8 


In the Babylonian cosmogony, from which that of Genesis is 
derived, Marduk cut in two pieces the monstrous Tihamat, and 
‘one half of her he set in place, he spread out as heaven.’ The 
primitive Egyptians, likewise, described Shu as separating the 
sky (Nut) from the earth (Seb). In the Taoism of China, an 
original ‘Chaos’ splits of its own accord into the two opposed 
moieties called Yang and γι, the regions of light and darkness 
associated with heaven and earth.4 


1 Frag. 484 N?, ap. Diod. Sic. i. 7, trans. Professor Murray. 
2 i. 496 (Diels, Frag. d. Vora, ii. p. 479): 
ἤειδεν δ᾽ ws γαῖα καὶ οὐρανὸς ἠδὲ θάλασσα 
τὸ πρὶν ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι μιῆι συναρηρότα μορφῆι 
velxeos ἐξ ὁλοοῖο διέκριθεν ἀμφὶς ἕκαστα. 

5 Bloomfield, Religion of the Veda, p. 194. 

4 De Groot, Religion of the Chinese, New York, 1910, p. 152. It may be 
noted that in this system there is no creator or God supenor to the Tao or 
order of the universe (pp. 102, 135); cf. the position of Moira as described 
above, ὃ 8. 


68 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


35. Social origin of this representation 


We ought not to allow the familiarity of this conception of 
the world’s origin to blind us to the fact that it is not a simple 
and obvious belief, which the mere appearance of the universe 
would readily suggest to many independent observers. It 18, 
on the contrary, a commonplace that the dome of the sky, with 
its apparently unchanging stars, seems, of all things in nature, 
the most permanent, and indeed eternal. Why suppose that 
it was ever ‘joined in one form with the earth,’ and then lifted 
up to its present place? How are we to account for such a 
representation ? 

The question is not commonly raised, and I do not know how 
it would generally be answered. One thing seems clear: the 
conception is not an extravagant flight of some individual mind, 
gifted with a specially wild and grotesque imagination. If it 
had been so, it is hard to believe that it would have been accepted 
and perpetuated, as an article of faith, even among one people ; 
it is quite out of the question that it could have been inde- 
pendently invented by several grotesquely imaginative indi- 
viduals in various parts of the world, and in each case accepted. 
The conception must have been elaborated, not by any singular 
imagination, but by the collective mind ; and its wide diffusion in 
independent centres could be explained, if we could point to 
some actual fact capable of suggesting it. 

The representation 1s this: the world began as an undiffer- 
entiated mass, without internal boundaries or limits—an ἄπειρον. 
This mass separated mto two parts, which were opposed or 
“contrary ’—male and female. Finally, the male and female 
were united by Eros, the contraries were combined, and gave 
birth to individual existence—to Gods, or to things. 

Is it a mere coincidence that this description of the origin of 
the cosmos reflects a social institution already mentioned, of 
great importance in totemic societies—the division of the tribe 
into two exogamous phratries? The principle of this division 
(from whatever cause it may arise) is sex. In a sense, the two 
exogamous segments are opposed as male and female, since the 
male belonging to one phratry must marry a female from the 
other. This contrariety is reconciled in marriage—the union 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 69 


of opposites. This exogamous principle, as we have seen, is of 
equal importance with the totemic classification with which it 
is combined. It is the focus of intense religious and moral 
emotions, and guarded by impassable taboo. Moreover, the 
continuity between human society and Nature on which we have 
already dwelt, the actual identity of their structural grouping, 
makes it inevitable that the same conception should be extended 
to the divisions of the universe. 

In support of this hypothesis, we have the express evidence of 
an Omaha Indian, Francis Laflesche, who delivered in 1905 an 
address at the unveiling of a statue of the Medicme Man.! He 
described, as follows, the structure of his tribal camp. ‘The plan, 
or order, which was carried out when all the people camped 
together, was that of a wide circle. This tribal circle was called 
Hu-dhu-ga, and typified the cosmos. . . . The circle was divided 
into two great divisions or halves’ (the exogamous phratries). 
“The one called In-shta-sun-da represented the Heavens; and 
the other, the Hun-ga-she-nu, denoted the Earth. . . . Hach of 
the two great divisions was subdivided into clans, and each of 
the ten clans had its particular symbol’ (totem) ‘ representing 
a cosmic force, one of the various forms of life on the Earth.’ 

It is true that Francis Laflesche is a sophisticated person, and 
that on this occasion he was talking up to his white brothers ; 
but any one who reads the authentic descriptions of the Omaha 
rites of initiation, in which the child is introduced successively 
to the various parts and provinces of the universe,? will not 
doubt that in this particular statement he is telling the truth. 
It gives us exactly the proof we need, that the heavens and 
the earth were identified with the two contrary phratries, by 
whose fission the exogamous grouping of society first came into 
being. 


36. The Pythagorean Table of Contrarves 


The Pythagorean community, as we shall see later, preserved, 
more than any other ancient society, the characteristic traits of 
1 Ἐς Laflesche, Who was the Medicine Man? 1905, p. 8. I did not meet 
with this tract till the theory above put forward was already written down. 


5 For an account of these rites, taken from Muss Alice Fletcher, see J. E. 
Harrison, Themis, p. 69, 


1 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


primitive social groups. In their earlier speculation an 1m- 
portant place is given to the table of Contraries, the two 
columns (συστοιχίαι) of opposites, in which, exactly as if in 
two exogamous phratries, they grouped ten pairs of principles, 
like so many clans.!- At the head of the two columns stood 
‘the Even and the Uneven, one of which is unlimited, the other 
hmited,’ the pair which were the elements of all number, and so 
of all the world.2 And the Even and the Uneven they held to 
be, respectively, female and male; while the undivided monad, 
the One, was bisexed. Thus the Pythagorean cosmology, once 
more, starts with the separation, out of an undifferentiated 
unity, of a male and female principle. 


37. Eros and the Marriage of Opposites 


The coming into existence of individual things is variously 
attributed by the early cosmologists to love or harmony, and to 
feud, strife, or war. The two representations are, as Heracleitus 
insisted,? not so irreconcilable as they seem to be at first sight. 
They are only two ways of conceiving the meeting of contraries. 
The two contraries are antagonistic, at perpetual war with each 
other. It is a war of mutual aggression—each seeking to invade 
the province of the other. But this very invasion involves a 
mixing of the two elements—a reconciliation, or marriage,’ in 
which both combine to produce a compound, the individual thing. 
Earth and Heaven are essentially the female and male principles 
in Greek cosmology. In the ‘gap’ between their sundered 
forms appears the winged figure of the cosmic Eros, whose 
function is to reunite them. In the more primitive cosmogonies, 
which make the world begin with the hatching of an egg, whose 
two halves form Sky and Earth, Eros is the bird with golden 
feathers who comes out of the egg.5 

When we come to the detailed discussion of the pre-Socratic 
systems, we shall see how the war and marriage of opposites is 
worked out. As late as Plato we shall find that a sexual char- 

1D, F. V.2, i. p. 271. 2 Arist. Met. 45, 9864 15. 

5 See below, p. 190. 

4 μίξις, μίσγεσθαι φιλότητι, is perhaps the commonest metaphor for marriage 


in Greek. 
δ Ar. Birds, 693. For the world-egg see Eisler, Weltenmantel, in, 410 ff. 


THE ORIGIN OF MOIRA 71 


acter still clings to the great contraries, Form and Matter. ‘ We 
must conceive three kinds: first, that which comes into being ; 
second, that in which the first comes to be; third, that from which 
the first is copied, when it is born into existence. And we may 
fittingly compare the recipient to the mother, the model to the 
father, and that which springs into life between them to the 
ofispring.’1 Even in the desiccated terminology of Aristotle 
the same representation persists, where he says that, whereas 
one piece of matter can contain only one form, the cause which 
imposes the form can generate many. ‘So is it with the female 
and the male,’ 3 


38. Summary 


At the outset of our inquiry, we called attention to three 
factors in Anaximander’s cosmology which needed explana- 
tion: (1) the primary physis, (2) the disposition or structure 
into which this living stuff is distributed, (3) the process by 
which the order arose. We have now, by tracing back the con- 
ceptions of Motra and Nomos to primitive social structure, thrown 
some light on the second factor, and incidentally on the third. 

We have seen how the social group is the original type on 
which all other schemes of classification—at first magical, and 
later scientific—are modelled. At a very early stage, the whole 
of the visible world was parcelled out into an ordered structure, 
or cosmos, reflecting, or continuous with, the tribal microcosm, 
and so informed with types of representation which are of social 
origin. To this fact the order of nature owes its sacred or moral 
character. It is regarded as not only necessary but right or just, 
because it is a projection of the social constraint imposed by the 
group upon the individual, and in that constraint ‘ must’ and 
‘ ought ’ are identical. Such we believe to have been the process 
by which Motra came to rule supreme over the Gods, and Justice 
to ordain the boundaries of the elements in Anaximander’s 
philosophy. 

We must now turn to the consideration of physis—that homo- 
geneous living fluid which is parcelled out by Destiny or Justice 
into the elemental provinces. It has already been hinted that 


1 Timacus, 50. 2 Met. a6, 988a 3. 


72 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


this primary world-stuff is the material out of which daemons, 
Gods, and souls were made. We have now to trace the process 
of their making, and first of all to make out what was the primi- 
tive representation which, as we believe, re-emerges at the 
threshold of philosophy under the name of physis. We shall 
seek for this conception also a social origin. 


ΠῚ 
NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 


39. Nature and Custom in the dynamic sense 


TE term ‘ Nature’ (physis, natura) has had a long and varied 
history, which we cannot here attempt to trace even in outline. 
No philosophical term is more dangerously ambiguous. We 
seem able to distinguish, however, two main heads under which 
its shifting senses may be grouped : the static and the dynamic. 
Statically conceived, Nature means the system of all phenomena 
in time and space, the total of all existing things; and the 
“nature ’ of a thing is its constitution, structure, essence. But 
it has never lost its other, dynamic, side—the connotation of 
force, of primordial, active, upspringing energy—a sense which, 
as its derivation shows, is original.* 

Hitherto, in our study of the three great conceptions, Destiny, 
Law, and Nature, we have been mainly concerned with their 
static or spatial aspect. The first of them, Movra, leans, as we 
have already seen, towards this side—a process hastened by the 
emergence of personal Gods, who, as they absorb the positive 
functions, leave to Destiny the negative attitude of prohibitive 
necessity and limiting taboo. Though it is not altogether for- 
gotten that the Moira: preside at the three transitional crises 
in the curve of life, at two of them—birth and marriage—they 
fade into the background behind the newer and more definite 
figures of Artemis and Aphrodite; and only the third moment, 
where life passes into the darkness of death, is left undisputed 
by the deathless ones to the daughters of Night. 

In the case of Law, again, the negative aspect has some 

1 Cf. J. Dewey in Baldwin’s Dictionary of Philos. and Psychol. s.v. 
* Nature.’ 

3 Thus, by the ‘nature’ of a thing the Scholastics understood its essence 
specially ‘considered as the active source (or principle) of the operations by 


which the being realised its end’ (Dewey, loc. cit.). 
78 


74 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


tendency to prevail. When laws come to be written down, 
‘ thou shalt not ’ occurs much more frequently than ‘ thou shalt.’ 
A customary action is performed unconsciously, and attracts no 
attention ; we only come to think of it as a duty, and to feel the 
binding obligation (τὸ δέον) to perform it, when some natural 
impulse prompts us to do something else. But the mere mention 
of ‘custom’ (τὰ νόμιμα, τὰ νομιζόμενα) reminds us of the active 
content of Nomos, which, before it means a prohibitive enact- 
ment, stands for behaving in a certain way, behaviour that is 
standardised, moralised, socialised—in a word, group-behaviour. 
Against this, sometimes intolerable, imposition of herd usage, 
our individual ‘ nature’ occasionally cries out and denounces 
convention as ‘unnatural.’ Custom and Nature are set at 
variance. But this outcry marks an age of individualism and 
self-consciousness.2 In earlier days, when the unitary moral 
and religious consciousness was coextensive, not with the 
individual, but with his group, no such conflict could anise: 
custom and nature were at one. 


40. Primitive identity of Nature and Custom 


We may go a step further and say that custom and nature 
were, not merely harmonious, but identical. If we recur to our 
illustration of the totemic clan, our meaning will be clear. This 
social group, consisting of its human members and their totem- 
species, is defined by the collective function it exercises 88 8 
continuous whole. If the nature or essence of a class of things 
is something which all of them have, and which nothing else 
has, in an early stage, when practical interests are paramount 
and disinterested speculation is unknown, the essential ‘ nature ’ 


1 Thus at the end of the fifth century φύσις is used in the sense of natural 
instincts 88 opposed to the restraint of morality. The Adikos Logos in 
Aristophanes’ Clouds, 1078, says: ἐμοὶ δ᾽ ὁμιλῶν χρῶ τῇ φύσει, oxlpra, γέλα, 
νόμιζε μηδὲν αἰσχρόν. Isoor., Areop. 38, says that, in presence of the august 
Areopagus, you may see people who in other circumstances are unbearable 
ὀκνοῦντας TH φύσει χρῆσθαι Kal μᾶλλον τοῖς ἐκεῖ νομίμοις ἢ ταῖς αὑτῶν κακίαις 
ἐμμένοντὰς. 

3 Cf. J. L. Myres, ‘Herod. and Anthrop.’ (Anthropology and the Classics, 
Oxford, 1908), p. 158, who points out that the opposition of νόμος and φύσις 
is not primitive. It does not become prominent in Greece until the age of 
the Sophists. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 15 


will be nothing but the social importance of the group—all that 
is expected of that division of society. It 18, in fact, what it 
collectively feels and does: all that matters about it, all that is 
(as we say) ‘ essential,’ is its behaving as it ought, fulfilling its 
function, performing its customs. It is, probably, in the light 
of this idea that we should interpret the alleged ‘identity ’ of 
the human clansmen with their totem-species.! They are, in 
the literal sense, practically identical. The superficial differences 
of appearance between (say) an emu-man and an emu-bird 
are ignored, and if necessary denied, because they are of no 
practical interest. The religious emphasis is entirely upon the 
eroup-behaviour, the group-functions ; and these, as we shall 
presently see, are identical for all ‘emus,’ whether they happen to 
look like men or birds. It may, indeed, be doubtful how much 
meaning this last phrase will have. The universals ‘man’ and 
‘bird’ are conceptions which will not be formed at all, until 
some practical interest calls for them. The Andamanese are 
said to have no word in their language for ‘ tree ’ or ‘ animal’ ; 
they have only a name for every species. They have no word 
for ‘fish’: they call it simply ‘ food,’ because that expresses the 
essential importance of fish in theireconomy.? Thus the ‘ nature’ 
or ‘essence’ 15 the social function: the physis 1s the nomor ; 
and both words denote the active, socially organised force 
expressed by a group, or moira. 


41. Primary Sympathetic Magic 


Seen in this light, the mystic identity of nature or consub- 
stantiality with the totem resolves itself into a set of common 
duties and magical observances, centred on the totem; the 
unity of the moira is the unity of its nomoi. The whole collective 
function of the human members, we are told, is to control and 
influence their non-human kindred of the same group. When 
the totem is an edible species, their business is to multiply this 
food for the common use of the tribe ; where it is a phenomenon 
like rain, wind, or sun, they have to make the rain fall or cease 

1 Cf. Lévy-Bruhl, Fonctions mentales, p. 77, for illustrations, and p. 135. 


2 I learnt these facts from Mr. A. R. Brown. Further evidence to the 
same effect is collected by Lévy-Bruhl, Fonct. ment. p. 187 ff. 


76 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


from falling, to raise or lay the wind, to regulate the sunshine. 
The means employed are commonly mimetic dances, in which 
men are disguised as impersonations of the totem, and which are 
representations of the functions of a group. 

When, however, we speak of these operations as ‘ controlling ’ 
or ‘influencing’ the natural species, we are wrongly anticipating 
a later phase of magic. Ina pure system of totemism, the human 
and non-human members, as we have insisted, are not distin- 
guished, but considered as identical ; hence neither can be said 
to ‘ control ’ the other. Their magical ceremonies are essentially 
co-operative and sympathetic—the common function of the group 
as an undivided whole. So, too, when we speak of the dances 
as mimetic, we must beware of interpreting that term from our 
own civilised conceptions. ‘Imitation’ suggests to us the act 
of deliberately copying or mimicking the external appearance 
of something unlike oneself, with the object of creating an 
illusion in the spectator. The mimetic magical dance is not 
imitative in this sense ; the focus of attention is not centred on 
an unlikeness which has to be overcome, or on any impression 
to be imposed on the onlooker. The disguise is rather an in- 
cidental means of helping out the emotion and desire of the 
actors themselves. If they want to feel with religious intensity 
what they at all times believe—that they are emus or kangaroos, 
it is obviously helpful to paint themselves so as to resemble the 
animal, and to put themselves into contact with parte of it, 
whether real or symbolically represented. But the chief and 
overmastering desire of the performers is not to produce an 
illusion, even in themselves ; it is to behave in the characteristic 
way, to represent, or rather pre-present,? the group-behaviour— 
actually to produce, there and then, with more or less realism, 
the action required of their totem, that is to say, of themselves 
and their species in co-operation. The circumstances of the 
performance exalt the sense of identity of nature by producing 
identity of behaviour—the practical expression of the common 
nature. 

The whole magical process, in this primary stage, is not to 
be conceived as a mock ceremonial, mimicking ἃ real process, 
and designed to cause that real process to happen some time 

1 For magic as pre-presentation, see J. E. Harrison, Themis, p. 44. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 77 


afterwards. That is how it may present itself to us, and perhaps 
to the magician of a decadent age, when the faith of magic has 
grown fainter. But, in the early stage now under consideration, 
magical action consists in actually doing what you want done. 
The rainmakers believe themselves simply to be ‘ making rain,’ 
not to be imitating rain, so as to cause real rain to fall later. 11 
we are right in insisting on the identity and continuity of the 
whole group—rainmakers and rain—and of their functions, 
then rainmaking and rainfall are, to the magicians, one and the 
same, not distinct events related as cause and effect. 


42. Collective emotion and desire 


What is actually experienced is sympathetic or collective 
emotion and desire. The emotion expresses itself in action, 
which, being necessarily co-operative, is of a customary and 
ritual kind, the rhythm of a dance or the prescribed gesture of a 
pantomime, motions which both enhance the feeling and give 
it vent. The desire is realised in the representation of its end. 
When the totem-clan meets to hold its peculiar dance, to work 
itself up till it feels the pulsing of its common life through all 
its members, such nascent sense of individuality as a savage 
may have—it is always very faint —is merged and lost; his 
consciousness is filled with the sense of sympathetic activity. 
The group is now feeling and acting as one soul, with a total 
force much greater than any of its members could exercise in 
isolation. The individual is lost, ‘ beside himself,’ in one of 
those states of contagious enthusiasm in which it is well known 
that men become capable of feats which far outrange their 
normal powers. Yet here again we are inclined to misuse the 
language of later phases of development. ‘ Ecstasy,’ ‘ getting 
outside oneself,’ implies that one ordinarily has a self, and 
can only get outside it under the exceptional stimulus of excite- 
ment, deliberately induced to that end. ‘Enthusiasm’ means 
being possessed by a power other than oneself which enters 
one at privileged moments. Both these conceptions belong to 
mystical religion, which must have recourse to ritual stimulants 
precisely because it has lost the primitive sense of constant and 


1 See P. Beck, Die Nachahmuny, Leipzig, 1904, p. 84 ff. 


78 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


continuous identity. The Australian savage, in whom that sense 
is hardly, if at all, disturbed, goes about his magical operations 
in a singularly businesslike way. His belief that he is a kan- 
garoo is so unquestioned that he has no need to pretend that 
he is one, or to induce a kangaroo to enter into him and possess 
him for the nonce; all he has to do is to be a kangaroo by 
behaving as one. 


43. Primary Magic needs no representation, and 18 
pre-religuous 


It appears, then, that the primitive magical fact is intense 
emotional activity, collectively experienced by a group. We 
shall presently have to inquire under what form this experience 
is expressed in conception—how it is represented. But in the 
first stage of magic, at present under consideration, there is not, 
as yet, any need for a representation at all. The collective 
life pervades the whole group in undisturbed continuity; the 
collective emotion is felt, the customary actions are performed, 
in sympathetic co-operation, by the group as a whole. Now, 
so long as it is thus lived and immediately experienced, and the 
distinction between my own power and the collective power has 
not broken out, there will be no image, or idea, or conception 
either of myself in contrast with it, or of it in contrast with 
myself. There is nothing but the actually existing natural facts 
of collective emotion, desire, and action.! 

In this primary stage we find a pre-religious condition of 
mankind ; for in the definition of religion we include some repre- 
sentation of a power which is in some sense ‘ not ourselves,’ 
and at the level we have now reached, although there exists 
such a power—namely, the collective emotion and activity of the 
group—we may infer that it will not be represented, because no 
need for representation will have arisen. 

Even among societies which have passed beyond this primary 
stage into a developed totemic system, there are some which 
have advanced so little from the pre-religious condition that they 
are reported to have no religion whatever (in the common sense 
of the word). Messrs. Spencer and Gillen expressly declare that 


1 Cf. Lévy-Bruhl, Fonct. ment. p. 283 ff. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 79 


‘the Central Australian natives . . . have no idea whatever of 
the existence of any supreme being who is pleased if they follow 
a certain line of what we call moral conduct, and displeased if 
they do not doso. They have not the vaguest idea of a personal 
individual other than an actual living member of the tribe, who 
approves or disapproves of their conduct, so far as anything like 
what we call morality is concerned.’ At initiation a boy is 
instructed in his moral duties, but he is not taught to believe in 
any supreme being. ‘In fact, he then learns that the spirit 
creature whom up to that time, as a boy, he has regarded as 
all-powerful, is merely a myth, and that such a being does not 
really exist, and is only an invention of the men to frighten the 
women and children.’ + 

Apart from these and similar reports from direct observers of 
savage tribes comparatively untouched by white civilisation, 
if we consider our primitive magical complex, we shall see that 
it is perfectly self-contained and complete without any kind of 
God. The sympathetic and continuous force which animates 
The unitary group fully suffices, at first, to express the collective 
emotion and to realise the desired end, involved in magical 
practice. There is no need for a God outside this complex, no 
room for him within it. Given that the object of a clan ceremony 
is to multiply the totem-species and promote its right behaviour, 
this object is immediately effected in mimetic representation. 
The thing desired is felt as actually performed ; and that not 
by way of influence or compulsion, but by sympathetic co- 
operation of human and non-human clansmen alike. This is not 
religion, but_pure magic. The difference between the two is 
seen to be this. The religious complex consists of worshippers 
on the one side and a spirit or God, distinct from them in kind 
and power, on the other. This distinction first makes it possible 
for the worshippers to control, influence, persuade, worship, the 
God; they can offer him gifts and beg for benefits in return. 
But in the stage of pure magic the distinction has not yet broktu 
out. The magical complex is one and continuous, both in kind 
and in power. No distinction is felt between one part of it and 


1 Northern Tribes of Central Australia, p. 491 ff. See further evidence in 
Frazer, Totemiem, vol. i. p. 141 ff. In our view the ‘spirit creature’ above 
mentioned is a religious representation, but it is minimal. 


80 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


another, because no distinction, however superficially obvious, 
is of any importance as against the identity of nature and 
functions. Hence, anything of the nature of worship is excluded 
by the very definition of such a group. A totem is not a God ; 
it is in any case (as we must never forget) a species, not an 
individual; and it has at first no powers that can be called 
‘divine,’ because it has none that its human kin do not share 
with it and exercise in common. All theology is the work of 
doubt and criticism, not of simple and childlike faith, which 
has at no time felt the need of it. 


44. The first representation needed 


How, then, will the need of representation first arise, and what 
is it that will be represented ? 

If we consider our primary complex—the continuous human 
group—we observe that its mentality contains two distinguish- 
able factors. The group is composed of individuals, each of 
whom has his own private world of inner and outer experience. 
But this by no means exhausts the psychology of these indi- 
viduals ; otherwise, the group would be a casual aggregation 
of independent atoms, destitute of continuity. Over and above 
their individual experiences, all the members of the group alike 
partake of what has been called the collective consciousness of 
the group as a whole. Unlike their private experiences, this 
pervading consciousness is the same in all, consisting in those 
infectious or epidemic states of feeling, above described, which 
at times when the common functions are being exercised, invade 
the whole field of mentality, and submerge the individual areas. 
To this group-consciousness belong also, from the first moment 
of their appearance, all representations which are collective— 
a class in which all religious representations are included. These 
likewise are diffused over the whole mentality of the group, and 
identical in all its members. The psychological force which 
diffuses them is known as ᾿ suggestion ’ or ‘ herd-suggestion.’ 

The collective consciousness is, thus, superindividual. It 
resides, of course, in the individuals composing the group— 
there is nowhere else for it to exist—but it resides in all of them 
together, and not completely in any one of them. It is both in 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 81 


myself and yet not myself. It occupies a certain part of my 
mind, and yet it stretches beyond and outside me to the limits 
of my group. And since I am only a small part of my group, 
there is much more of it outside me than inside. Its force, 
accordingly, is much greater than any individual force, and 
the more primitive I am, the greater this preponderance 
will be. Here, then, there exists in the world a power which 18 
greater than any individual’s—superindividual, that is to say, 
“ superhuman.’ 

Because this force is continuous with my own consciousness, 
it is, as it were, a reservoir to which I have access, and from which 
I can absorb superhuman power to reinforce and enhance my 
own. This is its positive aspect, to which we shall return in a 
moment. But it will also have a negative aspect, which will 
concern us later, and may here be touched upon.! In so far as 
this power is not myself and greater than myself, it is 8 moral 
and restraining force, which can, and does, impose upon the 
individual the necessity of observing the uniform behaviour of 
the group. 

With the first dawning of a distinction between myself and the 
social consciousness comes the first shadowy representation 
which can be called religious or moral. The characteristic of 
moral and religious representations is that they are obligatory— 
objects of faith which we are not allowed to question. The 
reason of this is now apparent. When the power of society— 
the only known moral power in the universe, superior to the 
individual—first comes to be felt as different from my own 
power, it is necessarily felt, in part, as a constraint, which imposes 
from without some sort of control over my actions. At first 
I shall feel myself powerless against it. Its dominance is absolute 
because the force is not wholly external. The collective con- 
sciousness is also immanent in the individual himself, forming 
within him that unreasoning impulse, called conscience, which, 
like a traitor within the gates, acknowledges from within the 
obligation to obey that other and much larger part of the collec- 
tive consciousness which lies outside. Small wonder that 
obedience is absolute in primitive man, whose individuality is 

1 See R. R. Marett, Threshold of Religion, chap. iii., ‘Is Taboo a Negative 
Magic?’ and p. 127. 

F 


82 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


still restricted to a comparatively small field, while all the 
higher levels of mentality are occupied by this overpowering 
force. 

We conclude, then, that the first religious representation is a 
representation of the collective consciousness itself—the only 
moral power which can come to be felt as imposed from without, 
and therefore need to be represented. Considered as moral 
and prohibitive, it is the first ‘not ourselves which makes for 
righteousness.’ From its positive content come the two great 
religious conceptions of God and Soul, and—strange as it 
may seem—that idea of ‘Nature’ which lies at the root of 
philosophy. 

The negative aspect of this superindividual moral power— 
its aspect as repression, imposing an external constraint—will 
give rise to conceptions such as Avenging Anger (Nemesis), 
Justice (Dike), and Destiny (Moira), when these are conceived 
as keeping individuals in their places, and asserting against 
arrogant egoism the self-protective instinct of the social group. 
These abstractions are all various ways of conceiving what the 
savage calls Taboo. We shall see, moreover, that when the 
positive content of the superhuman power is absorbed in the 
twin notions of God and Soul, its negative, repressive force 
still mses above them both, in the figure of Necessity or 
Destiny, Moira, to whom all Gods and souls are alike 
subordinate. 

But, as we before observed, this negative aspect is only the 
recoil of a positive force, which we have now learnt to identify 
with the collective power of the group. This power is only 
incidentally manifested as repressive, on the rare occasions 
when individual aggression calls it forth; and, although it is 
probably the sense of constraint that first causes it to be repre- 
sented at all, the content of the representation will not be purely 
negative, but rather consist of the positive, dynamic properties 
which give it body and force. This energy is normally expressed 
not in the repression of individuals, but in the exercise of the 
group-functions. As such it really consists, as we have seen, 
in collective emotion and desire, manifested in magical opera- 
tions. These, then, we may expect to form the content of our 
primary religious representation. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 83 


45. The Sympathetic Continuum as the representation of the 
collective consciousness 


At this point, however, an obvious cautign is required. When 
we speak of the savage forming a representation of the collective 
emotion and desire which animate a group in the performance 
of its ceremonies, we seem to be attributing to him our latter- 
day psychology and falling into the most elementary of errors. 
The subsequent argument will show that, if the savage had 
been capable of representing these facts of group-consciousness 
as they now appear to us, either theology and philosophy would 
never have existed, or their whole course would have been 
totally different. What we mean to affirm is that, while the 
real, natural fact embodied in the first religious representation 
was the group-consciousness in its active and emotional phase, 
the character of the representation formed of it by primitive 
man was, to our modern thinking, so unlike the real fact that 
we have only just come to recognise what it was that was 
represented. 

In the first place, we must remember that even civilised man, 
right on into the age of philosophy, did not succeed in conceiving 
anything as immaterial, or non-spatial. The Logos of Hera- 
cleitus, the Bemg of Parmenides, the Nous of Anaxagoras, 
the Love and Hate of Empedocles, are all indubitably possessed 
of material and spatial properties. Even when the term ‘ bodi- 
less,’ ‘incorporeal ἡ (ἀσώματον), makes its appearance in Plato, 
it is often doubtful how many material properties it negates. 
A ghost is “ bodiless,’ but, even when it is invisible and intangible, 
it is still extended in space and perhaps endowed with some active 
force. We may be certain, then, that when a savage was driven 
to form a mental image of the collective nature or powers of his 
group, he would conceive them as a subtle and mobile form of 
matter, not distinguished from vital force. 

An entity corresponding to this description does, in fact, hold 
ἃ fundamental place in the philosophy of existing savages in 
various parts of the world. Accounts of its nature and qualities 
have, of course, to be received with caution. Much so-called 
savage philosophy and theology have been developed by contact 
with Christian missionaries, who have forced upon savages the 


84 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


need to raise their implicit beliefs to a level of consciousness at 
which mutual explanation can begin. The scientific inquirer is, 
of course, exposed to the same risk of suggesting the categories 
and ideas which he seeks to elicit. But when all allowances are 
made for these sources of error, recent students seem to have 
apreed to postulate a conception now familiar under the various 
forms of mana, wakonda, orenda, etc. These various forms, 
though it appears from the descriptions of them that they have 
developed in different places along diverging lines, appear to be 
only varieties of one conception, which, as some think, lies at 
the root alike of magic and of religion.? 

The mana of the Melanesians is thus described by Dr. Cod- 
rington : 2 ‘The Melanesian mind is entirely possessed by the 
belief in a supernatural power or influence, called almost univer- 
sally mana. This is what works to effect everything which is 
beyond the ordinary power of man, outside the common pro- 
cesses of nature ; it is present in the atmosphere of life, attaches 
itself to persons and to things, and is manifested by results 
which can only be ascribed to its operation. When one has got 
it, he can use it and direct it, but its force may break forth at 
some new point; the presence of it is ascertained by proof. 
A man comes by chance upon a stone which takes his fancy ; 

its shape is singular, it is like something, it is certainly not a 
common stone, there must be mana in it. So he argues with 
himself, and he puts it to the proof; he lays it at the root of a 
tree to the fruit of which it has a certain resemblance; .. . an 
abundant crop on the tree... shows that he is right, the 
stone is mana, has that power in it. Having that power, it is 
a vehicle to convey mana to other stones. . . . This power, 
though itself impersonal, is always connected with some person 
who directs it; all spirits have it, ghosts generally, some men.’ 

In North America, we are told by a cautious and competent 


1 MM. Hubert et Mauss (‘ Esquisse d’une théorie générale de la magie,’ 
Année Sociol. vii. p. 116), after an interesting analysis of mana, remark 
that it may be taken as universally believed in, at a certain stage of 
development. At later stages it is replaced by daemons and then by 
metaphysical entities, e.g. the Indian brahman, which ends by being an 
active principle immanent in the world, the real (as opposed to illusion) 
union (yoga) with which confers magical powers. 

8 The Melanesians, Oxford, 1891, p. 118. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 85 


observer, ‘ The Omahas regard all animate and inanimate forms, 
all phenomena, as pervaded by a common life which was con- 
tinuous and similar to the will-power they were conscious of in 
themselves. This mysterious power in all things they called 
Wa-kon-da, and through it all things were related to man, and 
to each other. In the idea of the continuity of life, a relation 
was maintained between the seen and the unseen, the dead and 
the living, and also between the fragment of anything and its 
entirety.’ ἢ 

We may note at once that these Indians, who, of course, have 
long been in contact with whites, and assiduously urged by 
monotheistic missionaries to acknowledge a single ‘Great Spirit,’ 
have generalised their conception into one common life pervading 
all things. This is an inevitable stage, but probably not the 
first stage, in its history. For reasons already touched upon, it 
is likely that, the further back we could go, the more we should 
find that every group of things, defined by its social importance, 
would have a specific wakonda or mana of its own.? Indeed, we 
are driven to this view by the consideration that this medium 
is the vehicle of sympathetic action at ἃ distance, ensuring that 
persons and things related by it shall feel, act, and suffer together ; 
and in systems of magic we find that sympathetic interaction 
occurs not equally between any two objects whatever, but 
specially within the area of a group of objects which are related 
or akin.? 

A system of magic thus involves a system of classification. 


1 A. C. Fletcher, ‘The Significance of the Scalp-lock,’ Journ. of Anthrop. 
Studies, xxvii. (1897-8), p. 436. For other accounts of the conceptions of 
wakonda, orenda, mana, etc., see Hewitt, American Anthropologist, N.S., 
iv. 38; E. δ, Hartland, Address to Anthrop. Section of the British Aasocia- 
tion, 1906; R. R. Marett, Threshold of Religion, pp. 115 ff.; A. C. Haddon, 
Magic and Fetichism, London, 1906, chap. vii.; Lévy-Bruhl, Fonctsons 
mentales, 141 ff. ; Hubert et Mauss, ‘ Esquisse d’une théorie générale de la 
magic,’ Année Sociol. vii. (1904), p. 108 ff. On the work of these last-named 
authorities, the theory put forward in this chapter is based. 

3 On the other hand, the continuum is prior to distinct individuals. Cf. 
Lévy-Bruhl, Fonctions mentales, p. 109. 

* Thus, ‘among the Wakelbura and kindred tribes of Northern Queensland 
we are told that everything, animate and inanimate, belongs to one or other 
of the two exogamous classes into which the tribes are divided. A wizard in 
performing his incantations may use only things which belong to his own class.’ 
Frazer, Totemiem, i. 134. 


86 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


We have already seen, too, that the primitive type of all classi- 
fication is the grouping of society 1---ἃ fact still marked in ln- 
guistic usage by the use of the words ‘genus,’ ‘genre,’ ‘ kind,’ 
etc., to designate any sort of class. In other words, all likeness 
was originally represented as kinship. There exists, moreover, 
within any group of kin a strong bond of solidarity, which finds 
its characteristic expression in sympathetic emotion and collec- 
tive action. The members of such a group are thus psycho- 
logically en rapport with one another; in literal fact they do 
act and react on one another in a quite special degree. This 
psychological fact is the basis of that early axiom of causality 
which asserts that ‘ like can only act on like ’"—an axiom assumed 
by magic and expressly formulated by early philosophy. The 
mysterious action of magical power only works within the field 
of a certain group of things, which are ‘akin.’ Our suggestion 
is that the notions of mana, wakonda, etc., were at first repre- 
sentations of the bond of ‘ kinship’ uniting a social group—a 
supposed vehicle of sympathetic interaction. Later, they have, 
at least in some cases, been generalised into the typical form of 
all ‘ spiritual ᾿ substance.? 

When we consider under what form such an entity would be 
represented, the answer lies near at hand. Kinship 18 to our 
minds an immaterial entity—a relation. But, as we have said, 
to conceive anything as immaterial is a feat that is not achieved 
till late on in the history of rational speculation. Just as, to 
Empedocles, Philia (the solidarity of a group) was a mobile fluid 
running between the particles of the denser forms of matter, so 
to a savage the vehicle of kinship—the sympathetic continuum, 
as we shall henceforth call it—can only be represented as a 
fluid which takes the shape of the compartments which it fills. 

Following our principle that the functions of a group define 
its nature, we can see how inevitably the power resident in any 
group would be identified with the material substrate of kin- 


1 See Durkheim et Mauss, ‘ Classifications primitives,’ Ann. Soctol. vi. 

2 Cf. Lévy-Bruhl, Fonctions mentales, etc., p. 145: ‘Wakan (Wakonda 
ne saurait mieux se comparer qu’d un fluide qui circule, qut se répand dans 
tout ce qui existe, et qut est le principe mystique de la vie et de la vertu des 
éres. Cf. also the mulungu of the Central African Yaos—a conception which 
covers the individual soul, collective soul, and the mystic property possessed 
by all ‘sacred’ or ‘divine’ things (sbid., p. 141). 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 87 


ship—the blood of the group-kin. This actual substance 
answers exactly to our description of the continuum, for the blood 
is the life—the common life, derived, not from the natural parent, 
but from the totem-ancestor.1 The same fact, of kinship, is 
expressed statically and materially in terms of continuity of the 
blood, and dynamically or vitally in terms of identity of function. 
Both aspects are covered by the conception of ‘ nature ’ (physis). 
The terms mana, wakonda, etc., specially emphasise its character 
as force—the expression of life in action.” 

A totemic society, as we have already remarked, is complex 
and organic; it is a group of groups. This complexity is of a 
secondary or still higher order, developed out of the unitary 
group, which is the primary social fact. It is now clear that 
this primary group, with its collective consciousness, is sufficient 
to give birth to the first religious representation. This, we have 
argued, would be nothing but a representation of that collective 
consciousness itself, in its emotional and active phase. But, 
since a savage could not conceive such a thing as we conceive 
it, we have suggested that it would present itself to his mind as 
a subtle form of matter, not distinguished from life or from 
the vehicle of life and sympathetic interaction—the kindred 
blood. 


46. Summary 


We have now defined what, at the end of Chapter 1., we called‘ 
the primitive religious fact, and seen in what sense it is also the 
primitive social fact. We find it to be a social group (moira), 
defined by its collective functions (nomo.); these functions 
constitute its nature (physis), considered as a vital force proper 
to that group. Religion begins with the first representation of 
this fact. 

To resume the characteristics of this representation. (1) As 
collective, it is superindividual, or superhuman. (2) Being 

1 P, Beck, Die Nachahmung, p. 87: ‘Die sinnliche Vorstellung, die mit 
dem Kollektivbewusstsein verbunden 1st, ist das Blut. Wie der Hauch des 
Mundes mt dem Ennzelleben identifiziert wird, so das Blut mit dem Leben 
des Stammes.’ 

2 I shall try to show later how the notions of mana, etc., would come to 


be differentiated from the kindred blood. J am only arguing that there was 
probably an early stage in which this differentiation had not yet arisen. 


88 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


imposed on the individual by the group, its force is felt as obli- 
gatory and repressive. (3) But, on the other hand, its content 
is, also and mainly, dynamic—the energy of the group as ex- 
pressed. in collective emotion and activity, its mana. (4) It 18 
necessarily conceived in a material form, as fluid charged with 
life. (5) And this fluid, since it takes the outline of a social 
group, whose ‘nature’ it is, will inevitably be identified with 
the blood, which is common to the kin. (6) This kindred blood 
is, however, a mythical entity, in the sense that it may be con- 
ceived as uniting members of a group who are not really akin 
by blood, but may even (as in totemic clans) belong to different 
natural species (e.g. men and emus). 


47. The differentiation of ‘ God’ and ‘ Soul’ 


In the following pages we shall try to show how, out of the 
simple and fundamental conceptions which compose this primi- 
tive social fact, arose two collective representations which are 
still discussed by philosophers as well as by theologians. These 
are the ideas which we name ‘God’ and the ‘Soul.’ Our 
primary object in this inquiry will be to make out still more 
clearly the fact, established in the first chapter, that throughout 
the development of Greek polytheism, and on into rational 
speculation, the notion constantly persists, of a system of moirat, 
each filled by a specific living force, beneficently operative 
within its sphere, maleficent in its recoil upon the intruder. We 
have now to watch the process by which this force shapes itself 
into spirits, Gods, and human souls, and to realise that this pro- 
cess, with all its advance in clearness of conception and imagery, 
is 88 10 were an overgrowth, which leaves untouched beneath it the 
fundamental conceptual framework within which it springs up. 

The primitive complex of notions we have just defined—moira, 
physis, and nomos—was ineradicably fixed in collective repre- 
sentation. The reinterpretation of it into terms of personal 
Gods or human souls all took place inside the outlines of this 
formula ; it did not break them down and sweep them away. 
Hence, as we shall see, when the Milesian philosophers quietly 
left the Gods out of their scheme of things, and supposed them- 
selves to be dealing straight with natural facts, what really 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 89 


happened was that they cleared away the overgrowth of theology, 
and disinterred what had all the time persisted underneath. 
Hylozoism, in a word, simply raises to the level of clear scientific 
assertion the primitive savage conception of a continuum of 
living fluid, portioned out into the distinct forms of whatever 
classification is taken to be important. What the Milesians 
called physis has the same origin as what the savage calls mana.} 

The brief sketch, then, which follows, of the passage from 
magic to religion, is not a digression; it is an attempt to 
Indicate the process of theological complication which was un- 
ravelled again at the passage from religion to philosophy. But 
not completely unravelled. Philosophy, in our view, tried to 
cut away the superstructure of theological representation, and, in 
so doing, unwittingly harked back to the magical representation 
which preceded theology ; but meanwhile, in the religious age, ' 
the ideas of God and of the soul had become too firmly estab- 
lished. Philosophy could not sustain the effort of simply dis- 
pensing with them altogether. They perpetually haunt the 
philosopher, and distract speculation from the domain of observ- 
able fact to a region of metaphysics which escapes the control 
of scientific procedure. Hence, for the understanding of philo- 
sophy, it is essential to grasp the character of these collective 
representations, and to trace, if possible, their origin and growth, 
with just so much detail as our purpose demands. The real 
process of development must, it need hardly be said, be much 
more complicated ; and in different parts of the world it must 
have branched off along different lines, and been arrested at 
different stages. All that we shall attempt is a hypothetical 
reconstruction, in the barest outline, of the course which would 
lead from the primitive fact above defined to the religion of 
Greece as we know it in historic times. If we are right as to 
the starting-pomt, we have both ends of the chain in our hands ; 
and the only question is how, out of the confused, undifferen- 
tiated primary datum, the factors of Greek polytheism came 
to be distinguished and set up as separate classes of supernatural 
or supersensible beings. To construct anything like a complete 
history is impossible in the present state of our knowledge. 


1 This identification was, so far as I know, first put forward by MM. 
Hubert οὐ Mauss, Annee Sociol. vii. p. 116 ff. 


90 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Innumerable ethnographical and sociological changes will have 
to be made out before this chapter of pre-history can be written. 
We do not pretend to describe the causes. All that we attempt 
is really little more than an analysis—the drawing of certain 
distinctions, which must, somehow and at some time, have 
emerged out of the primary confused representation we have 
outlined, to give us the categories of Greek polytheistic religion. 
To define these, and to set them clearly before the reader, is our 
main object. 

In this inquiry, the two characters of the primary religious 
representation which specially concern us are: (1) that it is, 
from the first, a representation of the collective life in its positive, 
dynamic expression—it is thus the soul of the group; (2) that 
it is a superindividual or superhuman power, and so gives rise 
to the notion of the divine, of ‘God.’ When we look at it in 
this light, it appears that ‘God’ is, as it were, an offshoot of 
‘Soul.’ The notion of the group-soul is closer to the original 
fact of group-consciousness, of which, indeed, it is the first 
mythical representation. The notion of God, as distinct from 
Soul, arises by differentiation. Gods are projections into non- 
human nature of the representation of the group-soul. At the 
same time, Soul is only by one stage the older of the two con- 
ceptions. After that, they develop side by side in parallel courses. 

Our next question must be: how the differentiation occurs 
in the first instance. It will soon appear that this is the same 
as the problem: how ‘God’ was projected from society into 
Nature. The answer to both questions was implicitly contained 
in the last chapter ; we have now only to deduce some further 
consequences of the results there reached. 


48. From Primary Magic to Religion 


The outlines of the magical group are not, we must remember, 
necessarily conterminous with the limits of a genuine natural 
species, as recognised by our own science. In totemism, on the 
contrary, as we have seen, its boundaries traverse these limits, 
because the classification is based, not solely or primarily on 
biological facts, but on the social importance of its various 
elements. Man, for instance, is not a distinct species at all. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 9] 


Even a tribe of men—the largest group of mankind that is 
conceived—so far from being a single species, is divided up into 
as many species as there are totems; and every totem-clan 
traverses what seems to us the natural boundary between men 
and other creatures, and brings a department of Nature inside 
a subdivision of society. The kindred blood pervading such a 
group is a mythical, not a natural, fact, appropriately repre- 
sented by the mythical totem-ancestor. 

It is only when the dim consciousness of distinction has 
dawned, and the nature and behaviour (say) of an emu begin 
to appear in some degree different from, and independent of, 
the nature and behaviour of Emu-men, that the first step 18 
taken from magic on the road to religion. The intrusion of 
this fatal doubt, which, if it prevail, must shatter the social 
system, will for a long time be resisted by the whole force 
of herd-suggestion, instinctively protecting the moral fabric. 
Magical ceremonies, at first so simple and businesslike, will 
gather round them the apparatus of mystical rites, which at all 
times resort to emotional stimulants, with the very purpose of 
restoring the old sense of perfectly unbroken communion. If 
they are successful, the system may last on, as it has lasted in 
Australia, for an indefinite time. But, in less favourable 
circumstances, it may at any moment be broken down, either 
from without, by contact with the developed religion of some 
foreign ὍΝ or from bea by the growth of the intellect. 


“Same, 


at the joints,’ may + find an opening for a new prbiranen 
in which the real differences between men and emus will be 
too strong for their mystical identity. Then a time may 
come when no amount of dressing up in emu feathers and 
strutting about will bring back the old sense of communion 
and co-operation.? 


1 It is perhaps probable that the cause of this change in representation, 
where it is not due to foreign influence, should be sought in some change of 
social structure, which again may be due to mechanical causes. With that 
question we are not concerned, but only with the breaking down of the old 
faith, however caused, and its consequences. 


92 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


49. Corresponding change in representation : the two pools 


If we consider what effect this weakening of the old faith 
would have, in respect of the mythical continuum of magical 
sympathy, it is clear that this bond of union will be strained 
until it snaps. Or, to use a better metaphor, the mysterious 
fluid will part into two pools—one pool representing the magical 
powers and nature of the human clan, the other those of the 
natural species or department, formerly identified with it. 

This crisis closes the first, or pure, stage of magic, and opens 
the second, in which the magical energy of the human group is 
directed upon a natural force other than uself, which it seeks to 
control, to set in action, or to restrain. The threshold of this 
second stage of magic is also the birthplace of what is currently 
called religion. Here, for the first time, we encounter recog- 
nition of a power ‘not ourselves,’ towards which the cult- 
attitude is possible. There is something in Nature which we 
can woo, flatter, cajole, intimidate, bribe. In proportion as this 
something ceases to be human and familiar, it becomes divine 
and mysterious. Its ways are no longer just the same as our 
ways; it has begun to be incalculable, and acquired the rudiments 
of a will of its own. In some departments, moreover, such as 
the winds, the thunder, or the sea, the physical force now slipping 
from control is enormous and terrific. The making of a God 
has begun: where it will end, depends upon the genius and 
development of the race. The liberated force may acquire, one 
after another, any or all of the attributes of personality, by an 
advance which moves, step for step, with the advance of self- 
consciousness in its worshippers. At whatever point the wor- 
shippers stop, the God will be arrested too. He may crystallise 
as the vague, impersonal genius or daemon of his moirva—a 
power resident in some department and strictly confined to it. 
Or, like the Greek Gods, he may travel the whole road to com- 
pletely self-conscious personality, and become a figure so dis- 
tinct that, if he would visit mankind unrecognised, he is forced 
to assume ἃ disguise, since any one who met him in the street 
would instantly know him by sight; as men took the tall and 
bearded Barnabas for Zeus and the eloquent Paul for Hermes. 
Probably no other race of mankind has ever developed its Gods 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 93 


to this pitch of individual distinctness. For the moment, our 
point is that the process implies and reflects a corresponding 
development on the human side—a passage from group-con- 
sciousness to individual consciousness in the history of the 
human mind. 

The parting of the magical continuum into the two pools of 
human and non-human force must be accompanied—whether 
as cause or effect, we need not consider—by the dissolution 
of any social structure of a totemic type. Such structures imply 
the identity of human groups with natural species ; when this 
basis is weakened and destroyed, the elaborate departmentalism 
must break down on the human side. On the natural side, on 
the contrary, it may persist, because there the lines of division 
to a large extent separate real biological species, or classes of 
phenomena which really have a specific behaviour. Thus, in 
Nature, the old provinces of Moira can remain undisturbed ; 
but in the social organism the lines of demarcation, which 
were once continuous with their boundaries, may be obliterated, 
and superseded by a new grouping. This means, of course, ἃ 
new system of human kinship—a change such as occurs, for 
instance, when the natural fact of paternity is for the first time 
recognised. Whatever it may be that causes a change of this 
kind, it is clear that, when the outline of a group of kindred is 
determined by real affinity of blood, the correspondence between 
clan and natural d department is doomed to break down. 


50. Blood-kin and Magical Society differentiated 


Such a regrouping of society will, moreover, be reflected by 
a@ corresponding change in representation. In the present case. 
we shall now have two types of group, where before there was 
only one. The magical group will, henceforth, no longer coincide 
with the group of blood-kin. Over and above the structure based 
on consanguinity, there will accordingly emerge the magical 
fraternity, not held together by any ties of blood or supposed 

' Of course, various changes in the mode of life will also profoundly 
modify social structure and religious custom. A wandering pastoral tribe 
will be focused on its herds; a stationary society of agriculturalists will be 


mainly interested in the behaviour of the weather, the round of the seasons, 
the fertilising genius of its fixed portion of earth. 


94 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


descent from a common totem-ancestor, but only by the common 
possession of magical powers. The magical society will differ 
from the groups of kindred in the same sort of way as the Church 
differs from the family. 

~ This differentiation of the two types of group will cause a 
distinction in representation between the two types of bond 
which severally unite them. The magical society is united by 
its magical powers—its mana; the group of kindred by its 
common blood. In the original sympathetic continuum we 
supposed that these two notions were both contained in un- 
distinguished union. Henceforth, they are in some degree 
separate ; mana ceases to be a visible substance, but retains 
the properties of a material fluid; while the blood, though 
losing some of its magical power, remains the vehicle of life, 
which is, as it were, its specialised mana. 


51. Magwal Societies 


A magical society, then, is a group held together by the pos- 
session of exceptional and secret powers, reserved to an initiated 
order. These powers, moreover, being no longer limited to one 
totem-species, naturally claim a wider control over Nature, 
especially over the weather and the elements—the hot and the 
cold, the wet and the dry, rain and sun and thunder—on whose 
behaviour all life depends. 

Now, whether or not the remote ancestors of the Greeks ever 
passed through a phase of developed totemism, there certainly 
existed among them magical fraternities of the type we have 
just described. They were remembered in legend under the 
names of Kouretes, Telchines, Idacan Daktyls, Korybantes, Satyrs, 
etc., and in some cases actually survived as secret cult-societies 
far into historic times.? 


52. The Group-Soul 


A fraternity of this type has its existence as a whole; its 
‘nature, as before, consists of its collective functions. The 
individual, when he is initiated into the order, becomes just a 


For these societies see J. Εἰ, Harrison, Themis, where they are so fully 
treated that further discussion of them here is unnecessary. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 95 


Koures or a Daktyl, an undistinguished part of the whole. So, 
to-day, the first question to be asked about a monk is whether 
he is a Dominican or a Franciscan, not whether he is Brother 
This or Brother That. His personality is merged when he as- 
sumes the uniform dress, behaviour, and beliefs of his order. 

When we say of a man, ‘ He has the soul of a Jesuit,’ we convey 
in a condensed form a large amount of information (true or false) 
about the sort of behaviour that may be expected of him. Now, 
as applied to a member of a magical fraternity, a phrase of this 
type may be taken quite literally. The only ‘ soul’ a Koures has 
is the group-soul of his order, and this consists of nothing beside 
the group-functions, the behaviour expected of the group. This 
is what Aristotle would call ‘the being what it really is to 
be a Koures.’ The ‘soul’ is the collective ‘nature.’ Rites of 
initiation are regularly regarded as new births; and this implies 
that the admission of a candidate to the exercise of the new 
functions is the same fact as his being born again and receiving 
a new ‘soul.’ The soul is thus, at this stage, simply a pool of 
mana, which takes the outline of a group distinguished by 
specific functions and behaviour.! 


53. The Daemon of the Magical Society 


Another point to be noted is that a secret society of this sort, 
claiming as it does exceptional powers not possessed by all 


1 Cf. Lévy-Bruhl, Fonctsons mentales, etc., p. 92: ‘Originairement (dans 
la mesure ott U'usaye de ce terme est permis), l'rdée d’dme ne se trouve pas chez 
les primityfs. Ce quien trent la place, c'est la représentation en général trés 
émotionelle, d’une ou de plusieurs participations qui coextstent et qui s’entre- 
croisent, sans se fondre encore dans la conscrence nette d’une indsidualité 
vraiment une. Le membre d'une tribu, d’un totem, d'un clan, se sent mystique- 
ment une ἃ son groupe social, mystiquement uns a Vespéce animale ou véyétale 
qui est son totem, ete.... Ces communions, dont [intensité se renouvelle et 
saccroit ἃ des moments déterminés (cérémonies sacrées, rites d’snitiation et 
autres), ne s'empéchent niullement les unes les autres, Elles n’ont pas besoin de 
sexprimer par des concepts défints pour étre profondément senties, et pour étre 
senties par tous les membres du groupe. Plus tard, quand ces cérémonies et 
ces rites auront peu ἃ peu cessé déire compris, puis d'étre pratiqués, ces 
participations conservees dans les usages et dans les mythes préciprteront, pour 
ainsi dire, sous forme d’‘‘dmes multiples” .. . et plus tard enjin, tout pres de 
nous, comme le montre l’exemple dea Grecs, ces Ames multiples cristalliseront ἃ 
leur tour en une Ame unique, non sans que la distinction d'un principe vital et 
dun héte apirituel du corps reste visible.’ 


96 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


humanity, is lifted to a higher plane; it is, in some peculiar 
sense, sacred or holy; its members are something more than 
ordinary mortals, they are in some degree divine. Thus the 
Kouretes are called daemones, and even theot; the magician for 
Hesiod is a ‘divine man’ (θεῖος ἀνήρ). The epithet ‘divine,’ 
the term ‘daemon,’ at this stage mean nothing more than that 
the group embodies that magical superhuman force, withheld from 
the profane, which is its nature and collective soul. This col- 
lective soul is the daemon of the society ; its members are daemones 
in so far as it resides in them and they partake of it. 


54. The Daemon of the Gens 


The second type of daemon or collective soul corresponds to 
the new unitary group of a society whose structure is based on 
real consanguinity. This is the daemon of the gens or house. 
Such an entity was probably at first impersonal ; the process by 
which it acquired personality and even individuality will be 
discussed later. 

The Spirit, Fortune, or Genius of a gens is the common factor 
of a group united by kinship—as it were their collective per- 
sonality, all that the family of kin have in common, underlying 
their separate individualities, and making them different from 
any other clan or house. It survives the death of any individual 
or generation. Jt is the transmitted vehicle of hereditary 
qualities, including the tamt of hereditary guilt. It is also a 
' continuum, identified with the blood, which entails collective 
responsibility : any kinsman may be held accountable for any 
action of the whole group or of any other kinsman. Hence the 
blood-feud or vendetta.” 


55. Daemons of natural departments 


If we turn now from the human side to external nature, we 
can trace a parallel development. 


1 For the suggested derivation of theos from thes- which appears in 
πολύθεστος θέσσασθαι, perhaps θεσμός, Latin festus and feriae, see G. Murray 
in Anthropology and the Classics, p. 77. For the θεῖος ἀνήρ of Hesiod, cf. 
J. E. Harrison, Themis, p. 95. 

3 For some survivals of this daemon of a gens see above, p. 54. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 97 


It was suggested that the opening of the second stage of magic, 
which supersedes pure totemism, might be represented as the 
parting of the sympathetic continuum into two pools. The 
human pool, as we have seen, is the reservoir of superhuman force 
which makes the group of magicians something more than man. 
Correspondingly, the natural pool is a reservoir of supernatural 
force which makes the department of Nature—the element, or 
whatever species of natural objects you please—something more 
than a natural object. This something more is the raw material 
of the elemental daemon or God. It is necessarily endowed with 
some of the elements of human consciousness ; for (as we must 
never forget) it really consists of emotion and will-power pro- 
jected out of human consciousness into a non-human species 
in the co-operative ceremonies of primary magic. It is now cut 
loose from its human counterpart, and is entering upon an inde- 
pendent existence. The power of the fire, for instance, is more 
than the real, natural energy of the element as known to science ; 
it is the life and will of the fire—the will which the magician feels 
opposing his own, and has to deal with by means of the similar 
virtue in himself. The fire is, or has, a daemon in exactly the 
same way as the magical group possesses, or 18 possessed by, a 
daemon. Only, for reasons already pointed out, the one human 
group is confronted by a host of natural daemons, each speci- 
fically different, and occupying a distinct mowra—a fire-deemon, 
a water-daemon, a fever-daemon, and so on indefinitely. 

A nature-daemon is thus defined as the soul, or force, or mana, 
resident in some species of natural phenomena. It is, like its 
human counterpart, the soul of a group, not of an individual 
thing, except in cases where @ species happens to have only one 
member, as, for instance, the sun. The fire-daemon is mani- 
fested in all fire; for all fire has the same specific behaviour. 
It is for this reason that daemons, in Greek theology as else- 
where, remain impersonal ; they consist of will and force without 
individuality, because they are each the soul, not of an individual 
object, but of a species or kind (γένος), to which they are related 
exactly as the daemon of a human kindred (γένος) is related to 
his group. 

With these daemons may be classed also the spirits of striking 
natural features—rivers, rocks, trees, mountains, wells, etc.— 


98 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


which in Greek religion tended to be female (nymphs). They 
owe their existence to the same psychological causes which, 
among the Australians and elsewhere, make any feature of the 
landscape which is at all remarkable into an abode of spirits, 
or ‘ totem-centre.’ 


56. Local Good Daemons of Fertility 


Besides the elemental spirits who are the counterparts and 
antagonists of the weather magician, Herodotus, in a passage 
discussed above (p. 37), describes a class of divine beings who 
belong to a phase of Greek religion which preceded Olympianism. 
The essential feature of this phase was that the Gods, or more 
properly daemons, were undifferentiated and local. Each 
daemon was a daemon-of-all-work, and we may be sure that his 
function mainly consisted in providing an abundant and regular 
supply of the fruits of earth. 

When a tribe passes into the agricultural stage, the focus of its 
religious attention is centred on the portion of earth (its μοῖρα 
γῆς) which gives it sustenance. The Earth, just because it is now 
pre-eminently the source of life, will be pre-eminently ‘ sacred,’ 
endowed with the mysterious power which feeds the force of all 
living things. This power, possessing the bare elements of per- 
sonality, is centred, for each agricultural group, in the Good Spint 
(‘Ayados Δαίμων), giver of the fruits of the soil. He was 
worshipped sometimes beside the maternal figure of Tyche, 
Fortuna, the power of Earth herself, who brings all things to 
successful issue.1 

We must think of Greece, in pre-Olympian days, as parcelled 
out among as many of these undifferentiated local fertility 
spirits as there were distinct agricultural communities. This 
view corresponds with Plato’s ‘mythical ’ reign of the daemons 
in the age of Kronos. We have seen (§ 15) how he expressly 
compares the division of the parts of the universe among 
daemons to the present distribution of the earth into the 
seats of worship of the various Gods. He also tells us that 
each daemon was “sufficient in himself in all things for his 


1 The importance of the Good Spirit is brought out in Miss Harrison’s 
Themis, chap. viii. Sext. Math. ix. 40: καθάπερ τὸ τὴν γῆν θεὸν νομίζειν, οὐ 
τὴν αὐλακοτομουμένην ἢ ἀνασκαπτομένην οὐσίαν, ἀλλὰ τὴν διήκουσαν ἐν αὐτῇ καὶ 
καρποφόρον φύσιν καὶ ὄντως δαιμονιωτάτην. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 99 


own flock.’ Although Plato, for the purposes of his own 
philosophy, puts a mythical interpretation upon this rule of the 
daemons, it seems to reflect a genuine tradition of the phase 
described by Herodotus. 


57. Polydaemonism in China 


The system of polydaemonism, which we can thus make out 
in the background of the more familiar polytheism of later 
Greece, appears to subsist to this day in China, arrested at the 
stage of growth we have now reached. Taoism presents singu- 
larly clear traces of a course of development parallel to that 
which we have hypothetically reconstructed. We need only 
quote a few statements from a first-rate authority on Chinese 
religion.! 

‘The universe consists of two souls or breaths, called Yang 
and γύρη, the Yang representing light, warmth, productivity, and 
life, also the heavens from which all these good things emanate ; 
and the Yin being associated with darkness, cold, death, and the 
earth. The Yang is subdivided into an indefinite number of good 
souls or spirits, called shen, the Yin into particles or evil spirits, 
called kwez, spectres; it 1s these shen and kwet which animate 
every being and every thing. It is they also which constitute 
the soul of man ’ (p. 3). 

Tao is the ‘universal order which manifests itself by the 
vicissitudes of the Yang and Yin.’ ‘There is no god beyond 
nature, no maker of it, no Jahweh, no Allah. Creation is the 
spontaneous work of heaven and earth, repeating itself regularly 
in every year, or in every revolution of time or the Tao, the order 
of the universe’ (p. 102). ‘ Chaos, before it split into Yang and 
Yin and became the Tao, occupies the principal place in the 
pantheon under the name of Pan-ku’ (p. 152). ‘The sub- 
divisions of the universe, of heaven and earth, were the gods of 
ancient China, and are the gods of China to this day ’ (p. 134). 
‘The gods are such shen as animate heaven, sun, moon, the stars, 
wind, rain, clouds, thunder, fire, the earth, seas, mountains, 
rivers, rocks, stones, animals, plants, things—in particular also 
the souls of deceased men ’ (p. 5). 

1 De Groot, The Relsgion of the Chinese, New York, 1910. 


100 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


On the human side, there is ‘a Zao or way of man (jen-tao), 
being a system of discipline and ethics based upon observation 
and divination of nature, conducive to its imitation. This is a 
system of occult science, magic, a 7'ao of man pretending to be a 
copy of the great Tao of heaven and earth ’ (p. 135). “Men who 
possess the Tao by having assimilated themselves with nature, 
also possess miraculous powers, the same as those which nature 
herself displays ; they are, indeed, gods or shen of the same kind 
as those who constitute the Tao’ (p. 159). ° The human Tao is 
synonymous with virtue; it is synonymous with classical or 
orthodox doctrine ; it is synonymous with shen or divinity, and 
also with harmony with the world of gods.’ It is ‘ behaving as 
nature behaves ’ (p. 138). 

This departmental polydaemonism preserves all the main 
features we have described above. The undifferentiated Chaos 
splitting into the two contrary segments we can trace from 
Hesiod’s cosmogony, through Anaximander, to Parmenides,! 
whose two opposing principles of heavenly light and earthly 
darkness are closely analogous to Yang and Yin. What especi- 
ally concerns us now is the parallelism between the magical 
practitioners of the human Tao and their divine counterparts— 
the departmental spirits or Gods of the natural order. Shen is 
manifestly the Chinese for beneficent mana ; it is the substance 
of which Gods and the souls of ‘ divine ’ or holy men are alike 
composed. Its primitive continuity survives in the doctrine 
that ‘the universal Athmos, or Shen, pervades everything, and 
man’s life is derived from an infusion of a part of it into himself. 
Therefore he may prevent his death by constantly absorbing 
Athmos from the world surrounding him ’ (p. 146).? 


58. From Polydaemonism to Polythesm 


In the foregoing discussion of the daemonic phase of religion 
we distinguished four types of daemon in Greek theology. These 
were (1) the daemon, or genius, of the gens, or social group united 
by blood-kinship ; (2) the local Agathos Davmon, the Good Spirit 

1 For Parmenides’ system, see below, 88 115 ff. 

2 Cf. Aristotle, de Anima, av. 15; ‘The account in the so-called Orphic 


poems asserts that the soul enters from the universe in the process of 
respiration, being borne upon the winds,’ See further, p. 129 below. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 101 


or genius of fertility, embodying the life-giving ‘power of the 
portion of earth inhabited by the social group ; (3) the daemon, 
or collective soul, of a magical fraternity, which consists of their 
collective powers or superhuman mana, exercised in magical 
control of nature; (4) the daemon of a natural element—the 
non-human (or dehumanised) counterpart of (3), the supernatural 
mana of a natural department. 

From these four types of daemon we have now to show by 
what process there emerge four types of divine beings who are 
mdundual—the King, the Hero, the Mystery God, and the 
Olympian. These are the four principal factors in Greek 
polytheism, as known to us in historical times. 


59. From impersonal daemon to individual soul and 
personal God 


When we call all these entities ‘daemons,’ we imply that 
they are still impersonal, and not individual. They retain the 
collective character which marks them as derived from the 
common consciousness of a group, not from the individual 
consciousness of one person. It is upon this point that we join 
issue with animism as popularly understood. The animistic 
theory of the origin of religion commonly states that the savage 
believes everything in the world to possess a soul like his own. 
Now, if we are right in supposing that individual self-conscious- 
ness is quite a late growth, that it is only after an age-long 
struggle that the individual soul comes to define itself in dis- 
tinction from the group, it follows that animism, as so stated, 
must be of correspondingly recent date. At first, the individual 
has no soul of his own which he can proceed to attribute to other 
objects in nature. Before he can find his own soul, he must first 
become aware of a power which both is and is not himself—a 
moral force which at once is superior to his own and yet is 
participated in by him. 

Now, as we have seen, the only thing in the world which 
answers to that description is the collective consciousness,which 
both is immanent in every member of the group and also lies 
beyond him, diffused throughout all the members in continuous 
distribution. This, then, is the primal source of religious repre- 


102 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


sentation. In proportion as it comes to be felt more and more 
as ‘not ourselves,’ it becomes increasingly superhuman and 
divine; and, on the other hand, human individuality comes to 
be defined, hardened, and consolidated in contrast with it. 
The process, therefore, may be conceived as an externalisation, or 
projection, of the collective power which once was ourselves, 
into a power, at first daemonic and then personal, which 1s not 
ourselves. What we have now to do, is to form some notion of 
how this process takes place. How does the collective con- 
sciousness or emotional and active life of a group come to be 
externalised and projected into a personal daemon or God, while, 
on the other hand, the group-soul gives place to the individual 
soul ? 


60. The emergence of the Chief, or King 


The collective authority of the tribal group was, at first, vested 
in the group as a whole. This state of things survived in the 
Hebrew organisation, where we find the criminal arraigned before 
the whole tribe, which both gives and executes judgment. It 
existed also in Germany as described by Tacitus.1 So again, 
under the laws of Solon, the ἡλιαία nominally consisted of all 
citizens above the age of thirty. The social group as a whole is 
the administrator, and even the source, of law, which immediately 
affirms the emotional reaction of the common consciousness upon 
crime. 

The first individual embodiment of the repressive authority 
of the tribe is the despotic chief. “The individuals, instead of 
subordinating themselves to the group, subordinate themselves 
to its representative ; and since the collective authority, when it 
was diffused, was absolute, that of the chief, which is only an 
organisation of it, naturally took the same character.’ ‘It is 
a general law that the pre-eminent organ of any society partakes 
of the nature of the collective entity which it represents. 
Accordingly, where society has that religious, and (so to say) 
superhuman, character, which we have traced to its origin in 
the constitution of the common consciousness, it is necessarily 


1 Germ. 11, 12. Cf. E. Durkheim, Sur la div. du trav. soc.*, Ὁ. 42, from 
whom these instances are taken. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 103 


transferred to the chief who directs it, and who is thus elevated 
high above the rest of men. Where the individuals are simply 
dependent on the collective type, they quite naturally become 
dependent on the central authority in which that type is 
incarnated.’ ! 

Thus, out of the collective life of the many, emerges the One. 
But this one is not an independent individual. However abso- 
lute his power may be, he is not a tyrant claiming to be the 
original source of all authority. He does not rule by his own 
right, but solely as the representative of society. The authority 
he wields is drawn from the group, and only temporarily de- 
posited in him. He is an externalised group-soul—a daemon, 
not yet a God. This representative character explains the 
curious phenomenon of temporary kingships, upon which 
Dr. Frazer's work has thrown so much hght. This frequent 
phenomenon shows how the authority deposited in a king 
retains its collective character and remains distinguishable from 
his personality. 

Just because it remains distinguishable, a third and final stage 
is possible, in which the collective authority mses above the 
human sovereign and becomes transcendant in the impersonal 
form of Law. It ascends from the daemonic plane to the divine. 
Such was the position of the Mosaic Law in Hebrew society. 
The divinity of the Law is, of course, represented by declaring 
it to be the direct utterance of God. But the sovereign in a 
society which calls itself theocratic is, of course, really the divine 
Law itself. Thus, the collective authority first passes upwards 
to the daemonic chief, and then, through him, to the heaven 
above him, whose representative and functionary he now becomes, 
ruling by ‘divine right.’ At a much later stage of social de- 
velopment, a similar phenomenon occurs in the Greek democracy, 
the constitutional theory of which is that the sovereign is that 
impersonal and dispassionate reason, called Nomos.? 

Such, too, appears to be the position of Mowa, above and 

1 KE. Durkheim, Sur la division du travail social*, pp. 156, 172. 

2 Herod. vii. 104: ἐλεύθεροι γὰρ ἐόντες οὐ πάντα ἐλεύθεροί εἰσι" ἔπεστι γάρ σφι 
δεσπότης Νόμος. Arist. Pol. 1287a 28, ὁ μὲν οὖν τὸν νόμον κελεύων ἄρχειν δοκεῖ 
κελεύειν ἄρχειν τὸν θεὸν καὶ τὸν νοῦν μόνους, ὁ δ᾽ ἄνθρωπον κελεύων προστίθησι καὶ 


θηρίον" ἥ τε γὰρ ἐπιθυμία τοιοῦτον, καὶ ὁ θυμὸς ἄρχοντα: καὶ τοὺς ἀρίστους ἄνδρας 
διαφθείρει" διόπερ ἄνευ ὀρέξεως νοῦς ὁ νόμος ἐστίν. 


104 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


beyond the humanised polity of Olympus. She is the consti- 
tutional Law of the universe, restricting the aggression of in- 
dividual egoism. When the divine community is patriarchalised 
—a change which presumably reflects a corresponding trans- 
formation in human society—an attempt is made to substitute 
for Destiny the patria potestas, the will of Father Zeus. But 
the attempt is not wholly successful. It will be remembered 
how in the fifteenth Iliad, Poseidon claims that his status and 
mowra are on the same level with Zeus—he is ἰσόμορος and 
ἰσότιμος. Zeus, he adds, had better try to terrorise his own sons 
and daughters, who must of necessity obey his commands.! Thus, 
the patria potesias has its limits, and these are fixed by the social 
consciousness of Olympus, which still rises, even above Father 
Zeus, in the all-dominating figure of Moira. 


61. The King as Arch-magician 


But, as Dr. Frazer has pointed out, the functions of the 
primitive king are not solely, or even chiefly, political. In the 
light of what has gone before, the reason is clear. The 
collective powers deposited in him were not merely repressive 
and punitive; they were also magical. The king is the 
arch-magician. He has to regulate the weather, to stimulate 
the growth of herds and crops, to see that the sun may shine 
and the rain fall.? 

In this respect, he is the successor of the magical society, whose 
appearance we described above. From such a society it is 

possible that he may directly emerge, extending his scope from 
magical to political power. But, here again, his position at 
first is of the type we have called daemonic ; he gathers to him- 
self the force derived from the group. Only later will he become 
1 Il. xv. 197: θυγατέρεσσιν γάρ τε καὶ υἱάσι βέλτερον εἴη 
ἐκπάγλοις ἐπέεσσιν ἐνισσέμεν, obs τέκεν αὐτός, 
οἵ ἐθεν ὀτρύνοντος ἀκούσονται καὶ ἀνάγκῃ. 

* Lévy-Bruhl, Fonct. ment. p. 291. In most societies of a type slightly 
higher than the Australian, the desired (magical) result is no longer assured 
by the totemic group. ‘Un membre du groupe, particuliérement qualifié, est 
souvent le véhicule, obligé ou chorsi, de la participation quil s’agit @établir.’ 
The individual is sometimes designated by his birth, for a man is his 


ancestors, or a particular ancestor reincarnated. ‘C'est ainsi que les chefs 
et les rois, de par leur origsne, sont souvent lex intermédiaires nécessaires.’ 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 106 


the priest, who poses as the representative of a higher power 
descending upon him from the divine region above. 

Especially interesting, as marking a transitional phase, are 
what Dr. Frazer calls the ‘ departmental kings of nature.’1 * In 
the backwoods of Cambodia live two mysterious sovereigns, 
known as the King of the Fire and the King of the Water. Their 
royal functions are of a purely mystic or spiritual order; they 
have no political authority ; they are simple peasants, living by 
the sweat of their brow and the offerings of the faithful.’ They 
hold office for seven years, spending their time, according to 
one account, in absolute solitude, shut up in a tower on a moun- 
tain. If they fall ill, they are stabbed to death. The offices are 
hereditary in certain families, because these possess talismans 
which would lose their virtue or disappear, if they passed out 
of the family. When a vacancy occurs, the kinsmen of the 
dead king flee to the woods to escape the dreadful office ; the 
first who is hunted out is made King of the Fire or of the 
Water. 

It is transparently clear from this strange story that these 
magical kings are simply human daemons—the individual de- 
positaries of the magical power possessed by 8 certain clan, 
which power is the correlative of the daemonic power of the 
elements they control. 

There is abundant evidence from all quarters that this magical 
control of nature remains as the primary function of kingships 
of more developed types. Because at one time human society 
and nature formed one solid system, the head of society 18 ipso 
facto the head of nature also; he is the source of law, which 
governs the elements no less than mankind. In this sense, he 
is pre-eminently ‘divine.’ His judgments or ‘dooms’ (θέμιστες) 
are, as Hesiod 2 tells us, inspired. The word Themes, like its 
cognate, the English ‘doom,’ means both ‘ judgment,’ ‘ decree 
of right,’ and also the oracular utterance of Fate ; once more we 
find what ought to be undistinguished from what must and will 
be. The king is spokesman of the world-order, of destiny and 
law ; for he is the seer, and moves in the world of supersensible, 
sacred things, in immediate and perpetual contact with that 


1 Golden Bough, part 1. vol. 11. p. 1 ff. 
3 Theog. 80 ff. For Themis, see J. E. Harrison, Themis, chap. xi. 


106 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


power in nature which is the magnified reflex of his own august 
potency. 

That reflex, that Brocken spectre, of the king of men will 
come to be none other than the king of Gods; for the divine 
monarchy evolves step for step with the human institution 
which it reflects. Hence we are not surprised to find the 
human king conceived, by developed theology, as the 
embodiment or representative of the divine king—the Greek 
Zeus or the Roman Jupiter.’ 


62. The Eponymous Hero 


Somewhat similar to the development of the king is the growth 
of the representation called the eponymous hero. The source 
of this figure is transparently revealed by the fact that his name 
is not an individual appellation, but merely the singular form of 
the tribal name. Ion, for instance, is neither more nor less than 
the Ionian—the type and genius of all Ionians. As such, the 
eponymous hero is not an individual, but a persona—a mask, 
a representation of the genius of a social group. 

His life-history, if he has any, is, at least partly, made up out of 
the life-history of the tribe. Thusit has been shown conclusively 
that many of the duels (ἀνδροκτασίαι) of the warriors in the Iliad 
are simply real conflicts between the tribes, individualised into 
the personal achievements of the eponyms that represent them.” 
This is mainly the work of epic poets, who endow a daemon 
of purely mythical origin with a quasi-historic personality, so 
vivid and distinct that the Euhemerists of all ages will defend 
his historic existence. 

The tribal hero may reach the final stage of individualisation, 
if the empty persona happens to be filled by an historic person- 
ality. This may occur if some actual chieftain of great renown, 
who renders exceptional services to his tribe, is looked upon as 
the incarnation, par excellence, of the tribal genius. Thus a 
real man may, after his death, become a patron saint; but 
only because the empty frame into which he steps is already 

1 So in Zl, i. 238 the sceptre 1s held by the kings who are δικάσπολοι, of τε 
θέμιστας πρὸς Aids εἰρύαται. Their judgments are derived from Zeus. 


5. K. Bethe, ‘Homer und die Heldensage,’ Newe Jahrb. Klass. Alt. 1902; 
G. Murray, Rise of the Greek Hpic}, Ὁ. 181. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 107 


provided in the representation of the ‘hero.’ The individual 
hero in this way resembles the individual king. He owes his 
position, not merely to his really exceptional character and 
powers, but to the fact that there already exists a representation, 
personalised and daemonic, of that superhuman mana which is 
recognised as embodied in his individuality. The historic 
circumstances of his life and character, which occasioned his 
canonisation, are the least important part of him, and may soon 
be forgotten. His actual achievements blend with the other 
glorious acts of tribal history in a composite memory that defies 
analysis. 


63. Hero-worship 


Since, as we have seen, the hero is not originally an individual 
man, but represents the genius, or soul, or mana of a tribe, he 
keeps, like the king, a functional character. Saints are wor- 
shipped, not for the miracles which they performed in their life- 
time, but because those miracles proved that they possessed 
superhuman power, which may be counted upon to work more 
miracles in the future. The expectation of these benefits to 
come gives vitality to the cult. In precisely the same way, the 
hero who saved his country while he lived, watches over it after 
his death as guardian and saviour (φύλαξ, σωτήρ), and is the 
object of worship. 

His cult may easily blend with that of the local daemon of 
fertility—the Good Spirit who provides the fruits of the earth 
to a society dependent on agriculture.1 He will then become 
a daemon-of-all-work, charged with all the main functions 
which contribute to the sccial welfare—a saviour in war, 
and in peace ‘a giver of wealth, for that too is a kingly 
function.’ 2 

When such a fusion has taken place, the supposed life-history 
of the hero will be further enriched by ritual myths. These 
myths, which were originally representations of rites performed 
in the service of the Good Spirit, come to be translated into 
historical incidents in the hero’s career. The Greek hero- 

1 This explanation of hero-worship by the blend of Hero and Agathos 
Daimon is due to Miss J. E. Harrison (7'hemis, chap. viii.). 


* Hesiod, Hrga, 125 of the Spirits of the Golden Race: 
πλουτοδόται" καὶ τοῦτο γέρας βασιλήιον ἔσχον. 


108 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


legends are full of myths which have this ritual origin, and 
require to be carefully distinguished from those personalised 
exploits of tribal history which go to make another element in 
the legends.1 


64. The Individual Soul and Immortality 


In the king and the hero we have found transitional forms, 
which make, as it were, a bridge from the daemon of a group to 
the individual soul. The chief was, probably, the first individual.? 
The collective authority of the tribe, vested in him, must in- 
evitably be confounded with his individual will, which it rein- 
forces with superhuman power; for he will not be capable of 
those nice distinctions which modern officials love to draw 
between the various ‘ capacities ’ in which they act. The most 
successful tyrants, like Napoleon, are men of childish vanity, 
who believe that their own will is the primary source of their 
power. Thus, by a curious perversion, egoism establishes itself 
by the absorption of force derived from the subjects of its tyranny. 
The sense of individuality grows strong by feeding on the collec- 
tive mana. 

On the other hand, the king is still regarded by others as a 
mere depositary of social authority—a temporary embodiment 
of a power which existed before him and will be transmitted to 
his successor. The same holds true of the head of the gens 
or of the patriarchal family. In other words, the soul possessed 
by these individuals does not begin and end with their lifetimes, 
but is zmmortal. The soul has been held to be immortal, primarily 
because it was at first impersonal and superindividual—the soul 
of a group, which outlives every generation of its members. 
Beginning as the collective and impersonal life of the group, it 
becomes confounded, as we have seen, with the individual 
personality of the chief; and there was, probably, a stage in 
which only chiefs or heroes had immortal souls. The tradition 
of such a phase seems to survive in Hesiod’s Age of Bronze—a 
class of immortals which consists of the heroes who fought at 


1 In my chapter on the Olympic Games in Miss Harrison’s Themis, I have 
tried to show that the Pindarnc legend of Pelops consists of ritual myths 
of this kind. 

2 See E. Durkheim, Sur la div. du travail social®, p. 172. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL ᾿ 109 


Tlion and Thebes, but does not include the undistinguished mass 
of their followers. 

The democratic extension of immortality to all human 
beings was perhaps partly helped by the rise of the patriarchal 
family, as the unit of a new social structure. The | family ly differs 
ἴσαι the onginal undifferentiated group, in that it is organic: 
the father, the mother, the son, and the daughter, have each a 
distinct function in the household economy, and this means a 
distinct “ nature,’ essence, or “soul.’2 But, no doubt, many other 
causes contributed to this result. 

One such cause may have been the dream-image or memory- 
image, in which some inquirers have sought the whole origin of the 
belief in immortality. The point to be noted about this image 
(erdolon) is that it is from the first individual—it is the visible 
“shape ’ (οὐ 408) or appearance, which is recognisable as belonging 
to one particular person whom we have seen and known. It 
would, therefore, be peculiarly effective in facilitating the idea 
that some part of every human being survives his death. 

The psychology of Homer shows that this evdolon may remain 
distinct from that other kind of soul we have hitherto considered 
—the blood-soul, in which the vital powers or mana reside. Man 
in Homer has two souls. His evdolon or psyche escapes from his 
mouth at the moment of death; it is his recognisable shape, 
which may, for a time, revisit his survivors in dreams. It does 
not exist until the moment of death ; and it does not carry with 
it to the world of shades any of his vital force. This resides in 
the other soul (θυμός), whose visible vehicle is the blood; and 
it is only by drinking blood that the e:dolon can recover its “ wits’ 
(φρένες) or consciousness. In the mortal soul we find again the 
same combination of blood and mana which composed the 
sympathetic continuum of primary magic. As contrasted with 
the individual and recognisable erdolon, it is less personal—the 

1 Frga, 156 ff. They were ἀνδρῶν ἡρώων θεῖον γένος, ἡμίθεοι, and ὄλβιοι 
ἥρωες, for whom the earth bears fruit three times a year—so much functional 
fertility-mana have they carried with them to the Isles of the Blest. 

2 Some of the Sophists delighted in defining the virtue of the father, of the 
wife, etc., s.e. their specific function. 

3 Mr. A. E. Crawley (Zhe Idea of the Soul, London, 1909) has defended 
the memory-image in a new and interesting way, as against the older dream- 


theory. While emphasising the importance of the group-soul, I would not 
seem to underrate these other factors. 


110 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


same in all men alike—and thus bears the mark of its original 
collective character. 

The distinction between these two kinds of soul is important 
for the later course of philosophic psychology. The eidolon soul, 
the recognisable shape or image, is the soul as object (and later 
as subject) of knowledge; the blood-soul is the soul as the 
principle of force and motion. It is under these two heads that 
Aristotle, in the first book of his Psychology, groups the theories 
held by his predecessors, about the nature and functions of soul.? 

So, at last, we reach the notions of the individual ker, daemon, 
and moira. The ker is an erdolon, or winged sprite, which wears a 
sinister aspect—is an object of fear. If it is angry and seeks 
vengeance, it is an Erinys. Considered as allotted to the indi- 
vidual at birth, it is his movra—the span or limit of his vital 
force, the negative and repressive aspect of his fate. Being 
derived from a vanished group, the movra is necessarily shadowy, 
negative, unreal. The daemon (genius) of a person, on the other 
hand, retains the element of beneficent power, of functional 
mana. When Heracleitus, for example, says that a man’s 
character is his daemon, he means that it is the force which 
shapes his life from within, and makes or mars his fortunes, not 
a ‘destiny ’ allotted him from without.’ 


65. The formation of personal Gods, Mystic and Olympian 


Such, in briefest outline, is the history of the king and of the 
hero, leading to the individual soul. The two other types of 
divine being recognised by Greek polytheism still remain to be 
considered—the Mystery God and the Olympian. We shall 


1 For Homeric psychology, see Rohde, Psyche, chap. i. Among the 
Melanesians, ‘if a man has mana it resides in his ‘spiritual part” or 
“soul,” which after death becomes a ghost. . . . Not every man has mana, 
nor every ghost ; but the soul of a man of power becomes as such a ghost 
of power. . . . Mana can come very near to meaning “‘soul ” or ‘‘spirit,” 
though without the connotation of wraith-like appearance’ (Marett, Threshold 
of Religion, p. 134). 

3 See below, § 77. 

3 Cf. Isocrates, ix. 25, speaking of Euagoras: τοσαύτην ὁ δαίμων ἔσχεν αὐτοῦ 
πρόνοιαν, ὅπως καλῶς λήψεται τὴν βασίλειαν, ὥσθ᾽ ὅσα μὲν ἀναγκαῖον ἣν wapa- 
σκενασθῆναι δι’ ἀσεβείας, ταῦτα μὲν ἕτερος ἔπραξεν, ἐξ ὧν δ᾽ οἷόν τ᾽ ἣν ὁσίως καὶ 
δικαίως λαβεῖν τὴν ἀρχήν, Εὐαγόρᾳ διεφύλαξεν. For the guardian genius of the 
individual, see Rohde, Psyche ὃ, ii. 316. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 111 


try to exhibit their nature and origin by recurring to our con- 
ception of the two pools of mana, into which the original sym- 
pathetic continuum divided. The essential difference between 
these two types of God, which persists in spite of all reaction 
between them, is that the Mystery God is, from first to last, the 
daemon of a human group, while the Olympian God develops 
out of the daemon of a local department, who has become dis- 
tinct from his worshippers.1 


66. The Mystery God 


The typical Mystery God of Greek religion is, of course, 
Dionysus. In his case, the cult organisation reflects the essential 
fact that he is the daemon of a human group. From first to last 
he is attended by this group, called his thiasos, whether it be in 
the idealised form of the troop of Maenads and Satyrs, or the 
actual band of human worshippers, of Bacchae and Bacchoi. The 
group, moreover, becomes a religious, not a political, unit—a 
church, not a state. It is a secret and mysterious society ; 
admission to it is a matter of initiation, because Dionysus is a 
wandering divinity, not a fixed part of an official state religion, 
access to which is the birthright of every citizen. His church, 
accordingly, is a trans-social organisation, and essentially of 
the same type as the secret society of magicians, with which, 
indeed, it easily amalgamates, if it does not directly arise from it.? 

It is true that Dionysus represents, not only the soul or life 
of a human group, but also the life of all animate nature. But 
we must note that this life of nature 18 modelled upon the cycle 
of human life. The seasonal round of vegetation—its death in 
winter and rebirth in spring—is a larger transcript of the phases 
of human existence, birth and death and rebirth in the wheel 
of reincarnation. Hence, in this type of religion the conceptual 
framework is temporal—the recurrent circle of the year, which 
ends where it began; whereas in the case of Olympian Gods 

1 The distinction between these two types of religion has never been 
better stated than by Friedrich Nietzsche in his Geburt der Tragédie, a work 
of profound imaginative insight, which left the scholarship of a generation 
toiling in the rear. , 

I do not, of course, deny that the group was originally local and tribal ; 


I am only describing a later stage at which the religion had become de- 
localised. - 


112 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


the framework is spatial—the provincial order of Moira. Hence, 
too, the mystery cult gathers up those older magical ceremonies 
(in which at first sexual magic was prominent), designed to 
promote by sympathetic co-operation the birth and flowering 
and fruitfulness of trees and plants. The religion holds fast 
to the sympathetic principle that all life is one, and conceives 
Nature under that form which seems to keep her processes most 
closely in touch with the phases of human experience. Dionysus, 
then, and other such Mystery Gods, are fundamentally human 
daemons, however much they may be naturised , and the course 
of their development is, to that extent, the reverse of the process 
by which an Olympian, from being the impersonal daemon of a 
department, becomes more and more humanised, or (as we say) 
anthropomorphic. 

Because the province of a Mystery God is always, primarily, 
the human society from which he immediately springs, it is 
possible for him to remain human as well as divine. In this lies 
the secret of the vitality of mystical religions. The character- 
istic rite is sacramental—an act of communion and reunion with 
the daemon. Its effect may be conceived under two comple- 
mentary aspects: either as enthustasm—God enters into his 
group and they become ἔνθεοι ; or as ecstasy—man rises out 
of, and above, the prison of his individuality and loses himself in 
the common life of the whole, becoming “ immortal ’ and ‘ divine.’ 
Thus, the God remains both human and daemonic, being per- 
petually, at every celebration of the rite, re-created in the collec- 
tive emotion of his congregation. Orgiastic ritual ensures that 
the passage from the human plane to the divine remains open, 
and is continually traversed. God can enter into man, and man 
can become God.! 

In theology the same truth is reflected in the fact that 
Dionysus, even when his worship was contaminated with Olym- 
pian cults, never became fully an Olympian. His ritual, by per- 
petually renewing the bond of union with his group, prevented 
him from drifting away from his province, as the Olympians 
had done, and ascending to a remote and transcendental heaven. 
Moreover, a mystery religion is necessarily monotheistic or 

1 Schol. Ar. Knights, 406: βάκχον οὐ τὸν Διόνυσον ἐκάλουν μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ 


κώντας τοὺς τελοῦντας τὰ ὄργια. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 113 


pantheistic. Teaching the unity of all life, it disposes of poly- 
theism by the doctrine that all the Gods are only diverse shapes 
of one divine principle, ‘ one nature with many names.’ Diony- 
sus, accordingly, could not, for all the grotesque attempts of 
theologians, be fitted into a subordinate place in the Olympian 
polity. He was the God of his church—a group not social or 
organic, but defined precisely by its unique relation to its daemon- 
soul. Such a group cannot have more than one God. 

It is easy to see how this mystical scheme, rather than Olym- 
pianism, provides the appropriate setting for half-human and 
half-divine figures like Pythagoras, Buddha, and Jesus—actual 
living prophets, who, during their life or after their death, became 
the daemons of religious societies. The several stages in the 
deification of Jesus provide an instructive analogy to the at- 
tempted Olympianisation of Dionysus. The process shows the 
same tension between opposite forces. The upward-pulling 
force is the metaphysical affiliation to an already transcenden- 
talised Father God : the emphasis on the divine nature threatens 
to exclude the human, and to draw the daemon away from his 
group into a heaven of philosophical abstraction. But this tend- 
ency 1s prevented from completely triumphing by those mystical 
rites which perpetually reconstitute the emotional sense of 
communion and realise the promise: ‘ Where two or three are 
gathered together, there am I in the midst.’ In Romanist 
countries the real, human relation of Mother and Son has almost 
completely eclipsed the Fatherhood, which was never more than 
metaphysical! The really living objects of Christian cult are 
the figures of actual men and women—the Virgin, her Son, the 
saints and martyrs ; not the two other Persons of the Trinity, or 
the angels, in whom the Christian Fathers recognised the daemons 
of paganism. 

In this type of religion, then, the central fact is the human 
group, with a homogeneous, inorganic type of solidarity,” held 
together by the unique relation in which it stands to its daemon 
—a relation by which man can participate in the divine, and, 


1M. Jacques Raverat points out to me that for the French peasant the 
human father has effaced the divine. His trinity is Jésus-Marie-Joseph. 

* Hence the communism and equality of the Early Church and of the 
Pythagoreans. 


H 


114 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


conversely, the divine can enter into man. It is the parent of 
mystical philosophies, of monistic and pantheistic systems, 
which hold that the One can pass into the Many and yet remain 
One. It is also idealistic in tendency, in the sense that it 18 
other-worldly: the One is not only within, but beyond and 
above, the Many, and more real, because more powerful, than 
they. Accordingly, the Many, as such, are condemned to un- 
reality, to mere ‘seeming’ or appearance—half-false represen- 
tations of the One reality. 


67. The Olympian God 


In almost every important respect the Olympian presents a 
striking contrast to the Mystery God. With the progress of 
his worshippers towards increasing self-consciousness, he has 
advanced to the stage of quasi-individual personality. Like 
the tribal Hero, he has been endowed by the poets with a 
definite character, and a biographical record. He stands on 
his own feet, and is detached from the human group: he has 
no church, no thiasos. From this fundamental fact the chief 
characteristics of Olympian religion can be deduced. 

Since such a God has no human congregation, whose soul or 
daemon he can be, the relation of worshipper to God cannot be 
one of communion : the worshippers cannot re-create and feed 
him with their own emotional experience in mystical rites. 
God and worshippers do not form one solid group, but con- 
front one another, as a social or political unit and a power of 
Nature—between which only an external relation, of a con- 
tractual or commercial type, can subsist. Accordingly, the 
characteristic rite of Olympianism is the commercial sacrifice, 
regarded as a gift or bribe, in exchange for which benefits are 
to be returned. This ritual supersedes the attempt at direct 
compulsion previously made by the magician, who still believed 
that his own mana was a match for the divine mana of Nature. 
He who can no longer feel himself strong enough to compel, 
resorts to persuasion and the methods of commercial barter.? 

1 Cf. the analysis of religion in Plato’s Zuthyphro. 

2 Cf. Plato, Rep. 364 B, where the mendicant magician at once describes 


his power as ‘derived from the Gods’ (δύναμις ἐκ θεών ποριζομένη) und claims 
to ‘induce the Gods to serve him’ (τοὺς θεοὺς πείθοντές σφισιν ὑπηρετεῖν). 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 115 


Further, there is not for the Olympian God that bond of union 
which prevents the Mystery God from drifting altogether away 
from his province. The Olympian God sheds his functions, 
and so is cut loose from his anchorage in the life of earth. 
In proportion as he becomes anthropomorphic, he comes to 
be less and less in touch with his natura) region. The forma- 
tion of a pan-hellenic religion meant that the Olympians left 
their provinces, to go and form a polity of their own on the 
top of a mountain. Finally, they leave the earthly Olympus, 
and vanish into the sky. Nature, dispeopled of Gods, is left 
free for science. 

The grouping of the Gods into a patriarchal family involves 
(as we saw in the case of human society) differentiation of 
function. The Gods, as Herodotus says, from being an in- 
distinct plurality of impersonal daemons, come to have separate 
‘arts’ and ‘figures,’ and to form a group of the organic type. 
Thus, thanks to the extraordinary definiteness of Greek imagina- 
tion, they acquire very clear personalities. But, though such 
a (od mav become a person, this persona 18 not really more than 
an empty mask—not an individual. A God who was never a man, 
can never acquire individuality, for the simple reason that the 
indispensable basis of individuality 1s the unique world of inner 
and outer experience which every real animal being has, but 
nothing else can have The Olympian God can never be more 
than an evdos, ἃ species. As such, moreover, he is without any 
inward principle of life and growth—immortal and immutable. 
The only life he ever had was the daemonic and supernatural 
energy of his province, derived from its source in human 
emotion. As he recedes from this province and withdraws to 
his humanised Olympus, the mana passes out of him. Whither 
does it go ? 

Much of it, no doubt, is retained by the local divinity, the 
patron of the community, Athene at Athens, Hera at Argos, and 
so forth. The Olympian system does not supersede and efface 
the worship of a local spirit, any more than Catholic theology has 
succeeded in universalising its divinities. The Notre Dame of 
one village is distinct from, and may even be at enmity with, the 
Notre Dame of the next.! But, for more intellectual minds, these 


1 See A. Daudet, ‘ La Diligence de Beaucane’ in Lettres de mon Moulin. 


116 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


local Gods will be weakened and discredited by the mere existence 
of an Olympian pantheon to which they half belong. The 
Gods are uprooted, and what power is left to them must become 
not local, but cosmic. 


68. The Gods and the Elements 


We seem to discern one attempt to provide the Gods with 
new moirai in that cosmic dasmos of the elemental regions which 
we described in Chapter 1. It has already been remarked 
that this is a late and artificial proceeding. It seems to be 
based on a primitive elemental complex, which includes the 
powers instrumental in providing man with food—the thunder 
(fire), the rain, the clouds, and the earth. These were at first 
grouped in a pair—earth and the thunder-cloud, which breaks 
into fire and descends in rain to fertilise the dry ground in the 
primal marriage of Earth and Heaven, united by Eros. In the 
triple dasmos of the sons of Kronos, the trinity of Gods divide 
among them the three superterrestrial factors. Zeus is the 
thunder-God of all light and fire and warmth, who, for political 
and other reasons, happened to prevail. Poseidon has in the 
same way come to stand for all the powers of moisture, wells 
and rivers and seas; Hades is lord of the dark and cold air— 
the clouds and the western darkness. Karth remains yet 
common to all; but the agriculturalist is now taught to look 
upwards to heaven for the powers that give increase.! 

In the climate of the Mediterranean, with its rainless summer, 
the natural anxieties of the farmer, and consequently many of his 
religious rites, are concentrated on the powers of heat and cold, 
of wet and drought. The year divides itself into two well-marked 
periods—the θέρος and χεῖμα of Homer—in which the hot and 
the dry are leagued against the cold and the wet,? and each pair 

1 The battle of the Gods in Pherekydes is between the sons of Earth on 
the one side and the Heaven-God with spirits of fire, water, and wind on 
the other; see Eisler, Weltenmantel, in. 660. For the 7slanomachsa, see 
J. E. Harrison, Themis, p. 453. 

* This opposition peeps out in odd places; cf. the herald’s speech in 
Aesch. Agam. 655, ξυνώμοσαν γάρ, ὄντες ἔχθιστοι τὸ πρίν, πῦρ καὶ θάλασσα, and 
in Eurip. Troades, prologue, the same unholy alliance, on the same occasion, 


of Athena, who contributes the thunder and fire of Zcus (80), and ['useidon 
who raises a storm in the waters. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 117 


of allies has its appointed moiety and “ prevails,’ as Empedocles 
says of his elements, ‘as the circle of time comes round.’ For 
the farmer the behaviour of the universe is satisfactory when 
the aggression of these warring contraries is counterchecked 
and balanced, and he gets enough of each, and not too much 
of either. From their due mixture and harmony arise the 
individual things which interest him—the birth and blossoming 
and fruitage of his crops and trees.! 

Now, already in Homer it is clear enough that Zeus and 
Poseidon have drifted out of touch with their elements, which 
they rule only as absentee proprietors. Most of the time they 
are occupied with quite other interests, such as the progress of 
the siege of Troy. This means that the elements themselves 
regain the divine mana and potency which a God who leaves 
his department cannot carry away with him. The Hot (thunder, 
fire), the Cold (mist, clouds, air), the Wet (rain, sea, water), 
and the Dry (earth), are left to themselves as elements endowed 
with daemonic, supernatural energy. They become the four 
primary forms of physis. The perpetual war of these opposed 
powers goes on, obviously enough, before our eyes in the pro- 
cesses of Nature. In the phenomena of evaporation and pie 
cipitation, we see ‘ the fire of the sun and stars feeding itself 
on the exhalation of the waters.’? This is taken by the early 
physicists as the type of ‘rarefaction and condensation’ by 
which they explained qualitative change.® 

We can see now why Anaximander laid such stress on the 
departmental ordering of the four elemental opposites, and on 
their warfare and aggression. We must not, however, lose sight 
of the fundamental principle of Moa, as ordaining the dis- 
tinction of spatial provinces. Before we leave religion for 
philosophy, we must bring out one more aspect of this principle, 
because it will show us another contrast, of vital importance, 
between Olympian and Mystic religion. 


1 Hippocr. de Nat. Hom. 7: ws γὰρ ὁ ἐνιαντὸς μετέχει μὲν was πάντων καὶ τῶν 
θερμῶν καὶ τῶν ψνχρῶν καὶ τῶν ξηρῶν καὶ τῶν ὑγρῶν. . .. Plato, Symp. 1884, 
quoted below, p. 12). 

ἢ Aet. i. 3. 1 (Thales). 

* See Heidel, ‘Qualitative Change in Pre-Socratic Philosophy,’ Arch. /. 
Gesch. d. Phil. xix. 333, and Ὁ. Gilbert, Meteor. Theorien. chap. i. 


118 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


69. The Olympian God cut off from man 


For lack of the mystical link of communion, the Olympian 
recedes from man, as well as from Nature. A cardinal principle 
of Olympian theology is that man cannot become a God or 
‘immortal,’ neither can God become man. Each is confined 
to his own region, and the boundary of Moira set between them 
cannot, and must not, be passed. Unfed by human emotion, 
and shedding his own inherent life, the Olympian God is doomed 
to perish of inanition. 

Such psychology as the Gods possess mainly consists in the 
old doctrine of Moira, reinterpreted into terms of human passion. 
The power which pervades a department, and formerly used, 
with law-abiding regularity, to dispense its benefits, is now 
ἃ Capricious and arbitrary will, differing from a human will only 
in the superiority of its strength. The negative aspect, which 
defends the frontier against aggression from without, is a human 
passion, sometimes still called nemesis, more familiarly known 
as ‘ grudging jealousy (φθόνος). The prominence of this passion 
in the psychology of an Olympian God, undignified as it has 
often seemed, becomes intelligible when we realise that it covers 
half the field of the divine morality—indeed much more than 
half, inasmuch as the God is far more acutely conscious of the 
respect due to his position and privileges than of any duty 
towards his equals or inferiors. This is a necessary consequence 
of the growth of his humanised personality. The God who 
develops even this much of a ΄ self,’ loses his sense of duty. He 
no longer consists solely of his function, which was at first his 
raison d'étre: he forgets that his utility was once all that there 
was of him. The history of the word τιμή illustrates the transi- 
tion. In Hesiod it retains much of its original sense: the 
τιμή of ἃ God is the office which determines his status; it is the 
same as his γέρας, the privilege to do something, to operate in a 
certain department. But, when we come to developed Olym- 
pianism, the burden of τιμή shifts from the God to his wor- 
shipper : it comes to mean the honour which we are bound to 
render to him, no longer the service he is bound to render to us. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 119 


Anything he may now be pleased to do for us is an act of grace, 
with which he may, or may not, repay our dues of sacrifice. 
His nemesis again is no more the “ dispensation ᾿ of good things ; 
it passes wholly to the sense of anger against our presumption 
in expecting too much of them. 

Like other functionaries, he tends to withdraw into an attitude 
of aloofness and majestic condescension, and to insist, corre- 
spondingly, on humanity keeping its distance. Apollo’s message 
to his worshippers was: ‘ Know thyself, and do not go too far.’ 
Greek morality of the Olympian type 1s governed by this precept. 
Be conscious of yourself, realise vourself. make the most you can 
of it, up to the boundaries which limit its sphere; but be conscious 
also of those limits and keep your head—be ca-dpwv. Going 
too faris 7 eoveEca—‘ having more than your equal share ’; it 
15 ὕβρις, * getting above vourself’; or it 1s ὑπερβασία, * stepping 
across, invading the sphere which your neighbour claims to 
occupy from centre to circumference. With the instancy of an 


electric shock, your intrusion will be met by a discharge of 
φθόνος. 


70. Olympian and Mystic doctrines of Eros 


Once more Earth and Heaven are parted asunder, the Gap 
has come into being; and Olympian theology is clear that this 
gap 1s not to be bridged by Eros. The space between Earth 
and Olympus comes to be the great moral gulf which mortals 
may never pass. ‘Of one race, one only, are men and Gods ; 
both of one mother’s womb we draw our breath ; but far asunder 
is all our power divided, and fences us apart: here there 18 
nothingness, and there, in strength of bronze, a seat un- 
shaken, eternal, abides the heaven above.’! And it 18 
significant that the prevailing type of sinner who attempts 
to pass this gulf is he who secks marrage with the Queen 
of Heaven. 

‘Destiny and Device, eldest of the Gods, are masters of all ; 
but Strength has no winged sandals. Let no man ever fly aloft 
to heaven, nor seek to wed Aphrodite, the Cyprian queen, or 


1 Ping. Nem. vi. 1. Cf. frag. 104c (Schroder): τιμαὶ δὲ βροτοῖσι κεκριμέναι. 


120 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


some fair daughter of Porkos, whose dwelling is in the sea. 
. . . There is a vengeance of the Gods.’ 1 

Ixion’s two offences were that he was the first who ‘ imbrued 
kindred blood,’ and that he ‘ attempted the spouse of Zeus.’ 3 
Tityos, another typical sinner, committed the same act of un- 
lawful aggression.® It is noteworthy that the Chorus in the 
Prometheus Bound invoke the Moirai when they pray that they 
may never share the bed of Zeus, nor approach in marriage any 
of the inhabitants of heaven. To do so would be to pass from 
the moira of men, the earth, and invade the heavenly moira of the 
Olympians. ‘Device’ (Poros), and his child Eros, thus come to 
be conceived as symbols of unlawful and overweening ambition, 


1 Alkman, Partheneion, 1. 13: 
κράτησε yap Αἷσα παντῶν 
[καὶ Πόρος] γεραίτατοι 
[θιών" GAN’ ἀπ]έδιλος ἀλκά. 
[μήτις ἀνθ] ρώπων ἐς ὡρανὸν ποτήσθω, 
[μηδὲ πει]ρήτω γαμῆν τὰν ᾿Αφροδίταν, 
[Κυπρίαν] ἄνασσαν, ἤ τιν᾽ 
[ἠνειδ-]ῆ παῖδα ἸΙόρκω 
[εἰναλίω. Χά]ριτες δὲ Διὸς δόμον 
[εἰσβαινου]σιν ἐρογλέφαροι. .. 
ἔστι τις θιών τίσις. 


This is an instructive passage. Aisa 18 a synonym of Moira. Poros is 
‘device,’ which is lord of all that is not prohibited or prevented by Avsa. 
(So in Thucydides γνώμη, man’s foresight and decision, and 1 ύχη share the 
world between them. See my Thucyd. Mythistoricus, p. 105.) In Plato’s 
Symposium, 2038, Poros is father of Eros—the Eros which does pass from 
earth to heaven; and we can understand why the Scholiast on the Alkman 
fragment says that Poros= Hesiod’s Chaos: ὅτι τὸν Πόρον εἴρηκε τὸν αὐτὸν τῶι 
ὑκὸ τοῦ ᾿Ἡσιόδον μεμνθευμένωι χάει. But Strength (man’s mana) has not 
winged sandals to cross ‘Chaos.’ ‘Eros’ 1s a bad passion. Only the 
Charites (i.e. victory) may innocently exalt man to the Gods. (Cf. Emped. 
frag. 116: χάρις στυγέει δύστλητον ᾿Ανάγκην.) They are ἐρο-γλέφαροι: Eros 
dwells in their eyes, and they may look up to heaven. 

2 Pind. Pyth. in. 30: al δύο δ᾽ ἀμπλακίαι | φερέπονοι τελέθοντι᾽ τὸ μὲν Hows 
ὅτι | ἐμφύλιον αἷμα πρώτιστος οὐκ ἀτὲρ τέχνας ἐπέμιξε θνατοῖς, | Brite. . . | Διὸς 
ἄκοιτιν ἐκειρᾶτο. Χρὴ δὲ καθ᾽ αὑτὸν αἰεὶ παντὸς ὁρᾶν μέτρον. I suspect that in 
the first offence, ‘the mingling of kindred blood,’ we have a misunderstood 
reminiscence of the introduction of patriarchal marriage within the pro- 
hibited degrees of the matriarchal system, which 1s known to have prevailed 
among the Locrians. The two offences may be only two ways of regarding 
this breach of taboo. 

3 Pind. Pyth. iv. 90. 

4 Aesch, P. V. 984: μήποτέ μ᾽, ὦ πότνιαι Μοῖραι, λεχέων Ards εὐνάτειραν ἴδοισθε 
τέλουσαν" μηδὲ πλαθείην γαμέτᾳ τινὶ τῶν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 12] 


like the insolence and violence of the wooers of Penelope, which 
‘ reached even to the iron heaven.’ ἢ 

In accordance with this condemnation of Eros by Olympian 
theology, we shall find that the scientific tradition in philosophy, 
derived from that theology, lays emphasis on the justice and 
necessity of the separation of the elements, and regards their 
‘mixing’ or marriage as an injustice. Such was the view of 
Anaximander. On the other hand, the mystical schools look 
back to a quite opposite view of Eros, which any reader of 
Plato’s Symposium, and especially of the discourse of Diotima, 
will know to be characteristic of mystical religion. 

One of the speakers in the Symposium (p. 186 ff.), Eryximachus, 
a pythagorising physician, sets the two conceptions of Eros— 
the Olympian and the mystic—in clear contrast. In opposition 
to the Eros that goes with insolence and excess (ὁ μετὰ τῆς ὕβρεως 
“Epws), he speaks of the Eros who is orderly (κόσμιος), and indeed 
is the principle which binds all things into an order, a cosmos, or 
a harmony. Both these Loves are present, he says, in the 
blending of the seasons of the year ; and when the hot and the 
cold, the dry and the wet, are regulated in their relations to one 
another by the Love which is orderly, and they are mixed in 
temperate harmony, then they bring a good year and health to 
men and beasts and plants, and there is no injustice. But when 
the disorderly and excessive Love prevails in the yearly seasons, 
there is much injustice and destruction done by pestilence and 
various diseases. Frosts and hail and mildew are caused by 
this aggression and want of orderly adjustment (πλεονεξίας καὶ 
ἀκοσμίας). Such is the physician’s point of view; he regards 
the whole medical art as concerned with establishing the orderly 
and harmonious Eros between the opposites that make war 
upon one another in the body, each being impelled by the bad 
Eros to usurp the domain of its antagonist and set up ‘ injustice’ 
and disease.” 

As the dialogue proceeds, a deeper conception of the cosmic 
Eros is unfolded in the speech of Diotima. We cannot follow 


1 Od. xvii. 565: τῶν ὕβρις τε Bly τε σιδήρεον οὐρανὸν ἵκει. 

® Cf. Plato, Laws, θῦθο: τὴν πλεονεξίαν, ἐν μὲν σαρκίνοις σώμασι νόσημα 
καλούμενον, ἐν δὲ ὥραις ἐτῶν καὶ ἐνιαυτῶν λοιμόν, ἐν δὲ πόλεσι καὶ πολιτείαις τοῦτο 
αὖ τὸ ῥῆμα μετεσχηματισμένον ἀδικίαν. 


122 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


it out in detail, but only notice the passage which directly contra- 
dicts the Olympian doctrine of the impassable gulf between 
Gods and men. Eros is ἃ daemon, and intermediate between 
the human world and the divine. He ‘fills up the interval 
between the two, so that the universe is bound together in one.’ ὦ 
Plutarch, we believe, is unquestionably right in associating this 
doctrine with the mystical cults centred round the figures of 
those suffering daemons, like Adonis, Osiris, or Dionysus, whose 
passion (πάθη) and death showed them to be partakers of a 
common life with all things that live, and die, and are born again 
in Nature.2 When we come to the mystic tradition in philosophy, 
it will become clear how fundamental is this doctrine that God 
is not cut off from the world, nor man from God; there is no 
impassable gap between earth and a brazen heaven, but all things 
are bound together in harmony and linked by permeable ways. 
The soul can still regain its ancient continuity with the divine. 


71. From Olympianism to Ionian Philosophy 


In competition with a form of religion which held out to man 
the prospect of union with God, it is easy to see why Olympianism, 
with its doctrine of divine jealousy and of the impassable gulf 
of Moura, failed and died, while mystic religion continued to be 
a source of inspiration. The Olympians had passed beyond the 
reach of human needs and the touch of human emotion ; they 
had even left their provinces in Nature, and it was found out that 
the business of the world could go forward without them, just 
as it had been found out that the magnificent traffic of cloud 
and sunshine, and the daily circling of the heavens, could go on 
its appointed way without the impertinent aid of magical dances 
and incantation. The time had come for religion to give place 
to philosophy. 

1 Symp. 202E: ἐν μέσῳ δὲ ὃν ἀμφοτέρων συμπληροῖ, wore τὸ πᾶν αὐτὸ αὑτῳ 
συνδεδέσθαι. For this ξύνδεσμος, see Eisler, Wellenmantel, si. p. 418 ff. 

2 Plut. Def. Orac. 415.4: ἐμοὶ δὲ δοκοῦσι πλείονας λῦσαι καὶ μείζονας ἁπορίας 
οἱ τὸ τῶν δαιμόνων γένος ἐν μέσῳ θέντες θεῶν καὶ ἀνθρώπων καὶ τρόπον τινὰ τὴν 
κοινωνίαν ἡμῶν συνάγον els ταὐτὸ καὶ συνάπτον ἐξευρόντετ᾽ εἴτε μάγων τῶν περὶ 
Ζωροάστρην ὁ λόγος οὗτός ἐστιν, εἴτε Θραίκιος ἀπ᾽ ᾿Ορφέως εἴτ᾽ Αἰγύπτιος ἢ Φρύγιος, 


ὡς τεκμαιρόμεθα ταῖς ἑκατέρωθι τελεταῖς ἀναμεμιγμένα πολλὰ θνητὰ καὶ πένθιμα 
τῶν ὀργιαζομένων καὶ δρωμένων ἱερῶν ὁρῶντες. 


NATURE, GOD, AND SOUL 123 


The type of philosophy to which an Olympian theology will 
give rise will be dominated by the conception of spatial exter- 
nality, as Moira had dominated the Gods; and it will tend 
towards discontinuity and discreteness. Originating in an 
essentially polytheistic scheme, it will be pluralistic. It will also 
move steadily towards materialism, because, having no hold upon 
the notion of life as an inward and spontaneous principle, it 
will reduce life to mechanical motion, communicated by external 
shock from one body to another. It will level down the organic 
to the inorganic, and pulverise God and the Soul into material 
atoms. 


72. Physis 


But, when reason seemed to herself to have dispensed with 
the supernatural, and to be left with nothing but Nature, what 
was the Nature, physis, she was left with? Not simply the 
visible world as it would present itself to unbiassed sense- 
perception, if such a thing as sense-perception unbiassed by 
preconceived notions could ever exist, unless it be in a new-born 
baby. 

The ‘Nature’ of which the first philosophers tell us with 
confident dogmatism is from the first a metaphysical entity ; 
not merely a natural element, but an element endowed with 
supernatural life and powers, a substance which 18 also Soul and 
God. 

It is that very living stuff out of which daemons, Gods, and 
souls had slowly gathered shape. It is that same continuum 
of homogeneous matter, charged with vital force, which had 
been the vehicle of magical sympathy, that now is put forward 
explicitly, with the confident tone of an obvious statement, as 
the substrate of all things and the source of their growth. 

1 Cf. O. Gilbert, Meteor. Theorien, 703: Duse Ausfassung der Materse (in 
Tonian monisin), nach der die anderen Elemente Erzeugte des esnen sind, bedarf 
kerner besonderen gottlichen Kiast, die uber dem Stoge als solchem stehend, ihn 
ordnet und bestimmt, bewegt und lestet der Stoff selbst, als der Grundstoff und 
als dse abgelesteten Einzelstofe, lebt : und als lebend und persdniich gedachies 


Wesen bewegt er arch ; der Stoff sat dre Gotthest selbst, welche, in thm waltend, 
ems ist mit thm. 


IV 
THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 


73. Recapitulation 


In the foregoing chapters we have tried to define the starting- 
point of Greek philosophy, the fundamental representation of 
the world which would persist, in the minds of men like Thales 
and Anaximander, when the personal Gods of over-developed 
Olympianism were put aside. Our conclusion was that the 
representation they called physis, and conceived as the ultimate 
living stuff out of which the world grew, could be traced back 
to an age of magic actually older than religion itself. In that 
first age, it was not as yet a representation at all, but a real fact 
of human experience, namely the collective consciousness of a 
group in its emotional and active phase, expressed in the practices 
of primary sympathetic magic. The need for a representation 
would first arise when the collective emotion and desire ceased 
to find complete and immediate satisfaction in mimetic rites. 
The tension of this deferred reaction would give an opening for 
a representation of that power which is no longer available at 
the first demand, but has to be recovered with something of an 
effort. Here, then, would be formed the first conception of the 
“something not ourselves’; and this, we have argued, is pre- 
cisely the collective consciousness itself. Because it is not our- 
selves, it wears the negative aspect of a moral power imposing 
constraint from without; and this power, projected into the 
universe, leads to the conception of a supreme force, above Gods 
and men, in which Destiny and Right—Moira and Dike—are 
united. Its positive content, on the other hand, we identified 
with the sympathetic continuum, which is the vehicle of super- 
normal, magical power. This, as constituting the functions, 
and therefore the ‘nature,’ of a group, could be visibly em- 
bodied in the blood, which is the substrate of all kinship or 
1% 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 125 


‘likeness,’ and so the medium of interaction between like and 
like. Out of this primitive representation arose, by differen- 
tiation, the notions of group-soul and daemon, and finally the 
individual soul and the personal God. 

These imaginary objects, souls and Gods, are made of the 
same stuff ; their substance is simply the old sympathetic con- 
tinuum, more or less etherealised. In the case of the Gods the 
process has gone further than it has with souls, because Gods 
—or at least Olympian Gods !—have no visible and tangible 
bodies ; but it is still possible for souls, which have such bodies, 
to be identified with the blood. On the other hand, the analogy 
of the Gods helps souls to get clear of visible substances, and 
enables men to conceive a sort of spiritual substance, common 
to souls and Gods, a supersensible vital fluid, or gas, which is 
not to be completely identified with any visible or tangible form of 
body. This subtle and mobile stuff, considered as both animate 
and divine—endowed, that is to say, with all the properties that 
are held to belong to Soul and God—is what the Milesians called 
physis. 


74. Philosophy as the analysis of religious material 


In our survey of Greek speculation, we shall try to show that 
the various systems are deduced from the properties inherent 
from the outset in this primary datum of philosophy. The 
philosophers, one and all, speculated about the ‘ nature of things,’ 
physis; and the physis about which they speculate is nothing 
but this animate and divine substance. The several schools 
attach themselves to one or another of the attributes of the 
primitive complex, which they emphasise to the ultimate ex- 
clusion of the rest, or interpret in various senses, thus reaching 
highly diverse conclusions about the nature of things. But they 
hardly seem to travel outside the content of their original datum. 
Rather they seem merely to sift and refine the material it gives 
them, distinguishing factors in it which at first were confused, 
and, in that progress toward clearness and complexity, dis- 
covering latent contradictions and antinomies, which force 


' Gods like the sun and stars have of course visible bodies, but they too 
are helped to get clear of them by the anthropomorphic Gods. 


126 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


them to accept one alternative and reject another. The work 
of philosophy thus appears as the elucidation and clarifying 
of religious, or even pre-religious, material. It does not create 
its new conceptual tools; it rather discovers them by ever 
subtler analysis and closer definition of the elements confused 
in its original datum. 

From another point of view, which will be clear from what 
has gone before, philosophy rediscovers in the world that 
very scheme of representation which had, by a necessary pro- 
cess, been projected into the world from the structure and in- 
stitutions of society in its earlier stages of development. The 
concepts and categories which the intellect brings with it to 
ita task, are precisely those by which the chaos of phenomena 
had long ago been coordinated and organised into the signi- 
ficant outlines of a cosmos. No wonder that they seem to 
fit their object with a sort of pre-established harmony. The 
philosophers may be compared to the medieval scholastics, 
who were delighted to find that Christian theology could be 
reconciled with Aristotelianism, not realising that almost the 
whole of that theology had originally come from the schools of 
Plato and Aristotle. This accounts for the confident and 
successful tone in which the first philosophers unhesitatingly 
declare their vision of those ultimate things which manv prophets 
and kings of thought, since their days, have desired to see and 
have not seen. It accounts, too, for the a prior: methods of 
early science: in following the lines of its own concatenations 
of concepts, it is 1080 facto tracing the framework of the world. 

After all, when we consider what it is that is presented to the 
philosopher for his study, it is not the real world of things, as 
it may be supposed to exist in objective independence of human 
consciousness. It is from the first a representation, to which 
the subject, as well as the object, contributes its quota. And 
it 18, of course, true that this representation does not consist 
of a series of uncoordinated sense-impressions—the fleeting 
pageant of particular eolours and sounds and tastes and muscular 
feelings, immediately presented in the life of sensation from 
moment to moment. It is, on the contrary, a persistent whole, 
unified and organised by conception. Though each of us lives im- 
prisoned in a world of his own, centred about his own conscious- 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 127 


ness, with sensations, feelings, and images which exist in no 
other brain but his, we are convinced that all these worlds 
somehow fit together into one and the same world, and all 
possibility of communication rests on the truth of that con- 
viction. It is this common world that the philosophies seek to 
account for and explain; and, as we have tried to show, what 
at first seems most significant in that cosmos is of religious, and 
therefore of social, originm—a product, not of individual in- 
vention, but of collective mentality. When the individual 
intellect gets to work upon it in what is called philosophic 
speculation, it hardly succeeds in introducing any new con- 
ceptions, but merely analyses the content of its datum, and 
deduces from it diverging systems.? 


75. Physis as Substance, Soul, Divine 


In order to establish our point, that Greek philosophy, in its 
theories of the ‘nature of things,’ does not travel outside the 
elementary factors contained in the primary datum which it 
inherited from religion, we must first try to distinguish these 
elementary factors by a somewhat clearer analysis. When the 
Ionians said that the physis of things was water or air or fire, 
what did they mean by the subject of these propositions? What 
was the content of that ultimate thing which they variously 
identified with one or another of the sensible elements ? 

The gist of the whole matter 18 contained in those three 
doctrines of Thales which we have already quoted: (1) the 
nature of things is water; (2) the all is alive (has soul in it); 
and (3) 1s full of daemons or Gods. 

(1) The first of these propositions has been allowed to eclipse 
the second and third, for no other reason than that it happened 
to be the one which interested Aristotle, from whose school 
our doxographic tradition is derived. Modern historians of 
Greek philosophy are, of course, aware that Aristotle’s review 

1 It is, I hope, clear that I am speaking only of the theories put forward 
about the nature or ultimate constitution of the universe, not of the detailed 
explanations of various natural phenomena (earthquakes, thunder, meteors, 
etc.), which are sometimes mere guesses, sometimes deduced from a priori 


views about the structure of the world, sometimes supported by genuine 
observation. 


128 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of his predecessors’ theories in the first book of the Metaphysics 
is based upon his own distinction of the four ‘causes.’ His 
point of view is not historical; what interests him is to point 
out the process by which this distinction was reached, and so 
he groups the earlier thinkers according as they recognised, 
in his opinion, only a ‘ material cause,’ or added to that a * prin- 
ciple of motion,’ and so on. Governed by this scheme, he 
ranks the primary substance of the Milesians under the head 
of ‘ material cause,’ defined as ‘ that of which all things consist, 
from which they are originally generated, and into which they 
are finally dissolved, its substance persisting, though its attri- 
butes change.’ The modern historians, though aware of Aris- 
totle’s unhistorical methods, generally accept the emphasis 
thus thrown on the ‘ material’ properties of physzs, a8 a con- 
tinuous and homogeneous stuff, filling space. We shall not 
further discuss this side of physis, because it is already over- 
emphasised. What we have to make clear is that the other 
properties attributed to physis under the names ‘Soul’ and 
“God ’ are of at least equal importance. It is, as we shall see, 
the differences of opinion as to what these properties imply 
that give rise to the main divergences between the various 
philosophic schools. 

(2) The second proposition of Thales declares that the All 
is alive, or has Soul in it (to πᾶν ἔμψυχον). This statement 
accounts for the mobility of physis. Its motion, and its power 
of generating things other than itself, are due to its life (ψνχη), 
an inward, spontaneous principle of activity.1_ So nusleading is 
Aristotle’s suggestion that the Milesians did not recognise 
a ‘ principle of motion.’ 

Further, this Soul in the universe is identical with physis 
itself. In other words, the materiality of physis is supersensible, 
a stuff of that attenuated sort which is attributed to all super- 
sensible objects—souls, spirits, Gods—as well as to all sorts of 
evdola, ghosts, concepts, images, etc.? It is soul-substance, 

1 Cf. Plato, Laws, 892c: φύσιν βούλονται λέγειν γένεσιν τὴν περὶ τὰ πρῶτα" 
εἰ δὲ φανήσεται ψυχὴ πρῶτον, ob πῦρ οὐδὲ ἀήρ, ψνχὴ δ᾽ ἐν πρώτοις γεγενημένη, 
σχεδὸν ὀρθότατα λέγοιτ᾽ ἄν εἶναι διαφερόντως φύσει. 

3. Οἱ this subject see the valuable articles οἱ P. Beck, " Erkenntnisatheorie 


des primitiven Denkens,’ Zeitschr. f. Phil. u. phil. Kritik, Leipzig, 1904, 
bd. 123, p. 172 ff. and bd. 124, p. 9 ff. 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 129 


not ‘body,’ differing from body in being intangible and 
visible. The water or air or fire in which it is recognised is 
related to it as body to soul; these elements are embodiments 
of physis, but physis itself is soul, with a supersensible substance 
of its own—that minimum of materiality without which nothing 
could be conceived. That is one reason why none of the Ionians 
identified the nature of things with the fourth element, earth. 
Earth is pre-eminently ‘ bodily "—tangible, heavy, immobile— 
and so least suited to be the vehicle of the living soul-substance. 
We understand also why the philosophers do not go on to 
investigate the natural properties of water or air or fire ; these 
are mere gross vehicles of the primary soul-substance upon 
which their attention is fixed. The object of their speculation 
is thus from the first a supersensible, metaphysical entity, or in 
other words a representation, which moreover, as we have seen, 
is of mythical origin. 

(3) Finally, this soul-substance is declared to be ‘divine’ 
(ro θεῖον) : the All, says Thales, is full of daemons or Gods. 
This predicate preserves the attribute of superhuman force or 
mana, which was contained in the notion of the magical con- 
tinuum, and gave rise to the twin representations of Soul and 
God. We saw in the last chapter that Greek religion included 
two contrary notions of the divine and of its relations to man 
and nature—the Mystic notion and the Olympian. The divinity 
of physis thus contains the germ of a latent contradiction, the 
discovery of which will constitute a dilemma for philosophy. 

In the following sections we shall establish in detail this 
summary statement about the content of physis. 


76. Physis as Soul 


It is a general rule that the Greek philosophers describe 
physis as standing in the same relation to the universe as soul 
does to body. Anaximenes,! the third Milesian, says: ‘ As 


1 Frag. 2: οἷον ἡ ψυχὴ ἡ ἡμετέρα ἀὴρ οὖσα συγκρατεῖ ἡμᾶς, καὶ ὅλον τὸν κόσμον 
πνεῦμα καὶ ἀὴρ περιέχει. Compare Pythagoras’ ‘boundless breath’ outside 
the heavens, which is inhaled by the world (Arist. Phys. 56, 2136 22), and 
Heracleitus’ ‘divine reason,’ which surrounds (περιέχει) us and which we 
draw in by means of respiration (Sext. Emp. Adr. Math. vii. 127). See 
Burnet, Z.G. P.*, pp. 79, 120, 170, and Eisler, Weltensnantel, ii. 749. 

1 


180 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


our soul is air and holds us together, so a breath or air embraces 
the whole cosmos.’ Aristotle remarks that ‘there are some, 
too, who say that soul is interspersed throughout the universe : 
which is perhaps why Thales supposed all things to be full of 
Gods. But this view presents some difficulties. For why 
should the soul not produce an animal, when present in air or 
fire, and yet do so when present in a compound of these ele- 
ments; and that too, though in the former case it is believed 
to be purer? One might also inquire why the soul present in 
air is purer and more immortal than soul in animals. Which- 
ever of the two suppositions open to us we adopt, is absurd 
and irrational. To speak of fire or air as an animal is very 
irrational; and, on the other hand, not to call them animals 
isabsurd. But it would seem that the reason why they suppose 
soul to be in these elements is that the whole is homogeneous 
with its parts. So that they cannot help regarding universal 
soul as also homogeneous with the parts of it in animals, since 
it is through something of the surrounding element (τοῦ 
περιέχοντος) being cut off and enclosed in animals that the 
animals become endowed with soul. But if the air when split 
up remains homogeneous, and yet soul is divisible into non- 
homogeneous parts, it 1s clear that although one part of soul 
may be present in the air, there 18 another part which is not. 
Hither, then, soul must be homogeneous, or else it cannot be 
present in every part of the universe.’ } 

Through the dry and obscure argumentation of Aristotle 
shines the primitive conception of soul-substance, as a material 
continuum charged with vital force, interfused through all 
things, or ‘cut off and enclosed’ in various living creatures. 


1 De anim. av. 17 ff. The case of the Indian diman appears to be exactly 
parallel to that of physia and the individual soul in Greece. The oldest 
Upanishads recognise only one soul: ‘It is thy soul, which is within all.’ 
‘He who, while dwelling in the earth, the water, the fire, 1n space, wind, 
heaven, sun, etc., is distinct from them, whose body they are, who rules 
them all from within, ‘‘he is thy soul, the inner guide, the immortal.” . . . 
This déman who alone exists is the knowing subject nus... and with 
the knowledge of the dtman, therefore, all is known. . . . The diman created 
the universe and then entered into it as soul,’ and this gives rise to the later 
conception of individual souls, imprisoned in the eternal round of samsdra 
and needing deliverance. See Deussen, Relig. and Philos. of India, Upani- 
shads, Eng. trans. 1906, p. 257. 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 131 


‘Soul’ and physis are not merely analogous, but identical. 
The two conceptions—Soul, and ultimate matter—are as yet 
fused in one, just as we found that at a certain stage mana 
and the blood-soul were fused in the magical continuum. The 
later differentiation of the two conceptions will bring out one 
of the latent contradictions which divide the philosophic schools. 
As the properties of life come to be distinguished from those 
of inanimate matter, philosophers will have to make their 
choice between conceiving the ultimate reality as mind or as 
matter, as living or as dead. Whichever choice they make, 
the nature of Soul will still be the same as that of physis. 


77. Soul as Moving 


In reviewing the psychological doctrines of the earlier schools, 
Aristotle remarks: ‘There are two points especially wherein 
that which is animate is held to differ from that which is in- 
animate, namely motion and the act of sensation (or perception) : 
and these are, speaking in general, the two characteristics of 
soul handed down to us by our predecessors ’ (de anim. a2, 2). 

The two vital functions of moving and knowing were much 
less clearly distinguished by the early philosophers than by 
Aristotle. With regard to the first of them—motion—the 
primitive assumption is that whatever is capable of moving 
itself or anything else, is alive—that the only moving force in 
the world is Life, or rather soul-substance.! The existence 
of motion in the universe is thus an immediate proof of Thales’ 
doctrine: ‘ The All has soul init.’ Aetius 2 describes the doctrine 
as follows: ‘ There extends throughout the elemental moisture 
(Thales’ physis) a divine power capable of moving 10. This 
divine or magical power is the same as that ‘ soul ᾿ which Thales 
ascribed to the loadstone, because it moves iron.* Aetius, a 
late writer, distinguishes more clearly than Thales could have 

1 Plato at the end of his life reasserts this doctrine, defining ‘soul’ as 
‘that which is capable of moving -itself’ (Laws, 896), and deducing the 
conclusion that the heavenly bodies have souls and ‘all things are full of 
Goda’ (θεῶν εἶναι πλήρη πάντα), as Thales said (8998). Cf. Arist. Phys. 2656 32. 

2 Act. i. 7. 1] : τὸ δὲ πᾶν ἔμψυχον ἅμα καὶ δαιμόνων πλῆρες᾽ διήκειν δὲ διὰ τοῦ 
στοιχειώδους ὑγροῦ δύναμιν θείαν κινητικὴν αὐτοῦ. In Diog. L. ἰχ. 7, πάντα ψυχῶν 


εἶναι καὶ δαιμόνων πλήρη is attributed to Heracleitus. Cf. also Sext. Math. 
ix. 76. 3 Arist. de anima, aii, 14. 


132 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


done, between the ‘elemental moisture’ and the divine power 
pervading it. For Thales the moving soul was the same as 
the ultimate element, recognised in water, which pervades all 
things. The same holds of the ‘ ever-living fire’ of Heracleitus. 
At first, then, mechanical motion was not distinguished from 
vital activity. Once more we shall reach a parting of the 
ways when the distinction comes to be drawn; and before the 
two are recognised as independent and coordinate facts, science 
will go to the opposite extreme, and, instead of interpreting 
all motion as the spontaneous, internal activity of physis, will 
try the expedient of levelling down life to external mechanical 
motion, communicated by colliding particles of dead matter. 


78. Soul as Knowing 


The second function of Soul—knowing—was not at first dis- 
tinguished from motion. Aristotle! says, ‘The soul is said to 
feel pain and joy, confidence and fear, and again to be angry, 
to perceive, and to think; and all these states are held to be 
movements, which might lead one to suppose that soul itself 
is moved.’ Sense-perception (αἴσθησις), not distinguished from 
thought, was taken as the type of all cognition, and this is a 
form of action at a distance.* All such action, moreover, was 
held to require a continuous vehicle or medium, uniting the 
soul which knows to the object which is known. Further, 
the soul and its object must not only be thus linked in physical 
contact, but they must be alike or akin. 

The early philosophers, almost or quite unanimously,® assumed 
the maxim that ‘like knows like,’ which is a special case of the 
more general axiom : ‘ Like can only act on like.’* Here again 

2 De anim. a4, 4085 1. 

2 De anim. a5, 410a 25, Those who make soul consist of all the elements, 
and hold that lke perceives and knowa like, ‘assume that perceiving 18 a 
sort of being acted upon or moved (τάσχειν τι καὶ κινεῖσθαι), and that the 


same is true of thinking and knowing.’ 

3 Heidel, Arch. Gesch. Phil. xix. 357, disputes Aristotle's and Theo- 
phrastus’ exceptions to this rule. 

4 Another application of this maxim, ‘Like attracts like,’ is assumed by 
the philosophers down to Plato, and this assumption makes them to explain 
weight and lightness by the tendency of all bodies to move towards their 
‘kindred’—+ πρὸς τὸ σνγγενὲς ὁδός, Plato, Tim. 632; cf. Burnet, F.C. P.?, 


p. 396. 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 133 


we encounter a by no means obvious principle, which is surely 
not drawn from experience, but accepted from collective repre- 
sentation. The formula which states that this action can only 
take place between ‘like’ objects, is derived from that old 
magical doctrine which grouped things into classes of kindred, 
united by a sympathetic continuum. This continuum is, as 
we have seen, ἃ pervasive ‘soul’ running through all the class. 
It is the vehicle and medium of motion and interaction of all 
kinds, and so of that special kind of action called ‘ knowing’ or 
‘perceiving,’ which is an attribute of Soul. The maxim had 
become embedded in common sense, and was accepted without 
question by the philosophers. 

It follows from this principle that, if the Soul is to know the 
world, the world must ultimately consist of the same substance 
as Soul. Physis and Soul must be homoge.eous. Aristotle 
formulates the doctrine with great precision : 

‘Those who laid stress on its knowledge and perception of all 
that exists, identified the soul with the ultimate principles, 
whether thev recognised a plurality of these or only one. Thus, 
Empedocles compounded soul out of all the elements, while at 
the same time regarding each one of them as ἃ soul. His words 
are “ With earth we see earth, with water water, with air bright 
air, ravaging fire by fire, love by love, and strife by gruesome 
strife.” In the same manner Plato in the T:maeus constructs 
the soul out of the elements. Like, he there maintains, is known 
by like, and the things we know are composed of the ultimate 
principles. . . . 

“Thus those thinkers who admit only one cause and one 
element, as fire or air, assume the soul also to be one element ; 
while those who admit a plurality of principles assume 
plurality also in the soul. . . . Those who introduce pairs of 
opposites among their principles make the soul also to consist 
of opposites; while those who take one or other of the two 
opposites, hot or cold, etc., reduce the soul also to one or other 
of them.’ 1 

So, again, Aristotle tells us elsewhere that ‘ Diogenes of Apol- 
lonia, like some others, identified air with soul. Air, they thought, 
is made up of the finest particles, and is the first principle ; and 


1 De anima, a2, §§ 2, 6, 21. 


184 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


this explains the fact that the soul knows and is a cause of 
motion, knowing by virtue of being the primary element from 
which all else 1s derwed, and causing motion by the extreme 
fineness of its parts.’ ἦ 
Aristotle himself, though he refined upon the doctrine that 
“like knows like,’ by maintaining that perception involves a 
process of assimilation, is really at one with previous thinkers. 
‘ At the basis of his whole theory of perception there is for him, 
88 for his predecessors, the thought that the fundamental com- 
munity of elementary constitution in αἰσθητώ (sense-objects) and 
αἰσθητήρια (sense-organs) is the cause of our being able to per- 
ceive objects. The ἀλλοίωσις (1.6. the process of assimilation), 
by which he reconciles these different views (that “like knows 
like,” and “like knows unlike ”’) implies in every case a medium 
by, as well as through, which αἰσθητά and αἰσθητήρια are 
brought into correlation. For this medium has a common 
nature with’ both.? 
_ Thus, the possibility alike of motion and of knowledge is 
explained by the Greek philosophers by means of a conception 
of physzs as soul-substance, in which all the chief characteristics 
of the sympathetic continuum of magic are reproduced. The 
main proof that the philosophic conception 1s lineally descended 
from the magical one is the otherwise gratuitous and inex- 
plicable assumption that ‘ Like can only act on, or know, like.’ 
We can understand this assumption only when we know that 
the sympathetic continuum was originally the substrate of 
kinship; that it was the vehicle of interaction only within a 
group of the same kin; and that kinship is the primitive form 
of all ‘ likeness.’ 


79. Physis as the Divine 


Now that we have identified physis with that primitive sub- 
stance out of which, by processes traced in the last chapter, all 
the divinities of Greek religion took shape, we are prepared to 
find that the early philosophers call physis the ‘divine.’ The 
All is not only alive, but full of daemons. Thales’ Water 18 


1 Arist. de anim. aii. 15, 405a 21. Diog. Apoll. frag. 4: ἄνθρωποι yap καὶ 
τὰ ἄλλα ζῴα ἀναπνέοντα ζώει τῷ ἀέρι. καὶ τοῦτο αὐτοῖς καὶ ψυχή ἐστι καὶ νοήσιξ. 

. . καὶ ἐὰν τοῦτο ἀταλλαχθῇ, ἀποθνήσκει καὶ ἡ νοήσις ἐπιλείπει, 

81, Beare, Greek Theories of Elementary Cognition, p. 287. 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 135 


‘ pervaded by a divine power capable of moving it’; in other 
words, the soul-substance possesses a superhuman mana, a 
daemonic energy, distinct from the natural properties of water. 
Of the ‘limitless’ of Anaximander Aristotle says that it is 
‘the divine (τὸ θεῖον), immortal and imperishable.’ The Air 
of Anaximenes, similarly, is spoken of as a God. Diogenes of 
Apollonia says of the same element that ‘ what men call air is 
that which possesses thought, and 1t directs all and masters 
all; for just this is, I believe, God, and it reaches everywhere 
and disposes all things and is in everything.’ 2 

Speaking of the heavenly bodies, Aristotle 3 says: ‘ Our fore- 
fathers in the remote ages have handed down to us a tradition 
in mythical form, that these substances (the firmament and the 
heavenly bodies) are Gods, and that the divine encloses the 
whole of nature (περιέχει τὸ θεῖον τὴν ὅλην φύσιν). The 
rest of the tradition has been added later in mythical form, to 
persuade the multitude and for its utility with respect to the 
laws and expediency: they say the Gods are of human form, 
or like the other animals, and so on. But, if we separate the 
original point from these additions, and take it alone — that 
they thought the primary substances to be Gods, we might 
regard this as an utterance divinely inspired (θείως εἰρῆσθαι), 
and reflect that, while probably every art and science has often 
been developed as far as possible and perished again, these 
opinions have been preserved until the present, like relics of the 
ancient treasure.’ 

The importance of this attribute, ‘divine,’ as applied to the 
primary physis is overlooked by historians of philosophy ; 
yet it can hardly be over-emphasised. Philosophy is the im- 
mediate successor of theology, and the conceptions held by 
philosophers of the relation between the ultimate reality and 
the manifold sense-world are governed by older religious con- 
ceptions of the relation between God and the human group 
or Nature. The main purpose of the rest of this book will be 
to substantiate this statement. We shall try to show that there 
are two main currents in Greek philosophy which severally 
take their departure from those two types of religion—mystical 
and Olympian—which we distinguished at the end of the last 

1 Phys. y4, 2080 12. 3 Frag. 5. 5. Met. A8, 10740 1. 


136 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


chapter. It was not for nothing that metaphysics was still 
called ‘ theology ’ as late as the time of Aristotle.1 


80. The treatment of Physis by the philosophers 


We have argued above that when the earliest philosophers 
talked about physis, and declared that it was to be found in 
water, or air, or whatever it might be, the subject of these pro- 
positions—physis itseli—was a soul-substance, a supersensible 
and yet material thing, which was embodied in this or that 
element, rather than identified with it (though on this point our 
information is, naturally, not always clear). We know that they 
regarded it as God and Soul ; and Gods and Souls have a material 
of their own, an extended but intangible substance, which is 
distinct from the tangible and visible ‘body’ in which they 
may reside. This supersensible extended substance was, of 
course, from the first and always, not a natural object ; although 
it was called ‘Nature,’ it was really metaphysical—a repre- 
sentation whose mythical origin we have traced. Considered 
as matter, apart from its life, it differs from (say) the ether of 
modern physics chiefly in that it was not recognised to be a 
merely hypothetical substance, but believed to be actually 
existent.” Really, it was an entity of the same order as ether, 
and it was regarded in the same way as amenable to ὦ prior 
mathematical treatment. You could take one or another of 
its recognised properties and deduce the consequences. Thus, 
the Eleatics emphasised its unity and perfect continuity to 

1 For the divinity of the eloments see Eisler, Weltenmantel, ii. 664; 
O. Gilbert, ‘Spekulation u. Volksglaube in der ionischen Philosophie,’ Arch, 
Jf. Relig. xiii. 306 ff., and Arch. 7. Gesch d. Philos. xx. 279: die ganze 
tonische und eleatische, nicht minder auch die Pythagoreteche Spekulation ist 
nicht als ein Suchen nach der Gotthert, d. h. nach der die Weltentwrcklung 
bedingenden und tragenden Gottessubstanz. 

2 It will be remembered that Dr. Frazer writes: ‘Both branches of magic, 
the homeopathic and the contagious, may conveniently be comprehended 
under the general name of Sympathetic Magic, since both assume that 
things act on each other at a distance through a secret sympathy, the 
impulse being transmitted from the one to the other by means of what we 
may conceive as a sort of invisible ether, not unlike that which, I under- 
stand, is postulated by modern science for a precisely similar purpose— 
namely, to explain how things can physically affect each other through a 


space which appears to be empty’ (Lectures on the Karly History of the 
Kingshsp, 1905, p. 40). 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 137 


such a point that they were driven to deny it any possibility 
of internal motion. This drove the Atomists to suppose that 
the substance consisted, not of one atom, but of an infinite 
number, and so they restored the possibility of motion. Now, 
in this procedure the Atomists were behaving exactly as a 
modern man of science would do, remodelling the hypothetical 
substance to ‘save appearances’; only, the Atomists thought 
their atoms were real. The Eleatic Parmenides, on the other 
hand, starts, not from a scientific supposition, but from a religious 
beliei—a passionate conviction that the real being, which 18 
God, must be One. This conviction is the ultimate premiss 
of Eleaticism ; it is a pure matter of religious faith, for which 
no reason was, or could be, given. Our present point 18 that 
the thing which Parmenides declared to be one, because it was 
God, was in origin the same thing as that which the Atomists 
declared to be innumerably many, because, having no prejudice 
in favour of monotheism, they did not object to plurality, and 
plurality had the scientific advantage of saving the obvious 
fact of motion from one part of space to another. The ‘ Being ’ 
of both systems had the same properties: it was homogeneous 
soul-substance, diffused in space. The real question between them 
is whether the ‘ divinity,’ which had all along been ascribed to 
this Being, implied ‘ unity,’ in a sense that condemned all plur- 
ality and motion to be unreal, or merely implied immutability 
—a property which a polytheistic tradition could ascribe to 
material atoms without sacrificing plurality and motion. When 
we look at Atomism in this light, we see that although it goes 
the whole way to the extreme of ‘ materialism,’ the properties 
of immutability and impenetrability ascribed to atoms are the 
last degenerate forms of divine attributes. 

In fine, the various schools treat this substance in an 2 priori 
way, as if it were a mere scientific hypothesis; but they all 
alike believe that they are speculating about an actually exist- 
ing ultimate reality. The reason why they do not realise its 
hypothetical character is precisely that it was not invented 
by any of them, but taken over from pre-philosophic religious 
representation. Above all, the point on which we would insist 
is that the principal object of Greek speculation is not external 
nature as revealed through the senses, but a metaphysical 


138 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


representation of reality as a supersensible extended substance, 
which is at first both alive (Soul) and divine (God), and also has 
a ‘matter’ of its own, distinct, or distinguishable, from visible 
and tangible ‘ body’ with its sensible properties. The problem, 
all along, was: given that reality is a substance of this sort, how 
can it be related to the sense-world; how can it be adapted 
and remodelled so as to account for what we perceive; how 
can we get out of it the world we see around us ? 


81, The causes of philosophic systems 


Our contention, then, is that, in accounting for the dogmatic 
systems of the first philosophers, who had nothing but theology 
behind them, the two main causes are to be found in two op- 
posed schemes of religious representation, and in the tempera- 
ments of the individual philosophers, which made one or other 
of those schemes the more congenial to them. As compared 
with these two causes, those questions of the ‘ influence ’ of one 
system or another, so fully discussed by historians, are of secon- 
dary importance. One philosopher is influenced by another 
chiefly because his temperament predisposes him to a view 
which happens either to agree or to disagree with the other's. 
The form his reasonings take will, of course, be largely governed 
by the fact that he will develop his views mainly in antagonism 
to views which he detests. But this form is superficial, and 
often misleading. It will rarely represent any train of thought 
which really set him on the way to his conclusion. Almost all 
philosophic arguments are invented afterwards, to recommend, 
or defend from attack, conclusions which the philosopher was 
from the outset bent upon believing, before he could think 
of any arguments at all. That is why philosophical reasonings 
are so bad, so artificial, and so unconvincing. To mistake 
them for the causes which led to a belief in the conclusion, is 
generally to fall into a naive error. The charm of the early 
Greek philosophers lies in the fact that, to a large extent, they 
did not trouble to invent bad arguments at all, but simply 
stated their beliefs dogmatically. They produced a system 
as an artist produces a work of art. Their attitude was: ‘That 
is how the world is to be’; and the system itself, as distinct 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 139 


from any arguments that may be constructed to buttress the 
fabric, is thrown out, like a statue or a poem, as the expression 
of some thought or emotion that lies within and will have 
utterance. 

We shall, therefore, in what follows, say little of the influence 
of one system on another ; questions of that sort must, of course, 
be answered, but they have been excellently treated in the 
histories. It is, also, of little use to discuss the temperaments 
of individual thinkers, for the simple reason that in most cases 
we know nothing whatever of their temperaments, except that 
they must have been such as to lead them to this or that type of 
system. What remains, then, is the systems themselves, taken 
as coherent wholes, as typical schemes of representation, or 
possible ways of conceiving the world. We shall try to show 
that they can be better understood when we group them in 
two lines of tendency,! which originate in the two types of 
religious system above distinguished. 


82. The Scientific Tendency : explanations and causes 


It is now, perhaps, generally agreed that science has its princi- 
pal root in magical art. Behind the systems of representation 
which science elaborates and remodels, lies the practical impulse 
which drives man to extend his power over Nature, an impulse 
which found its first collective expression in magic. In order 
to explain the characteristics of the scientific tendency in Greek 
speculation, we must, therefore, recur to certain features of 
magical practice which have already been described. 

Sympathetic magic consists in the representation of the object 
of passionate desire. Primarily, this representation is mimetic 
—in other words, the realisation of the desired end in dramatic 
action. The emotion is satisfied by actually doing the thing 
which is willed. Besides this, there is also the verbal expression 
of the same emotion and desire—the element of myth, which 
at first is simply the statement of what is being done and willed.* 
At a later stage, the myth becomes ‘ aetiological,’ that is to say, 

1 Cf. Diog. L. proem. 13, φιλοσοφίας δὲ δύο γεγόνασιν ἀρχαί, ἥ τε ἀπὸ 


᾿Αναξιμάνδρον καὶ ἡ ἀπό Πυθαγόρον. 
3. For this view of Myth, see J. E. Harrison, Themis, p. $27. 


140 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


a description of the action, alleged as an explanation of it; 
but the content of the myth remains, as before, a transcript or 
representation of the action itself. The mimetic action and the 
verbal expression are thus, at first, only two modes in which 
the same desire finds vent and satisfaction. 

In the earliest stage, we have supposed that the dramatic 
action and the desired effect are not distinguished. The rain- 
maker feels simply that he is making rain, not that he is imitat- 
ing the fall of rain, in order to cause real rain to fall subsequently. 
When the faith in magic begins to weaken, some distinction 
must begin to arise between the mimetic action and the natural 
event; some notion of causality makes its first appearance. 
This is a critical moment in the pre-history of science. It is 
of cardinal importance to grasp the form under which the 
relation of cause and effect was originally represented. 

Now, the fundamental fact about the class of causes and 
effects which we are considermg—a class which, from their 
social importance, will pre-eminently be the centre of attention 
—is that they are alike, since sympathetic magic produces its 
efiects by imitation. In the second place, all likeness, as we 
have seen, is interpreted as kinship or membership of the same 
group. Finally, all kinship is represented by means of a matenal 
substrate or continuum, co-extensive with the group, and the 
medium of sympathetic interaction within it. On this basis, 
the emphasis is thrown entirely on the likeness, kinship, and 
material continuity of the two events, not on their temporal 
succession. The first notion of causality is, thus, not temporal 
but static, simultaneous, and spatial. Magic, then, is not at 
all concerned with the order of time, but solely with classi- 
fication. Its nascent science is occupied with more and more 
elaborate schemes, in which all objects are ranged in groups 
of kindred—clans of things which, being united by sympathetic 
continuity, can interact on one another. Its framework is 
not temporal, but spatial; it traces the boundaries of 
mova. 

1 This is confirmed by the study of primitive languages. Lévy-Bruhl 
(Fonct. ment. p. 165) quotes Gatschet (The Klamath Language, Ὁ. 554): 
* Les catégories de position, de situation dans lespace, et de distance sont, dans 


les représentations des peuples sauvages, d'une importance aussi capitale que 
celles de temps et de causalité le sont pour nous.’ 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 141 


At the same time, to the magician knowledge is power; the 
impulse which drives him is still the desire to extend the 
influence of his mana (or the mana of the group, for the whole 
process is collective) to its utmost bounds. To form a repre- 
sentation of the structure of Nature is to have control over it.! 
To classify things is to name them, and the name of a thing, 
or of a group of things, is its soul; to know their names is 
to have power over their souls. Language, that stupendous 
product of the collective mind, is a duplicate, a shadow-soul, 
of the whole structure of reality ; it is the most effective and 
comprehensive tool of human power, for nothing, whether 
human or superhuman, is beyond its reach. Speech is the 
Logos, which stands to the universe in the same relation as 
the myth to the ritual action: it 1s a descriptive chart of the 
whole surface of the real. 

Karly science seeks an intelligible representation or account 
(logos) of the world, rather than laws of the sequence of causes 
and effects in time—a logos to take the place of mythor. We 
have spoken of the aetiological myth as the transcript in verbal 
expression of the ritual performed. Such a verbal equivalent 
was called an azza or aztion, in the sense rather of ‘ explanation ’ 
than of ‘cause.’ It is true that the aia is thrown into the 
past, by that curious psychological process which transformed 
the aorist tense (‘this 1s done ἢ) into the past (‘this was done’); ? 
but the atta remains rather a representation of the significance 
of the rite than a mere historical account of its first enactment. 
Similarly, early science does not always clearly distinguish 
between explanatory representations and processes of genesis. 
It wavers between cosmogony and cosmology, easily reversing 
its own process of analysis, in taking the world to pieces, into 
a process by which it supposes that the world first arose. Thus, 
even when it appears to be describing how the universe came 


1 As late as Anaxagoras we shall find that Mind masters (κρατεῖ) the world 
because it knows it; ‘for knowing defines and determines what is known’ 
(Simpl. de Caelo, 608, ἡ yap γνῶσις ὁρίζει καὶ περατοῖ τὸ γνωσθέν, D.F.V.?, 
p. 329). For this conception of the work of the intellect, see Bergson’s 
Evolution Créatrice. 

® P. Beck, ‘Erkenntniasth. ἃ. prim. Denkens,’ Zeischr. f. Phil. ὦ. phil. 
Krittk, Leipzig, 1904, bd. 124, p. 9 ff. has some valuable remarks on this 
phenomenon in connection with the concept of eternity. 


142 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


into being, its interest really lies in the analysis of the world 
as it now is—its aetiological logos. It1is bent on the static aspect 
of structure, arrangement, order, rather than on the temporal 
questions of cause and effect which become prominent in modern 
science.! 

The view that will here be put forward is that the dominant 
aim of early philosophy, on what we have called the scientific 
side, is to perfect and simplify a new tool—a conceptual model 
of reality, starting from the notion of physis above defined. 
The first business of the intellect, driven by the impulse to power, 
is to find its way about the world, to trace out the shapes and 
contours of its parts, and to frame a perfectly clear plan of the 
cosmos. With this intent, it will take for its point of departure 
that aspect of physis which submits to this treatment—its 
aspect as material substance filling space. This aspect will be 
emphasised to the ultimate exclusion of Soul, or Life, and of 
God, in so far as these conceptions contain something that 
defies exact analysis and measurement, for you cannot make 
a map of vital energy. All that will be left of God is the attri- 
bute of immutability, which can be ascribed to matter; all 
that will be left of Soul is mechanical motion—change of position 
in space. Such philosophy is governed in its progress by the 
ideal which it finds in the science of space-measurement, 
geometry ;* and it reaches its own perfect fulfilment in 
Atomism. 


1 Plato in the Phaedo shows the same desire to discover a fixed, immutable 
structure of the ‘nature of things’ (the Ideal World, which 18 his φύσις), and 
insists that this supersensible ground (αἰτία) of the sensible world is the only 
‘cause’ worth looking for. 

2 Geometry is known to have had a strictly practical origin in an art of 
social importance—the land-measurement practised by the ‘cord-fasteners ’ 
(harpedonaptat), who marked out the divisions of the soil in Egypt after the 
inundations of the Nile (see Burnet, #.@.P.2, p. 24). Mr. Payne remarks 
that geometry is the only mathematic science, beyond arithmetic, the 
rudiments of which are found in aboriginal America. He adds that ‘the 
primary stimulus to measurement appears to have been the division, sub- 
division, and redivision of land in densely peopled districts of limited 
extent, such as Egypt and Babylonia, and Peru. Only in the valleys of 
the latter district were these conditions produced in the New World; and 
it is significant that the Peruvian peoples, in genera] less advanced than the 
Mexicans, excelled the latter in the practice and the proximate applications 
of a rudimentary geometry’ (History of the New World called America, ii, 
p- 281). 


THE DATUM OF PHILOSOPHY 143 


83. Ionian Science and Olympianism 


The scientific tendency is Ionian in origin: it takes its rise 
among that race which had shaped Homeric theology, and it 
is the characteristic product of the same racial temperament. 
We may note, too, that its birthplace, Miletus, was one of the 
most important centres of commerce at that time. Science 
and commerce are, here as elsewhere, twin products of that 
daring spirit of exploration and adventure which voyages over 
strange seas with a strictly practical object in view. Baconian 
science insists upon ‘ fruit’ in exactly the same spirit as the 
buccaneering admirals of the same Elizabethan age went in 
pursuit of gold-dust, and accidentally discovered new lands. 
In the same way, Thales, bent upon measuring the distance 
from land of ships at sea, accidentally discovered trigonometry. 

It will now be clear why we regard this tendency in philo- 
sophy as succeeding to the place left vacant by Olympian 
theology. They are two similar products of the same tempera- 
ment. Both systems of thought are governed by the notion 
of Moira—the distribution of the world into spatial provinces. 
Both are pluralistic, rationalistic, and fatalistic in tendency. 
Above all, both are realistic, in the sense that is opposed to 
other-worldliness. Science, no matter to what heights of 
disinterestedness its specific emotion of curiosity may some- 
times rise, remains practical from first to last, and for it all 
value lies in the sense-world. True, it will mistake its own 
conceptual model of atoms and void for the real structure of 
the universe, and condemn the senses because we cannot see and 
touch the supersensible. But its affections are never set upon 
this metaphysical construction ; the spectral dance of imaginary 
dead particles has never smitten the human soul with home- 
sickness. The intellect must find its satisfaction in the excite- 
ment of pursuit, not in the contemplative fruition of anything 
it can either discover or invent.? 


1 It is noteworthy that, whereas all the philosophers of the mystical 
tradition (Heracleitus, Pythagoras, Xenophanes, Parmenides, Empedocles, 
and Plato) assert that there is only one cosmos, the scientific tradition 
(Anaximander, Anaximenes, the Atomists) admit ‘innumerable worlds’ 
(ἄπειροι κόσμοι). 

® The description of the mystic tendency, which we contrast with the 
scientific, is reserved to chap. vi. 


V 
THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 


84. The course of Science 


THE aim of science, described in the last chapter, was triumph- 
antly achieved in Atomism. The course of what we have called 
the scientific tendency is marked by a line of thinkers which 
starts from the Milesian school, and leads, through Anaxagoras,! 
to Leucippus and Democritus. These Atomists succeeded in 
reducing physis to a perfectly clear, conceptual model, such as 
science desires, composed of little impenetrable pieces of homo- 
geneous ‘ matter,’ with none but spatial properties—tiny geo- 
metrical solids, out of which all bodies, of whatever shape or 
size, could be built up. 


85. The Milesian School : ANAXIMANDER 


As we saw at the outset, the really important member 
of the Milesian school is its second head, Anaximander. The 
closer study of his system, from the point of view we have now 
reached, will start us upon the track which leads science to 
its goal in Atomism. We may also hope to clear up some 
difficulties which have hitherto obscured the interpretation 
of his cosmology. 

Anaximander’s great achievement, which stamps him as a 
man of genius, is the partially successful effort of thought by 
which he attempted to distinguish the primary physis from 
the visible elements. He isolated in conception that soul- 
substance which we have called the primitive datum of philo- 

1 Cf. Burnet, #.G.P.%, p. 292, who points out that the doxographers’ 
statement that Anaxagoras was the ‘ pupil’ or ‘companion’ of Anaximenes, 
though not hterally true, correctly describes the relation between their 


systems. 
14 


THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 145 


sophy, from the water with which Thales had confused it, and 
kept it clear also of fire, air, and earth. This, as we can now 
see, was really an effort of abstraction, which drew a line of 
distinction between the supersensible soul-substance and its 
sensible embodiments. God once more gets clear of Nature, 
as he had done before in the age of religion ; only not this time 
in the personal form which anthropomorphising theology had 
reduced to absurdity, but in that older impersonal form from 
which theology had started on its long side-track of delusion. 
Anaximander, putting aside the humanised shapes of divinity, 
rediscovers the substance which had informed those shapes. 
He rechristens it physis, because its function now is to inform 
and animate, not Gods, but the world we see: it is the ‘ nature 
of things.’ 

But, although we can see that this was simply an effort of 
abstraction, it was not as such that it could present itself to 
Anaximander. He thought he had found, not a mythical 
representation, which was only entitled to be considered as 
hypothetical, but the actually existing primitive substance. 
Hence, instead of isolating it only in thought, he isolates it in 
time, and conceives it as the first state of the world, out of which 
the world we see must somehow have arisen. Physts is not to 
him an hypothesis, but a ‘beginning’ (ἀρχή). The problem 
is, how to get the world out of it. 

Now, owing to causes we have already traced, the most 
important aspect of the visible world is the departmental 
distribution of the four elements in their appointed moira. 
The breaking out of this division is, accordingly, the first act of 
cosmology, as it had been of cosmogony. The elements are 
parted by a process of separation (ἀπόκρισις) out of the primal 
continuous substance. Correspondingly, the important fact 
about that substance is the absence of these secondary depart- 
mental limits ; it is therefore described by the negative name, 
“the Limitless’ (azrecpov)—a word which specially suggested 
to the Greek mind the having no beginning, middle, or end. 
Physis is thus called ‘the unlimited,’ primarily in contradis- 
tinction to the elemental provinces which are limited, though, 
as we shall soon see, this sense of the word is not distinguished 
from others. Here, then, we have the first two stages of exist- 

K 


146 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


ence, which precede the birth of individual things—the third 
stage. 

The next question is: how to account for the passage from 
the first stage to the second—how do the limits of the elemental 
provinces ever come to be imposed ? 

To answer this question, Anaximander falls back upon the 
moral character which had clung to physis ever since it had come 
into existence as a representation of the social consciousness, 
felt. precisely as a power which imposes limits on individual 
ageression. This character, as we have seen, had never passed 
altogether from Mozra to be vested in the will of the supreme 
deity ; and, now that the Gods have vanished, it resides in the 
divine soul-substance, physis itself, which ‘not only embraces 
but governs all other things.’1 This governance is moral, 
showing itself in the dispensation of the elemental regions. 
In presence of this transparently mythical conception, it 18 
probable that the ‘ eternal motion,’ which is said to have caused 
the separation, should not be understood in a purely mechanical 
sense. It is ‘eternal’ because native to the divine, the ‘im- 
mortal and imperishable’ physis, whose motion, like itself, 
must be without beginning or end; but, since physis is alive, 
its motion is probably not distinguished from growth—the 
characteristic movement of life. We may perhaps think of the 
opposed. elements as developed, or unfolded, out of the one by 
a process of growth not clearly distinguished from a mechanical 
sifting. due to the rotation of the universe—a motion which, 
being circular, is without beginning or end, and so limitless or 
‘eternal.’ There is here a tangle of confusion and obscurity, 
which it will be the business of Anaximander’s successor to 
unravel so far as he can.? 

Next, since the elements were separated out of the limitless 
thing, their specific qualities must at first have been somehow 


1 Arist. Phys. 74, 203) 6: καὶ περιέχειν ἅπαντα καὶ κυβερνᾶν. O. Gilbert, 
‘Spekulation u. Volkaglaube,’ Arch. f. Relig. xu. p 312; Damut tritt aber 
dem tatsdichlich bratchenden Kampf- und Raubzustande der Welt cine hohere 
sittliche Ordnung gegenuber und dese letztere kann nur auf τὸ θεῖον achlecht- 
hin, das absolut Gottliche des ἄπειρον, zuruckgefuhrt werden. 

3 Eisler ( Weltenmantel, ii. 666) identifies Anaximander's ἄπειρον with the 
‘Orphic’ supreme God Chronos or Αἰὼν ἄπειρος. If this is right, as I incline 
to think, ἄπειρος would mainly mean the unendsng revolution of Time. 


THE SCIENTIFIO TRADITION 147 


fused in it. Later authorities, familiar with atomistic “con- 
ceptions, call Anaximander’s limitless physis a ‘mixture’ 
(wetyua). Once more, it seems right to interpret the name 
‘limitless ’ in a negative way. It is nof fire or air or water or 
earth, and has not the distinct and limited properties of any 
or all of them. These properties must have been latent in it, 
or they could not have come out of it; but we must not think 
of the primal mixture as containing portions of them all in a 
chaos. In that first stage, there was no such thing as fire or air, 
earth or water. They were mixed, rather, as wine is mixed 
with water, so that you cannot say that the mixture is either 
wine or water, or that any part of it is only water or only 
wine. 

Finally, the moral character of the elemental disposition is 
strongly marked in the doctrine already dwelt upon, that in- 
dividual things owe their existence to ‘injustice,’ consisting 
in the encroachment of one element upon another. The becom- 
ing of things (γένεσις) is birth, and all birth results from the 
mixing of opposites. Anaximander emphasises the antagonism 
of opposites, rather than the necessity of their union to give birth 
to existence. In so doing, he unconsciously revives that primi- 
tive morality which emphasises the absolute supremacy of the 
group over the individual, and, as against the inflexible custom 
of the tribe, bans all individuality and personal freedom as 
arrogant aggression. The elements in his scheme correspond 
to individuals; the moral ordinance of physis enjoins them 
to keep within their regions, exactly as Moira, in Olympian 
theology, restricted the Gods to their departments. 

We need not pursue, in further detail, the evolution of the 
visible world. Throughout our analysis of the various systems, 
we shall only be concerned with views about the fundamental 
‘ nature of things,’ our purpose being to show how they can be 
deduced from the primitive datum of philosophy.! 


1 If I have put Anaximander at the head of the scientafic tradition, I do 
not overlook the mystical elementa in his system, for which Eisler, Welten- 
mantel, vol. ii. p. 666 ff., should be consulted. He seems to mo to hold both 
tendencies in solution, but his immediate successors went off in the scientific 
direction. Empedocles, as we shall see (p. 231), when he sought to reconcile 
mysticism and science, went back to Anaximander. 


148 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


86. ANAXIMENES 


Anaximander’s successor, Anaximenes, was a lesser man than 
his master. So far from making any advance towards the 
truth that Anaximander’s physis was a hypothetical entity, 
he could not even keep it distinct from one of the elements, 
dark and cold air, or mist (2p), which, by the way, had always 
been regarded as the appropriate clothing of divinities (ἠέρα 
ἑσσάμενοι). He thus reverted to the position of Thales, merely 
substituting air for water as the embodiment of physis, and 
no doubt thinking that he was effecting a simplification. In 
another direction, however, he really took a considerable step 
towards that clearness of conception at which science instinc- 
tively aims. He turned his attention to that point in Anaxi- 
mander’s scheme where obscurity and confusion most obviously 
reigned—the problem, how to get the qualitatively different 
elements out of the indeterminate physts. 

To Anaximenes it seemed simple to identify the soul-sub- 
stance with air; for air is breath, and breath is life, or soul. 
* Just as our soul, being air, holds us together, so do a breath 
and air encompass the whole world.’! Thus, the soul-substance 
becomes again confused with an actually existing form of matter. 
The advantage of this theory is that the other elemental forms 
can be got out of it without resorting to the conception of Movra, 
which is accordingly eliminated. Air 18 of the same order of 
existence as the other elements, not a metaphysical substance 
on a higher plane. Consequently, its transformation into them 
can be interpreted in purely quantitative terms. For Anaxi- 
mander qualitative differences were ultimate; his ‘ Limitless’ 
was a perfect fusion of all qualities, which were afterwards 
“separated out.’ Anaximenes reduced all change and trans- 
formation to ‘thickening and thinning’: the real fact which 
underlies what we call qualitative differences is simply difference 
of quantity—more or less of the same stuff in a given space.* 
To get rid of quality in this way is to make an enormous advance 
in simplification. Instead of the infinitely subtle gradations, 
and innumerable varieties, of quality—colours, sounds, tastes, 
and so forth—we have now only to conceive one uniform material 


1 Frag. 2= Aet. 1. 3. 4. 2 Cf. Burnet, £.¢. P.*, p. 78. 


THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 149 


with differences of density, which are comparatively distinct and, 
above all, commensurable.! 

On the other hand, it may be remarked that you do not get 
rid of qualities by saying they are caused by thickening and 
thinning; you only get rid of the trouble and difficulty of 
thinking about them: nor can you be said to have explained 
them, until you can form some notion how qualitative differences 
could result from changes of density. The truth seems to be 
that Anaximenes’ theory is motived by the desire to simplify 
and clarify the conceptual model of the world—to explain 
away, rather than to explain, the confused variety which 
our senses show us. From this point of view, the impulse of 
science, perpetually allured by the ideal clearness of geometrical 
conceptions, is to turn away from all sensible qualities, 
which it has not yet learnt how to measure, and to dismiss 
them as secondary, and derived from the spatial properties 
of body. 

Finally, it is really only by confusion that the air which is 
physis and soul-substance can be identified with atmospheric 
air or mist. The latter is obviously not identical with fire or 
water or earth. It exists, side by side with them, in a region of 
its own, and has its own peculiar properties. The air which 
18 soul-substance, on the other hand, exists, one and the same, 
in all the elements alike. Atmospheric air is considered to be 
the primary or fundamental form of matter only because it 18 
confused with the mythical soul-substance. If it were taken 
simply as a natural substance, there would be no reason what- 
ever for calling it primary, rather than fire or earth or water. 
It is selected for this position merely because it is the one of 
the four elements which seemed to Anaximenes to be most like 
soul-substance—the most appropriate vehicle of life. It is 
qua soul-substance, not gua natural element, that it is called 
divine, or God ; and it is really on the same metaphysical plane 


1 Cf. G@. Milhaud, Les philosophes géométres de la Gréce (1900), p. 18 ff. 
Act. i. 24. 2, brings out the point that this abandonment of quality and 
transformation (ἀλλοίωσις) for quantity and ‘coming together and separa- 
tion’ leads on to Atomism : ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς, ᾿Αναξαγόρας, Δημόκριτος, "Exixoupos, 
καὶ πάντες ὅσοι κατὰ συναθροισμὸν τῶν λεπτομερῶν σωμάτων κοσμοποιοῦσι, σνγ- 
κρίσεις μὲν καὶ διακρίσεις εἰσάγουσι, γενέσεις δὲ καὶ φθορὰς οὗ κυρίωξ᾽ οὐ γὰρ κατὰ 
τὸ ποιὸν ἐξ ἀλλοιώσεως, κατὰ δὲ τὸ ποσὸν ἐκ συναθροισμοῦ ταύτας γίνεσθαι. 


150 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


as Anaximander’s physis. From it, we are told, Anaximenes 
said, ‘the things that are and have been and shall be, and the 
Gods and things divine, took their rise, while other things come 
from its ofispring.’! Thus, it is clear that, in Anaximenes’ 
system, physis does not really shake off its metaphysical char- 
acter. It is not a natural substance, but only confused with 
one, and it retains properties which belong to God and Soul. 


87. EMPEDOCLES as man of science 


Empedocles, the wonder-worker, who went about among 
men as an immortal God, crowned with fillets and garlands, 
primarily belongs to the mystical tradition, whose home was 
in the western Greece of lower Italy and Sicily, where he was 
born. The detailed study of his system must, therefore, be post- 
poned for the present ; but he has a place also in the scientific 
tradition, for his exuberant genius combined the temperament 
of a prophet with a really scientific turn of mind, which led him 
so far as to illustrate his theories by experimental demon- 
strations. As we shall see later, he makes a brilliant attempt 
to combine the mystic view of the world with Ionian science, and, 
in 80 doing, he takes a step beyond the Milesians in the direction 
of Atomism. It is in respect of this advance only that we are 
here concerned with his opinions. 

The Milesians were hylozoists ; physis, for them, still retained 
its original meaning of something containing a vital principle 
within it and capable of growth. It was both a soul-substance, 
living and self-moving, and yet could be identified (or confused) 
with a bodily element. Now, in the spontaneous, procreant 
movement of life there is something which defies analysis in 
mechanical terms, something gratuitous and unaccountable, 
of supreme importance to the mystical temperament, and corre- 


1 Hippol. Ref. i. 7: ἀέρα ἄπειρον ἔφη τὴν ἀρχὴν εἶναι, ἐξ οὗ τὰ γινόμενα καὶ 
τὰ γεγονότα καὶ τὰ ἐσόμενα καὶ θεοὺς καὶ θεῖα γίνεσθαι, τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ ἐκ τῶν τούτον 
ἀπογόνων. O. Gilbert, ‘Spek. u. Volksglaube,’ Arch. 7. Rely. xii. 318, 
holds that the three other elements are pre-eminently meant by θεοὶ καὶ 
θεῖα, and correspond to Anaximander’s second stage; while τὰ λοιπά =the 
ὄντα of Anaximander's third stage, particular things, which are born of 
those offspring (ἀπόγονοι) of God, the three inferior elements. 


THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 151 


spondingly abhorrent to a science that is bent upon making 
physics conform to the perfect lucidity of geometry. The un- 
conscious aim of such science must be to get the life out of 
matter, and finally to eliminate life altogether from its con- 
ceptual model of the real. Empedocles, mystic though he 
was, and little aware of what he was doing, forwarded this 
aim, and so has a place in the development of the scientific 
tradition. 

It was even partly because he was a mystic. that he was led 
to this advance. Mystical religion, with its doctrine of immor- 
tality, emphasises the distinction between the soul and the 
body in which it is temporarily imprisoned. It is, therefore, 
specially easy for a man of science, bred up in mysticism, to 
get soul-substance clear of body-substance. Partly owing to 
this cause, and partly because a severe logic had led Par- 
menides, by another track, to assert the absolute rigidity and 
lifelessness of real being, Empedocles distinguished two kinds 
of material substance—the four elements, which are bodily, and 
two new soul-substances, Love and Strife, which move those 
bodily elements mechanically from without.! 

The social origin of these two life-forces we have already 
traced, and explained how they came to be inherent in physvs, 
so that Empedocles could get them out of it.2_ The detailed 
consideration of the part they play in forming worlds must 
be reserved for the present. The point which concerns us 
here is that these two constituents into which physis is analysed, 
as self-moving fluids, provide a vehicle for motion, outside, and 
between, the portions of the bodily elements, which accordingly 
lose their own inherent life. The coming into existence of in- 
dividual bodies is, therefore, now no longer a birth. There is 
no such thing as ‘ coming into being,’ no vital process of growth 
(φύσις) ; only a mixing of immutable elements, and a change 


1 Aristotle (Met. a5) says that Empedocles was the first to introduce the 
cause of motion in a double form, assuming, not a single source of motion, 
but a pair which are opposed to one another; and Aristotle implies that 
Empedocles was led to this because he saw the necessity of a cause of good 
things (Love) and a cause of evil things (Strife). See below, p. 230. Aris- 
totle clearly regards these two principles of motion as different in kind 
from the four bodily elements. 

ἡ Above, 83]. 


162 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of what is mixed! And this mixing and remixing is caused, 
from outside, by the two animate fluids. 

In our view, then, these two fluids are not on a level with the 
four visible or bodily elements; when Empedocles declares 
them to be ‘ equal and coeval ’ with the rest, he merely means 
that all alike are eternal and immutable. Love and Strife 
are two life-forces, whose function is to perform mechanically 
those acts of separation and recombination which, in Anaxi- 
mander’s system, were left to the mythical figure of Duke. 
They thus fill a gap in the mechanical model of the world, 
and, at the same time, leave for Atomism only the final step 
of depriving these vital fluids both of life and matter, and 
reducing them to motion in a void. 

Besides this advance, Empedocles contributed to science the 
notion, to which he had been helped by Parmenides, that each 
of the four forms of body is a ‘ thing,’ eternally distinct from 
each of the others, an ultimate and irreducible ‘element ’ 
(στοιχεῖον). Material substances are built up out of portions of 
these elements, which are conjoined in various proportions in a 
temporary combination, but remain distinct from one another, 
and simply come together and separate in space. We need 
not dwell upon the point that this conception of elements as 
discontinuous masses paves the way to a complete Atomism. 
It eliminates that element of continuity which still survived 
in Anaximenes’ variations of density—his processes of ‘ thicken- 
ing and thinning, which were to lie behind changes of quality. 

Empedocles, then, is an incomplete Atomist. He has reached 
the fundamental principle of the Atomistic conception, by build- 
ing up bodies out of distinct parts, and treating motion as com- 
municated from outside. Motion is still confused with life, and 
caused by vital fluids, running between the bodily elements ; 
but it is a great step to have got it out of body, and deposited 
in a distinct soul-substance. The scientific tradition lays hold 
of these new conceptions, leaving aside the rest of Empedocles’ 
extraordinary system. 


1 Emped. frag. 8: 
φύσις obderds ἐστιν ἁπάντων 
θνητῶν, οὐδέ Tis οὐλομένον θανάτοιο τελευτή, 
ἀλλὰ μόνον μίξις τε διάλλαξίς τε μιγέντων 
ἐστί, φύσις δ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῖς ὀνομάζεται ἀνθρώποισιν, 


THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 153 


88. ANAXAGORAS 


Anaxagoras of Klazomenae, who first transplanted Ionian 
science to Athens in the Periclean age, went a step beyond 
Empedocles in the direction of Atomism. He put a more 
rigorous construction upon the principle that what 1s cannot 
come out of what is not. He is not content to say, with Em- 
pedocles, that flesh, for instance, is made of earth and water 
etc., mixed in a certain proportion; for that would mean that 
what is flesh has come out of what is not flesh! That implies 
a birth (φύσις), a sheer coming into existence, of something 
which did not exist before—the very thing Empedocles had 
denied to be possible, when he said that all becoming was 
nothing but mixing, and that ‘birth’ (φύσις) was a mere 
name. 

If you take a hair and cut it in half, the two pieces are still 
hair; suppose you continue cutting them up into smaller and 
smaller pieces, the same is true—they are still bits of hair. 
There is no moment at which you will suddenly find them 
dividing into a portion of earth and a portion of fire, or whatever 
it may be. Thus, every bodily substance is composed of parts 
which are like itself, and into these it is infinitely divisible.* 
But, in spite of this infinite divisibility, Anaxagoras speaks 
as if there were minimal parts, which could not actually be cut 
into smaller ones, but are, in fact, atoms ; for he speaks of them 
as ‘seeds’ (σπέρματα). The four elements of Empedocles 
are not ultimate and irreducible: each of these masses is 
a collection of heterogeneous seeds. The original indis- 
criminate mass, out of which the order of the world arose, is 
a ‘mixture of all seeds." We have reached the notion of 
& primitive disorder or chaos, which has to be sorted out 
into ἃ cosmos. 

Like Empedocles, Anaxagoras needs a soul-substance or 
animate fluid, to run through the mixture of bodies and move 


1 Frag. 10: πῶς γὰρ ἂν ἐκ μὴ τριχὸς γένοιτο θρὶξ καὶ σὰρξ ἐκ μὴ σαρκός ; Aet. 
i. 3. 5. 

* Frag. 3: ‘Of the small there is no smallest, but always a smaller,’ ete. 

δ Burnet (¥.@.P.*, p. 807) thinks Anaxagoras probably used the word 
πανσπερμία. It is not our purpose to follow out the details of Anaxagoras’ 
interesting system, 


164 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


them from without. It is characteristic of Anaxagoras that 
his soul-substance is not emotional, like love and hate, but 
intellectual: he calls it Mind (Nous). He dwells on the fact 
that it knows everything, in a way that suggests that its power 
or mastery over things was due to its understanding.! Its task 
is described as ‘setting things in order’ (διακοσμεῖν), ‘ distin- 
guishing,’ ‘ separating,’ ‘ discriminating ’ (διάκρισις, ἀπόκρισις). 
It is nothing but the scientific intellect itself, which has taken 
the world to pieces, and now is projected to the further end, and 
charged with the task of sorting out the heap, and reducing 
it again to order. With an admirable scientific economy, its 
action is restricted within the narrowest limits. It is invoked 
to start mechanical motion: body, no longer being self-moving, 
must receive its first motion from something which can move 
itself, something which is alive, a soul-substance, a physis. 
But, once the motion is started, the more we can explain the 
structure of the world without falling back on this first cause, 
the better. From the scientific point of view, Anaxagoras’ 
great merit lies in this economy, of which Socrates in the 
Phaedo (98 B) so bitterly complains. Socrates would have 
had Anaxagoras use his Nous at every turn, and explain every 
cosmic arrangement by showing how it was best that it should 
be so and not otherwise, making Nous a benevolent God, who 
designs everything for the best. Some modern writers appear 
to sympathise with Socrates, as if they were unaware that the 
progress of science demanded that, so far from endowing this 
mythical soul-substance with additional attnbutes, such as 
benevolence, it should be deprived even of intelligence and life 
and reduced simply to motion. A purely mechanical ex- 
planation of the world must be tried, before it is found wanting ; 
and we ought rather to be thankful to Anaxagoras for refraining 
(if it ever occurred to him) from setting up a mythical teleology, 
and ΄ explaining * the known by the unknown. 


1 Frag. 12: καὶ γνώμην ye περὶ παντὸς πᾶσαν ἴσχει καὶ ἰσχύει μέγιστον. Ci. 
Simpl. de Caclo, 608 (D.F.V.2, p. 316): πάντα γιγνώσκειν τὸν γοῦν... ἡ γὰρ 
γνῶσις ὁρίζει καὶ περατοῖ τὸ γνωσθέν. Nous conatatutes the world, as the 
scientific intellect constitutes its representation of it, by introducing dis- 
tinctions and discriminations. 


THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 165 


89. The Atomism of LEUKIPPUS 


The author of the Atomic theory was a Milesian, who pro- 
bably migrated to Elea, and certainly was influenced by the 
arguments of the Eleatics, Parmenides and Zeno.' But. though 
these arguments helped him to form his theory, he belongs, 
in our view, to the scientific tradition which had originated 
at his birthplace. The common opinion, reported by Theo- 
phrastus,* instinctively recognised that his standpoint is really 
opposed to that of the mystics. ‘Leukippus of Elea, or Miletus, 
(for both accounts are given of him) had associated with Par- 
menides in philosophy, but he did not follow the same road 
with Parmenides and Xenophanes in his explanation of things, 
but, as is commonly believed, the opposite one. For, whereas 
they held the All to be One, immovable, without beginning, 
and limited, and did not allow us so much as to search for “ what 
is not,” Leukippus posited unlimited and ever-moving elements, 
namely the atoms. He made their shapes infinite in number, 
because there was no reason why they should be of one sort 
rather than another, and because he saw there was an unin- 
terrupted becoming and change in things. Further, he held 
that what 15 (1.6. atoms) is no more real than what is not (1.6. 
empty space), and that both alike are needed to explain the 
things that come into existence: for he postulated that the 
substance of the atoms was “ compact,’ or full, and called them 
what 1s (ov), saying that they move in the void, which he called 
what rs not (μὴ ov), but declared to exist just as much as 
what 1s.’ 

Leukippus accepted Parmenides’ doctrine, that ‘ out of what 
is in truth one, a plurality cannot come, nor yet a unity out of 
what is really many’?; but here the two ways part. The 
mystic, ᾿ transgressing against sense-perception and ignoring it, 
holds that he ought to follow the argument’; ὅ and the premiss 
of that argument, to which, as a mystic, he must hold, is: 


' For the Pythagorean number-atomism, see below, § 114. 

® Ap. Simpl. Phys. 28, 4 (D F.V.*, p. 344). 

δ Arist. de Gen. εἰ Corr. 325a 34: (Λεύκιππος φήθη) ἐκ τοῦ κατ᾽ ἀλήθειαν ἑνὸς 
οὐκ ἂν γενέσθαι πλῆθος οὐδ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἀληθῶς πολλῶν ἕν. 

4 Ibid. 1. 13 (of the Kleatics): ὑπερβάντες τὴν αἴσθησιν καὶ παριδόντες αὐτὴν 
ὧς τῷ λόγᾳ δέον ἀκολουθεῖν, alluding to Parm, frag. i. 33 ff, 


156 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


The All is One, namely God. To save the unity of God, he 
will unhesitatingly condemn the world of seeming plurality as 
unreal. The scientific tradition, on the other hand, is not tied to 
this premiss, and Leukippus can follow the argument to an 
opposite conclusion. He feels, with Aristotle,’ that ‘so far 
as arguments go, the (Eleatic) conclusion seems to follow; but 
if we look at facts, such opinions border on madness; for no 
madman is so utterly out of his senses that fire and ice seem 
to him one.’ That is the scientific temper, which starts with 
sensible facts, and will not fly in the face of them to save the 
unity of God. Accordingly, we are told? that ‘ Leukippus 
thought he had a theory which would agree with sense-percep- 
tion, and not do away with becoming and perishing, or motion, 
or the plurality of things.’ Whats consists of an infinite number 
of indivisible bits of matter, impenetrable, and invisible because 
of their smallness. These atoms differ from one another, not 
qualitatively at all, but only in shape and position. The whole 
world and all it contains is resolvable into these tiny bodies. 
The coming into being and perishing of all things is nothing 
but the aggregation or dissipation of a set of atoms, moving 
mechanically in the void. 

Besides atoms and void, there is motion, which had once 
been the spontaneous activity of life or soul. The incomplete 
Atomists, Empedocles and Anaxagoras, had, as we have seen, 
made this property reside in soul-substances, distinct from the 
elements, and penetrating between them. But now there is 
nothing between the elemental atoms save empty space, which 
gives them room to move, without any soul-substance running 
through. The soul-substance accordingly disappears; it has 
become a superfluous hypothesis. Leukippus took the strictly 
scientific course of not attempting to account for motion at 
all? Aristotle, with his theistic prejudices, complains that 
to dismiss the question of the origin of motion was a piece of 
‘ slackness.’ The modern reader will prefer the Atomist’s 
attitude to Aristotle's own grotesque doctrine of the Primum 
Mobile. Leukippus declared plainly that ‘nothing happens at 


1 Ariat. de Gen. et Corr. 325a 17. 2 Ibid. 1. 23. 
5. Arist. Met. a iv. 985): περὶ δὲ κινήσεως, ὅθεν ἢ πῶς ὑπάρχει τοῖς οὖσι καὶ 
οὗτοι (Leukippus and Democritus) . . . ῥᾳθύμως ἀφεῖσαν. 


THE SCIENTIFIC TRADITION 157 


random; but everything for some reason and of necessity.’ ! 
What the necessity was, he did not, we are told, further define. 
We may recognise in this Ananke the figure of Moura, still 
pre-eminent in a world from which the Gods have utterly 
vanished. 

The soul, too, has become, like physis, a mere collection of 
atoms. ‘Democritus affirms the soul to be a sort of fire or heat. 
For the “shapes” or atoms are infinite, and those which are 
spherical he declares to be fire and soul: they may be compared 
with the so-called motes in the air, which are seen in sunbeams 
passing through windows. The aggregate of such seeds (pans- 
perma), he tells us, forms the constituent elements of the whole 
of nature (and herein he agrees with Leukippus), while those of 
them which are spherical form the soul, because such figcres 
most easily find their way through everything, and, being them- 
selves in motion, set other things in motion.’ If it is true, as 
Aristotle says, that Leukippus gave no account of the origin 
of motion, we must not conceive this motion of the soul-atoms 
as an inherent principle of spontaneous activity, but as due, like 
that of other atoms, to mechanical shock and collision.? The 
soul-atoms merely differ in that their round shape makes them 
more easily movable, and so they are the first to be set in motion, 
and impart the shock to other atoms of more stable figures. 
At death, the atoms are dispersed ; there can be no question of 
immortality. ‘The Atomists assume that it is the soul which 
imparts motion to animals. Hence they take respiration as 
the distinctive mark of life. For, when the surrounding air 
compresses bodies and tends to extrude those atoms which, 
because they are never at rest themselves, impart motion to 
animals, then they are reinforced from outside by the entry 
of other similar atoms in respiration, which, in fact, by helping 
to check compression and solidification, prevents the escape 

1 Frag. 2: οὐδὲν χρῆμα μάτην γίγνεται, ἀλλὰ πάντα ἐκ λόγου τε καὶ ὑπ᾽ ἀνάγκης. 
Hippol. Ref.1. 12: τίς δ᾽ ἂν εἴη ἡ ἀνάγκη, οὐ διώρισεν. Dieterich, Abraxas, 75, 
compares Plato. Tim. 484: μεμιγμένη γὰρ οἷν ἡ τοῦδε τοῦ κόσμον γένεσις ἐξ 
ἀνάγκης τε καὶ νοῦ συστάσεως ἐγεννήθη. 

3. Arist, de anim. aii. 4036 31. 

3 Alex. in Art. Met. aiv. 985): οὗτοι (Leukippus and Democritus) γὰρ 
λέγουσιν ἀλληλοτυπούσας καὶ κρονομένας πρὸς ἀλλήλας κινεῖσθαι τὰς ἀτόμους. 


Arist. de anim. a2, 88 3 and 4, contrasts the Atomists with those who 
describe the soul as self-moving. 


1608 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of the atoms already contained in the animals; and life, 
so they held, continues so long as there is strength to do 
this,’ 1 

That other function of the soul—knowing—must be similarly 
explained. A soul which is nothing but a group of bodily atoms 
can only know or perceive other groups by colliding with them, 
or with filmy wraiths (deskela, erdola) thrown off by them.? 
Such, then, is the Atomists’ doctrine of knowledge: they too 
“follow the argument’ to its most strange conclusions. The 
effect is that whatever is mysterious and unintelligible in the 
ideas of ‘soul’ and of ‘life’ is, as completely as may be, ex- 
purgated out of existence. 

We are thus left with a conceptual model of the real, in which 
pez.ect clarity of conception triumphed, and which, accordingly, 
held the field in science till yesterday. The Gods and the im- 
mortal soul have vanished in the dance of material particles. 
Physis, though the name may be retained, has lost all its ancient 
associations of growth and life. There is no such thing as 
‘growth’; nothing but the coming together and separating of 
immutable atoms. All motion had once been the inherent 
property of the living thing, the proper expression of its inward 
life. Now the life is wrung out of matter; motion, no longer 
a spontaneous activity, lies not within, but between, the im- 
penetrable atoms. Instead of life, nothing 1s left but the change 
of space relations ; and the governance of the world returns to 
Ananke-Morra. 


90. Contrast with the Mystical Tradition 


In one very important respect, the scientific tradition differs 
from the mystic. lonian science supersedes theology, and goes 
on its own way, without drawing any fresh supply of inspiration 
from religion. Science, with its practical impulse, is like magic 
in attempting direct control over the world, whereas religion 
interposes between desire and its end an uncontrollable and 
unknowable factor—the will of a personal God. The perpetual, 

1 Arist. de anim. a2, 3. 

So all senses are reduced to one—Touching ; Arist. de Sensu, 4420 29: 


Δημόκριτος καὶ ol πλεῖστοι τῶν φυσιολόγων, ὅσοι λέγουσι περὶ αἰσθήσεως, ἀτοπώ- 
τατὸν τι move. πάντα γὰρ τὰ αἰσθητὰ ἁπτὰ ποιοῦσι. 


THE SCIENTIFIO TRADITION 159 


if unconscious, aim of science is to avoid this circuit through 
the unknown, and to substitute for religious representation, 
involving this arbitrary factor, a closed system ruled throughout 
by necessity. The Gods may be exiled to the intermundane 
spaces, or pensioned off with the honorary position of First 
Cause; what science cannot allow is that their incalculable 
action should thrust itself in between the first cause and the 
last effect. Thus, science turns its back on theology, and works 
away from it with what speed it may ; it reaches, in a few rapid 
strides, a very simple and clear model of the structure of reality, 
from which the supernatural has all but disappeared. 


Ergo uuida urs anime perurcit, et extra 

processit longe flammantia moenia mundi, 

atque omne tmmensum peragrauit mente animoque, 
unde refert nobis wictor quid possit rire, 

quid nequeat, finita potestas denique curque 
quanam sit ratione atque alte terminus haerens. 
quare relligio pedibus subjecta urcissim 

opteritur, nos exaequat wictoria caelo.} 


In contrast with this steady advance away from religion and 
theology, the mystic tradition 1s continuously inspired by living 
religious faith. The mystical systems will be best understood 
if we consider them, not as followmg one upon another in a 
logical deduction, but as a series of efforts to translate a certain 
view of life, of God, and of the soul and its destiny, into terms 
of a physical system. Not, of course, that these efforts are 
independent of one another, or unaffected by science; each 
profits by the failures of its predecessor, and some at least 
borrow the results of the scientific tradition. But the in- 
spiration and the impulse come fresh, each time, from a form of 
religious faith which was kept alive in the Pythagorean com- 
munities from the days of their founder, and survived their 
dispersion in the latter half of the fifth century. Thus, we 
regard the series of systems, now to be considered, as thrown 
off in succession by a mystical religion, whose view of life and 
of the world they, each and all, attempt to formulate. 


1 Lucr. 1. 72. 


VI 
ἸῊΝ MYSTICAL TRADITION 
91. The representation of Time fundamental in Mysticism 


In the foregoing chapter, we haveseen how the scientific tradition 
in philosophy is dominated throughout by the concept of 
spatial externality, as Olympian theology had been dominated 
by the figure of Moira, delimiting with mgid distinction the 
provinces of all individual powers, divine and human. Guided 
by that concept, science culminated in geometrical Atomism, 
and the reign of Moira, under the name of Necessity. In the 
mystical tradition, to which we now turn, the concepts of Time 
and Number (the measure of Time 1) hold the same predominant 
position, and the notion of Righteousness (Dike) replaces that 
of Moira. In the explanation of this central fact lies the key 
to the interpretation of the mystical systems. It has already 
been suggested that, as science is the legitimate successor of 
Olympian theology, so the mystical philosophies derive their 
inspiration and their conceptual scheme from the religion of 
Dionysus. Before we come to details, we must pomt out why 
the notion of Time is fundamental in this type of religion. 

We may start from the structure of the group—the organisa- 
tion of the cult-society itself; for there, as we have learnt, 
the origin of its typical system of representation may be 


1 Cf. Plato, Timaeus, 308: ἵνα δ᾽ εἴη μέτρον ἐναργές... ὁ θεὸς ἀνῆψεν 
. ὃ δὴ νῦν κεκλήκαμεν ἥλιον, ἵνα ὅτι μάλιστα εἰς ἅπαντα φαίνοι τὸν οὐρανὸν 
μετάσχοι τε ἀριθμοῦ τὰ Spo, ὅσοις ἦν προσῆκον, μαθόντα παρὰ τῆς ταὐτοῦ καὶ 
ὁμοῖον περιφορᾶς. Distance in space is measurable psychologically, by ex- 
penditure of strength ; but tume-distance can be measured only by counting 
the rhythmical repetition of the same occurrence. Hence the extent of 
time-consciousness depends on the extent of the number-system. See 
P. Beck, ‘ Erkenntnisstheorie des primitiven Denkens,’ Zeitschr. ΚΓ. Philos. 
uw. plilos. Krittk, Leipzig (1904), bd. 123, p. 172 ff. 
160 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 161 


sought.1 The Dionysiac cult-society, we have seen, is a single 
self-contained group, with a common hie centred in its daemon. 
This life is continuous in several senses. 

First, in the spatial or distributive sense, the group is con- 
tinuously animated by one soul or daemon, which both resides in 
all its members at once, and also hes beyond any one of them. 
Since there is only one group—one church, no matter how far 
asunder its members may be scattered *—the organisation ex- 
cludes any idea of its parts being confined within impenetrable 
provinces ; the polytheistic notion of Moira is absent. 

Next, in a temporal sense of continuity, the life of the group, 
being a common life which transcends every individual, is 
immortal, which, to the Greek, means ‘ divine.’ This conception 
gives rise to several cardinal doctrines of mysticism. 

The most primitive of these is Reincarnation (palengenesia). 
The essence of this belief is that the one life of the group, or 
tribe, extends continuously throcgh its dead members as well as 
through the living ; the dead are still part of the group, in the 
same sense as the living. This life, which is perpetually renewed, 
is reborn out of that opposite state, called ‘ death,’ into which, 
at the other end of its arc, it passes again. In this idea of 
reincarnation, still widespread among savage races, we have 
the first conception of a cycle of existence, a Wheel of Life, 
divided into two hemicycles of light and darkness, through 
which the one life, or soul, continuously revolves.® 

1 }).odorus, v. 64, 4 (D.F.V.", p. 473), preserves the statement of Ephorus 
that Orpheus was the pupil of the Idavan Dactyls, who were magicians 
(γόητες) and practised spells, initiations, and mysteries, which Orpheus 
first introduced nto Greece. Pythagoras also was initiated in Crete by the 
Idaean Dactyls and at Leibethra im Thrace. These traditions mark the 
continuity between the Orphic cult-soceties and the magical fraternities, 
and also the fact that Orphism revived a primitive type of religion. See 
J. KE. Harrison, Themis, p 462. 

2 Cf. Porph. de abst. iv. 11 (of the Essenes): μία δὲ οὐκ ἔστιν αὐτῶν πόλις, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἑκάστῃ κατοικοῦσι πολλοί, κτλ. 

3 Lévy-Bruhl, Fonct. ment. p. 358, points out that the sharp distinction 
between living and dead does not exist at a low level of mentality: a 
‘dead’ person still lives in a certain sense, and belongs both to the living 
society and to the dead. (We may note that ‘immortality’ so conceived 
precedes any clear conception of death. The belief in immortality is thus 
partly due toa failure to grasp the nature of death. There is no need to 
look further for a cause of the belief.) See also Dr. W. H. R. Rivers, The 
Primitwe Conception of Death, Hibbert Journal, 1912, p. 393. 

L 


162 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


How did the doctrine of rebirth come to be moralised ? 
Among the Orphics and Pythagoreans, we find it associated 
with the notions of a fall of the soul from its original divine 
state, a purification of the soul’s sins in this life and in an 
underworld purgatory, and a final restoration to the heavenly 
mansions whence it came. As we shall see later, this group of 
doctrines is of fundamental importance for the understanding 
of the mystic philosophy, and of the systems that emerged 
from the Pythagorean school. It concerns us, therefore, to 
give some account of the process by which the old savage doc- 
trine of reifcarnation came to have this moral significance. 


92. The Cycle of Reincarnation 


We need not discuss at length the origin of the belief in re- 
incarnation, as it exists among savages. It is, probably, a very 
simple matter. When the totemist is engaged in multiplying 
his totem-species, his whole attention is bent upon the idea of 
new animals, or plants, that have to be brought into existence. 
The image of these animals or plants before his mind must 
be the memory-image of those that have already existed and 
been eaten. Thus, what he desires to bring into existence is 
to him the same thing as what has existed already. How could 
he help believing that the new animals and plants are the old 
ones, come back again from the other world?! But, however 
that may be, it is certain that the notion of rebirth has none 
of those associations with sin and retribution which we find 
attached to it, when it recrudesces in Orphism. How did they 
come there? We are not in a position to answer this question 
fully. It is complicated by the view, now being put forward, 
that the charactenstic doctrmes of Orphism were derived from 
Persian religion, and came into Greek thought in the sixth 
century, when Persia was in contact with the Ionian colonies 
of Asia Minor.? About this theory we must keep an open mind. 
Religious ideas, as we have remarked, are easily assimilated 
only when there already exists an indigenous system of thought 


1 For the supersensible realit? attributed to memory-images, see P. Beck, 


op. cit. 
* This theory is advanced by Eisler, Weltenmaniel u. Himmelszelt, vol. ii., 
where a great mass of evidence is adduced. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 163 


into which they readily fit. Orphism is, indubitably, a revival 
and reformation of Dionysiac religion. Wherever the new 
ideas came from, it is probable that they were not totally foreign 
to the existing cults. Our object must be to throw into relief 
the chief elements of Dionysiac belief, and to distinguish from 
them the later factors which can be classed as specially Orphic. 
It will appear that, although Orphism was sufficiently like the 
older worship to emerge from it, or be grafted upon it, there is 
a latent contradiction between the two conceptions of immor- 
tality and of the soul, which severally belong to the two systems. 
This contradiction will give rise to two contrasted types of 
mystic philosophy. 

The philosophy that lay implicit in the old doctrine of re- 
incarnation is drawn out by Socrates, when, on the day of his 
death, he discusses with his Pythagorean friends the mystic 
view of life on earth and in the other world of the unseen. He 
recalls ‘ the ancient doctrine, that souls pass out of this world 
to the other, and there exist, and then come back hither from 
the dead. and are born again.’! One of the arguments by 
which this view is supported, is that there must be a constant 
process of repayment (ἀνταπόδοσις), according to which a set of 
souls that are born must be balanced by another set that die. 
If they did not thus‘ go round in a circle,’ but the process went 
forward in a straight line, stead of bending round again 
to its starting-point, a moment would come when all would 
reach the same state, and becoming (γένεσις) would be at a stand- 
still. The living are constantly going over to the dead: unless 
the supply is renewed by a reverse process, life would be ex- 
hausted, and all would end in death. 

Although Socrates refers this argument to the more general 
principle, that all becoming is a passing from one to the other 
of two opposite states, the notions involved are very simple 


1 Plato, Phaedo, 106: παλαιὸς μὲν οὖν ἔστι τις λόγος, οὗ μεμνήμεθα, ws εἰσὶν 
ἐνθένδε ἀφικόμεναι ἐκεῖ, καὶ πάλιν γε δεῦρο ἀφικνοῦνται καὶ γίγνονται ἐκ τῶν 
τεθνεώτων. 

2 Plato, Phaedo, 728: εἰ γὰρ μὴ ἀεὶ ἀνταποδιδοίη τὰ ἕτερα τοῖς ἑτέροις γιγνό- 
μενα, ὡσπερεὶ κύκλῳ περιιόντα, ἀλλ᾽ εὐθεῖά τις εἴη ἣ γένεσις ἐκ τοῦ érépov μόνον 
εἰς τὸ καταντικρὺ καὶ μὴ ἀνακάμπτοι πάλιν ἐπὶ τὸ ἕτερον μηδὲ καμπὴν ποιοῖτο, 
οἶσθ᾽ ὅτι πάντα τελευτῶντα τὸ αὐτὸ σχῆμα ἂν σχοίη καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ πάθος ἂν πάθοι 
καὶ παύσαιτο γιγνόμενα ;. .. εἰ γὰρ ἐκ μὲν τῶν ἄλλων τὰ ζῶντα γίγνοιτο, τὰ δὲ 
ζῶντα θνήσκοι, τίς μηχανὴ μὴ οὐχὶ πάντα καταναλωθῆναι εἰς τὸ τεθνάναι ; 


164 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


and primitive. We are to conceive a limited quantity of soul- 
substance,! which passes out of the living body into the opposite 
state of separation from it, and, in perpetual revolution, re- 
appears again in new living bodies. Soul of this sort evidently 
has no organic connection with the series of bodies it tem- 
porarily informs,” and it must be conceived as impersonal, con- 
tinuous, and homogeneous. The same soul-stuff passes through 
an endless succession of individual forms, and their individu- 
alities leave no abiding mark upon it. Such a description 
goes in no respect beyond the terms in which the savage doc- 
trine of reincarnation could be described, in that there is, so 
far, no trace of a moral significance, but merely the notion of a 
stream of living stuff, flowing perpetually in a circle.* 


93. Grades of Initiation 


We advance one step further, when we add to this conception of 
continuous life the perhaps equally primitive idea of Initiation. 
Rites of initiation are the way-marks upon the road of life in 
savage communities. We must think of the complete circle of 
life and death as divided into a series of grades or phases, 
through each of which in succession that life must pass. The 
transition from each phase to the next is a rite of initiation— 
a rue de passage.4 The infant is initiated into the living world 


1 The interpreters who speak of a ‘constant quantity’ of absolutely «m- 
material ‘spirit’ seem to me to be using words without meaning. 

3 Ariat. de anim. 407b 21: ὥσπερ ἐνδεχόμενον κατὰ τοὺς Πυθογορικοὺς μύθους 
τὴν τυχοῦσαν ψνχὴν εἰς τὸ τύχον ἐνδύεσθαι σῶμα. 

3 Cf. Plutarch, Consol. ad Apoll. 10 (after quoting Heracleitus, frag. 78, 
Byw.): ὡς yap ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ πηλοῦ δύναταί τις πλάττων ζῴα συγχεῖν καὶ πάλιν 
πλάττειν καὶ σνγχεῖν καὶ τοῦθ᾽ ἕν wap’ ἕν ποιεῖν ἀδιαλείπτως, οὕτω καὶ ἡ φύσις 
ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς ὕλης πάλαι μὲν τοὺς προγόνου; ἡμῶν ἄνεσχεν, εἶτα συνεχεῖς αὐτοῖς 
ἐγέννησε τοὺς πατέρας, εἶθ᾽ ἡμᾶς, εἶτ᾽ ἄλλους ἐπ᾽ ἄλλους ἀνακυκλήσει. καὶ ὁ τῆς 
γενέσεως πόταμος οὕτως ἐνδεμαχῶς ῥέων οὕποτε στήσεται, καὶ πάλιν ὁ ἐξ ἐναντίας 
αὐτῷ ὁ τῆς φθορᾶς. Zeller (Phil. d. Griech.*, 1. p. 640), following Bernays, 
thinks that Plutarch derived the general drift of this whole passage from 
Heracleitus, including the image of the potter. Cf. O. Gilbert, Meteor. 
Theor., 335. Lévy-Brubl, Fonct. ment. Ὁ. 398: Quand un enfant nait, 
une individualité définie reparatt, ou, plus exactement, se reforme.  ‘T'oute 
naissance est une réincarnation. ... La narssance est donc simplement le 
passage d'une forme de vie ἃ une autre, tout comme la mort. 

4M. van Gennep, Rites de Passage, p. 107, has brought out this signifi- 
cance of initiatory rites. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 100d 


soon after its birth ;1 the youth is initiated into full membership 
of the tribe on attaining manhood, and so on. Hach of these 
rites, moreover, is a new birth, and means the acquisition of 
a new soul, or rather, perhaps, the growth of the soul, its ex- 
pansion to include new social rights and duties. The import- 
ance of these initiations overshadows the mere physical fact 
of birth ; the new-born child has little or no soul, until society 
confers it upon him.” Its growth culminates in the full privi- 
leges of manhood, and then passes into its decline. As his 
social effectiveness drops away from him, the man’s soul 
dwindles, until, in old age, he has sunk again to a second, 
soulless. childhood and is dead already, the physical death 
being of little moment. This conception adds to the cycle 
of life the idea of promotion upwards through a series of 
grades, culmination, and degradation on the downward curve 
of the arc. 


94. The Cycle of all Life in Nature 


At death, the soul passes into the underworld: the lower 
half of the circle moves through the nether darkness. The 
reason 18 that the earth is the source of all [6.1 The plants 
and trees spring up out of earth; from her, too, must come the 
souls of animals and men; and hence, when they are dead, 
they must be stored, like seeds, in the darkness of her womb. 
Spring festivals, such as the Anthesterva, are concerned alike 
with the seeds which man requires for his tillage, and with 
the revocation of souls ; ὅ for, in the spring, all life needs to be 


1 Cf. the Omaha mites of infant initiation described by Miss Alice Fletcher. 
See above, p. 69. 
2 Cf. Dieterich, ‘Mutter Erde,’ Arch. 7. Relsg. vis. 1 ff. 
* See Lévy-Bruhl, Fonct. ment. p. 360, and Hertz, ‘ Répresent. collectives 
de la mort,’ Année sociol. x. 
4 Eur. frag. 415, ap. Plut. Consol. ad Apoll. 1048: 
κύκλος γὰρ αὑτὸς καρπίμοις re γῆς φυτοῖς 
γένει βροτῶν τε, τοῖς μὲν αὔξεται βίος, 
τῶν δὲ φθίνει τε κἀκθερίζεται πάλιν. 
δ See J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena, chap. u., and Themis, p. 289. Cf. 
also Plato, Polstscus, 2728, where the souls, before each new birth, are 
described as falling into the earth as seeds, πάσας ἑκάστης τῆς ψυχῆς τὰς 


166 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


magically revived after the death of winter. In such com- 
binations we see the basis upon which a doctrine of trans- 
migration (metensomatosis) can easily arise. If all life is one 
and sympathetically continuous, the same soul-stuff may pass 
at one time into a man, at another into an animal or plant. 
All alike are creatures of earth! Further, the life of Nature 
in the cycle of the seasons follows the same curve as the life 
of man. Nature, likewise, has her phases and grades. Her 
life waxes in spring, culminates in summer, and in autumn 
wanes again, till her fruits decay and leave only the seed, which 
must be buried in death, and lie in hope of resurrection. The 
year with its two seasons of light and dark, warmth and cold, 
drought and wet, corresponds to the two halves of man’s life- 
circle. ‘All mortal things, by necessity of Nature, revolve in 
a wheel of changes. . . . When they are born they grow, and 
when they are grown they reach their height, and after that 
they grow old, and at last perish. At one time Nature causes 
them to come to their goal in her region of darkness, and then 
again out of the darkness they come back into mortal form, 


γενέσεις ἀποδεδωκυίας, ὅσα ἦν ἑκάστῃ προσταχθέν, τοσαῦτα els γῆν σπέρματα 
πεσούσης. Cf. also Timaeus, 42p, where God sows (ἔσπειρε) the souls into 
earth, moon, and the other ‘instruments of time.’ Phaedo, 83D: ὥστε 
ταχὺ πάλιν πίπτειν els ἄλλο σῶμα καὶ ὥσπερ σπειρομένη ἐμφύεσθαι. It 18 
significant that Anaxagoras calls his primary bodies, ae yet unordered by 
Nous, ‘seeds’ (σπέρματα), and (probably) described the primitive chaos, or 
mixture of these, a8 a panspermia (sce p 153), the word used of the pot of 
all seeds offered at the spring festival of Souls and Seeds (cf. J. KE. Harrison, 
Themis, p. 292). Democritus used the same term (Arist. de anim. 404a 4) 
to denote ‘the elements of all physis,’ the spherical seeds being soul- 
atoms. 
1 Musaeus, frag. 5 (D.F.V.?, p. 485) : 

ὡς δ᾽ αὕτως καὶ φύλλα φύει ζείδωρος ἄρουρα" 

ἄλλα μὲν ἐν μελίῃσιν ἀποφθίνει, ἄλλα δὲ φύει" 

ὡς δὲ καὶ ἀνθρώπων γενεὴ καὶ φῦλον ἑλίσσει. 
Aesch. Choeph. 128: 

καὶ Γαῖαν αὐτήν, ἣ τὰ πάντα τίκτεται 

θρέψασα τ᾽ αὖθις τῶνδε κῦμα λαμβάνει. 
Eur. frag. 757N. : 

θάπτει τε τέκνα χἄτερ' αὖ κτᾶται νέα 

αὐτός τε θνήσκει" καὶ τάδ᾽ ἄχθονται βροτοί 

εἰς γῆν φέροντες γῆν᾽ ἀναγκαίως δ᾽ ἔχει 

βίον θερίζειν Gore κάρπιμον στάχυν . . . 
See Dieterich, ‘Mutter Erde,’ Arch. f. Relsg. νὰ. 1 ff. for all this 
subject. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 16/ 


by alternation of birth and repayment of death, in the cycle 
wherein Nature returns upon herself.’ 1 


95. The correspondence of Works and Days 


Nor is it Nature alone that urges life along its perennial 
round. Man, too, must do his share ; his Works must be fitted 
into the cycle of Days. The Works and Days of Hesiod is, signi- 
ficantly, both a treatise on agriculture and a hand-book of 
morality. The primitive art of agriculture is deeply tinged 
with magic: * mimetic ritual was, at first, even more important 
than digging and sowing. The mere practical operations will 
not be effective. unless there is a sympathetic correspondence 
between man’s ways and Nature’s course. He must keep 
straight upon the path of custom (nomos) or right (deke), or 
else the answering processes of natural life will likewise leave 
the track.? We seem to see in this the first interpretation of a 
moral maxim that fills a large place in the ethical consciousness 
of later days: Live according to Nature (ζὴν κατὰ φύσιν). We 
understand, also, why the Works and Days opens with a long 
discourse on Right (Dike). In the very first lines, too, we 
encounter the image of the wheel. The Muses are to sing of 
Zeus, through whom mortal men become illustrious or obscure ; 
‘easily he lifts them up to strength, and then, when they are 
strong, he casts them down; easily he causes the light of one 
that shines to wane, and another to wax from obscurity.’ 4 


1 Hippodamus the Pythagorean, ap Stob. Flor. 98,71" πάντα μὲν ὧν τὰ 
Ovara dt ἀνάγκαν φύσιος ἐν μεταβολαῖς καλινδεῖται. . . Ta μὲν ὑπὸ φύσιος els τὸ 
ἄδηλον αὐτᾶς τερματιζόμενα καὶ πάλιν ἐκ τοῦ ἀδήλου ες τὸ θνατὸν ἐπισυνερχόμενα, 
ἀμοιβᾷ γενέσιος καὶ ἀνταποδόσει φθορᾶς, κύκλον αὐταύτας ἀναποδιζούσας. Com- 
pare the mystical passage in Plato, Rep. 5464 fi. : οὐ μόνον φντοῖς ἐγγείοις 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν ἐπιγείοις ζῴοις Popa καὶ apopia ψυχῆς τε καὶ σώματος γίγνονται, ὅταν 
περιτροπαὶ ἑκάστοις κύκλων περιφορὰς σινάπτωσι, βραχυβίοις μὲν βραχνυπόρους, 
ἐναντίοις δὲ ἐναντίας, κτλ. 

* See J. E. Harrison, Themis, p. 423. 

3 Porph. ce abst. ui. 27: μιμησώμεθα τὸ χρυσοῦν γένος. . . wed’ ὧν μὲν yap 
Αἰδὼς καὶ Νέμεσις re Δίκη ὡμίλει, ὅτι ἠρκοῦντο τῷ EK γῆς καρπῷ" καρπὸν γάρ 
σφισιν ἔφερεν ζείδωρος ἄρουρα αὐτομάτη πολλόν τε καὶ ἄφθονον (Hes. ἄγρα, 117). 

ὁ Hrga,3: ὃν τε δία βροτοὶ ἄνδρες ὁμῶς ἄφατοί τε parol re. . . 

ῥέα μὲν γὰρ βριάει, ῥέα δὲ βριάοντα χαλέπτει, 

ῥεῖα δ᾽ ἀρίζηλον μινύθει καὶ ἄδηλον ἀέξει. .. 

Ζεὺς ὑψιβρεμέτης. 
Ar. Lys. 772: τὰ 8 ὑπέρτερα νέρτερα θήσει Leds ὑψιβρεμέτης. Horat. Oarm. i. 
34, 12: ualet ima summis mutare εἰ insignem attenuat deus obscura promens. 


168 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Dike is the Hora, the Season, who brings wealth ; her sisters 
are Eunomia (Law-abidingness), and Evrene (Peace), who was 
represented in art, carrying the infant Wealth (Ploutos) in her 
arms. Their mother is Themis.!_ Wealth must not be snatched 
from another by robbery ; it is much better and more abiding 
when it is given of God, and comes in its duly appointed season 
(κατὰ καιρόν) in the circle of the year.* 

This primitive correspondence between the ordered process 
of the year bringing fruits, and the appointed path of “ season- 
able works ᾿ (ὥρια ἔργα) which those fruits reward, helps to ex- 
plain why the wheel of Time is also the wheel of Right. ‘ Time, 
in the length of his unnumbered years, gives birth to all things 
out of the darkness, and when they have come into the light, 
hides them again.’* And so, too, there is a turn of the wheel 


1 Hesiod. Theog. 901; Pind. Ol. xiii. 6: ἐν τᾷ γὰρ Evvoula ναίει κασίγνηται 
te... . Δίκα καὶ ὁμότροπος Εἰρήνα, ταμίαι ἀνδράσι πλούτου. Bek.? Frag 
Adesp. 140, the Moiras are invoked to conduct Hunoma, Dike, and Eurene 
to the city. Cretan ‘Hymn of the Kouretes’ (Brit. Sch. Annual, xv 
p. 357 ff.): 

Ὧραι δὲ βρύον κατῆτος 
καὶ βρότους Δίκα κατῆρχε 
πάντα τ᾽ ἄγρι᾽ dugen je ty 
a φίλολβος Kipjva. 
For this hymn, see J. E. Harrison, Themss, especially the concluding 
chapter on Themis. 
3 Hesiod, Hrga, 320: 
χρήματα δ᾽ οὐχ ἁρπακτά, θεόσδοτα πολλὸν ἀμείνω. 
εἰ γάρ τις καὶ χερσὶ βίῃ μέγαν ὄλβον ἕληται. . . 
ῥεῖα δέ μιν μαυροῦσι θεοί, μινύθουσι δὲ οἶκον 
ἀνέρι τῷ, παῦρον δέ 7’ ἐπὶ χρόνον ὄλβος ὀπηδεῖ. 
Solon, frag. 13 (Bgk.*) 9: πλοῦτον δ᾽ ὃν μὲν δῶσι θεοὶ παραγίγνεται ἀνδρὶ 
ἔμπεδος. . . οὗ δ᾽ ἄνδρες μετίωσιν ὑφ᾽ ὕβριος, οὐ κατὰ κόσμον ἔρχεται. 
Theognis, 197: χρῆμα... Διόθεν καὶ σὺν dlxp .. . παρμόνιμον, contrasted with 
ἀδίκως παρὰ καιρόν. Bacch, xiv, 50-64, Dike, Hunomia, and Themss give 
wealth ; Hybris, which snatches it from another, brings destruction. The 
use of καιρός, to mean ‘due measure,’ and κατὰ καιρόν ΔΒ synonymous with 
μετρίως, goes back to this association of Right with Time. Iambl. Vit. Pyth. 
182 (D.F.V.3, p. 284): συμπαρέπεσθαι τῇ τοῦ καιροῦ φύσει τήν τε ὀνομαζομένην 
ὥραν καὶ τὸ πρέπον καὶ τὸ ἁρμόττον. For Time and Justice see W. Headlam, 
Journ. of Philol. xxx. p. 290 ff. Dike is daughter of Chronos (Eur. frag. 
223 N.). 
δ᾿ Soph. Ajax, 646: ἅπανθ᾽ ὁ μακρὸς κἀναρίθμητος Χρόνος 
φύει τ᾽ ἄδηλα καὶ φανέντα κρύπτεται. 
Cf. ἐνιαυτός in Plato, Cratylus, 4100 : τὸ γὰρ τὰ φυόμενα καὶ τὰ γιγνόμενα 
προάγον els φῶ: καὶ αὐτὸ ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἐξετάζον . .. of μὲν ἐνιαυτόν, ὅτι ἐν ἑαντῷ, 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 169 


that abases pride. Ajax, in the speech which opens with the 
above words, goes on to acknowledge this neceasity of abase- 
ment. ‘Even things dread and powerful yield to dignities 
(τιμαῖς): the snowy Winter gives place to fruitful Summer; 
Night’s weary round makes room for Day, with her white steeds, 
to kindle light... . And shall not I also learn to curb my 
pride δ᾽} 

In the age of the Sophists, when controversial writings on 
the subject of politics began to appear, the disputants were 
eager to claim the authority of Nature for the particular form 
of government they were upholding. Several traces of one 
such treatise survive in Kuripides.? The author bases the rule 
of justice, or equality, among men on the equality observed in 
Nature’s course. Thus, Jocasta in the Phoenissae® argues with 
Kteocles : 


“ Equality is what is naturally lawful for mankind : the more 


of δὲ ἔτος, ὅτι ἐτάζει. See my note on ‘Hermes, Pan, Logos,’ Classical 
Quarterly, ni. p. 282. Nauck?, frag. adesp. 483: ὁρῶ γὰρ χρόνῳ δίκαν πάντ᾽ 
ἄγουσαν els φῶς βροτοῖς. Dieterich, Abraxas, 96: das sat csn uralt mythsscher 
Zusammenhang zwischen Schicksal, Recht, und Licht. 
1 Ajax, 669. καὶ yap τὰ δεινὰ καὶ τὰ καρτερώτατα 
τιμαῖς ὑπείκει" τοῦτο μὲν νιφοστιβεῖς 
χειμῶνες ἐκχωροῦσιν εὐκάρπῳ θέρει" 
ἐξίσταται δὲ νυκτὸς αἰανὴς κύκλος 
τῇ λευκοπώλῳ φέγγος ἡμέρᾳ φλέγειν. 
ἡμεῖς δὲ πῶς οὐ γνωσόμεσθα σωφρονεῖν ; 
Note the references to Time in the precedmg and following choruses, 
especially 1. 711: θέσμια (Themis) εὐνομίᾳ σέβων peyiorg’, πάνθ᾽ ὁ μέγας Χρόνος 
μαραίνει. 
2 Sec F. Dummler, Prolegomena zu Platons Staat, Basel, 1891. 
3 638 ff : τὸ γὰρ ἴσον νόμιμον ἀνθρώποις ἔφυ, 
τῷ πλέονι δ᾽ αἰεὶ πολέμιον καθίσταται 
τοὔλασσον, ἐχθρᾶς θ' ἡμέρας κατάρχεται. 
καὶ γὰρ μέτρ᾽ ἀνθρώποισι καὶ μέρη σταθμῶν 
ἰσότης ἔταξε κἀριθμὸν διώρισε, 
νυκτὸς δ᾽ ἀφεγγὲς βλέφαρον ἡλίου τε φῶς 
ἴσον βαδίζει τὸν ἐνιαύσιον κύκλον 
κοὐδέτερον αὐτῶν φθόνον ἔχει νικώμενον. 
εἶθ᾽ ἥλιος μὲν νύξ τε δουλεύει βροτοῖς, 
σὺ δ᾽ οὐκ ἀνέξει δωμάτων ἔχειν ἴσον 
καὶ τῷδ᾽ ἀπονέμειν ; 
So again in the Suppliants, 406, the principle of democracy is derived from 
the heavenly order (Dammler, op. cit. p. 13): 
δῆμος δ᾽ ἀνάσσει διαδοχαῖσιν ἐν μέρει 
ἐνιαυσίαισιν. 


170 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


and the less are in eternal enmity, and herald the day of hatred. 
Equality it is, that ordained for man measure, and the divisions 
of weight, and the distinctions of number. Equal, on their 
yearly course, move the rayless eye of night and the light of the 
sun, and neither of them grudges the victory of the other. So 
the sunlight and the night are the servants of men; and can 
you not bear to hold an equal place with your brother, and 
allow him an equal share ? ’ 


96. Heaven-worship 


From the seasonal round of summer and winter, it is an easy 
step to the worship of the heavenly bodies, whose rhythmical 
revolution numbers the circuit of the years. Among many 
peoples, this shift has occurred when, first, the monthly waxing 
and waning of the moon, and, later, the annual periodicity of 
the sun, came to be regarded as sympathetically linked with 
the growth and decay of vegetation. Sunshine was, perhaps, at 
first regarded as a casual and capricious meteoric phenomenon, 
like the clouds and rain which interrupt it; the one, like the 
other, needing to be specially induced by magical ceremonies. 
But, with the first occurrence of a vague notion that the fruits 
of the earth, on which man’s life depends, were not solely the 
ofispring of earth herself, fertilised by the rains of heaven, but 
mysteriously connected with the periodic phases of the moon 
and with the waxing of the sun’s power in summer and its 
waning in winter, moon and sun must become religious objects, 
and the old divisions of time, the seasons or Hours, will be 
worshipped with them as the givers of life and fertility.’ 

Sophocles compares the turning wheel of human destiny to 
the waxing and waning of the Moon, which can never stay in 
one form, but grows out of darkness to the full, and then melts 
away and returns to nothingness.” And again, the Women of 


1 The seasonal year being probably older than the solar or even the 
lunar calendar, the Hora would naturally be prominent before the moon 
and the sun were worshipped as the measurers of time and the givers of 
life. For the sequence of calendars—seasonal year, moon year, sun year, 
see Payne, History of the New World called America, i. 474 ff. 

2 Frag. 787 N2: ἀλλ᾽ οὑμὸς dei πότμος ἐν πυκνῷ θεοῦ 

τροχῷ κυκλεῖται καὶ μεταλλάσσει φύσιν᾽ 
ὥστερ σελήνης ὄψι: εὐφρόνας δύο 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 171 


Trachis sing to Deianeira, how ‘the son of Kronos has not 
appointed to mortal men a lot free from pain, but sorrow and 
joy come round to all, as the Bear moves in his circling paths. 
Nothing abides in one stay for men; not starry night, nor 
calamities ; no, nor yet wealth; in a moment it is gone, and 
another has his turn of gladness or of loss.’! These images are 
not mere poetical comparisons, but look back to the old belief 
that the fate of man is sympathetically related to the circling 
lights of heaven. Any attentive reader of Pindar’s most Orphic 
ode, the second Olympian, will see how the whole movement 
of its thought follows the turning wheel of Destiny (Movra) and 
Justice (Dike).2 He will notice, too, the recurrence of Time, 
the Father of all things—X povos ὁ πάντων πατήρ (1.19). Ifhe 
is also alive to Pindar’s cryptic methods—one of those en- 
lightened ones, to whom the poet’s words are to have a voice *— 
he will observe that Zeus is addressed as the ‘son of Kronos 
and Rhea,’ and detect that these names signify Time and Flow.‘ 
The wheel of Time, in which all things flow and nothing abides, 
is the same as the wheel of Right (Deke). 


στῆναι δύναιτ᾽ ἂν οὔποτ᾽ ἐν poppy μιᾷ, 

ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἁδήλου πρῶτον ἔρχεται νέα 

πρόσωπα καλλύνουσα καὶ πληρουμένη" 

χωτανπερ αὑτῆς εὐπρεπεστάτη φανῇ, 

πάλιν διαρρεῖ κἀπὶ μηδὲν ἔρχεται. 
{Hippocr.] de Veetu, 1 5. (after Heracleitus): χωρεῖ δὲ πάντα καὶ θεῖα καὶ 
ἀνθρώπινα ἄνω καὶ κάτω ἀμειβόμενα, ἡμέρη καὶ εὐφρόνη ἐπὶ τὸ μήκιστον καὶ 
ἐλάχιστον, ὡς σελήνη ἐπὶ τὸ μήκιστον καὶ ἐλάχιστον, «οὕτως» ἥλιος ἐπὶ τὸ 
μακρότατον καὶ βραχύτατον. πάντα ταὐτὰ καὶ οὐ ταὐτά, φάος Ζηνί, σκότος ᾿Αἰδῃ, 
φάος ’Aldn, σκότος Zyl. φοιτᾷ κεῖνα ὧδε καὶ τάδε κεῖσε, πᾶσαν ὥρην, πᾶσαν 
χώρην... .. Selene is addressed 88 ἀνάγκη, Μοῖρα, and Δίκη, Orph. Hymn, 
Abel, p. 292, 1. 49. 

1 Trach, 125: ἀνάλγητα yap οὐδ᾽ ὁ πάντα κραίνων βασιλεὺς ἐπέβαλε θνατοῖς 
Κρονίδας" | ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ πῆμα καὶ χαρὰ πᾶσι κυκλοῦσιν, οἷον ἄρκτον στροφάδες κέλευθοι. 
μένει γὰρ οὔτ᾽ αἰόλα | νὺξ βροτοῖσιν οὔτε κῆρες | οὔτε πλοῦτος, ἀλλ᾽ ἄφαρ | βέβακε, 
τῳ δ᾽ ἐπέρχεται | χαίρειν τε καὶ στέρεσθαι. Herod. 1. 207: μάθε, ὡς κύκλος τῶν 
ἀνθρωπηίων ἐστὶ πρηγμάτων, περιφερόμενος δὲ οὐκ ἐᾷ αἰεὶ τοὺς αὐτοὺς εὐτυχέειν 
(wheel οἱ Τύχη). 

* Note ¢ gy. the recurrence of Dike in all the Epodes: 1. 18, ἐν δίκᾳ καὶ 
παρὰ δίκαν ; 41, wheel of Moira; 65, δικάζει; 83, Rhadamanthys; 106, δίκᾳ 
συναντόμενος. 

3 φωνάεντα συνετοῖσι (1. 93). 

41. 13, ὦ Κρόνιε wai Ρέας, an odd form of address, obviously used for the 
sake of introducing both names. That Kronos=Chronos is rendered prac- 
tically certain by the tautometric responsion, |. 19, Χρόνος ὁ πάντων rarip= 
85, πόσις ὁ πάντων ‘Péas (=Kronos). The equation Chronos= Kronos 18 at 


172 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


97. Tao, Ria, and Asha 


Dike means ‘ Way.’1 In a passage of the Medea of Kunpides, 
the word means the ‘ course of Nature.’ After Medea’s threat 
of woman’s vengeance upon man, the chorus opens: 2 “The 
sacred river-founts flow upwards to their source, and Dike and 
all the world are turned backwards.’ There is probably an 
allusion to the reversal of the revolution of the sky, which 
ancient legend connected with the strife of Atreus and Thyestes,° 
and which Plato curiously turns to account in the myth of his 
Politicus.1 In the Laws, the solemn address to the citizens 


least as old as Pherekydes (D.F. V.", 1i. p. 507), whose principles were Zen, 
Chthonie, and Kronos: Ζῆνα μὲν τὸν αἰθέρα, XOoviny δὲ τὴν γῆν, Κρόνον δὲ τὸν 
χρόνον... ἐν ᾧ τὰ γιγνόμενα. For the Orphic Time-God and his antiquity 
see below, p. 178, note 1, and Eisler, Weltenmantel, 1 chap. iv. especially 
p. 378. For Rhea= Flow, Plato, ταί. 402A: τὸν ᾿Ηράκλειτόν μοι δοκῶ καθορᾶν 
παλαί᾽ ἄττα σοφὰ λέγοντα, ἀτεχνῶς τὰ ἐπὶ Kpbvov καὶ Péas . . . ὅτι πάντα χωρεῖ καὶ 
οὐδὲν μένει (οἷ. Soph. Trach., loc. cit μένει γὰρ οὔτε... .) καὶ ποταμοῦ poy ἀπεικάζων 
τὰ ὄντα λέγει ὡς δὶς ἐς τὸν αὐτὸν ποταμὸν οὐκ ἂν ἐμβαίης, followed by reference to 
the Orphic Okeanos and Tethys. In Olympian is. the Emmenidaiare εὐώνυμοι 
(1. 8), because their name means abideng (ἐμμένειν), though they dwell by a 
river (10), and mortals cannot reckon on unfailing happiness, but divers streams 
(poal) of joy and pain flow upon men at different times (ἀλλότε), and reverse 
of sorrow follows upon prosperity at another time (ἄλλῳ χρόνῳ). Cf. {ει}. 
lit, 18: αἰὼν δὲ κυλινδομέναις ἁμέραις ἄλλ᾽ ἄλλοτ᾽ ἐξάλλαξεν. Ol. vir. 94: ἐν δὲ 
μιᾷ μοίρᾳ χρόνου ἄλλοτ᾽ ἀλλοῖαι διαιθύσσοισιν αὖραι. [Eur.] frag 594N (Kritias, 
frag. 18, D.F.V.?, p. 618): ἀκάμας τε Χρόνος περί γ᾽ ἀενάῳ ῥεύματι πλήρης 
φοιτᾷ τίκτων αὐτὸς ἑαυτόν, δίδυμοί τ᾽ ἄρκτοι, κτλ. Time, as he moves forward, 
brings truth to light: ὁ τ᾽ ἐξελέγχων μόνος ἀλάθειαν ἐτήτυμον Χρόνος. τὸ δὲ 
σαφανὲς ἰὼν πόρσω κατέφρασεν, Ol. x. (xi.) 53. There are other cryptic 
and etymological meanings 1η Ol. 11. ; for instance, the strange word ἀγροτέρα 
(μέριμνα), 1. 60, is used because Θήρων 18 the ‘hunter’ after ἀρετή and fame ; 
cf. Arist. frag. 625: ᾿Αρετὰ θήραμα κάλλιστον... σὰν ἀγρεύοντες δύναμιν. 

1 This sense is still common in Homer, ¢ g. Od. 11, 218, αὕτη δίκη ἐστὶ 
βροτῶν, ‘this 1s the way of mortals.’ Plato, Laws, 904 5, brings together 
this old use and the later, quoting αὕτη τοι δίκη ἐστὶ θεῶν ot Ὄλυμπον ἔχουσιν 
in connection with the Justice which assures that the soul shall be rewarded 
according to ita deeds, δίκην. . . fw πασῶν δικῶν διαφερόντως ἔταξαν ol τάξαντες. 

2 410: ἄνω ποταμῶν iepwr χωροῦσι παγαί, 

καὶ Δίκα καὶ πάντα πάλιν στρέφεται. 
Verrall, ad. loc., says, ' δίκα, the custom or order of nature,’ and compares 
Parmenides, frag. 6, πάντων δὲ παλιστροπκύς ἐστι κέλευθος. 

δ Eur. Hlectra, 726. The chorus doubt whether the sun could be turned 
backwards, θνατᾶς ἕνεκ᾽ ἀδικίας. Cf. also Electra’s words in the following 
scene, 771: ὦ θεοί, Δίκη τε πάνθ᾽ dpwo’, ἠλθέε wore. ποίῳ τρόπῳ δὲ καὶ rin 
ῥυθμῷ φόνον κτείνει Θυέστον παῖδα, βούλομαι μαθεῖν, where the words Θυέστου 
παῖδα point the reference to the preceding chorus. 

‘268m ff: τὸ yap πᾶν τόδε τότε μὲν αὐτὸς ὁ θεὸς συμποδηγεῖ πορενόμενον 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 173 


opens with the words: ‘God, as the ancient doctrine also has 
it, containing the beginning and end and middle of all things 
that are, moves straight upon his revolving journey in the 
course of Nature. And always attendant upon him is Dike, the 
avenger of all negligence of the divine law, after whom follows 
closely, in orderly and humble fashion, whosoever desires that 
it shall be well with him.’! The next paragraph opens thus: 
‘What, then, is that conduct which is pleasing to God and 
follows after him?’ And the answer is: the conduct which 
observes measure, and therefore is like God, who is to us the 
Measure of all things. 

In these passages, the notion of Dike seems to come very 


καὶ συγκυκλεῖ, τότε δὲ ἀνῆκεν, ὅταν ai περίοδοι τοῦ πρυσήκοντος αὐτῷ μέτρον 
εἰλήφωσιν ἤδη χρόνου, τὸ δὲ πάλιν αὐτόματον εἰς τάναντια περιάγεται. In the 
former age of Kronos, men lived justly, without war or strife, or devouring 
one another (271 £, from Hesiod, Erga, 276: Zeus gave men δίκη, that they 
should not eat each other lke beasts), and ‘the seasons were tempered to 
do them no hurt’ (τὸ τῶν ὡρῶν αὐτοῖς ἄλυπον ἐκέκρατο, 2724). The period 1s 
the Great Year, which puts a term to the cycle of reincarnations of souls. 
Note also the mention of the Seasons’ names in the parallel passage describ- 
ing the rule of the daemons in the Golden Age of Justice, Lazs, 713 Ε, ὁ θεὸς 
. . » γένος ἄμεινον ἥμων ἐφίστη τὸ τῶν δαιμωύνων. . εἰρήνην τε καὶ aidw καὶ 
εὐνομίαν καὶ ἀφθονίαν Sians παρεχυμενον. For the reversal of the rotation 
of the umverse see J Adam, Republic of Plato, 1902, vol. ii p. 295 Mf. 

1 7168Ὲ (included by Diels, #.V-4, p. 474, among the older Orphic frag- 
ments): ὁ μὲν δὴ θεός, ὥσπερ καὶ ὁ παλαιὸς λόγος, ἀρχήν τε καὶ τελευτὴν καὶ 
μέσα τῶν ὄντων ἁπάντων ἔχων, εὐθείᾳ περαίνει κατὰ φύσιν περιπορευόμενος" τῷ 
δ᾽ ἀεὶ συνεπέται Δίκη τῶν ἀπολειπομένων τοῦ θείου νόμου τιμωρός, ἧς ὁ μὲν εὐδαι- 
μονήσειν μέλλων ἐχόμενος συνέπεται ταπεινὸς καὶ κεκοσμημένος... . T16C: 
Τίς οὖν δὴ πρᾶξις φίλη καὶ ἀκόλουθος θεῷ; Compare Euripides, 7'roades, 
886 - 


Ζεύς, εἴτ᾽ ἀνάγκη φύσεος εἴτε vous βροτῶν, 
προσηυξάμην ce’ πάντα γὰρ δι᾽ ἁψόφου 
βαίνων κελεύθου κατὰ δίκην τὰ θνήτ᾽ ἄγεις. 


Cf. [Archytas] Mullach, Frag. Phil. Gr. i 599; the philosopher δυνατὸς 
ἐσσεῖται τὸν θεὸν κατοψεῖσθαι καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν τᾷ σνστοιχείᾳ καὶ τάξει τὰ ἐκείνω 
κατακεχωρισμένα, καὶ ταύταν τὰν ἁρματηλάταν ὑδὸν ἐκπορισάμενος τῷ νόῳ κατ᾽ 
εὐθεῖαν ὁρμαθῆμεν καὶ τελεοδρομᾶσαι τὰς ἀρχὰς τοῖς πέρασι συνάψας τε καὶ ἐπιγνοὺς 
ὅτι ὁ θεὸς ἀρχά τε καὶ τέλος καὶ μέσον ἐστὶ πάντων τῶν κατὰ δίκαν τε καὶ τὸν 
ὀρθὸν λόγον περαινομένων. The language refers to the Laws, above quoted, 
and to Phaedrus, 246 £, where Ζεὺς, ἐλαύνων πτηνὸν Appa, πορεύεται διακοσμῶν 
πάντα καὶ ἐπιμελούμενος, followed by the host of Gods and daemons. The 
immortals emerge on to the back of the οὐρανός, and are carried round by its 
περιφορά. Ps.-Archytas uses κατὰ δίκαν (περαίνεσθαι) as synonymous with 
Plato’s κατὰ φύσιν (περαίνει). Soph. frag. 226 N?: ἀλλ᾽ eis θεόν σ᾽ ὁρῶντα, 
κἂν ἔξω δίκης | γωοεῖν κελεύη. κεῖσ᾽ οδοιπορεῖν χρεών. 


174 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


near to the Chinese Ταῦ, a term which, as we saw, also means 
‘Way ’—the daily and yearly revolution of the heavens, and 
of the two powers of light and darkness, day and night, summer 
and winter, heat and cold. ‘It is heaven’s Tao or way to give 
felicity to the good, and bring misfortune upon the bad.’* “The 

Tao, or order of the world, represents all that is correct, normal, 

or right (chong or twan) in the universe ; it does, indeed, never 

deviate from its course. It consequently includes all correct 
and righteous dealings of men and spirits, which alone promote 
universal happiness and life. All other acts, as they oppose the 

Tao, are incorrect, abnormal, unnatural.’? As in Hesiod’s 

Works and Days we traced a correspondence between the ordered 

course of man’s ways and the seasons called Dike, Eunomia, and 
Eirene, so among the Chinese, ‘ Z’a1-sui is the great year, the 
planet Jupiter, whose path in the heavens governs the arrange- 
ments of the almanack which is annually published by imperial 
authority, and gives the various days suitable for the transactions 
of the various business of life. This god thus rules the Tao, or 
revolution of the universe, and, as a consequence, the Tao of 
human life, which, in order to bestow happiness and prosperity, 
must fit in with the universal Tao.’ ! 

When Buddhism was transplanted to China, the Chinese 
unhesitatingly identified with their own Tao the Dharma of 
Mahayanism. ‘ Dharma, the universal law, embraces the world 
in its entirety. It exists for the benefit of all beings, for does not 
its chief manifestation, the light of the world, shine for blessing on 
all men and all things? Salvation, which means conformity of life 
to the dharma, consequently means in thefirst place manifestation 
of universal love, both for men and animals. Indeed, as men and 
animals equally are formed of the elements which constitute the 


1 See above, § 57. ἢ De Groot, Reliyson of the Chinese, 1910, p. 18. 

> De Groot, Religion of the Chinese, 1910, p 45 The Greek would be 
παρὰ δίκην. Pind. Ol. ri. 17: τῶν πεπραγμένων ἐν δίκᾳ τε καὶ παρὰ δίκαν 
ἀποίητον οὐδ᾽ ἂν Xpbvos ὁ πάντων πατὴρ δύναιτο θέμεν ἔργων τέλος. The original 
sense of δίκη remains clear in the compound ἔνδικος. Cf. Solon, frag. 36 
(Bgk.‘) ap. Ar. Ath. Pol. 12: συμμαρτυροίη ταῦτ᾽ ἂν ἐν δίκῃ χρόνον μήτηρ 
μεγίστη. . . [ὴ κτλ. 

“Ibsd. p.114. Cf. Iambl. Vit. Pyth. 137 (ὁ Πυθαγόρειοι) βίος ἅπας συντέτακται 
πρὸς τῷ ἀκολουθεῖν τῷ θεῷ, καὶ ὁ λόγος οὗτος ταύτης ἐστὶ τῆς φιλοσοφίας, ὅτι 
yehoioy ποιοῦσιν ἄνθρωποι ἀλλοθέν ποθεν ζητοῦντει τὸ εὖ ἢ παρὰ τῶν θεῶν 
(D.F.V.2, p. 283). 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 175 


universe itself, animals may become men, and through the human 
state be converted into arhats, boddhisattwas and buddhas.’ 1 

Buddhism takes us to India, where ἃ similar conception was 
dominant in religion long before the time of Buddha. It goes 
back, indeed, in all probability to a time before the separation 
of the Indian and Iranian stocks, for it is found both m the 
Veda and in the Persian Avesta. The Vedic name for it is 
Ria; the Persian equivalent is Asha. ‘The processes, whose 
perpetual sameness or regular recurrence give rise to the repre- 
sentation of Order, obey Réa, or their occurrence 1s Rta. “The 
rivers flow Ria.” “ According to Rta the light of the heaven- 
born morning has come.” . . . The year is the path of Rta.’* 
The Gods themselves are born of the Rta or in the Rta; they 
show by their acts that they know, observe and love the Ria. 
In man’s activity, the Ria manifests itself as the moral law. 

The sun is called the wheel of Ria; the ritual and symbolism 
of the wheel are closely associated with this conception. The 
so-called praying-wheel of Buddhist religion is really an instru- 
ment of sympathetic magic, a wheel turned, the way of the 
sun, for the purpose of keeping the rotation of the heaven or 
of the sun going upon the path of the cosmic order. The wheel 
of Fortune, familiar to us, does not symbolise chance or accident, 
but the very reverse. The wheel is essentially a symbol of 
regular recurrence. It is the wheel of Order and Right, on the 
observance of which all prosperity or fortune depends. 

When we have traced this conception across Asia from the 
furthest east to Persia, we have reached a point at which the 
possibility of contact with Greek thought cannot be ruled out 
as impossible. Herodotus ὃ remarks that the Persians above 


' Pe Groot, Religson of the Chinese, 1910, p. 166. Cf. below, p. 182. 

? Maurice Bloomfield, 7'he Religion of the Veda, 1908, p. 125 ff. It is held 
that the Tel-el-Amarna tablets guarantee for this notion an antiquity of at 
least 1600 years Β Ὁ. 

? Oldenberg, Veda, p. 196. 

*'W. Simpson, The Buddhist Praying Wheel, 1910. Theopompus, ap. 
Diog. L. proem. 13, reports that the Magians said that they ‘ maintained 
the order of the world by their invocationa,’ τὰ ὄντα ταῖς αὐτῶν ἐπικλήσεσι 
διαμένειν. 

δι, 139. Herodotus says (ibed.) that the Persian names correspond (in 
their meaning) to the nobleness of the individuals who bear them, and tells 
us (vi. 98) that Arta-xerxes means puéya(s) ἀρήιος. Did he know that Arta- 


110 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


all things hate lies, and in the next place debts, because they 
bring with them lying and fraud, which are punished by the 
God of Light with leprosy. The Avesta confirms the truth of 
this statement. Lying and Ahriman are so closely allied that 
not only are the demons always treated as liars, because they 
try to deceive the world with false doctrine, but falsity itself 
is a work of the devil. Further, ‘ the practical side of veracity 
is Justice, whose celestial representative is the Asha. Justice 
is the rule of the world’s life, as Asha is the principle of all well- 
ordered existence, and the establishment or accomplishment 
of justice is the end of the evolution of the universe.’ ! 

Whether or not we accept the hypothesis of direct influence 
from Persia on the Ionian Greeks in the sixth century, any 
student of Orphic and Pythagorean thought cannot fail to see 
that the similarities between it and Persian religion are so close 
as to warrant our regarding them as expressions of the same 
view of life, and using the one system to interpret the other. 
The characteristic preoccupation of Pythagoreanism with 
astronomy and the contemplation (θεωρία) of the heavens, 
becomes transparently clear, when we see it in the light of 
notions like Tao, Ria, and Asha. 

We cannot here follow further the various developments of 
the wheel of Time, Fate, and Justice in Greek religious repre- 
sentation ;* but we may note that in philosophy this notion of 
periodicity has an important consequence. It excludes the 
possibility of conceiving the process of change and evolution 
as a progress in a straight line, a history which never repeats 
itself. Onwards from Anaximander, who declares that all that 
comes into being must pay the penalty of injustice by perishing 
again, according to the order of tume (κατὰ τὴν τοῦ χρόνου τάξιν) 
and the ordinance of destiny, Greek philosophers are haunted 


is the same as Asha=rta? 10 seems possible that, if he could discuss the 
derivation of names, his informants might have explained the idea. 

1 Chantepie de la Saussaye, Manuel d’histotre des religuons, Paris, 1904, 
p. 467. Porph. Vet. Pyth. 41: τοιαῦτα παρήνει (Πυθαγόρας) μάλιστα δὲ 
ἀληθεύειν" τοῦτο yap μόνον δύνασθαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ποιεῖν θεῷ παραπλησίους, 
ἐπεὶ καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ, ὡς παρὰ τῶν Μάγων ἐπυνθάνετο, ὃν ᾽ρομάζην καλοῦσιν ἐκεῖνοι, 
ἐοικέναι τὸ μὲν σῶμα φωτί, τὴν δὲ ψυχὴν ἀληθείᾳ. Plut. Is. ef Ox 370, renders 
Asha- Aria by ἀλήθεια. 

2 See Lobeck: Aglaoph. 798 ff. ; Dieterich, Nekyia, 88. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 177 


by the idea of the periodic growth, culmination, and destruction 
of the world and all that 1t contains. They thought of the life 
of the universe as following the same curve as the life of an 
animal—birth, growth, maturity, decay, and death, to be 
followed by rebirth, and the same repeated round. 


98 Orphic revival of Heaven-worship 


The Orphic reformation of Dionysiac religion seems to have 
meant, among other things. the revival of the primitive worship 
of the heavenly bodies, and especially of the Sun. Orpheus 
is said to have honoured Helios instead of Dionysus, ‘ and rising 
early in the morning he climbed the mountain called Pangaion, 
and waited for the rising of the Sun’! That the worship of the 
heavenly measurers of time had belonged to an early phase of 
religion in Greece 15 probable, and Plato seems to preserve the 
tradition of 11. Socrates m the Avatylus (397 c) suspects that 
‘the first men in Hellas recognised only those Gods who are 
now recognised by many other nations—sun, moon, earth, stars, 
and sky.’? ‘The Persians, says Herodotus (1. 131), ‘do not 
erect images, temples, or altars; indeed, they charge those who 
do so with folly, because, I suppose, they do not, like the Greeks, 
think that the Gods are of human shape. Their custom 18 to 
go up on to the mountain-tops and sacrifice, and they give the 
name of Zeus to the whole circle of the sky.’ When Xeno- 
phanes, the satirist, took that step, which we have described in 
a previous chapter, of deliberately wipmg out the figures of the 
anthropomorphic Gods, he too went back to an earlier phase of 
religion which had preceded those too clear-cut human figures. 
We are told of lnm that ‘he looked“at the whole sky, and de- 
clared that the One is, namely God.’* He disinterred, as it 
were, that older nature-worship, in which the circle of the sky 


1 Eratosth Catast xxiv Cf. J E Harrison, Prolegomena, Ὁ. 461; 
Themis, p. 465; Roscher, Lex s v. ‘Orpheus’ 

2 Cf. also Laws, 8858, where the firat Gods whose existence is asserted 
are γῆ καὶ ἥλιος ἄστρα τε τα σύμπαντα καὶ τὰ τῶν ὡρῶν διακεκοσμημένα καλώς 
οὕτως, ἐνιαυτοῖς τε καὶ μησὶ διειλημμένα ; and it 18 implied that all nations 
recognise these as divine. 

3 Arist. Met. av. 986 εἰς τὸν ὅλον οὐρανὸν ἀποβλέψας τὸ ἕν εἶναί φησι τὸν 
θεόν. 

M 


178 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


and the heavenly bodies had ruled the destinies of man. The 
Orphics seem to have stood for a similar revival of heaven- 
worship. The‘ Rhapsodic Theogony,’ which our best authorities 
now agree to date from before the Persian wars, starts, like 
Pherekydes, from the divinity of Endless Time. 


99. The heavenly origin and fall of the Soul 


Whether or not this revival was occasioned by Oriental 
influence, it is easy to see how well it agrees with the doctrines 
characteristic of Orphism.2_ The wheel of birth or becoming 
is now governed by the circling of the starry heaven. From 
the stars the soul of man is believed to have fallen into the prison 
of this earthy body, sinking from the upper region of fire and 
hght into the misty darkness of this ᾿ roofed-in cave.’? The 
fall is ascribed to some original sin, which entailed expulsion 
trom the purity and perfection of divine existence, and has to 
we expiated by life on earth and by purgation in the underworld. 
Caught in the wheel of birth, the soul passes through the forms 
of man and beast and plant. But the cycle, instead of going 
o& for ever, is terminated by the limit of the Great Year of 
tén thousand solar years; at the end of this period, the soul 
may escape and fly aloft to the fiery heaven whence it came, 
regaining perfection and divinity. Then a new Great Year 
begins (for the cycle of Time is endless), and a new world is 
born, to pass away in its season, and give place to another." 

When we analyse this conception, it becomes clear that the 
cycle of the Great Year, which must have an astral ongin,® has 


} This date for this Orphic Theogony (Abel, frag 48 ff D.F.V.7, p 476) 
was held by Lobeck, and is now accepted by Diels, Gomperz, Kern, Gruppe, 
and Eisler; see Eisler, Orpheus, the Fisher (Third Internat. Congress for 
the History of Religions, Oxford), who discusses its affinities to Iraman 
Zrvanism, especially the similarity of χρόνος ἀγήρατος to Zrvan akarana 
(endless time). For the detailed statement of the theory of Persian 
influence, see his Weltenmantel, vol. in. 

2. For references see Gruppe, Griech. Myth. u. Kelig. pp. 1028 ff. 

* Emped. frag. 120; Hisler, Weltenmante/, u. p, 618. 

4 Eudem. Phys. 51 (Simpl. Phys. 732, 26): ὁ δὲ αὐτὸς χρόνος πότερον ylyve- 
rat... ἢ οὔ, ἀπορήσειεν ἄν τις. . . εἰ δέ τις πιστεύσειε τοῖς Πυθαγορείοις, 
ὥστε πάλιν τὰ αὐτὰ ἀριθμῷ, κἀγὼ μυθολογήσω τὸ ῥαβδίον ἔχων ὑμῖν καθημένοις: 
οὕτω, καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πάντα ὁμοίως ἕξει, καὶ τὸν χρόνον εὔλογόν ἐστι τὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι. 

5 Eisler, Weltenmantel, ii. 602. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 179 


been superimposed upon the old cycle of reincarnation. That 
primitive belief belonged to earth, not to heaven: it taught 
the revolution of all life or soul in man and nature, passing in 
an endless round from the underworld into the light of day, and 
back again. There was no hope or possibility of any release ; 
indeed, such an idea would have no meaning, since the individual 
soul did not persist after death, but was reabsorbed in the one 
life of all things. No part or fragment of this life had any 
separate persistence. It had not come from the aether, and 
could not fly off thither; it came from earth, and returned to 
earth again. In the later doctrine, a series of such periods is 
fitted into a larger period or Great Year, based upon astro- 
nomical theories, probably of Babylonian origin, of the length 
of time required for all the heavenly bodies, in their various 
revolutions, to come back to the same relative positions.! The 
focus is thus shifted from the annual recurrence of earthly life 
to the periodicity of the stars; and with this change goes the 
doctrine that, while the body is of earth, the soul comes from 
the starry sky and claims to be of heavenly descent.* 

This contrast brings out what seems to be the essential differ- 
ence between the ‘ Dionysiac ’ view of immortality (as we may 
call it) and the Orphic. Orphism is focused on the individual 
soul, its heavenly origin and immutable nature, and its persis- 
tence, as an individual, throughout the round of incarnations. 
It is ‘an exile from God and a wanderer’;*? and it is reunited 
with God, and with other souls. only after its final escape at the 
end of the Great Year. Hence, the Orphic is preoccupied with 
the salvation, by purifying rites, of his individual soul. 

This insistence on the individual soul, perhaps, gives us the 


' See W. Schultz, Pythagoras u. Heralist, 1905, p. 68. Plato, Timacus, 
99}: ὅ ye τέλειος ἀριθμὸς χρόνου τὸν τέλειον ἐνιαυτὸν πληροῖ τότε, ὅταν ἁπασῶν 
τῶν ὄκτω περιόδων τὰ πρὸς ἄλληλα ξυμπερανθέντα τάχη σχῇ κεφαλὴν τῷ τοῦ ταὐ- 
τοῦ καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναμετρηθέντα κύκλῳ. 

® Orphic tablet from Peteha, 1). 1. 1΄.3,.. in. p. 480, J. E. Harrison, Prole- 
gomena, 66) ff. : 


γῆς παῖς εἰμι καὶ οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντοτ" 
αὐτὰρ ἐμὸν γένος οὐράνιον. 

* Emped. frag. 115: φυγὰς θεόθεν καὶ ἀλήτης. Plotinus, Ann. iv. 8. 1: 
"Euwedox\fs re εἰπὼν ἁμαρτανούσαις νόμον εἶναι ταῖς ψυχαῖς πεσεῖν ἐνταῦθα καὶ 
αὐτὸς φυγὰς θεόθεν γενόμενος. . . τοσοῦτον παρεγύμνον ὅσον καὶ Πυθαγόρας, 
οἶμαι, καὶ οἱ ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου ἡνίττοντο. 


180 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


psychological key to the phenomena of Orphism. The cosmic 
dualism, with its contrast of the principles of light and darkness, 
identified with good and evil, reflects outwards upon the universe 
that inner sense of the double nature of man and the war in our 
members, which is called the “ sense of sin.’ It 18 also the sense 
of separation from ‘ God,’ which goes with the intense desire for 
reunion. We may, perhaps, see the psychological cause of all 
this in the development of self-conscious individuality, which 
necessarily entails a feeling of isolation from the common life, 
and at the same time an increasing conflict between self-assertive 
instincts and that part of the common consciousness which 
resides in each of us, and 18 called ‘conscience.’ If this is so, 
it is significant that the conflict is represented as between ‘ body ’ 
and ‘soul.’ To “body ’ are assigned those senses and lusts 
whose insurrection destroys the inward harmony. ‘Soul’ still 
covers the field of the common consciousness, or ‘ conscience’ ; 
but it has shrunk from being the pervasive soul of the whole 
group to being one among un aggregate of individual selves, 
weakened by their novel isolation, and always longing for the 
old undivided communion. 

In the terms of religious representation, this is expressed as 
“separation from God,’ the loneliness of exile. As the barriers 
of individuality close in upon the soul, the old Dionysiac faith, 
with its sense of a communion easily and perpetually renewed, 
grows fainter, and calls for ever greater efforts, if it is to be 
recovered. The Orphic could no longer find a complete satis- 
faction in the immediate union with his God in orgiastic ecstasy ; 
his Way of Righteousness was a long and painful round of ritual 
forms, which easily degenerated into external observances, the 
preservation of ceremonial purity, and all the vacant futilities 
of ecclesiasticism. We know, too, that the baser sort of 
Orphics, in the decline of the movement, believed that the 
mere fact of initiation would secure to the believer the some- 
what gross enjoyments of Elysium. Such debasements are 
common in this type of religion; but, on the other hand, the 
conception of life which lies behind it is full of inspiration to 
the mystical temperament, and the old forms may at any time 
be reanimated, when a new prophet arises to rekindle faith, by 
means of what seems a profounder and more spiritual inter- 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 18] 


pretation. Such a prophet was Pythagoras; the “Pythagorean 
Life’ was a new Way of Righteousness, which followed the old 
tracks, but made it possible for the intellectually enlightened to 
travel along them, by substituting a purification by ‘ music’ 
(philosophy) for the mere ritual washing away of sin.! 


100. Mystical morality 


Long and painful as this Way of Righteousness may be, at 
least it 1s a way, and it leads, at the end, to God. It is here 
that the morality of the mystic is in sharp contrast with Olym- 
pianism. Olympian morality, as we have seen, rested on the 
idea of Morra. The type of all offences was going beyond your 
allotted province, overstepping its limits (ὑπερβασία), trying 
to have more than your due share (πλεονεξία). Eros and Elpis 
are the two fatal passions; Hybris, the cardinal sin. The whole 
conception is static and geometrical ; everything has its limited 
field, with bounds that must not be passed. Mystical morality 
is totally different ; its fundamental idea is the Way of Righteous- 
ness. The cycle of life is, indeed, divided into grades or phases, 
but these are not impermeable compartments ; on the contrary, 
all life must pass through every phase ; there is a rightful way 
that leads through the whole round of existence, and, along 
it, life moves from the lowest forms to the highest. 

It 18 easy to see how a philosophy, starting from this stand- 
point, must take a different course from a philosophy dominated 
by Moa. The properties of the original datum to which it 
must cling, will be precisely those which Science progressively 
and triumphantly eliminated—unity and continuity, Life (soul), 
and God. 

The mystic conception of Nomos shows a corresponding 
contrast with that notion of a dispensation of rigidly exclusive 
provinces which we analysed in the first chapter. Aristotle, 
when he draws the distinction between the law peculiar to any 
given state and that ‘common law’ (κοινὸς νόμος) which is 
‘ according to nature ᾿ and embodies what is naturally right and 
wrong, cites Empedocles’ declaration that the killing and eating 


’ Aristoxenus (D.F. V.", p. 282): of Πυθαγορικοὶ καθάρσει ἐχρῶντο τοῦ μὲν 
σώματος διὰ τῆς ἰατρικῆς, τῆς δὲ ψυχῆς διὰ τῆς μουσικῆς. 


182 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of things that have souls, is not right for some and wrong for 
others, but is forbidden by that universal law which pervades 
the whole universe. This passage significantly connects the 
idea of a Law of Nature with the unity of all Life. Sextus,? 
again, observes that ‘ the schools of Pythagoras and Empedocles 
and the Italian philosophy in general teach that we have com- 
munity and fellowship (κοινωνία) not only with one another and 
with the Gods, but also with irrational animals; for there is 
one spirit, which, like a soul, pervades the whole cosmos and 
unites us to them. To kill them is therefore an act of impiety.’ 
To the mystic, the whole of Nature is bound together in one 
society (κοινωνία), of which human communities are microcosmic 
parts.3 All living things are under the universal sway of Deke. 
In contrast with this view, the Olympian tradition draws its 
fast line, not only between men and Gods, but between human 
society and the rest of Nature. As a consequence of this 
separation, the rule of Dzke is confined to the ordered structure 
of the human state. Hesiod tells us that fishes, beasts, and 
birds prey upon one another because they have no Dike; 
but the son of Kronos gave Dike to man, that he might 
not follow their example. The same notion is repeated in 
the myth which Plato puts mto the mouth of Protagoras.° 
There, Ardés and Dike are the final gift of God to mankind, 
who up to that time had lived, scattered and without cities, 
at the mercy of the beasts of prey. Two characteristic 


1 Arist. Rheét. a 13,2 - ἔστι yap, ὃ μαντεύονταί τι πάντες, φύσει κοινὸν δίκαιον καὶ 
ἄδικον, κἂν μηδεμία κοινωνία πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἢ μηδὲ συνθήκη. . . ὡς ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆτι 
λέγει περὶ τοῦ μὴ κτείνειν τὸ ἔμψυχον" τοῦτο γὰρ οὐ τισὶ μὲν δίκαιον τισὶ δ᾽ οὐ 
δίκαιον, 

ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν πάντων νύμιμον διά 7” εὐρυμέδοντος 
αἰθέρος ἡνεκέως τέταται διά τ᾽ ἀπλέτου αὖ γης (Fray. 135). 


2 The text is quoted below, p. 202, note 1. Compare also Pythagoras’ 
doctrine of Themis, Dike, and Nomos, and the rule of Law in every part 
of the universe, above, p. 54, note 1; and Heracleitus’ umversal Law 
identified with the Logos, which is the Life of the world, below, p. 191. 

3 Cf. Heracleitus, frag. 910: τρέφονται yap πάντες ol ἀνθρώπειοι νόμοι ὑπὸ 
ἑνὸς τοῦ Belov’ κρατεῖ γὰρ τοσοῦτον ὅκοσον ἐθέλει καὶ ἐξαρκεῖ πᾶσι καὶ περιγίνεται. 
Hippocrates, de Victu, 11 (D.F.V¥.2, p. 83). 

4 Erga 276: τόνδε γὰρ ἀνθρώποισι νόμον διέταξε Kpovlwy, ἰχθύσι μὲν καὶ θηρσὶ 
καὶ οἰωνοῖς πετεηνοῖς ἐσθέμεν ἀλλήλονς, ἐπεὶ οὐ δίκη ἐστὶν ἐν αὐτοῖς᾽ ἀνθρώποισι δ᾽ 
ἔδωκε δίκην. . 

δ Plato. Protag. 2200 ff. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 183 


opinions are contained in this representation. In the first 
place, Law and Right are held to be peculiar to man, who 
lives within his ring-fence of custom and convention, while the 
rest of Nature is given over to a lawless struggle for existence. 
Second, Right, or Justice, dates only from the formation of 
civil communities. In the hands of other sophists, this theory 
became a weapon in a general attack upon the validity of all 
human morality. ‘ Justice’ was assailed as a mere arbitrary 
convention, under which men, originally independent and free 
from any restraint, surrendered their natural right of getting 
the better of one another (πλεονεξία) The Social Contract 
theory marks an age of individualism. This view, moreover, 
that Society is an ageregate, arbitrarily formed by the coming 
together of independent individuals, is nothing but the equiva- 
lent, in political theory, of the physical doctrine of Atomism, 
according to which all things are casual aggregates of distinct 
atoms, temporarily cohering. The two theories make their 
appearance at the same time, and both belong to the scientific 
tradition. Plato, who condemned both alike as atheistical and 
immoral, devoted the argument of the Republic to the refutation 
of political Atomism and the proof that the State is natural, 
and, if reconstructed on ideal lines, might embody the same 


principle of Justice that rules through every part of the 
cosmos. 


Before we consider Pythagoreanism, we have first to deal 
with Heracleitus. His system of thought is dominated by the 
twin conceptions of Time and Flow, Chronos and Rhea. But the 
type of his philosophy is distinct from the Pythagorean. It is 
not Orphic, but Dionysiac. It is not inspired by any doctrine 
of individual immortality, or of the persistence, through all 
transformations, of a plurality of soul-atoms, fallen from the 
heavenly fires. Rather, he goes back to the older notion of the 
one continuous and homogeneous Soul, or Life, in all things— 
a perennial stream, on whose surface individual forms are mere 


' Callicles in Plato’s Gorgsas, 483; Thrasymachua in the Republic, 
Book i.; and the restatement of his argument by Glaucon, Rep. ii. 358 = ff., 
especially 3590: διὰ τὴν πλεονεξίαν, ὃ πᾶσα φύσις διώκειν πέφυκεν ws ἀγαθόν, 
νόμῳ δὲ βίᾳ παράγεται ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ ἴσον τιμήν. 


180 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


an endless circle, and its unity is such that it cannot be dis- 
solved, or broken up into parts, like Anaximander’s ‘ Limitless.’ 
Its unity is not that of a mixture, out of which the elemental 
forms could come by separation ; it is continuous in substance, 
as in time. Heracleitus insists on the unity and continuity of 
the one real Being, just as emphatically as Parmenides ; and, 
from this point of view, the histories of philosophy are misleading, 
when they set the two systems in polar antagonism. 

From the unity of the real follows the inevitable condem- 
nation of the many to comparative unreality or ‘seeming. 
This is the true ground of Heracleitus’ contempt for Ionian 
science and rationalism. He calls it ‘ polymathy,’ a “learning 
of many things,’ which ‘does not teach insight’ (frag. 16). Of 

| what use, he seems to argue, are their various explanations of 
natural phenomena? By what do they explain them? By 
other phenomena of the same order of unreality. Why run 
about the world, like Hekataeus, picking up scraps of infor- 
mation, and call that ‘research’ (or ‘science,’ ἱστορίηγ1 You 
will come back no wiser than you started. There is only one 
truth, and that truth is within you, and in all things around 
you. There is one logos, one reason for everything, through- 
out ‘the one cosmos, which is the same for all’ (frag. 20). Of this 
one meaning all particular things are merely symbols; no one 
of them is a complete and independent expression of it; taken 
as such, they are as false as the idols which polytheism mistakes 
for individual Gods, ‘for they know not what Gods and Heroes 
are’ (frag. 126). ‘Wisdom is one only; it is willing and un- 
willing to be called by the name of Zén’! (Life, which is God, 
Zeus, frag. 65). ‘I searched myself’ (frag. 80)°; for * it 1s open 
to all men to know themselves and to be wise ’ (frag. 106). But 
they will not find wisdom by running to the ends of the earth, 
and trusting to their “eyes and ears, which are bad witnesses 
to men, if they have not souls that understand their language ’ 
(frag. 4).5 “ Nature loves to hide herself’ (frag. 10); she hints her 


1 Ζηνός. The nominative Ziv was used by Pherekydes (frag. 1), and pro- 
bably by Empedocles (-- ξέσις, D.F.V.?, p. 159, 1.17). See Eusler, Welten- 
mantel, ii, p. 357. 

2 Plot. Hnn. iv. 8. 1: ὁ 'Βράκλειτος. . . ἀμελήσας σαφῆ ἡμῖν ποιῆσαι τὸν 
λόγον, ws δέον ἴσως wap’ αὐτοῖς ζητεῖν, ὥσπερ καὶ αὐτὸς ζητήσατ εὗρεν. 

8 1 understand frag. 49, χρὴ γὰρ εὖ μάλα πολλῶν ἴστορας φιλοσόφους ἄνδρας 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 187 


one meaning under many forms, which delude the senses of the 
fool ; she is like ‘ the lord at Delphi, who neither declares plainly, 
nor yet conceals, his meaning, but shows it bya sign.’! To the 
mysticism of all ages, the visible world is a myth, a tale half 
true and half false, embodying a logos, the truth which is 
one.” 


102. Soul and Logos 


What, then, is the one truth, the one reality which runs through 
all these manifold transformations ? It is, as before, the divine 
soul-substance, physis, only with all the emphasis thrown, not 
upon its nature as material filling space, but upon its life, one 
and continuous in the round of death and rebirth, which is like 
the cycle of ‘ the seasons that bear all things.’ It is God, who 
is ‘day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, surfeit 
and hunger ; only, he takes various shapes, just as fire, when it 
is mingled with spices, is named according to the savour of 
each’ (frag. 36). It 1s also Soul (uy), the principle of hfe. 
‘ Heracleitus takes soul for his first principle, as he identifies 
it with the vapour from which he derives all other things, and 
further says that it is the least corporeal of things and in cease- 


εἶναι, ‘Lovers of Wisdom must know a great many things indeed,’ as an 
ironical sneer at ‘polymaths,’ perhaps especially directed at Pythagoras, 
whose humility led him to call himself not ‘ wise,’ but a ‘lover of wisdom.’ 
To Heracleitus, convinced that ‘wisdom is one’ (frag. 19), and that he 
possessed it, such humility seemed mawkish and hypocritical. πολλῶν 
ἵστορες in his language is a term of contempt; cf. frag. 35: διδάσκαλος δὲ 
πλείστων ᾿Ησίοδοτ᾽ τοῦτον ἐπίστανται πλεῖστα εἰδέναι, ὅστις ἡμέρην καὶ εὐφρόνην 
οὐκ ἐγίνωσκεν" ἔστι γὰρ ἕν. 

1 Frag. 11: ὁ ἄναξ, οὗ τὸ μαντεῖόν ἐστι τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖς, οὔτε λέγει οὔτε κρύπτει 
ἀλλὰ σημαίνει. Cf. p. 218, note 1, for meaning of σῆμα (σημαίνειν). 

2 Sallustius, de Dus εἰ Mundo, 3: ἔξεστι yap καὶ τὸν κόσμον μῦθον εἰπεῖν, 
σωμάτων μὲν καὶ χρημάτων ἐν αὐτῷ φαινομένων, ψυχῶν δὲ καὶ νόων κρυπτομένων. 
See Plato, Arnt. 408 Δ, on derivations of Hermes, Pan, Logos, especially 
ὁ λόγος πᾶν σημαίνει καὶ κυκλεὶ καὶ πολεῖ del, καί ἐστι διπλοῦς, ἀληθής τε 
καὶ ψευδής. . . τὸ μὲν ἀληθὲς αὐτοῦ. . . θεῖον καὶ ἄνω οἰκοῦν ἐν τοῖς θεοῖς, 
τὸ δὲ ψεῦδος κάτω ἐν τοῖς πολλοῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων. For the antiquity of this 
Hermes-Logos doctrine, see Zielinski, ‘Hermes und die Hermetik,’ Arch. f. 
Relig. 1x. The equation Hermes= Logos goes back to Theagenes of Rhegium 
in the sixth century ; see D.F. V.%, ii. p. 511. 

8 Frag. 34: ὧραι af πάντα φέρουσι. φέρειν, hike ‘ bear,’ has a double sense : 
. ae all things moving‘ in the yearly round, (2) ‘bring all things to 

irth.’ 


188 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


less flow; and that it is by something in motion that what is 
in motion is known; for he, like the majority, conceived all 
that exists to be in motion.’ ! 

Heracleitus, like the rest, could not conceive the divine Soul 
as immaterial ; it is only ‘ the least corporeal of things’; and 
its appropriate vehicle is Fire, the element which is ‘ ever-living ’ 
and ever-moving. Here again, the argument we put forward 
about the ‘Air’ of Anaximenes (p. 149) holds of the Fire of 
Heracleitus. Visible flame—fire as a natural object—is only one 
of many forms in the sense world, and, as such, is on a level 
with water, air, and earth ; fire dies into air, just as air dies into 
water, or water into earth. It is only one embodiment of a 
substance which must, in some way, be other than it, since that 
substance persists the same through all embodiments and 
transformations. Fire is considered primary, only because its 
mobile nature seems nearest to the moving force of life. and to 
be its most transparent medium. The soul-substance itself is 
a sort of metaphysical Fire, composed of the supernatural, 
daemonic mana of fire, the least corporeal or most ‘ spiritual ’ 
form of matter, which can be identified with the force of life. 

What is really constant, throughout all the transformations, is 
Logos, which, in one of its senses means the proportion of equiva- 
lence. Every transformation is an exchange: ‘all things are 
an exchange for Fire, and Fire for all things, even as wares for 
gold and gold for wares’ (frag. 22). Thats to say, the ‘measure 
or value remains constant, though the form assumed 1s different. 
When earth becomes liquid sea, ‘it is measured by the same 
tale as before it became earth’ (frag. 23). The ever-living Fire 
is described as ‘with measures kindling and with measures 
going out ’ (frag. 20). 


103. The Way of Justice 


This maintenance of measure, or constancy of proportion, 
is the principle of Justice, and it is important as bringing out 
another contrast between Heracleitus and Anaximander. To 
Anaximander, as we have seen, Justice meant the keeping of 
bounds: Dike, for him, is not the ‘ Way,’ but the barrier, or the 


1 Arist de anim. a2, 45a 25 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 189 


avenging power who guards the frontiers of Mowa. Hera- 
cleitus takes the opposite view: he identifies Justice precisely 
with the living power which owns no barriers between the 
elemental regions, but passes, on its ordered course, through 
every phase and form. The doctrine is preserved for us in the 
Kratylus of Plato (412 c). Discussing the derivation of δίκαιον 
(;ust), Socrates says that the school of thinkers who hold that 
all things are in motion, say that there is something which 
passes through the whole universe, and causes all things to come 
into existence. It is the swiftest and subtlest of things: 
nothing can keep it out, and it treats other things as if they 
were stationary. Since, then, it governs all things, passing 
through (Stator) them, it is nightly called ‘ just’ (δί(κ)αιον). 

Socrates complains that. to further questioning as to the nature 
of Justice, he could only get conflicting answers. One would 
reply that Justice is the Sun ; for he alone ἡ passing through and 
burning’ (d:avorvta καὶ xuorta, ve. dia-xa-ior) governs all 
things. Another says, it is Fire; another, the Heat that is in 
Fire.! Another laughs at this, and says, with Anaxagoras, that 
Justice is Mind ; for Mind has absolute mastery, and mixes with 
nothing, and orders all things, and passes through all things. 

It is evident that the successors of Heracleitus were puzzled 
by their master's famous obscurity, and caught at various ex- 
planations. In so doing, they introduced new distinctions 
which were becoming obvious to them, but were foreign to the 
mystical thought of Heracleitus. To him. the living Fire, which, 
through all the cycle of its transformations, preserved its 
measures, actually was Reason (another meaning of Logos) and 
the principle of Justice. Its chief embodiment was the Sun, 
who ‘ will not overstep his measures, or the Spints of Vengeance, 
the ministers of Justice, would find him out’ (frag. 29). Later 
writers, a8 we should expect, identify this Justice with Destiny. 
* The all is finite, and the world is one. It arises from fire, and is 
consumed again by fire, alternately, through all eternity, in certain 
cycles. This happens according to Fate (καθ᾽ εἱμαρμένην). 3 


1 A material way of expressing what I have called the mana or daemon 
of the fire. It shows that this fieriness, or spirit of the fire, was half 
distinguished from visible flame. 

2 L. Dnog. ix. 8. 


100 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Theophrastus adds, ‘He lays down a certain order (τάξις) and 
a determined time for the changing of the world, according to 
a certain fated necessity.’! But, i Heracleitus’ own time, the 
principle of Dike, as he understood it, was in opposition to the 
principle of Motra or Destiny, as understood by Ionian science. 
His divine Fire is the Way, as well as the Truth and the Life. 


104. The Harmony of Opposites 


When once we understand that Justice is the Way of Life, 
and also the force that moves along that way and owns no 
barners, the doctrine of the harmony of opposites falls into 
line, as another contradiction of Anaximander’s view. Anaxi- 
mander held that all individual existence is unjust, because it 
results from the mixing of the elements which ought to be 
distinct, and can only combine by invading each other's pro- 
vinces. The penalty is paid, and the reign of Moira restored, 
by death or dissolution. Heracleitus convicts him out of his 
own mouth. You admit, he seems to say, that ‘ War (Πόλεμος) 
is the father of all things ’ (frag. 44), and yet you condemn the 
parent of all life as unjust. The end of warfare would be the 
end of life itself. ‘Homer was wrong when he said: ‘“ Would 
that Strife might perish from among Gods and men!” He did 
not see that he was praying for the destruction of everything ; 
for, if his prayer were heard, all things would pass away’ (frag. 43). 
Death is not dissolution, but rebirth ; so, war is not destruction, 
but regeneration. “War is common to all, and Strife is Justice, 
and all things come into being through Strife.’ * Strife is Justice ; 
if if were not for these acts of ‘ injustice,’ as you call them, men 
would not have known the name of Justice.* Justice is not 
the separation of opposites, but their meeting in attunement 
or ‘harmony.’ Without opposition there were no agreement. 
“What is at variance agrees with itself. It is the attunement 


1 Theophr. ap. Simpl. Phys. 6° 24,40: ποιεῖ δὲ καὶ τάξιν τινὰ καὶ χρόνον 
ὡρισμένον τῆς τοῦ κόσμου μεταβολῆς κατά τινα εἱμαρμένην ἀνάγκην. 

Σ Frag. 62: εἰδέναι δὲ χρὴ τὸν πόλεμον ἐόντα ξυνόν, καὶ Δίκην "ἔριν, καὶ γιγνό- 
μενα πάντα κατ᾽ ἔριν. . .. 

® Frag. 60: Δίκης ὄνομα οὐκ ἂν ἤιδεσαν, εἰ ταῦτα μὴ ἦν. I agree with Burnet 
(4.G.P.?, p. 151, note 5) that ταῦτα means ‘all kinds of injustice’; but I 
think he especially meant what Anaximander called ‘injustice,’ as Burnet 
seems to recognise (pp. 158, 160). 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 191 


of opposite tensions, like that of the bow and the lyre’ (frag. 45). 
The give and take between the elements, then, without which 
nothing can come into being, is an ‘injustice’ that is also the 
very essence of justice, a war that is peace—not the peace of 
changeless, ‘immortal’ stagnation, but the peace of ‘ harmony,’ 
that hidden attunement of opposite tensions, which is better 
than any that appears to the senses (frag. 47). 


105. The Common Reason 


This Justice or Harmony, again, is the Logos, the Spirit of 
Life, observing measure, but passing all barners. It is the 
divine soul-substance, whose life consists in movement and 
change. It is also the one divine Law, the law of Nature (physzs), 
which 1s the Will of God. ‘It is Law (nomos) to obey the will 
of One’ (frag 110) This is true for the universe, no less than for 
human society; it 1s common (Evvos) to all things. ‘ Those 
who speak with understanding must hold fast to what is common 
to all, as a city holds fast to 1ts law, and even more strongly. 
For all human laws are fed by the one divine law. It prevails 
as much as it will, and suffices for all things with something to 
spare’ (frag 91 δ). ‘So we must follow what is common, yet 
the many live as if they had a wisdom of their own’ (frag. 92). 
“It 1s not mect to act and speak like men asleep. The waking 
have one common world, but the sleeping turn aside each into 
a world of his own ’ (frag. 94, 95). 

When we take these sayings in conjunction, we are tempted 
to say that (strange as it may seem) Heracleitus had all but 
divined what this book is intended to prove—that physis is, 
ultimately and in origin, a representation of the social conscious- 
ness. At any rate, our theory could hardly have a stronger 
confirmation than a system which identifies the one continuous 
soul-substance, or nature of things, not only with Justice and 
Law, but with that ‘common world’ or ‘common reason’ 
which is accessible to all and present in all, if only their eyes 
are open to perceive it, and they do not turn aside, as the many 
do, to slumber each in his individual world of private opinion 
or ‘seeming.’ Heracleitus comes as near to describing the 
social consciousness, as was possible for a man whose ον 


192 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


apparatus was not yet refined enough to enable him to dis- 
tinguish it from a material continuum, and who still thought, 
as theologians have thought before and since, that the social 
Consciousness, as the source of morality, was the will of God. 

Further, it was Heracleitus’ respect for the common con- 
sciousness that led him to seek true wisdom in the most marvel- 
lous product of its collective activity, language. He and his 
followers, as we may see from Plato’s Kratylus, constantly 
appealed to words as embodying the nature of things, because 
he saw in language an expression of that common wisdom 
which 15. in all men, and thought that, as a collective product, 
it might be free from, or at least onlv partly obscured by, the 
false private opimons of individuals. The Logos 1s revealed in 
speech.! The structure of man’s speech reflects the structure 
of the world; mote, it is an embodiment or representation of 
it. The Logos is contamed and immanent in it, as one meaning 
may be contained in many outwardly different symbols. When 
Heracleitus says that the Wise, which is One only, ‘1s willing 
and unwilling to be called by the name of Zén’ (Zeus, Life), 
we are to understand that it 15 willing to be so called, because 
that name reveals some of the truth about it , unwilling. because 
it 15 only some of the truth that is revealed, and more 1s con- 
cealed. Language, like the visible world, 1s a mamfold, and 
so half unreal and false ;* yet, for those who have ears, the 
one truth lives through all its varied forms. 


We have dealt with Heracleitus at some length, because he 
has been so frequently misunderstood by interpreters who did 


1 The modern interpreters of the Avatylus who imagine that these 
mystical interpictations of names are simply bad attempts at plulological 
derivation of one woid fiom another, are utterly at fault. Taken as such, 
they are too obviously false and mdiculous for any sane person, however 
innocent of philology. to mistake them for derivations The point that 
matters in mystical philology 1s what significant elements the name 
contains; the historical question, how they came to be there, is irrelevant 
and never considered To the mystic the ‘derivation’ of the name Nero 18 
not of the smallest account, nor does he inquire mto it; what matters 18 
that the number value of the letters (no matter how they came there) adds 
up to the number of the Beast. For the number-mysticism of Heracleitus’ 
logos-doctrine see Eisler, Weltenmantel, i. 694 ff. 

2 Plato, Krat. 408c. οἶσθ᾽ ὅτι ὁ Λόγος τὸ Πᾶν σημαίνει καὶ κυκλεῖ καὶ πολεῖ 
ἀεί, καί ἐστι διπλοῦς, ἀληθης τε καὶ ψευδής. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 193 


not know that the mystical representation of physis is the key 
to his famous obscurities, and supposed that he was working 
on the same lines as the Milesians. One further point remains. 
His insistence, in the truly mystical spirit, on the unity and 
continuity of all Life seems, at first sight, inconsistent with his 
personal attitude of solitary disdain towards his fellow-men. 
Are we justified in classing him with Pythagoras, the founder 
of a community and preacher of the common life ? 

After what has been said of Heracleitus’ respect for the 
common consciousness, we need not be misled by his contempt 
for the mass of mankind, whom he condemned precisely because 
they slumbered, and could not wake to the wisdom that was in 
them. All mystics have fled from the world to find their own 
souls, as Jesus went into the wilderness, and Buddha into the 
jungle. Some, when they have found themselves, can stand | 
alone, in fiery freedom of spirit, and despise their followers far 
more than their opponents. Such were Heracleitus and Fried- 
rich Nietzsche ; for the author of Beyond Good and Evil, more 
than any other modern man, could understand the philosopher 
who said that ‘Good and II] are one,’ and know the temper in 
which, instead of founding a church or publishing his book, 
Heracleitus dedicated the single copy of his Logos in the temple 
of Ephesian Artemis, careless whether the ‘asses who prefer 
straw to gold,’ went there to drink its wisdom, or quenched 
their thirst elsewhere.” Pythagoras, to whom we turn next, 
was ἃ preacher as well as a prophet, and, like Jesus and Buddha, 
must needs have disciples, and cannot leave the world to go 
its own way unenlightened. These, when they have discovered 
the truth by searching themselves, will not find peace in a 
hermitage, but are driven to externalise the common life ina 
monastic church. oS 


1 Porph. de abst. i. 36: οὕτως γὰρ καὶ τῶν πρόσθεν ἀκούομεν κλέα ἀνδρῶν, 
Πυθαγορείων τε καὶ σοφῶν, ὧν οἱ μὲν τὰ ἐρημότατα χωρία κατῴκουν, οἱ δὲ (6.0. 
Apollonius of Tyana) καὶ τῶν πόλεων τὰ ἱερὰ καὶ τὰ ἄλση. 

2 The successors οἱ Heracleitus, satirised by Plato (Theaet. 179κ ff.), 
refused to be taught by one another, but ‘sprang up like mushrooms,’ each 
claiming a private inspiration, and denying that any of the others knew 
anything at all, 


194 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


106. Pyraagoras 


The School of Pythagoras, in our opinion, represents the 
main current of that mystical tradition which we have set in 
contrast with the scientific tendency. The terms ‘ mystical ’ 
and ‘ scientific,’ which have been chosen in default of better, 
are, of course, not to be understood as if we supposed that all 
the philosophers we class as mystic were unscientific. The fact 
that we regard Parmenides, the discoverer of Logic, as an off- 
shoot of Pythagoreanism, and Plato himself as finding in the 
Italian philosophy the chief source of his inspiration, will be 
enough to refute such a misunderstanding. Moreover, the 
Pythagorean School itself developed a scientific doctrine closely 
resembling the Milesian Atomism; and Empedocles, again, 
attempted to combine the two types of philosophy. 

What we do hope to establish is that the philosophy of the 
western Greek colonies, however much its individual thinkers 
may be influenced by the Milesians and their followers in the 
Hast, however far they may severally go to join hands with 
“science,” has at its root a different and opposed view of life, 
a different type of religion, and, consequently, a different con- 
ceptual scheme of the nature of things, which lies behind all its 
manifestations, and is the point of departure which they all 
have in common. What this was, we have already tried at some 
length todescribe. It was that type of religion, centred in Greece 
round the figure of Dionysus, which has some claim to be called 
the only form of religion that possesses the secret of vitality, just 
because it is, at bottom, the religion of the Life of earth and man, 
the life which, though it dies, is perpetually reborn. Asif because 
its faith has been rooted in this life, mystical religion has itself 
been reborn a thousand times. Its history is a series of revivals ; 
and every such revival is heralded by the doctrine of regeneration : 
‘Ye must be born again.’ But he that would save his life must 
lose it ; this religion is also the religion of death and renunciation : 
Hades and Dionysus are the same. Herein lies its almost irre- 
sistible attraction for a certain type of emotional ascetic—the 
man whose nature demands intensity of passion, and who yet 
rejects “ bodily ’ passions as impure. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 195 


107. The Orphic Revival 


Behind the School of Pythagoras, we can discern, in the so- 
called Orphic revival, one of these reformations of Dionysiac 
religion. It is important for us to grasp its nature, because the 
reforming principle, represented in the figure of Orpheus, is 
Apolline in character, and therefore drawn partly within the 
circle of Olympian theology. Orpheus, the ideal of the Orphic, 
is a Dionysus tamed, and clothed, and in his right mind—in a 
word, Apollinised.1 When we come to the Pythagorean School, 
which carries on this representation into philosophy, the same 
combination of Dionysiac with Apolline elements will reappear ; 
and we shall see, moreover, that (as we should expect) there is, 
between the two ideals, a deep-lying contradiction, which defies 
reconciliation. Dionysus may become Orpheus, without losing 
all his life and mystery ; but, if he takes the further step (which 
perhaps, in a sense, he actually did take at Delphi *) and becomes 
Apollo, then he ceases to be Dionysus. He has left the earth 
and her cycle of life, which dies and is born again, and ascended 
to his seat among the ‘deathless’ ones, above the reach of 
mortality. He is no longer a daemon in communion with his 
church, but a God beyond the great fixed gulf of Moira. This 
fatal sequence, from the group-daemon to the personal God, 
is reflected in a curious way in the Pythagorean philosophy, 
which is always passing from mysticism to science, as its religion 
had passed from Dionysus to Apollo. Yet, philosophy and 
religion alike do not cease to be mystical at the root; and the 
attempt to hold the two ends together involves religion in certain 
contradictions, and leads philosophy to corresponding dilemmas, 
which it will be our business to bring to light. 

It is important to observe that the Orphic movement was a 
revival, as well as a reformation ; that is to say, it was a return 
to a type of religion more primitive than the prevailing Olym- 
pianism. It must have been caused by one of those outbursts 
of mystic fervour which, from time to time, upheave and shatter 
the crystallised forms of theology and ecclesiasticism, when the 

1 For Orpheus as son, or ἐρώμενος, or ἕταιρος of Apollo, see Roscher Lex. 


5.0. ‘Orpheus’; Eisler, Weltenmaniel, ii. p. 681. 
* Seo J. HE. Harrison, Themis, p. 443. 


106 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


life that created them has died out of them, and they have drifted 
away from all touch with genuine emotion. The rule in such 
cases is that, with much clearing away of lumber, there is a 
return to the simple, primitive type of organisation shaped by 
the first impulse of the same spirit, which now resurges and 
seeks once more to clothe itself in the bare essential form. The 
Orphic movement was thus, in some degree, a return to Dionysus 
and his thvasos—the daemon and his church, held in one by the 
unique, mystical relation. It is the organisation of the magical 
secret society, adapted once more to a reviving human need. 

But history never repeats itself. The Dionysus to whom the 
Orphics return, is not the old Dionysus of a group of satyrs, 
but the Orpheus who was more at home with the Muses than 
with the Maenads. It was the Maenads, indeed, that tore him, 
the Muse’s enchanting son, to pieces. Thus, Dionysus, though 
revived, is also reformed ; the more savage parts of his ritual 
are expurgated, or toned down to a decent symbolism. 

Above all, what had formerly been the religion of earth and 
of the life and death of her trees and plants in the circling 
seasons, becomes now a religion of the heavenly bodies, and 
especially of the Sun. The Sun also moves through the circle 
of the year, waxing in summer and waning in winter; but he 
too easily comes to be conceived as an immutable and deathless 
God.! The Olympian notion of immortality (athanasia), as a 
life that negates change and death, intrudes itself. With 
the doctrine of the fall of the soul from the stars, went, as we 
have seen, the belief in an indestructible individual soul, per- 
sisting throughout its round of reincarnation. 

After what has been said above of Heracleitus, it will be clear 
that this Orphic notion of individual immortality is in contra- 
diction with the other mystic representation, to which Hera- 
cleitus remains true, that there is no life without death, and 
that there is only one life, which dies and is reborn in every 
shape of existence. This representation is the older, for it goes 
back to days when only the group had a soul, and the atomic 
individual soul was not yet invented. The soul of Hera- 
cleitus’ world is like the soul of the tribe which passes from the 


1 Heracleitus characteristically protested against this, declaring that the 
Sun, hke everything else, changes, and is ‘new every day’ (frag. 32). 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 197 


living state to the dead, and round again. This was no “ sorrow- 
ful weary wheel,’ from which any escape was either possible or 
to be desired. The cyclic movement simply was the movement 
of life, and life could take no other course, no upward flight to a 
mansion in the stars. Thus, the Orphic religion already contains 
two contradictory notions of the nature and destiny of the soul, 
one Dionysiac, the other Ouranian. Modern writers have failed 
to see this contradiction, because they have been blinded by 
the compromise in which Orphism attempts to ‘reconcile’ the 
incompatible. 

Further, throughout the mystical systems inspired by Orphism, 
we shall find the fundamental contrast between the two prin- 
ciples of Light and Darkness, identified with Good and Evil. 
This cosmic dualism is the counterpart of the dualism in the 
nature of the soul; for, as always, physis and soul correspond, 
and are, indeed, identical in substance. The soul in its pure 
state consists of fire, like the divine stars from which it falls; 
in its impure state, throughout the period of reincarnation, its 
substance is infected with the baser elements, and weighed down 
by the gross admixture of the flesh.!_ In the cosmologies inspired 
by this conception, we may expect to find, first, that the element 
of fire will be set in contrast with the other three,” and second, 
that the manifold world of sense will be viewed as a degradation 
from the purity of real being. Such systems will tend to be 
other-worldly, putting all value in the unseen unity of God, and 
condemning the visible world as false and illusive, a turbid 
medium in which the rays of heavenly light are broken and 
obscured in mist and darkness. These characteristics are 
common to all the systems which came out of the Pythagorean 
movement—Pythagoreanism proper, and the philosophies of 
Parmenides, Empedocles, and Plato. 

1 All this is very clearly brought out by Socrates in Plato’s Phaedo ; see 
below, p. 246. 

2 It must be remembered, too, that Fire is the element of which the 
Measurers of 7'ime (the heavenly bodies) consist. Diog. Laert. viii. 1, 27 
(Pythagoras): ἥλιόν τε καὶ σελήνην καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἀστέρας εἶναι θεούς" ἐπικρατεῖν 
γὰο τὸ θερμὸν ἐν αὐτοῖς, ὅπερ ἐστὶ ζωῆς αἴτιον. . . καὶ ἀνθρώποις εἶναι πρὸς θεοὺς 
συγγένειαν, κατὰ τὸ μετέχειν ἄνθρωπον θερμοῦ" διὸ καὶ προνοεῖσθαι τὸν θεὸν ἡμῶν. 
So, in aboriginal America, ‘the Fire-God was especially associated with the 


lapse of time,’ and his vital force, enfeebled by use, was periodically re- 
newed by the kindling of new fire. Payne, History of the New World, ii. 330. 


198 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


108. The Pythagorean reformation of Orphism 


As Orphism was a reformation of Dionysiac religion, so Pytha- 
goreanism may be regarded as a further reformation of Orphism,? 
which takes yet another step, away from Dionysus, away even 
from Orpheus, towards Apollo. It is a further movement from 
emotion towards intellect and reason, from religion towards 
philosophy. Orphism was still a cult, in which the initiate, as 
Aristotle 3 says, ‘ was not expected to learn or understand any- 
thing, but to feel a certain emotion and get into a certain state 
of mind, after first becoming fit to experience it.’ The means 
to that emotional state of mind had formerly been ‘ orgiastic ἡ 
ritual, and especially those dramatic representations of the 
passion and resurrection of the life-daemon, which point back 
to the old mimetic dances of magic, and forward to the tragic 
drama. The state of mind is that of passionate sympathetic 
contemplation (θεωρία), in which the spectator is identified 
with the suffering God, dies in his death, and rises again in his 
new birth. By these and other ritual means—the eating of 
flesh or the drinking of wine—the old sense of mystical one- 
ness and participation can be renewed, and the daemon-soul of 
the group re-created in collective emotion. The only doctrine 
is the myth, the verbal counterpart of the action of the nite, 
the life-history of the God, which is also the life-history of 
the soul. 

The doctrines of mysticism are secret, because they are not 
cold, abstract beliefs, or articles in a creed, which can be taught 
and explained by intellectual processes ; such beliefs no one has 
ever desired to conceal, except from fear of persecution. The 
‘truth’ which mysticism guards is ἃ thing which can only be 
learnt by being experienced (παθεῖν μαθεῖν); it is, fundamentally, 
not an intellectual, but an emotional experience—that invasive, 
flooding sense of oneness, of reunion and communion with the 


1 For Pythagoras’ relation to the Orphic communities in Western Greece 
see Kisler, Weltenmaniel, ii. p. 679. 

2 Arist. frag. 45, 1483a 19: xaddwep Ἀριστοτέλης ἀξιοῖ τοὺς redoupévous οὗ 
μαθεῖν τι δεῖν, ἀλλὰ παθεῖν καὶ διατεθῆναι δηλονότι γενομένους ἐπιτηδείους. Cf. 
Burnet, #.G.P.?, p. 91, who, however, ignores the importance of the emo- 
tional state of mind. This, surely, not the ritual action, is the essential 
thing. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 199 


life of the world, which the mystical temperaments of all ages 
seem to have in common, no matter in what theological terms 
they may happen to construe it afterwards. Being an emotional, 
non-rational state, it is indescribable, and incommunicable save 
by suggestion. To induce that state, by the stimulus of collec- 
tive excitement and all the pageantry of dramatic ceremonial, 
is the aim of mystic ritual. The ‘ truth ’ can only come to those 
who submit themselves to these influences, because it is a thing 
to be immediately felt, not conveyed by dogmatic instruction. 
For that reason only—a very sufficient one—‘ mysteries ’ are 
reserved to the initiate, who have undergone ‘ purification,’ and 
so put themselves into a state of mind which fits them for the 
consummate experience. 

Pythagoreanism presents itself as an attempt to intellectualise 
the content of Orphism, while preserving its social form, and as 
much as possible of the spirit which that form had originally 
clothed. Like Orphism itself, it is both a reformation and a 
revival. Like all reformations, it means that much of the 
ceremonial overgrowth is shaken off: Orphism ceases to be a 
cult, and becomes a Way of life. As a revival, Pythagoreanism 
means a return to an earlier simplicity, a disinterring of the 
essential form, whose outline is simple enough to adapt itself 
to a new movement of the spirit. Pythagoreanism is thus, from 
the very first, a complex phenomenon, containing the germs of 
several tendencies, which, when we come to the philosophies 
that emerged from the school, we shall find separating towards 
divergent issues, or intertwined in ingenious reconciliations. 
Our analysis must take account of three strata, superimposed in 
the order we have described—Dionysus, Orpheus, Pythagoras. 
From Dionysus come the unity of all life, in the cycle of death 
and rebirth, and the conception of the daemon or collective soul, 
immanent in the group as a whole, and yet something more than 
any or all of the members that partake of it. To Orpheus is 
due the shift of focus from earth to heaven, the substitution for 
the vivid, emotional experience of the renewal of life in nature, 
of the worship of a distant and passionless perfection in the 
region of light, from which the soul, now immortal, is fallen 
into the body of this death, and which it aspires to regain by the 
formal observances of asceticism. But the Orphic still clung 


200 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


to the emotional experience of reunion and the ritual that in- 
duced it, and, in particular, to the passionate spectacle (theorta) 
of the suffering God. Pythagoras gave a new meaning to theorta ; 
he reinterpreted it as the passionless contemplation of rational, 
unchanging truth, and converted the way of life into a * pursuit 
of wisdom ’ (philosophia). The way of life is still also a way 
of death ;! but now it means death to the emotions and lusts of 
this vile body, and a release of the intellect to soar into the 
untroubled empyrean of theory.? This is now the only avenue 
by which the soul can ‘follow God’ (ἕπεσθαι θεῷ), who has 
ascended beyond the stars.? Orgiastic ritual, which plays upon the 
emotions, only drives a new nail into the coffin of the soul, and 
binds it by a new chain to its earthly prison-house. All that 
must go; only certain ascetic prescriptions of the Orphic askesis 
are retained, to symbolise a turning away from lower desires, 
that might enthral the reason.‘ 

Such, in our opinion, is the trend of this new movement, called 
Pythagoreanism. But, though it moves further from Dionysus 
towards Apollo, it remains Dionysiac at the root, and keeps 
alive something of the faith first delivered to the saints of mys- 
ticism. Hence, in the analysis to which we now turn, we shall 
try to distinguish what Pythagoreanism preserves from each 


1 Plato, Phaedo, 644: κινδυνεύουσι yap ὅσοι τυγχάνουσιν ὀρθῶς ἁπτόμενοι 
φιλοσοφίας λεληθέναι τοὺς ἄλλους, ὅτι οὐδὲν ἄλλο αὐτοὶ ἐπιτηδεύοισιν ἢ ἀποθνήσκειν 
τε καὶ τεθνάναι. 

2 Not to be confounded with the θεωρία of Ionian science, which char- 
acteristically means curtosty, such as led Hekataeus or Solon to travel about 
the world as spectators of ite marvels. The θεωρία of Pythagoras meant 
especially contemplation of the heavens. Cf. his sermon on the Three Lives, 
Herac]. Pont. ap. Cic. Tse. v. 3; Iambl. Wit. Pyth. 58: eiuxpwéoraroy δὲ 
εἶναι τοῦτον ἀνθρώπου τρόπον, τὸν ἀποδεξάμενον τὴν τῶν καλλίστων θεωρίαν, ὃν καὶ 
προσονομάζειν φιλόσοφον. καλὴν μὲν οὖν εἶναι τὴν τοῦ σύμπαντος οὐρανοῦ θέαν 
καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ φορουμένων ἀστέρων, εἰ τις καθορῴη τὴν τάξιν... Plato, 
though impatient of this star-gazing (Rep. 529 Α), and of those who study 
the ‘ proportion (συμμετρία) of day to mght, and of day and night to month, 
and of month to year, and of the other stars to sun and moon’ (5304), still 
speaks of the philosopher as the ‘ spectator of all tzme.’ 

* For the escape of the soul from the wheel of birth, as Pythagorean 
doctrine, see Rohde, Psyche, 1i. 165. Plato, Theaet. 176a: διὸ καὶ πειρᾶσθαι 
χρὴ ἐνθένδε ἐκεῖσε φεύγειν ὅτι τάχιστα, φυγὴ δὲ ὁμοίωσις θεῷ κατὰ τὸ δύνατον. 

4 Plato’s rejection of the drama and of the orgiastic kinds of music is 
partly motived by a similar condemnation of violent states of non rational 
emotion. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 201 


of the two strata—Dionysiac and Orphic—that lie below it. 

In the actual history of the school, all the elements are, of course, 

present from the outset and blended together ; but, in analysis, 
it is worth while to isolate them, with a view to following out 
their shifting combinations in the systems which derive from 
the Pythagorean tradition. 


109. Pythagoras as Daemon of his School 


Dikaiarchos,! after describing the founding of the community 
at Kroton, says that it is hard to get any @#rtain knowledge of 
what Pythagoras taught his disciples; but his best known 
doctrines were, ‘first, that soul is an immortal thing, and that 
it is transformed into other kinds of living things; further, that 
whatever comes into existence is born again in the revolutions 
of a certain cycle, nothing being absolutely new; and that all 
things that are born with life in them ought to be treated as 
kindred ’ (ὁμογενῆ). 

We have already dwelt at length on the significance of these 
doctrines, of the unity and kinship of all life or soul, and its 
continuous rebirth in periodic revolutions. Later legend told 
how Pythagoras, like Francis of Assisi and the Spanish Car- 
melites, preached to animals; ? and, when we remember that 
Orpheus before him had made the wild things gather to his 
music, there is no reason to doubt the substantial truth of the 
tradition. What specially concerns us is to note that, for any- 
thing Dikaiarchos says, the Master himself, like Heracleitus, 


1 Ap. Porph. Vit. Pyth. 18, 19: πρῶτον μὲν ws ἀθάνατον εἶναί φησι τὴν ψυχήν, 
εἶτα μεταβάλλουσαν εἰς ἄλλα γένη ζῴων, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ὅτι κατὰ περιόδους Twas 
τὰ γενόμενά ποτε πάλιν γίγνεται, νέον δὲ οὐδὲν ἁπλῶς ἐστι, καὶ ὅτι πάντα τὰ 
γινόμενα ἔμψυχα ὁμογενῆ δεῖ νομίζειν. 

* Tambl. Vit. Pyth. xin. ; Porph. Vit. Pyth, 24; G. Cunninghame Graham, 
Santa Teresa (1907), p. 51. Compare also’ the Golden race of the Age of 
Kronos in the Polsticus of Plato (272 8), who ‘have the power to converse not 
only with men but with beasts,’ and use their opportunity eis φιλοσοφίαν, 
‘inquiring from all nature’ (xapd πάσης φύσεως), in case any part of nature 
may have some peculiar faculty, so as to perceive, better than any other, 
what might contribute to the ingathering of wisdom. In the Meno, 810, 
where the Orphic doctrine of palingenesia 1s stated, 1t is the ‘kinship of all 
nature’ (dre τῆς φύσεως ἁπάσης συγγενοῦς οὔσης) that makes it possible for the 
soul, which has learnt all things in the other world, to recover its knowledge 
here by reminiscence (anamnesia). 


202 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


may have held, more closely than his later followers, to the primi- 
tive Dionysiac belief in one all-pervading Soul, the substratum 
of kinship which unites all forms of life into ‘ one clan  (ὁμογενῆ).ἷ 
It seems probable that he dwelt upon this unity, rather than 
upon the inconsistent idea of a plurality of indestructible, atomic 
souls, which always asserts itself in the popular mind as soon 
as the sense of individuality has grown strong enough to insist 
upon a personal immortality. Not that we are convinced that 
Pythagoras himself saw the inconsistency or tried to avoid it ; 
only, the very form which he gave to his community embodied 
the value he set on“unity and his attempt to keep in check the 
self-assertion of individualism. 

To this society men and women were admitted without dis- 
tinction ; they had all possessions in common, and a “ common 
fellowship and mode of life’? In particular, no individual 
member of the school was allowed to claim the credit of any 
discovery he might make. The significance of this rule has not 
been fully understood. It was vulgarly supposed that the 
school must have wished to keep its knowledge to itself as a 
“mysterious ’ doctrine, as if there were any conceivable reason 


1 Sextus Emp. Math. ix. 127: οἱ μὲν οὖν wept τὸν Πυθαγόραν καὶ τὸν 
᾿Εμπεδοκλέα καὶ τῷν ᾿ΙΤαλῶν πλῆθος φασὶ μὴ μόνον ἡμῖν πρὸς ἀλλήλους καὶ πρὸς τοὺς 
θεοὺς εἶναί τινα κοινωνίαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἄλογα τῶν ζῴων. ἕν γὰρ ὑπάρχειν 
πνεῦμα τὸ διὰ παντὸς τοῦ κόσμου διῆκον ψυχῆς τρόπον, τὸ καὶ ἑνοῦν ἡμᾶς πρὸς 
ἐκεῖνα. Tamblichus (Vit. Pyth. 108) well expresses the doctnne in the 
following words: Pythagoras ‘taught them to abstain from things that 
had life (soul) in them (ἐμψύχων) ; for, if they wished to reach the height of 
just behaviour, they must of course do no wrong to any of the living things 
that were their kindred (συγγενῶν ζώιων) How could they induce others to 
behave justly if they themselves were convicted of aggression (πλεονεξία), 
although bound in the participation of kinship (συγγενικῆι μετοχῆι) with 
living things, which are linked to us, as it were, in brotherhood by fellowship 
(κοινωνίαν) in the same life and elements and the same mixture composed 
of them.’ If Aristoxenus (see Burnet, ¥.G.P.?, p. 102) 1s right in stating 
that Pythagoras only prohibited, among animals, the ploughing ox and the 
ram, he probably did so because the ram stood for the male fertilusing 
principle of animal life, and the ox which ploughs the earth for the same 
principle in vegetation, which springs from the ploughed earth. The two 
animals would be symbols of all life. Compare the doubtful fragment of 
Empedocles 154} (D.F. V.*) which says that the first miserable men who ate 
flesh βοῶν ἐπάσαντ᾽ ἀροτήρων. 

2 κοινὴ συνουσία καὶ δίαιτα, Iambl. Vit. Pyth. 246. Το admission of women 
was ‘Dionysiac’ (the Maenads) rather than Orphic. Orphism was anti- 
feminine. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 203 


for hiding a theorem in geometry or harmonics. The truth 
comes out in the story of Hippasos of Metapontion, who ‘ was of 
the Pythagoreans, but, because he published a treatise on the 
sphere of the twelve pentagons, was cast away at sea, as having 
committed an impiety and taken glory to himself for his dis- 
covery, whereas all discoveries belonged to “ Him ” (éxe/vou τοῦ 
ἀνδρός), for so they call Pythagoras. They say that a super- 
natural vengeance overtook (τὸ δαιμόνιον νεμεσῆσαι) those 
who published what belonged to Pythagoras.’! This super- 
natural or daemonic anger was the wrath of Pythagoras himself, 
who after his death remained what he had been in life—the 
daemon in whom all the life of his church was centred and 
incarnated. That Pythagoras worked miracles and was con- 
scious of supernatural power, there is no reason whatever to 
doubt; he was probably the author of the doctrine: ‘There 
are Gods, and men, and beings like Pythagoras —beings who 
are half-divine, daemons in human shape.? What is to be 
gathered from the story of Hippasos is that the pious Pytha- 
goreans believed that the Master’s spirit dwelt continually 
within his church, and was the source of all its inspiration.? The 
impiety lay, not in divulging a discovery in mathematics, but 
in claiming to have invented what could only have come from 
* Him.’ 

Thus Pythagoras seems to have held to the conception of a 
group-soul, incarnate in himself, but living on after his death 
as the Logos of his disciples. Heracleides, who preserves the 
famous story of his previous incarnations, reports him as saying 
that Hermes had offered him anything he wished for, except 
deathlessness (athanasia) ; and that he chose to preserve, through 
life and death, the memory of what happened to him. The 
legend may enshrine the truth that the ‘immortality ’ Pytha- 
goras desired and claimed was not the deathless continuation 

1 Tambl. Vit. Pyth. 88= D.F.V.? s. tit. ‘ Hippasos,’ 4. 

4 D.F.V.*, p. 24. Cf. the Introd. to the Hindu Tales of Somadeva: ‘The 
Gods have perpetual happiness, men are in constant unhappiness ; the actions 
of those who are between men and Gods are, by the diversity of their lot, 
agreeable, Therefore I will recount to you the life of the Vidyddhéras,’ 
ἴ.6. demons and magicians (Kdtha-Sdra-Sdrit-Sagara, 1. i. 47). 

3 Cf. Procl. in Hud. i. p, 419: ἔστι μὲν ἀρχαῖα, φασὶν οἱ περὶ τὸν Εὔδημον, 


kal τῆς τῶν Πυθαγορείων Μούσης εὑρήματα. 
4 Heracl. Pont. ap. Diog. vini. 4 (2. Κ. Κ.3, p. 24). 


204 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of individual personality, but the older Dionysiac continuity 
of the one life that is born again im every generation of the 
group.! But, as usual, his followers could not be content to live 
in communion with a spirit of like passions with themselves, 
but must needs exalt their daemon to the highest grade of 
divinity. Pythagoras soon becomes the son of Apollo by a 
virgin birth,? and even an incarnate God, Apollo Hyberoreios 
himself? But, through all the overgrowth of decadent super- 
stition in the later legend, enough remains of the older faith 
to warrant us in refusing to attnbute these ingid inventions 
to the Master himself. Apotheosis and athanasia are precisely 
the fatal steps in the career of a “ being like Pythagoras,’ because 
they put an end to the reality of that communion in which 
the originators of such churches find the very meaning of the 
common life. 

If our view, then, be correct, the society of Pythagoras, so 
long as the influence of his own ideal survived, realised once 
more the primitive type of religious group, and that peculiar 
relation, best called ‘ participation ’ (metheais), m which such 
a group stands to its immanent collective soul. The passage 
from the divine plane to the human, and from the human to 
the divine, remains permeable, and 1s perpetually traversed. 
The One can go out into the manv; the many can lose them- 
selves in reunion with the One. This essential conception is 
the key to the understanding of the number doctrine, on which 
rests Pythagoras’ claim to be a philosopher, as well as a founder 
of mathematics. 


110. The Tetractys ἢ 


The misguided followers who reckoned Pythagoras among 
the Gods, were accustomed, Porphyry tells 8,5 to swear by 


1 It will be remembered how Diotima in Plato’s Symposium (207 Ὁ) 
explains this immortality of perpetual renewal Plato, too, thought of his 
logot as living on in the souls of his school and peipetually giving birth to 
new thoughts im each generation that arose and passed away. 

? His mother 1s called Parthenis, in legend. See Ensler, Weltenmantel, 11. 
p. 679 ff ; W. Schultz, Altronsche Mystik, p. 97 

8 Arist. frag. 186; Porph. Vet. Pyth. 20: μετὰ τῶν θεῶν τὸν Πυθαγόραν 
κατηρίθμουν. 

4 For the tetractys see W. Schultz, ATTOZ, Memnon, 1910; ΕἸ ΒΙΘΓ, 
Weltenmantel, 11. Ὁ, 684. 5 Vat. Pyth. 20. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 205 


him, as the God who had left with them a symbol applicable to 
the solution of many problems in nature—the tetractys. 

‘ The so-called Pythagoreans,’ says Aristotle,’ ‘ attached them- 
selves to the mathematics, and were the first to advance that 
science by their education, in which they were led to suppose 
that the principles of mathematics are the principles of all 
things. So, as numbers are logically first among these prin- 
ciples, and they fancied they could perceive in numbers many 
analogies of what is and what comes into being, much more 
readily than in fire and earth and water... and since they 
further observed that the properties and determining ratios of 
harmonies depend on numbers—since, in fact, everything else 
manifestly appeared to be modelled in its entire character 
(φύσιν) on numbers, and numbers to be the ultimate things in 
the whole universe, they became convinced that the elements 
of numbers are the elements of everything, and that the whole 
“ Heaven” is harmony and number.’ Aristotle adds that the 
decad was held to be perfect, and to embrace the whole ‘ nature ’ 
of number. We may therefore look for the ‘nature’ of all 
things in the decad,as expressed in the symbol called the tetractys, 
which, we have every reason to believe, goes back to Pythagoras 
himself. 

The original tetractys appears to have been the ΄ tetractys of 
the decad,’ obtained by the addition, 1+2+38+44=10: 


‘This tetractys, says Theon of Smyrna,® “is of great im- 
portance in music, because all the consonances are to be found 


1 Met. a5, trans, A. E. Taylor. 

2 Met. a5, 98θα : ἐπειδὴ τέλειον ἡ δεκὰς εἶναι δοκεῖ καὶ πᾶσαν περιειληφέναι τὴν 
τῶν ἀριθμῶν φύσιν. Cf. Philolaus, frag. 11: θεωρεῖν δεῖ τὰ ἔργα καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν 
τῷ ἀριθμῶ καττὰν δύναμιν ἅτις ἐστὶν ἐν τᾷ δεκάδι' μεγάλα γὰρ καὶ παντελὴς καὶ 
παντύεργος καὶ θείω καὶ οὐρανίω βίω καὶ ἀνθρωπίνω ἀρχὰ καὶ ἁγεμὼν κοινωνοῦσα, 
Lévy-Bruhl (Fonct. ment. p. 237) has an interesting discussion of the 
mystic properties of numbers. He remarks that the numbers so enveloped 
with a mystical atmosphere rarely go above 10. The higher numbers have 
not, together with their names, passed into collective representations, but 
have generally been mere arithmetical numbers from the first. 

5 περὶ τετρακτύος, p. 154, Dupuis (1892). 


206 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


contained in it. But it is not only on this account that it has 
been held in the highest honour by all Pythagoreans ; but also 
because it is held to contain the nature of the universe. Hence 
it was an oath by which they swore : 

‘By him who gave to our soul the tetractys, which hath the 
fountain and root of ever-springing “ nature ” (physis).’ 1 

Theon proceeds to enumerate other forms of the ¢etractys. 
The second is that used by Plato in the Timaeus to symbolise 
the harmonic constitution of the world-soul : 


8 27 


These two tetractyes ‘contain the musical, geometrical, and 
arithmetical ratios, of which the harmony of the whole universe 
is composed.’ 

The later Pythagoreans delighted in using this symbol as 
the master-key to the interpretation of the world. The third 
tetractys is point, line, surface, solid ; the fourth is fire, air, water, 
earth ; the fifth is pyramid, octahedron, eikosahedron, cube ; 
the sixth is ‘ of things that grow’ (τῶν φυομένων) : the seed, 
growth into length, into width, into height; 2 the seventh is 
that of societies: the individual, the family, the village, the 


ὶ οὐ μὰ τὸν ἁμετέρᾳ ψυχᾷ (γενέᾳ, al.) παραδόντα τετρακτύν, 
παγὰν ἀενάον φύσιος ῥίζξωμά τ᾽ ἔχουσαν. 


Diels, Arch. f. Gesch. d. Phil. ini. 457, conjectures that these lines were 
the opening of the poem often cited as the ‘Iepds Λόγος or Περὶ θεῶν, in which, 
according to Theol, Arith. p. 17, the might of the number 4 was celebrated, 
and Metaphysics eonnected with it. 

Cf. Payne, History of the New World, 1i. 283, 410: ‘Nauh-, the Mexican 
particle for this number (4), in the abstract form ‘‘ Nahui” probably embodies 
some conception analogous to “ Nahua,” the Command or Rule of Life, and 
suggesting wholeness, perfection, or indefeasibility; these austere and 
orderly barbarians recall the Pythagorean philosophers, who held the 
number 4 to be the root or source of all things.’ Nahuatlaci is a general 
name used by the Mexicans to denote ‘tribes living mainly by agriculture 
in accordance with a settled Nahua or Rule of Life, dictated by a custom 
administered by hereditary chiefs.’ 

* Note this as the primitive form of the three ‘dimensions’ (atta, 
‘ growths’). 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 207 


state; the eighth is the four cognitive faculties: reason, know- 
ledge, opinion, sense ; the ninth is the rational, spirited, and 
appetitive parts of soul, and the body; the tenth is spring, 
summer, autumn, winter—the seasons by which all things come 
into being; the eleventh is the four ages of man: infancy, 
youth, manhood, old age. 

‘The cosmos composed of these éetractyes is geometrically, 
harmonically, and arithmetically adjusted, potentially contain- 
ing every nature of number, and every magnitude and every 
body, whether simple or composite. It is perfect because all 
things are parts of it, and itself is not ἃ part of anything. That 
is the reason why the Pythagoreans swore by it, and said “all 
things are like number.” ’ 

The details of some of these interpretations of the fetractys are, 
of course, late; they are expressed partly in Platonic terms.” 
But they are in a line with the earliest traditions of Pytha- 
goreanism, and are typical of the whole tendency of the school. 
They satisfy the mystic’s passion for unity, his desire to find 
the meaning and nature of the whole in every part. 


111, The Procession of Numbers 


The real significance of the tetractys comes out in the second 
line of the Oath, which describes it as ‘ containing the fountain 
and root of ever-springing nature (physis).’ No words could 
better express what we take to be the genuine Pythagorean 
conception of the process by which the One goes out into the 
manifold world. The éeéractys is not only a symbol of static 
relations linking the various parts of the cosmos; it contains 
also the cosmogonical movement of life, evolving out of primal 
unity the harmonised structure of the whole. It is a fountain 
of ever-flowing life. 

The tetractys of the decad is a numerical series, the sum of 
which is the perfect number, ten, which we are told that Pytha- 
goras regarded as ‘the nature of number, because all men, 


1 Arist. de Anim. a2, 4046 21. 

3 Cf. Arist. de Anim. a2, 404018. ‘It was explained in (Plato’s) lectures on 
philosophy that tho self-animal (universe) is composed of the form of One, 
and the first length (Two), breadth (Three), and depth (Four),’ etc. 


208 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


whether Hellenes or not, count up to ten, and, when they reach 
it, revert again to unity.’ The word ‘revert’ (ἀναποδοω) 
recalls the fragment, already quoted, of the Pythagorean Hippo- 
damus, which tells us that this reversion is to be conceived as the 
revolution of a wheel. ‘ All mortal things under constraint of 
Nature revolve in a wheel of changes. . . . When they are born 
they grow, and when grown they reach their height, and after 
that they grow old, and at last perish. At one time, Nature 
causes them to come to their goal in her region of darkness, and 
then back again out of the darkness they come round into 
mortal form, by alternation of birth and repayment of death, in 
the cycle wherein Nature reverts upon herself’ (ἀναποδιζούσας).3 

We have seen that the whole nature of things, all the essential 
properties of physis, were believed by the Pythagoreans to be 
contained in the fefractys of the decad; and it now appears 
that, just as we should expect, this ‘fountain of ever-flowing 
nature’ contains the periodic movement of life, evolving out 
of unity and reverting to unity again, in the recurrent revolution 
of a wheel of birth. It embodies the fundamental Dionysiac 
representation of palingenesia. 

But there is something more in it than this. Pythagoras 
inherited the music of Orpheus, as well as the reincarnation 
doctrine of Dionysus. From the Orphics he inherited also the 
doctrine of the fall of the soul from its first perfect state of 
union with the divine, its degradation into the darkness of this 
life and of the underworld, and its final restoration to peace 
and unity. Now, on the model of this doctrine of the fall of 
the soul, the Pythagorean philosophy must hold that all exist- 
ence proceeds out of the One and returns to it again; and 
that the One alone is perfect, while the manifold world of visible 
body is a turbid medium of appearance, in which the one truth 
is half-revealed and half-concealed, as the divine soul is manifest 
in the flesh and yet obscured by it and degraded. 

There is thus, inherent in the representation handed down 

1 Aetius, 1.3. 8: εἶναι δὲ τὴν φύσιν τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ δέκα" μέχρι γὰρ τῶν δέκα 
πάντες Ἕλληνες, πάντες βάρβαροι ἀριθμοῦσιν, ἐφ' ἃ ἐλθόντες πάλιν ἀναποδοῦσιν 
ἐπὶ τὴν μονάδα. Professor Burnet (Κ᾽. Ο.}.3, p. 114) thinks we are probably 
justified in referring this to Pythagoras himself. For προποδισμός (‘ proces- 


sion’), the opposite of ἀνατοδισμός, see below, p. 209, note 1. 
3 Hippodamus, ap. βίου. Flor. 98, 71, see above, p. 167, note 1, 


THE MYSTICAL TKADITIUN Lun 


from Orphism to Pythagoras, not only the primitive wheel of 
birth, but another aspect of the movement of life, which is best 
described as a processional movement (προποδισμός) out of unity 
into plurality, out of light into darkness.1 This movement, also, 
must be revealed in the nature of numbers, and contained in the 
tetractys. Pythagoras found it in the procession of numerical 
series, the study of which he originated, thereby founding the 
science of number. It is practically certain, also, that in music 
he discovered the ratios of the octave, the fifth, and the fourth, 
contained in the harmonic proportion 12:8:6.2 Now a pro- 
gression like those contained in the tetractys of Plato’s world- 
soul (p. 206)—the series, 1:2:4:8, 1:3:9:27—is what the 
Pythagoreans called an harmonia ; it is a continuous entity knit 
together by a principle of unity running through it, namely the 
logos or ratio (4 or 4) which links every term to its predecessor 
by the same bond.’ Both series, moreover, radiate from the One, 
which in Pythagorean arithmetic was not itself a number, but 
the source in which the whole nature of all numbers was gathered 
up and implicit. When we note, further, that every number is 
not only a many, but also one number, we can see how Pytha- 
goras would find the whole movement of cosmic evolution con- 
tained in the procession of series, in which the One passes out of 
itself into a manifold, yet without losing all its unity, and a 
return from the many to the One is secured by that bond of 
proportion which runs, backwards and forwards, through the 
whole series and links it into a ‘harmony.’ It is thus that we 
must understand the doctrine that ‘the whole Heaven is har- 
mony and number.’ The processional movement of physts is 
modelled upon that of soul, which falls from its first state of 
union with the divine, but yet remains linked to the One life 


1 Theon Smyrn. p. 29 (Dupuis) : ἀριθμός ἐστι σύστημα μονάδων (the atomic 
view discussed below, p. 212) ἢ προποδισμὸς πλήθους ἀπὸ μονάδος ἀρχόμενος καὶ 
ἀναποδισμὸς εἰς μονάδα καταλήγων. 

2 See Burnet, 5. 6.}.3. p. 118. 

3. Actius, i. 3. 8: Πυθαγόρας... ἀρχὰς τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς καὶ τὰς συμμετρίας ras 
ἐν τούτοις, ἃς καὶ ἁρμονίας καλεῖ. Compare the Jogos of Heracleitus, as con- 
stancy of ‘measures’ preserved throughout transformation, above, p. 188. 
Plato, Jim. 310, on the ‘ bond ' of proportion : δεσμῶν δὲ κάλλιστος ὃς ἂν αὑτόν 
τε καὶ τὰ σνυνδούμενα ὅτι μάλιστα ἕν ποιῇ" τοῦτο δὲ πέφυκεν ἀναλογία κάλλιστα 
ἀποτελεῖν. 


O 


210 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


by mysterious bonds of harmony, and can return to it again, 
purified by music.’ 

Indiscussing the segregation of opposites and its possible origin, 
as reflecting the exogamous segmentation of the undifferentiated 
human herd, we have already pointed out that the Pythagorean 
One, or Monad, splits into two principles, male and female, the 
Even and the Odd, which are the elements of all numbers and 
so of the universe.2 The analogy reminds us that the One is 
not simply a numerical unit, which gives rise to other numbers 
by a process of addition. That conception belongs to the later 
atomistic number-doctrine, presently to be considered.* In 
the earlier Pythagoreanism, we must think of the One (which is 
not itself a number at all) as analogous to Anaximander’s 
ἄπειρον. It is the primary, undifferentiated group-soul, or 
physts, of the universe, and numbers must arise from it by a 
process of differentiation or ‘separating out’ (ἀπόκρισις). 
Similarly, each of these numbers is not a collection of units, 
built up by addition, but itself a sort of minor group-soul—a 
distinct ‘nature,’ with various mystical properties. In the 
same way, it 18 by dividing up the whole interval of the octave 
that the harmonic proportions are determined.* 


1 See Theon Smyrn p 18 ff. (Dupuis) for philosophy as purification and 
initiation; Procl. MéMooa, Ance. Grr. et Lat. ii. p. 25: ἡ μέν ye pupids, aris 
ἐστὶν ἁρμονία κρείττων, ἐκ τῆς τριωδουμένης γενομένη μονάδος ἐπιστραφείσης εἰς 
ἑαυτήν (i.e. 100x100), ἀποκαταστατική τίς ἐστι καὶ τελεσιουργὸς τῆς ψυχῆς, 
ἐπανάγουσα πεσοῦσαν εἰς τὴν οἴκησιν πάλιν ὅθεν ἥκει δεῦρο, καθάπερ φησὶν ὁ ἐν 
Φαίδρῳ Σωκράτης. The reference is to Phaedrus, 248 5, εἰς μὲν γὰρ τὸ αὐτὸ 
ὅθεν ἥκει ἡ ψυχὴ ἑκάστη οὐκ ἀφικνεῖται ἐτῶν μυρίων, and, since this agrees with 
Empedocles’ doctrine that the fallen soul 18 exiled for 30,000 ὧραι = [0,000 
years (sce below, ἢ. 228), it 18 probable that Proclus’ connection of the 
return of the soul with the return to the monad is of old Pythagorean 
origin, as indeed the character of the doctrine would lead us to expect. 

4 Above, p. 70. Also Theon Smyrn. p. 34 (Dupuis): ᾿Αριστοτέλης ἐν τῷ 
Πνυθαγορικῷ τὸ ἕν φησιν ἀμφοτέρων (ἀρτίου καὶ weplrrov) μετέχειν τῆς φύσεως. 

3 The methods of Eurytos described by Burnet (£ G./’.?, p 110) belong, 
as he points out, to the fourth century. By that time the atomistic doctrine 
was developed. 

4 Cf. the division of the soul in Plato’s 7'smaeus, 358, and the distribution 
of the whole mass of aoul-substance, first into a number of portions, one for 
each star, and secondly into individual souls (1bsd. 41 v). 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 211 


112, Pythagorean Ethies 


The Pythagorean conception of goodness (ἀρετή), including 
both moral virtue and the physical excellences of health and 
strength, is based entirely on the notion of ‘ arrangement’ 
(τάξις) and ‘ order’ (cosmos). The best expression of it is to 
be found in Plato’s Gorgias. Socrates there argues that the 
good artist will not work at random, but always with reference 
to an ideal or pattern. Guided by this model, he will put his 
material into a certain arrangement, making one part suitable 
and fitting to another, until he has marshalled the whole into 
‘an arranged and ordered thing.'! Trainers of the body and 
physicians order and systematise the body (κοσμοῦσι τὸ σῶμα 
καὶ συντάττουσι), and this cosmos is health and strength. The 
similar cosmos that is introduced into the soul, is Law, which 
makes men law-abiding and orderly; and this is Justice and 
Temperance.” The source from which this conception is de- 
rived is acknowledged later, where Socrates says that ‘the wise 
say that heaven and earth and Gods and men are held together 
by fellowship, and friendship, and orderliness, and Temperance, 
and Justice, and, for that reason, call this universe Cosmos.’ 
Their knowledge of geometry has taught them the great power, 
among Gods and men, of Proportion; whereas the ignorant 
believe in grasping more than one's due share.® 


1 Gory. 503: εἰς τάξιν τινὰ ἕκαστος τιθησιν ὃ ἂν τιθῃ, καὶ προσαναγκάζει τὸ 
ἕτερον τῷ ἑτέρῳ πρέπον τε εἶναι καὶ ἁρμόττειν, éws ἂν τὸ ἅπαν συστήσηται τε- 
ταγμένον τε καὶ κεκοσμημένον πρᾶγμα. Tambl. J’. P. 182, after Aristoxenus 
(D.F.V.?, p. 284). συμπαρέπεσθαι τῇ τοῦ καιροῦ φύσει τήν τε ὀνομαζομένην ὥραν 
καὶ τὸ πρέπον καὶ τὸ ἅρμοττον. 

2604p: ταῖς δὲ τῆς ψυχῆς τάξισι καὶ κοσμήσεσι νόμιμον καὶ νόμος, ὅθεν καὶ 
γόμιμοι γίγνονται καὶ κόσμιοι" ταῦτα δ᾽ ἐστι δικαιοσύνη τε καὶ σωφροσύνη. Cf. 
Rep. 432a, where Temperance is the concord (ἁρμονία), compared to the 
harmony of the octave (δι᾿ ὅλης ἀτεχνῶς τέταται, διὰ πασῶν παρεχομένη συνάδον- 
Tas), an ὁμόνοια, συμφωνία. See also Phaedo, 93, for virtue as λαγηιοπια. 

δ 807: φασὶ δ᾽ οἱ σοφοὶ (Pythagoreans and Empedocles, Olympiod.) καὶ 
οὐρανὸν καὶ γῆν καὶ θεοὺς καὶ ἀνθρώπους τὴν κοινωνίαν σινέχειν καὶ φιλίαν καὶ 
κοσμιότητα καὶ σωφρυσύνην καὶ δικαιότητα, καὶ τὸ ὅλον τοῦτο διὰ ταῦτα κόσμον 
καλοῦσιν. .. λέληθέ σε ὅτι ἢ ἰσότης ἢ γεωμετρικὴ καὶ ἐν θεοῖς καὶ ἐν ἀνθρώ- 
wos μέγα δύναται" σὺ δὲ πλεονεξίαν οἴει δεῖν ἀσκεῖν' γεωμετρίας γὰρ ἀμελεῖς. 
Plutarch, Symp. Q. viii. 2. 2, says that this principle of proportion is called 
Δίκη and Νέμεσις (Aristotle's ‘distributive justice,’ Δ... v. 3. 13). Alex. in 
Arist. Met. a5, 9856 26. τῆς μὲν γὰρ δικαιοσύνης ἴδιον ὑπολαμβάνοντες εἶναι τὸ 
ἀντιπεπονθός τε καὶ ἴσον (οἱ Πυθαγόρειοι), ἐν τοῖς ἀριθμοῖς τοῦτο εὑρίσκοντες ἔν, 


212 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


113. Pythagorean Science 


The earliest ‘science’ of the Pythagoreans is simply a tran- 
script of the procession of numbers into terms of space and 
space-filling matter ; or, rather, we should say that they were 
at first unable to conceive number and its behaviour except 
under the forms of space and motion, and hence did not 
distinguish at all between the procession of numbers out of 
the Monad and the process which generates the visible world 
in space. This process presented itself in the only possible 
way—as the progressive conquest of a formless and unlimited 
field (χώρα) of darkness (the dark and cold air) by the light 
and warmth radiating from a central nuclear unit.1_ We may 
note, by the way, that this led to the displacement of earth 
from the central position in the universe, which must be 
occupied by the nuclear Fire, Hestia. The first great step away 
from geocentric astronomy was thus due to the bold acceptance 
of the consequences of an a prior: theory, which simply restated 
a purely mythical representation. Its importance for us is the 
way it illustrates once more the truth of our hypothesis, that 
the nature and behaviour of physis reproduce mythical and 
religious beliefs about the nature and behaviour of Soul. 


114. Number Atomism 


Guided by the same hypothesis, we can predict the final stage 
of Pythagorean science. It will inevitably reproduce the later 
and inconsistent conception of the atomic, indestructible, in- 
dividual soul. This, as we saw, was already present in Orphic 
religion, fallen from its first Dionysiac faith in the one continuous 
life in all things, towards the Olympian conception of athanasia. 
The later Pythagoreans of the fifth century ‘ construct the whole 
world out of numbers, but they suppose the units to have magni- 
tude. As to how the first unit with magnitude arose, they 


διὰ τοῦτο καὶ τὸν ἴσακις ἴσον ἀριθμόν (either 4 or 9) πρῶτον ἔλεγον εἶναι δικαιο- 

σύνην. The mathematical education in Rep. vii. (630 Α) culminates in the 

conceptions of συμφωνία in harmonics and συμμετρία in astronomy, and these 

provide a bridge to dialectics and the study of beauty and goodness (531 c). 
1 See Burnet, H.0.P.%, p. 120. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 213 


appear to be at a loss.’! They might well be at a loss, because 
they could not realise that this physical doctrine was nothing 
but a reflection of the belief in a plurality of immortal souls, 
which contradicted their older faith that Soul was a Harmony 
—a bond linking all things in one.? This Soul had formerly been 
the One God manifest in the logos ; now it is broken up into ἃ 
multitude of individual atoms, each claiming an immortal and 
separate persistence. And the material world suffers a corre- 
sponding change. In place of the doctrine of procession from the 
Monad, bodies are built up out of numbers, now conceived as 
collections of ultimate units, having position and magnitude. 
Thus, Pythagoreanism is led on from a temporal monism to a 
spatial pluralism—a doctrine of number-atoms hardly distin- 
guishable from the atoms of Leukippus and Democritus, who, 
as Aristotle says,? like these Pythagoreans, ‘in a sense make 
all things to be numbers and to consist of numbers.’ But the 
development of this number-atomism was predestined by 
religious representations of the nature of soul older than Pytha- 
goreanism itself, and already contained in the blend of Dionysiac 
and Olympian conceptions inherited by Pythagoras from 
Orphism. 


The tendency which impelled Pythagorean science towards a 
materialistic atomism is only the recoil of that same tendency 
which exalted Pythagoras, from his position as the indwelling 
daemon of his church, to the distant heaven of the immortals. 
It is the tendency to dualism. When God ceases to be the 
immanent Soul of the world, living and dying in its ceaseless 
round of change, and ascends to the region of immutable per- 


' Arist. Met. 16, 10800 18 ff. Sce Burnet, E.G. P.*, p. 336 ff. 

® Barnet (#.C.P.*, p. 343) says that the view that the soul is a harmony 
cannot have belonged to the earliest form of Pythagoreanism, ‘for, as shown 
in Plato’s Phaedo, it is quite inconsistent with the idea that the soul can 
exist independent'y of the body.’ The inference would hold, if it were 
impossible for religious, or even philosophic, representation to be inconsis- 
tent. I doubt, however, if it is even inconsistent ; see below on Empedocles’ 
logos-soul, p. 235. The doctrine that the soul is a harmony is attributed 
to Pythagoras by Macrobius, Somn. Scip. i. 14, 19. Cf. Rohde, Peyche’, ii. 
169. 

* De Caelo, 74, 303a 8. Cf. de Ansm. a5, 409) 7, on the monads of 
Xenocrates and their likeness to atoms. 


214 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


fection, it is because man has acquired a soul of his own, a little 
indestructible atom of immortality, a self-subsistent individual. 
‘Nature’ likewise loses her unity, continuity, and indwelling 
life, and is remodelled as an aggregate of little indestructible 
atoms of matter. But note the consequence: she, too, 18 now 
self-subsistent. The world of matter becomes the undisputed 
dominion of Destiny, or Chance, or Necessity—of Movra, Lachesis, 
Ananke. There is no place in it for the God who has vanished 
beyond the stars. We shall watch, in the sequel, the mystic 
philosophers, who cannot dispense with God, exhausting their 
Ingenuity in devices to get him back into touch with Nature, to 
restore to him the ratson d’étre which he lost from the moment 
that he ceased to animate the world from within, to be the 
“nature of things’ itself. All such attempts seem now to us 
like efforts to draw down Apollo from the skies, and change him 
back into Dionysus ; or, if that is impossible, to find a mediator 
between God and Nature, some daemonic power, half-natural, 
half-divine, an Eros who will fill up the chasm, and bind all 
things again into one. But the time for these efforts is not yet. 
We have first to consider two systems that emerged from the 
Pythagorean tradition, before that tradition went all the way 
to join hands with scientific Atomism, and so became fatally 
Olympianised. These are the systems of Parmenides and 


Empedocles, 
115. PARMENIDES 


Parmenides wrote what he had to say ‘ about the Nature of 
Things’ (περὶ φύσεως) in hexameter verse, which combines a 
certain oracular dignity and earnestness with the closely knit 
sequence of logical argument. He is the first philosopher, so far 
as we know, who cast his theory of Nature into the form of a 
deduction, in this respect justifying the historians who throw 
him into the sharpest contrast with the cryptic and interjectional 
Heracleitus. But it is characteristic of him, too, that his theory 
is stated as a revelation, accorded to him by the Goddess who 
governs all things in person. Certain features of the proem 
call for our attention. 

Like Orpheus, Parmenides seeks wisdom by a descent, through 
the western gate of the sunset, into the darkness of the under- 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 215 


world.! He travels thither on the chariot of the Sun, attended 
by the sun-maidens. In the nether darkness he remains with 
the Goddess Dike, after she has opened the gates of sunrise for 
the chariot to pass up again to the region of light. She tells 
him, in words which now have for us a new significance, that 
he has been ‘conducted on his journey, not by an evil Mora 

(for the way lies far apart from the path which mankind tread), 

but by Themis and Dike.’ The Goddess tells him that he must 

learn ‘both the unshaken heart of rounded Truth, and the 

opinions of mortals, in which there is no true belief.’2 Accord- 

ingly, the poem is divided into two parts—the Way of Truth and 

the Way of Opinion. These are ‘the only two ways of search 

that can be thought of’ (frag. 4). The one is a ‘ much disputed 

proof,’ which Parmenides is told to judge by reasoning (λόγῳ) ; 

the other is at the mercy of the senses, “ the objectless eye, the 

droning ear, and the tongue’ (which fashions ‘ names’ without 
meaning). From this second path he is warned to turn away his 
thought, and not to let ‘ custom force him’ along its misleading 
track.? 


The Way of Truth is excellently described as a proof which 
must be judged by reasoning, in abstraction from, and in de- 
fiance of, the witness of the senses.1_ The nature of things is a 


1 Parmenides’ journcy 1s generally regarded as a Heaven Journey ; see 
Diels, Parmenides Lehryedicht ; but O. Guibert, Arch. f. @esch. d. Philos. 
xx. p 90 ff, has argued that it 1s a journey to the Underworld. See, 
however, below, note 3 on p. 222. Epimenides, during his initiatory sleep 
in the Dictaean Cave, communed with Alethera and Dike, Max. Tyr. p. 286 
(D.F.V.3, nu. 494) In the Ps.-Platome Axsochus (3718) the πέδιον ᾿Αληθείας 
is in the Underworld. 

* Frag. 1. 28: χρεὼ δέ σε πάντα πύθεσθαι 

ἠμὲν ᾿Αληθείης εὐκυκλέος ἀτρεμὲς ἦτορ 
ἠδὲ βροτῶν δόξας, ταῖς ova ἔνι πίστις ἀληθής. 

5 Frag. 1. 33: ἀλλὰ σὺ τῆσδ' ἀφ᾽ ὁδοῦ διζήσιος εἶργε νόημα 

μηδέ σ᾽ ἔθος πολύπειρον ὁδὸν κατὰ τήνδε βιάσθω, 
νωμῶν ἄσκοπον ὄμμα καὶ ἠχήεσσαν ἀκοι ἦν 

καὶ γλῶσσαν, κρῖναι δὲ λόγῳ πολύδηριν ἔλεγχον 
ἐξ ἐμέθεν ῥηθέντα. 

I interpret ἄσκοπον as meaning ‘having no (real) object,’ guided by 
Parmenides’ identification of the object of thought with ‘that for the sake 
of which the thought exists’ (frag. 8. 34). He does not distinguish ‘ object’ 
from ‘aim’ or ‘ mark.’ 

4 Cf. Arist. de Gen. εἰ Corr. 325 a 13 (of the Eleatics): ὑπερβάντες τὴν 
αἴσθησιν καὶ παριδόντες αὐτὴν, ws τῷ λόγῳ δέον ἀκολουθεῖν. 


216 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


rounded sphere of logical consistency, which threatens to leave 
the world as known to the senses an inexplicable tissue of 


delusion. 
116. The Way of Truth 


In the Thing which is (τὸ ἐόν), as Parmenides called it, we 
recognise, transparently enough, the primitive datum of philo- 
sophy—physis conceived as a material continuum, and, above 
all, as divine. The ancients recognised the parent of Hleaticism 
in Xenophanes,! who ‘looked at the whole sky and declared 
that the One is, namely God’; and this view expresses the 
truth that Parmenides’ ultimate premisses are: that God alone 
is, and that he is One. It is from the divinity of physis that 
his system is deduced. What he does is to argue, with his un- 
relenting logic, that the attributes of unity, perfect continuity, 
and divinity (now construed in the Olympian sense of deathless 
immutability) exclude and negate plurality, discontinuity, and 
the changing movement of life. The system of Heracleitus, 
Tonian science, and the earlier forms of Pythagoreanism, all 
in their various ways attempted to combine the two sets of 
predicates, and to get the One to evolve somehow into the many. 
Parmenides declares that no such evolution is possible. His 
cosmology faces, and accepts as unanswerable, an objection that 
besets pantheism, and some other theisms, in all ages. If God 
is one and perfect in himself, why should he ever leave that 
state and go forth into unreality and imperfection? Yet, if 
he does not do so, he ceases to be the pervasive life and moving 
soul of the world ; he crystallises into a being that cannot be- 
come, or move, or change; and, since life is change, he is lifeless 
—a complete, immovable, continuous, homogeneous substance, 
unbegotten and imperishable. Necessity in all her formas, 
moral, physical, fatal (and, we must now add, logical), deprives 
him of the creative force of life. ‘ Dike does not loose her 
fetters and let anything come into being or pass away, but holds 
it fast.’? ‘Mastering Ananke holds it in the bonds of the 


1 See above, p. 177. 

3 Parm. frag. 8. 13: οὔτε γενέσθαι 
οὔτ᾽ ὄλλυσθαι ἀνῆκε Δίκη χαλάσασα πέδηισιν 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔχει. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 217 


limit that fences it on every side.’ ‘ Moira has fettered it so 
as to be whole and immovable.’? Thus all the original life of 
the ultimate physis is frozen out of it; the World Egg is har- 
dened to adamant, and cannot hatch. That it should become 
and perish, both be and not be, change its place, or vary its 
colour—all these are mere ‘names,’ which mortals have agreed 
to use, believing them to be true. Thus, Parmenides absolutely 
rejects the Heracleitean harmony of opposites. 

The One Being of Parmenides’ vision is the Monad of the 
Pythagoreans, but it is no longer a ‘fountain of ever-flowing 
nature.’ The whole doctrine of the procession of numbers out 
of the One is shorn away, because that One can no longer contain 
within itself the principle of the manifold ; since it is absolutely 
and strictly One, the opposites and the many are not implicit 
within its nature, and therefore cannot come out of it. It is 
also the ‘ Limitless’ of Anaximander; but Movra, instead of 
portioning it out into provinces, has now ‘ fettered it so as to be 
whole.’ There can be no division or ‘ separating out’ (ἀπόκρισις) 
of opposites or elements. ‘Thou canst not cut off what 15 from 
holding fast to what 1s, neither scattering itself abroad in an 
order (cosmos) nor coming together.’* Aristotle® called Par- 
menides an “ unphysicist ᾿ (ἀφυσικός), because he did away with 
the principle of motion, which is physis. 

The disappearance of the doctrine of the procession of numbers 
out of the One, which is cut off at one blow of Parmenides’ lopic, 
has disguised from critics, ancient and modern, the fact that 
the Way of Truth starts from Pythagoreanism; but the Pytha- 
gorean character of the Way of Opinion is recognised. In con- 
sidering this second way of search, we will put aside for the 


1 Fray, 8. 30: κρατερὴ γὰρ ᾿Ανάγκη 
πείρατος ἐν δεσμοῖσιν ἔχει, τό μιν ἀμφὶς ἐέργει. 
© Frag. 8. 37: ἐπεὶ τό γε Moip’ ἐπέδησεν 
οὖλον ἀκίνητόν τ᾽ ἔμεναι. 
8 Frag. 8. 38: τῷ πάντ᾽ ὄνομ' ἔσται 
ὅσσα βροτοὶ κατέθεντο πεποιθότες εἶναι ἀληθῆ, 
γίγνεσθαι τε καὶ ὄλλυσθαι, εἶναί τε καὶ οὐχί, 
καὶ τόπον ἀλλάσσειν διά τε χρόα φανὸν ἀμείβειν. 
4 Frag. 2: ob γὰρ ἀποτμήξει τὸ ἐὸν τοῦ ἐόντος ἔχεσθαι 
οὔτε σκιδνάμενον πάντῃ πάντως κατὰ κόσμον 
οὔτε συνιστάμενον. 


δ Ap. Sext, Adv, Math. x, 46, 


218 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


moment the disputed question, what a philosopher can mean 
by propounding ἃ cosmology (the details of which, so far as we 
know, were his own, and have been taken as such by most, if 
not all, of his readers), and yet declaring that ‘there is no true 
belief’ in them. Our first business must be to establish the type 
of this physical system, and determine from what part of the 
Pythagorean scheme of thought it is derived. 


117. The Way of Opinion 


This second part of the poem begins as follows (frag. 8. 50) : 
‘Here do I close my trustworthy speech and thought about the 
truth. Opinions (δόξας), mortal opinions, thou must hence- 
forward learn, hearkening to the deceptive ordering of my words. 

“Two forms (μορφάς) there are, which mortals have made 
up their minds to name (ὀνομάζειν), one of which they 
ought not to name, and that is where they have gone astray. 
They have distinguished them as opposite in body (δέμας), and 
assigned them visible tokens! distinct from one another—to 
the one the Fire of heaven, a gentle thing, very light, in every 
direction the same as itself, but not the same as the other. The 
other is just the opposite to it, indiscernible Night, a dense 
and heavy body (δέμας). Of these I declare to thee the whole 
disposition, as it seems likely ; for so no mortal judgment shall 
outstrip thee.’ 

Two other fragments give us little more light : ‘ Now that all 
things have been named (ὀνόμασται) Light and Night, and 
the names which belong to their several powers have been 
assigned to these things and to those, everything is full at once 


1 σήματα. The word seems to mean ‘visible signs,’ ‘tokens,’ almost 
‘symbols.’ Fire, for instance, may be regarded as a visible embodiment 
(5éuas) of one ‘form,’ rather than completely identical with it. It stands 
for it, represents it visibly. That body is a mark or visible sign, is one of 
the meanings of the Orphic dictum, σῶμα σῆμα, for σῆμα means ‘tomb’ only 
because 16 meant a mark or sign of a place which is taboo, or ‘impure,’ 
and so a gravestone or pillar. Plato (Phaedr. 250c) avails himself of both 
senses : καθαροὶ ὄντες καὶ ἀσήμαντοι τούτον ὃ viv σῶμα περιφέροντες ὀνομάζομεν, 
where ἀσήμαντοι means that we are not marked by this gravestone called ἃ 
body. Cf. Heracleitus’ use of σημαίνειν above, p. 187. See also J. Adam, 
Religious Teachers of Greece (1908), p. 96. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 219 


of Light and unapparent Night, both equal, since neither has 
any part in the other.’ ἢ 

At the end of the poem (frag. 19): ‘Thus, according to 
Opinion, did these things come into being (ἔφυ), and thus they 
are now, and after this shall grow and come to their end. Men 
have stamped them each with a name to know them by.’ ? 

The two fundamental ‘forms’ in this scheme are Light and 
Dark, and the other pairs of contrary attributes may be regarded 
as attaching to these two substances (if substances they be) : 


That which Is and That which Is Not 
Light and Dark 
Warm and Cold (Aristotle) 
Light and Heavy 
(Rare) and Dense 
Fire (Heaven) and Earth 
Male and Female.* 


Now, we know that the Orphic said of himself: ‘I am the child 
of Earth and of the starry Heaven,’‘ believing that the divine 
and immortal soul came down from the heavenly fires, and was 
imprisoned in the darkness of the earthy body. The same truth 
18 symbolised in the descent of Orpheus and Parmenides into the 
dark underworld and their resurrection into the light of day. 
Aristotle speaks of the ‘ theologians ’ (Orphic) who made all things 
come into being out of Night, and contrasts with the ancient 
poets who said that Zeus was king of all, others who held that 
the eldest Gods were Night and Heaven.> In the Way of Opinion 
we are on Orphic ground, and the fundamental scheme is the 
fall and descent from the region of heavenly light, reality, and 
truth, to the darkness, unreality, and falseness of bodily existence. 


' Frag. 9: αὐτὰρ ἐπειδὴ πάντα φάος καὶ νὺξ ὀνόμασται 
καὶ τὰ κατὰ σφετέρας δυνάμεις ἐπὶ τοῖσί τε καὶ τοῖς, 
πᾶν πλέον ἐστὶν ὁμοῦ φάεος καὶ νυκτὸς ἀφάντου, 
ἴσων ἀμφοτέρων, ἐπεὶ οὐδετέρῳ μέτα μηδέν. 


2 rots δ᾽ ὄνομ᾽ ἄνθρωποι κατέθεντ᾽ ἐπίσημον ἑκάστῳ. A ‘name’ also 18 a 
σῆμα, embodying or entombing a thing or meaning, which it σημαίνει. 

> See 0. Kern, Arch. f. Gesch. d. Phil. ini. p. 174, for the male and female 
character of the two principles and the bisexed Eros in Parmenides. 

4 Orphic tablets, D.F.V.2, ii. 480; above, p. 179. 

5 Met: X6, 1071 b 26; v4, 109104. D.F.V.%, ii. 475. 


220 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


What Parmenides does in the Way of Opinion is to take this 
purely Orphic conception of a descent from light to darkness, and 
expurgate that other, Dienysiac, view of life and death as a 
perpetual process of change revolving in a cycle, which Hera- 
cleitus had championed against the Orphic and Olympian 
notions of the destiny of the soul. Both views, we have seen, 
were inherent in the religious tradition of mysticism, before philo- 
sophy appeared; they are now separated out, as their mncon- 
sistency becomes apparent, by Heracleitus and Parmenides. If 
we start from this point, we can deduce the other characteristics 
of the Way of Opinion, and perhaps gain new light upon them. 

Let us note, in the first place, that Parmenides says that mortals 
have decided to name two ‘forms’; and that where they have 
gone wrong is in naming the second. He does not say they 
were wrong to name the first. Aristotle, moreover, says that 
“ he ranks the Warm under the head of That which Is, its opposite 
under the head of That which Is Not.’ The natural conclusion 
is that Parmenides meant that Fire, the principle of light and 
warmth, is the embodiment (δέμας), or visible token (oijua), of 
the real, as it were an effluence from that inward omnipresent 
God who alone Is, into the world of ‘seeming’ (δόξα). Par- 
menides must have had in his mind some distinction between 
‘reality ’ and ‘appearance.’ Probably he did not distinguish 
‘appearance’ from ‘opinion’: both are what ‘seem’ to 
mortals, and δόξα probably covers both meanings. The con- 
fusion makes Parmenides speak as if mortals were responsible 
for the appearance of the world. He cannot have really thought 
this, in any sense that we should put upon it; his difficulties 
arise largely because he cannot get his thought clear about the 
meaning of δόξα. 

If mortals were not wrong when they named the first ‘ form ’ 
fire, they did go astray when they named the second, and they 
ought not to have named it at all. Why not? Because there 
is no thing (dv) to correspond to these names in the second 
column of contraries. As Aristotle says, they come ‘ under 
the head of That which Is Not.’ These opposites, or antagonists, 
of the principle of Light simply are not; they are names which 


1 Met. Ab, 9860 35: τούτων δὲ κατὰ μὲν τὸ ὃν τὸ θερμὸν τάττει, θάτερον δὲ 
κατὰ τὸ μὴ ὅν. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 221 


denote nothing, or a ‘ not-thing’ (μὴ ἐόν), words that stand 
for no positive existing things whatever." 

It is here that Parmenides joins issue with Ionian science 
and with Heracleitus. Both these types of system had ex- 
plained ‘becoming’ by the separation and conflict, or har- 
mony and reconciliation, of opposites, regarded as equal and 
balancing powers, each with a domain, or a force, of its own. 
Parmenides sweeps this whole conception away. In these pairs 
of antagonists which ‘men have agreed to name,’ one member 
is a not-thing, a mere word ; only the other stands for anything 
teal. The War of Opposites, and all those views of life and 
death which hang with it, are banished, by the same uncom- 
promising logic that banished life from the real being of God. 

If this is so, we can explain frag. 9, quoted above (p. 218), as 
follows: When these names, Light and Night, have once been 
given, and all the other pairs of contrary names that go with 
them, then we have all things ‘full at once of Light and Night,’ 
and these are equal, and independent of one another. The two 
antagonists are set up, and they can go about their wars and 
reconciliations. But the whole process is illegitimate: one 
set of names denotes no positive things. 

What, then, can Parmenides mean by declaring that cold, 
heavy, dark, etc., are mere names, without things to correspond ? 
Only one explanation seems possible ; it is simple, and surely it 
would easily occur to the father of Logic. It is that cold only 
means not-hot, dark means not-light, and so on.* Heat and 
light exist (or represent something that exists); cold and dark- 
ness are absences of them. This explanation has the authority 
of Aristotle;®? and we cannot see what other conclusion 


1 Tdo not think Parmenides meant by τὸ μὴ ὅν the absolutely non-ecsatent as 
we conceive it; rather it was, as it were, a subject with no predicates, only 
to be described negatively, like Anaximander’s ἄπειρον, or Aristotle’s formlesa 
matter. The distinction between negative existential propositions (x does 
not exist) and negative Subject-Predicate propositions (x 18 not A) was not 
yet drawn. Parmenides’ μὴ ὅν is an x which is not A, not B, etc., for all 
positive predicates. 

7 Cf. the ‘not-things’ (μὴ ὄντα) which the Eleatic Stranger in Plato's 
Sophist allows himself, with due respect to Parmenides, to reinstate from 
being nothing to being other thinge. 

> De Gen. εἰ Corr. 818, 3 ff.: οἷον τὸ μὲν θερμὸν κατηγορία τις καὶ εἶδος, ἡ δὲ 
ψυχρότης στέρησις. Ο. Gilbert, Griech. Religionsphilosophie, p. 49, note 1. 


222 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Parmenides could have reached from his rigidly monistic 
premisses, or what difficulty there was, that could arrest a mind 
80 powerful as his before he reached it. 

We hold, then, that to Parmenides the process of becoming 
which brought the visible world into existence was like the fall 
of the Orphic soul—a declension or degradation of light, till it 
fails and dies out in darkness and nonentity. The fact that 
the earth itself, which to the ordinary materialist seems so 
solid and real, is at the lower end of this scale, did not stagger 
Parmenides: in the language of any mystic, ‘earthy’ means 
dark, unreal, false. When he calls dark Night ‘a compact and 
heavy body,’ he evidently means the earth;! the more com- 
pact and heavy it is, the further is it from being a true embodi- 
ment of the substance of God. But even the earth, though 
low in the scale, has still some fire and heat and light in it. 

If we sink still further, what do we reach at the nadir? The 
power of darkness, Moira, Lachesis, Ananke. Modern critics 
apparently think of this figure, as of a lady whom it is not quite 
decorous to accommodate with a seat in the centre of the earth, 
presumably because they do not realise that the earth is verging 
on non-existence.? She is Necessity, on whose knees is the 
spindle with its turning whorls, in the vision of Er. But she 
is also Aphrodite, who contrived Eros, first of the Gods, 
and the axis of her spindle passes through the midst of the 
“crowns ’ up to the limits of the world. It 18 the path of souls, 
who ascend upwards and fall downwards.’ Light is also Soul ; 


1 Cf. O. Gilbert, Arch. Geach. Phil. xx. p. 42. 

2 Professor Burnet, who feels this impropricty (Z.G.P.?, p. 219), now 
politely hands her to a place in the Milky Way, good-humouredly abandon- 
ing his former effort to make a hole through the earth for her and turn it 
from a sphere into a ring. 

3 Simpl. Phys. 39,18: ταύτην (᾿ Αφροδίτην) καὶ θεῶν αἰτίαν εἶναί φησι λέγων 
(frag. 13), ““πρώτιστον μὲν "Ἔρωτα θεῶν μητίσατο πάντων," καὶ τὰς ψυχὰς 
πέμπειν ποτὲ μὲν ἐκ τοῦ ἐκφανοῦς εἰς τὸ ἀειδές, ποτὲ δὲ ἀνάπαλίν φησιν. Plato, 
Rep. 6168 ff., describes a ‘straight pillar of light, stretched all through 
the heaven and the earth,’ which is apparently the axis of the cosmos 
and the shaft of the spindle of Necessity (see J. Adam, ad loc.). The 
souls journey to the centre of this light, 1.6. the centre of the earth and 
of the universe. I believe that Parmenides’ path of souls is similar, and 
that his Dike 18 αὖ the centre. The difficulties of interpretation which 
beset both Parmenides’ and Plato’s descriptions are ultimately due to the 
attempt to combine the ‘Dionysiac’ and ‘Orphic’ conceptions, whose in- 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 223 


hence we are told that men were first born from the sun,! and 
that the dead body cannot perceive light and warmth and 
sound, because the fire has failed out of it.2 Fire, or Light, is 
thus the soul-substance, and nearest akin to the substance of 
God. 

But, finally, let us observe that the life which has gone out of 
God, has come back into Nature. The Goddess, throned in the 
centre, is the Queen of Life, Aphrodite; and of her, Eros, 
banished by Olympianism, is born again. The downward fall 
of life from the heavenly fires is countered by an upward impulse 
which ‘sends the souls back from the seen to the unseen.’ We 
have here a hint of the movement of life interpreted as desire for 
perfection, which leads to important developments in later con- 
ceptions of physis. The last resource of Nature, deserted by 
God, is to aspire towards that perfection which lies above and 
beyond her reach, and in that aspiration she regains the life 
which God has Jost. 


We would not leave the impression that Parmenides was 
satisfied with this physical system, obtained by developing the 
Orphic view to its logical conclusion and expurgating the 
Dionysiac. He was too much in earnest with his monism to be 
content, and too penetrating and sincere to hide from himself 
or others that he had not really reduced the power of darkness 
to an empty name. So he calls the Way of Opinion misleading. 


consistency we have pvinted out. The ‘ Dionysiac’ path of souls is a circle, 
from the upper region of light above the carth to the dark region below and 
back again. Parmemides adopts this for his own journey to the underworld. 
But according to that view J:ke ought to be in Tartarus, under the earth, 
not in the centre. The Orphic path of souls is from heaven down to earth, 
and the lowest point is the centre of earth, where the Pythagorean central 
fire and Jhke ought to be. Cf. Theol. Arith. p. 6 ff. ed. Ast, which states 
that the Pythagoreans place a ἑναδικὸς διάπυρος κύβος περὶ τὸ μέσον τῶν τεσ- 
σάρων στοιχείων, and οἱ περὶ ᾿Εμπεδοκλέα καὶ [[αρμενίδην follow them in so far 
as they maintain τὴν μοναδικὴν φύσιν Korlas τρόπον ἐν μέσῳ ἱδρῦσθαι και διὰ τὸ 
ἰσόρροπον φυλάσσειν τὴν αὐτὴν ἕδραν (see Ὁ. Gilbert, Joc. cst. p. 42; and 
Griech. Religronsphslosophie (1911), pp. 185, 189 ff.). Plato (Rep. 616) 
attempts to combine both by making the pillar of hght at its two poles 
spread out into a belt which runs all round the heavenly sphere (if Adam, 
ad loc., is right). The very fact that scholars are divided on the question 
whether Parmenides’ journey is to heaven or the underworld points to 
Parmenides not being clear in his own mind. 
1 Diog. ix. 22. 3 Theophr. de Senst, 3. 


224 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


We take his position to be this. If God is really and absolutely 
One and perfect, then there is nothing to be made of the world 
we see, with its plurality and changing life. The Way of Opinion 
is the best that can be made of it; but still it will notdo. God, 
with his unity and immutable perfection, has gone out of the 
world, and animates it no longer. One or the other must be 
given up: either such a God is not, or the world infected with 
darkness and evil cannot come from him. It is Parmenides’ 
glory to have formulated this dilemma with unfaltering courage, 
and made his choice—the choice of the “ unphysicist,’ the Mystic. 


118. EMPEDOCLES 


We have considerable fragments of two long poems by Em- 
pedocles, called Purtfications and About Nature. The current 
opinion is that the religious views contained in the Purtfications 
are inconsistent with the physical theory of the other poem ; 
and Professor Burnet adds that ‘this is just what we should 
expect to find. All through this period, there seems to have 
been a gulf between men’s religious beliefs, if they had any, and 
their cosmological views. The few points of contact (between 
the two poems) which we have mentioned may have been 
sufficient to hide this from Empedocles himself.’ 1 

This is ἃ hard saying; and the following account of Em- 
pedocles will, we hope, make it clear that it is not a true one. 
In our view, there is no more inconsistency in Empedocles’ 
system of things—religious and scientific—than that which we 
have pointed out as already inherent in the Orphic and Pytha- 
gorean doctrines of immortality. Empedocles seems to us to 
make a heroic and amazingly ingenious effort to reconcile these 
views of the nature and destiny of the soul with Ionian physical 


1 £.G.P.?, p. 289. Cf. Zeller, Phil. d. Griech.®, i. p. 806: Anders verhalt 
es sich mit gewissen religiosen Lehren und Vorschriften, welche . . . mit 
den wissenschaftlichen Grandsatzen unseres Physikers in keiner sichtbaren 
Verbindung stehen. In diesen Sitzen konnen wir nur Glaubensartikel 
sehen. . . . Rohde, Payche®, nu. 175: Zumeist aber stehen in seiner Vor- 
stellungewelt Theologie und Naturwissenschaft unverbunden neben ein: 
ander. In spite of these authorities, the entertaining of religious beliefs 
which will not square with the same person's philosophical opinions, seemt 
to me characteristic rather of modern orthodoxy than of the Greek 
philosophers. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 225 


science, and he comes within an ace of succeeding. We regard 
his physical system as modelled on his religious beliefs and 
dictated by them. We shall, therefore, reverse the usual practice 
of discussing first the poem About Nature and explaining its 
conclusions as reached by purely rational processes of reasoning, 
mainly in reaction against Parmenides. There is, of course, 
truth in that point of view; but what we are concerned to dis- 
cover is the innermost convictions of Empedocles, the view of 
life and of the world, which made him dissent from Parmenides 
in some points and agree with him in others. The driving power, 
the cause of Empedocles’ system, is not only, or chiefly, intel- 
lectual dissatisfaction with Parmenides’ theories, but a pro- 
found belief that a somewhat different interpretation of the 
mystic view of the soul and God provides a scheme which, when 
we use it to interpret nature, leads to conclusions not so para- 
doxically at variance with sense-data and with Ionian science 
as those of Parmenides. We shall, accordingly, begin with the 
religious poem, in which that interpretation is plainly set forth. 
It states in mythical form the very doctrine which the poem 
About Nature attempts to throw into more scientific language. 
We learn from Aristotle! that Empedocles’ poems were 
‘esoteric,’ in the sense explained by Professor Margohouth in 
his recent edition of the Poetics.2, They were, that is to say, 
first learnt by heart, without being understood, because it ‘ took 
time for them to be assimilated.’ When the whole text had 
thus got into the mind, one part of it would throw light upon 
another, and so the hidden meaning would gradually come out. 
If Empedocles’ writings were of this character, we should beware 
of charging him with inconsistency, and rather look out for 
cross-references, characteristic of this method of wniting, of 
which, in fact, we shall encounter some instances.* Probably 
it will be found that Parmenides’ poems are similarly esoteric. 
This would explain the metrical form used by both philosophers ; 


1 Beth. Nic. 45, 1147018: καὶ γὰρ οἱ ἐν πάθεσι rovros (states of drunken- 
ness, etc.) ὄντες ἀποδείξει: καὶ ἔτη λέγουσιν ᾿Εμπεδοκλέους, καὶ ol πρῶτον μαθόντες 
σνυνείρουσι μὲν τοὺς λόγου:, ἴσασι δὲ οὕπω᾽ δεῖ γὰρ συμφνῆναι, τοῦτο δὲ χρόνον 
δεῖται. Schol. ad loc. : συμφνῆναι᾽" οἱονεὶ φύσιν γενέσθαι τὴν ἕξιν ἐν αὐτοῖς. 

* Ὁ. 8. Margoliouth, 7λε Poetics of Aristotle, p. 22. London, 1911. 

δ Thad already observed these cross-references before I learned from 
Professor Margoliouth the nature of esoteric composition. 

P 


226 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


for it is convenient that such writings should be both compact 
and easily committed to memory.! 


119. The PuRIFICATIONS 


Parts of the introductions to both poems are fortunately 
preserved ; and the impression we get by comparing them is 
that Empedocles regarded the Purifications as containing a fuller 
revelation of truth than the other. Addressing Pausanias at 
the beginning of the physical poem, he dwells on the difficulty 
and darkness that beset men in this mortal life; how hard it is 
for their mind to grasp truth through their eyes and ears. Pau- 
sanias is not to distrust his senses altogether ; they leave some 
‘opening for understanding’ (frag. 4). But itis only an imperfect 
comprehension that can come that way. ‘Thou, then, since 
thou hast found thy way hither, shalt learn no more than mortal 
mind hath power.’ 2 

He calls upon the Muse to allow him to hear what is lawful for 
the children of a day, and tells her that no garlands of honour 
offered by mortals shall force her to lift them from the ground, 
at the cost of her speaking more than is religiously permissible 
(ὁσίης πλέον), or taking ἃ seat upon the heights of wisdom 
(frag. 4). 

Contrast with this the opening of the Purifications. Em- 
pedocles there says that he goes about among men ‘an im- 


1 Our view of Empedocles agrees with that taken by Aristotle (Afet. 
B4, Ἰ001α 5 ff.), who discusses him under the head of ‘the school of 
Hesiod and all theologians’ (θεολόγοι), who only think of what convinces 
themselves and take no trouble about persuading us. He singles out 
Empedocles as ‘the one whose statements might be expected to be moat 
consistent’ (ὄνπερ οἰηθείη λέγειν ἄν τις μάλιστα ὁμολογουμένως αὑτῷ), and says 
that ‘even he’ makes the principle of destruction (Neskos) also that which 
produces everything, except the One, that is God. This is not the incon- 
sistency which modern writers discover between the two poems, but 
belongs to both equally, and in itself it 1s no more an inconsistency than 
Heracleitus’ corresponding doctrine that ‘Strife is Justice,’ explained 
above, p. 190. 

5 Frag. 2: σὺ δ᾽ οὖν, ἐπεὶ ὧδ᾽ ἐλιάσθης, 

κεύσεαι οὐ πλεὸν ἠὲ βροτείη μῆτις ὄρωρεν. 
I take this as meaning that Pausanias’ soul, having ‘found its way’ into this 
mortal body, must be content to look out through the senses and so gain 
what imperfect knowledge can come to it through them. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 227 


mortal God, no mortal now, honoured among all as is meet, 
wreathed with fillets and flowery crowns.’ He seems to have 
no fear that ‘garlands of honour’ will uplift him too high ;} 
he has attained the heights of wisdom, and now does not scruple 
to declare it. ‘ Why should I harp on these things, as if it were 
any great matter that I should surpass mortal, perishable men?’ 
(frag. 113). ‘ Friends, 1 know indeed that truth is in the words I 
shall utter ; but it 18 hard for men, and jealous are they of the 
assault of belief in their souls ’ (frag. 114). Empedocles does not 
now invoke the Muse, or pray that his lips may be pure and not 
go beyond what is lawful. He speaks as an immortal God, 
uttering truth from the heights of wisdom. It is strange that 
his modern interpreters should not seek in this poem the real 
convictions of Empedocles, but should treat it as so much mere 
“religious belief,’ which we may expect to be inconsistent with 
his theory of nature. On the contrary, his violent disapproval 
of Parmenides—to whom the words, ἡ O ye Gods, turn aside my 
tongue from the madness of those men ! ’ * are supposed to refer 
—may well have been due to the very fact, so creditable to Par- 
menides’ logic and candour, that he had not been able to 
construct a physical theory that would harmonise with the Way 
of Truth. Empedocles’ principal motive is to find a new Way 
of Opinion, which will not contradict the religion he passionately 
proclaims. He almost says as much when, in open contrast 
with Parmenides, he bids Pausanias ‘ listen to the course of his 
argument which is not deceptive. True, no theory of the sense 
world can be free from that element of falsity and darkness which 
1 Compare Περὶ Φύσεως, frag 4. 6 (above paraphrased) - 
μηδέ σέ γ᾽ εὐδόξοιο βιήσεται ἄνθεα τιμῆς 
πρὸς θνητῶν ἀνελέσθαι, ἐφ᾽ ὧι θ᾽ ὁσίης πλέον εἰπεῖν 
θάρσει καὶ τότε δὴ σοφίης ἐπ᾽ ἄκροισι θοάζειν 
and Καθαρμοί, frag. 112: 
ἐγὼ δ᾽ ὑμῖν θεὸς ἄμβροτος, οὐκέτι θνητός, 
πωλεῦμαι μετὰ πᾶσι τετιμένος, ὥσπερ ἔοικα, 
ταινίαις τε περίστεπτος στέφεσιν τε θαλείοις. 
I take this for an esoteric cross-reference. 
® Frag. 4. 
> Frag. 17. 26: σὺ δ᾽ ἄκονε λόγον στόλον οὐκ ἀπάτηλον, contrasted with 
Parm. 8, 52: μάνθανε κόσμον ἐμῶν ἐπέων ἀκατηλὸν ἀκούων. Note that 
Empedocles uses λόγος where Parmenides has ἐπέων. Parmenides’ physical 


system is (partly) a cosmos of words, names ; Empedocles’ system is ἃ λόγος, 
with a rational and consistent meaning. 


228 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


infects its object; but Empedocles is determined that it shall 
not be in open conflict with the Truth. 


120. The Exile of the Soul 


The basis of Empedocles’ position is disclosed in the famous 
fragment describing the exile of the soul and its wanderings 
round the wheel of rebirth :? 

‘There is an oracle of Necessity, a decree of the Gods from 
of old, everlasting, with broad oaths fast sealed, that, whensoever 
one of the daemons, whose portion is length of days, has sinfully 
stained his hands with blood, or followed Strife? and sworn 
a false oath, he must wander thrice ten thousand seasons ὃ 
away from the Blessed, being born throughout the time in all 
manner of mortal forms, passing from one to another of the 
painful paths of life. 

‘For the power of the Air drives him seaward ; and the Sea 
spews him out on the dry land; Earth hurls him into the rays 
of the blazing Sun, and Sun into the eddies of Air. One from 
another receives him, and he is loathed of all. 

* Of these now am I also one, an exile from God and a wanderer, 
having put my trust in raging Strife.’ 

That the doctrine contained in these lines was not invented 
by Empedocles is certain from the fact that the essential features 
of it are to be found in Pindar’s second Olympian,‘ written for 

1 Frag. 115: ἔστιν ᾿Ανάγκης χρῆμα, θεῶν ψήφισμα παλαιόν, 
ἀΐδιον, πλατέεσσι κατεσφρηγισμένον ὅρκοι:" 
εὖτέ τις ἀμπλακίῃσι φόνῳ φίλα yuia μιήνῃ, 
<Neixet θ᾽ ὅς κ᾽ ἐπίορκον ἁμαρτήσας ἑπομόσσῃ, 
δαίμονες οἷτε μακραίωνος λελάχασι βίοιο, 
τρίς μιν μυρίας wpas ἀπὸ μακάρων ἀλάλησθαι, 
φυομένου: παντοῖα διὰ χρόνου εἴδεα θνητῶν 
ἀργαλέας βιότοιο μεταλλάσσοντα κελεύθου:. 
αἰθέριον μὲν γάρ σφε μένος πόντονδε διώκει, 
πόντοι δ᾽ ἐξ χθονὸς οὗδας ἀπέπτυσε, γαῖα δ᾽ és αὐγὰς 
ἠελίου φαέθοντος, ὁ δ᾽ αἰθέρος ἔμβαλε Sivas’ 
ἄλλος δ' ἐξ ἄλλου δέχεται, στνγέουσι δὲ πάντες. 
τῶν καὶ ἐγὼ νῦν εἰμι, φυγὰς θεόθεν καὶ ἁἀλήτη;, 
Νείκει μαινομένῳ πίσυνοι. 
51 accept Diels’ Νείκεί as a certain restoration of the word lost at the 
beginning of this line. Its appropriateness will appear later. 
3 i.e. 10,000 years. Cf. Dieterich, Nekyia, 119. 
4 The fragments of Pindar’s Threnoi supply further details. Rohde, 
Payche’, ii, 216. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 229 


Theron of Acragas, where Empedocles was born, at a date when 
Empedocles was ἃ boy. Throughout the course of that majestic 
Ode revolves, as we have seen, the wheel of Time, Destiny, and 
Judgment. The doctrine can be classed unhesitatingly as 
‘Orphic.’ The soul is conceived as falling from the region of 
light down into the ‘ roofed-in Cave,’ the ‘ dark meadow of Ate ’ 
(frag. 119, 120, 121). This fall is a penalty for sin—flesh-eating or 
oath-breaking.? Caught in the wheel of Time, the soul, preserv- 
ing its individual identity, passes through all shapes of life. 
This implies that man’s soul is not ‘human’: human life 
(ὁ ἀνθρώπινος Bios) is only one of the shapes it passes 
through.* Its substance is divine and immutable, and it is 
the same substance as all other soul in the world. In this sense, 
the unity of all life is maintained ; but, on the other hand, each 
soul is an atomic individual, which persists throughout its ten 
thousand years’ cycle of reincarnations. The soul travels the 
round of the four elements: ‘ For I have been, ere now, a boy 
and a girl, a bush (earth), a bird (air), and a dumb fish in the 
sea ’ (frag. 117). These four elements compose the bodies which 
it successively inhabits. 

The soul is further called ‘an exile from God (θεόθεν) and 
& wanderer, and its offence, which entailed this exile, is de- 
scribed as ‘ following Strife,’ ‘ putting trust in Strife.’ At the 
end of the cycle of births, men may hope to ‘ appear among 
mortals as prophets, song-writers, physicians, and princes ; ἢ 
and thence they rise up, as Gods exalted in honour, sharing the 
hearth of the other immortals and the same table, free from 
human woes, delivered from destiny (ἀπόκληροι 1) and harm’ 
(frag. 146, 147). Thus the course of the soul begins with separa- 
tion from God, and ends in reunion with him, after passing 
through all the motrai of the elements. 

1 Χρόνος, Μοῖρα, Δίκη are the keywords throughout. See above, p. 171. 

* That ‘ defiling the hands (or limbs, yvia) with blood’ means flesh-eating 
and animal sacrifice is clear from frag. 128, 136, 137, 139; cf. Hippol. Ref. 
viii. 29 (D.F.¥’.?, p. 206). Oath-breaking is taken from Hesiod, Theog. 793. 

5 Cf. Xen. Cyrop. viii. 7. 17 ff. and A. E. Taylor’s remarks on the affinity 
of this passage with Plato's Phaedo (Varia Socr.1. 33). The flesh is a ‘strange 
garment’ (frag. 126), not native to the soul. 

* Compare Pindar’s list (T'hrenoi, frag. 183, Christ): kings, athletes, poets 


(σοφίᾳ μέγιστοι), who are called ‘ pure heroes’ (ἥρωες ἀγνοί) ; and Plato’s nine 
stages (Phaedrus, 248 p). 


280 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Now it is chiefly, if not solely, on the ground of this doctrine 
of immortality, that the Purifications have been condemned as 
inconsistent with the poem On Nature, where it is generally held 
that ‘ there can be no question of an immortal βου]. 1 We hope 
to show that there is no inconsistency at all; but before we can 
do so, we must turn to the analysis of the physical system. The 
remaining doctrines contained in the Purzfications will most 
conveniently be taken in connection with their counterparts in 
the theory of nature. 


121. The World Period 


The course of the world, as we expect, is modelled on the 
cyclic movement of the soul above described. It begins in ἃ 
state of unity, with all the elements mixed in the ‘Sphere’ by 
Love. Then, as Love streams out of the mass, and Strife pours 
in from outside, there is a process of separation which terminates, 
at the lowest point of the circle, in complete segregation of the 
elements into four regions. The process is then reversed. 
Love begins to prevail and draws the elements into fusion again, 
ending in the complete reunion of the Sphere. 

The factors in this scheme have already been discussed 
(p. 63), and we have followed ancient authority * in distin- 
guishing the four elements as ‘ bodily,’ while Love and Strife 
are of that attenuated and fluid consistency which belongs to 
soul-substance, with the least conceivable degree of corporeality. 
Kmpedocles, says Aristotle, identifies Love with the Good; and 
Love is both a moving principle, since it draws together, and 
a material, since it is a part of the mixture. To move is the 
function of Soul, or God; but Soul and God can still only be 
thought of as the finest forms of matter. 

The two new elements are invoked to cause motion, which 
Parmenides had excluded from the real. Love and Strife are, 
as it were, the two life-forces which once animated matter, but 
now, as matter solidifies into impenetrable atoms, are squeezed 
out of it and conceived as subtle and mobile fluids. Strife is 

1 Burnet, £.C.P.2, p. 283. 

3 Eg. Simpl. Phys. 25,21: τὰ μὲν σωματικὰ στοιχεῖα ποιεῖ τέτταρα, τὰς δὲ 


xuplws ἀρχάς . . . Φιλίαν καὶ Neixos. Cf. Arist. Met. A5; Aet. i. 8. 20. 
3 Met. 10, 10756 2. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 231 


spoken of as ‘ running out ’ of the members of the universe, and, 
in proportion as it does so, ‘ a soft, immortal stream of blameless 
Love ’ pours in to take its place.1 We need not be surprised at 
Aristotle's statement 2 that Empedocles’ Love is the substrate 
of the One, in the same sense as the Water of Thales, the Fire of 
Heracleitus, the Air of Anaximenes. For those earliest philo- 
sophers, the primary element was still alive, and consequently 
self-moving. Empedocles’ fluids of Love and Strife are half- 
way between this conception of an internal life spontaneously 
moving matter from within, and the purely external and de- 
materialised motion, by which, in developed Atomism, one piece 
of matter moves another entirely by a mechanical shock from 
without. It is as living and self-moving soul-substances that 
Love and Strife are like the physis of the Ionians. 

Empedocles’ scheme of the cycle of existence, in which worlds 
pass into being and perish again, is an adaptation of Anaxi- 
mander’s stages of existence, which we have analysed above 
(p. 8).3 If we start from the ‘Sphere’ or Reign of Love, in 
which all the elements are fused in one mass, it is easy to recog- 
nise Anaximander’s Limitless Thing, in its primal state, before 
the distinction of opposites has broken out. At the opposite 
pole, we have what he called the Reign of Justice—all four 
elements completely separated. In Empedocles, Strife plays 
the part of Moira or Lachesis ;4 only Strife is now no longer ἃ 
dim, mythical personality, like the moral power inherent in 
Anaximander’s Limitless, but a divine fluid substance doing its 
work mechanically. 

At this point, there is a significant difference between the two 
systems. Empedocles interpolates the whole of the period of 
our world’s existence between the Reign of Love and the Reign 


1 Frag. 85, 12: ὅσσον δ᾽ αἰὲν ὑπεκπροθέοι, τόσον αἰὲν ἑπήιει 

ἠπιόφρων Φιλότητος ἀμεμῴεος ἄμβροτος ὁρμή. 

3 Met. B1, 996a 7. 

δ Thus Aristotle brings Anaximander’s system and Empedocles’ together : 
Phys. a 4, 187a 20, οἱ δ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ ἑνὸς ἐνούσας τὰς ἐναντιότητα: ἐκκρίνεσθαι, ὥσπερ 
᾿Αναξιμανδρός φησι καὶ ὅσοι δ' ἐν καὶ πολλά φασιν εἶναι, ὥσπερ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς καὶ 
᾿Αναξαγόρας᾽ ἐκ τοῦ μείγματος γὰρ καὶ οὗτοι ἐκκρίνουσι τἄλλα. διαφέρονσι δ᾽ 
ἀλλήλων τῷ τὸν μὲν (Emp.) περίοδον ποιεῖν τούτων, τὸν 5 (Anaxag.) ἅπαξ. . .. 

* So, in religious representation, the division of the world among the Gods 
was regarded sometimes as fated and determined by drawing of lots, some- 
times as the result of strife between the Gods (Eps). 


232 FROM BELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


of Strife. It occupies one half of the circle, in which we pass 
from zenith to nadir; and it is balanced by the opposite half, 
in which the movement is upwards from the Reign of Strife back 
to the Sphere, causing by the way the existence of another 
world, as Love regains the mastery. In Anaximander’s scheme 
the Reign of Justice came next after the primal state of fusion 
and before the existence of individual things. The motive of 
Empedocles’ rearrangement is clear. To him Strife is an evil 
principle ; it causes separation, and, to the mystic, separation 
is evil, union is good. Hence, the state of the world in which 
Strife triumphs is the lowest depth of evil, not, as it was for 
Anaximander, a Reign of Justice. When it is fitted into the 
frame of the wheel,! it must occupy the lowest point, and the 
existence of worlds must fall in the two hemicycles, between the 
best state and the worst. 


122. The Hemispheres of Day and Night 


If we form ἃ visual image of this world period, we see a circle 
divided by a horizontal diameter into two regions. The upper 
one is filled with light radiating from its pole, the lower with 
darkness which deepens into utter night at the bottom. Now 
this is precisely the picture which, in another connection, gives 
us the physical doctrine of the two hemispheres of Day and 
Night, which move round the earth in a circle. The diurnal 
hemisphere consists of fire; the nocturnal, of air (the dark 
principle) mixed with a little fire.2 Day and Night are caused 
by, or rather consist of, these two hemispheres ; the Sun is only 
a reflection of the diurnal fire, focused on the crystalline vault, 
and so it travels round with the daylight which causes it. This 
physical theory is manifestly a counterpart in actual space of 
the wheel of light and darkness, which in the world period is 
the wheel of birth and death. As the scattered rays of fire or 
light are gathered up into one focus, called the Sun, and then 
spread abroad again in the “ backward reflection,’ ὃ and mixed 


1 Cf. the last words of the quotation from Aristotle in note 3, p. 231. 
2 Pa.-Plut. Strom. (D.F.V.*, p. 158. 30). 
3 ἀγνταύγεια is the technical word. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 233 


with darkness, so, in the cosmos, the soft stream of Love is 
gathered up into the unity of the Sphere, and then, as it is mixed 
with Strife, diffused and scattered in the opposite hemicycle 
of the wheel of existence. 

When we study the parts played by Fire and Air in the for- 
mation of our world, it becomes clear that, of the ‘bodily ’ 
elements, Fire is the nearest akin to Love, Air to Strife. Thus, 
as Love draws things together, so Fire, in defiance of the common 
representation,! is credited with a power of solidifying. The 
firmament (οὐρανός) is solid, consisting of air compacted after 
the fashion of ice by fire.2 The astonishing doctrine that fire 
freezes, can only be explained by this element’s close kinship 
with the attracting force of Love; and this also accounts for 
Aristotle’s repeated statement that, though Empedocles has 
four elements, he reduces them to two, opposing fire to all the 
rest, and treating earth, water, and air as one physis.5 That 
Air, similarly, is nearest to Strife, follows from the analogy 
between the two hemispheres of Day (Fire) and Night (Air with a 
little fire) and the two halves of the world cycle dominated by 
Love and Strife. There is nothing in the doctrine of the equality 
of the elements to prevent us from ranging them in a series: 
Love, Fire, Water and Earth, Air, Strife. 


123. The Sphere and the Reign of Love 


Can we now form a clear picture of the process which is going 
on at this moment, as our world passes from the Reign of Love 
to the Reign of Strife ? " 


1 Arist. de Gen. ef Corr. 336a 3: ἐπειδὴ γὰρ πέφυκεν, ὥς φασιν, τὸ μὲν 
θερμὸν διακρίνειν, τὸ δὲ ψυχρὸν συνιστάναι. 

3 Δεῖ, ii. 11.2: στερέμνιον εἶναι τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐξ ἀερὸς συμκαγέντος ὑπὸ πυρὸς 
κρυσταλλοειδῶς. Cf. Aet. ii. 25. 15: Ε. ἀέρα συνεστραμμένον... πεκηγότα 
ὑπὸ πυρὸς (τὴν σελήνην). ‘Fire in general had a solidifying power’ (Burnet, 
£.G.P.*, p. 273). Plutarch’s identification of fire wth Neskos, and water 
with Philia (de prim. frig. 9528) appears to be mistaken. The firmament is 
the shell of the egg (Act. ii. 31. 4), whose shape Empedocles, following 
Orphic tradition, attributed to the cosmos. 

® De Gen. εἰ Corr. B3, 830ὺ 19 (D.F. V.?, p. 159); Met. a4, 985a 31]. 

4 That our world does fall in this hemicycle, not in the other, I regard as 
certain. . See Burnet, 2.G. P.*, p. 270. 


234 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


The point of departure is the Sphere. We are to conceive the 
four bodily elements in complete fusion. Outaide them is 
Strife, forming an envelope ‘at the outermost limits of the 
round, and completely separated from the elements.! Where 
is Love? It is evidently diffused in equal distribution through- 
out the whole.* If Empedocles had been a complete Atomist, 
he would have conceived the Sphere as consisting of molecules, 
each composed of five atoms—of Love, Fire, Water, Earth, Air 
—Stnife alone being absent. But, as it is, we must think of 
portions, rather than atoms; and we must remember that Love 
is not a bodily element, but ἃ soul-substance, and can therefore 
be conceived as continuously diffused throughout the whole 
mass, not broken up into discontinuous portions like the four 
primary bodies. If we suppose for a moment the molecular 
structure, then Love would not be a fifth atom, but the soul 
pervading and unifying the four bodily portions. Love is also 
called Harmonia; it is of the same order of things as Hera- 
cleitus’ Fire-Logos; that is to say, it is both a fluid and a 
unifying principle which pervades the elements, as the soul 
pervades the body and holds it together. The Sphere is the 
body of God, and Love is the soul which pervades it, and binds 
it together in the bonds of harmony, as Justice bound the Sphere 
of Parmenides into indissoluble unity. ‘There is no discord or 
unseemly strife in his limbs’ (frag. 27). “He was equal on 
every side and quite limitless (ἀπείρων), a rounded Sphere, 
rejoicing in his circular solitude ’ (frag. 28). 

Love in the Sphere is, thus, a thing of the same kind as the 
harmony-soul of the Pythagoreans, which was both a ratio and 
ἃ spiritual substance—a combination of notions which Plato 

1 Frag. 36. 9, states this very clearly. 

® I believe this to be the sense of frag. 17. 19: 


Neixos τ᾽ οὐλόμενον δίχα τῶν, ἀτάλαντον ἁπάντηι, 
καὶ Φιλότης ἐν τοῖσιν, ἴση μῆκοι τε πλάτος τε. 


The contrasted words δίχα τῶν and ἐν τοῖσιν are pointless unless these lines 
describe the Sphere ; and if they do, the description of Love as ‘equal in 
length and breadth’ may mean ‘diffused over the whole extent of the 
Sphere’; while ἀτάλαντον ἁπάντηι (der uberall gleich wuchtige, Diels) 1 take 
to mean that Strife envelops the whole mass in a covering that is ‘ equally 
balanced all round,’ not thicker at any one point than at another. So 
Parmenides says of his Sphere: τὸ γὰρ οὔτε τι μεῖζον οὔτε τι βαιότερον πελέναι 
χρεόν ἐστι τῆι ἣ τῆι (frag. 8. 44). 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 235 


showed to be inconsistent, and which puzzled Aristotle. After 
dismissing the view that the soul can be a ‘ harmony ’ in either 
of two senses—the combining (σύνθεσις) or fitting together of 
separate parts, and the proportion (λόγος) of the components 
of a mixture—Anistotle goes on to say that ‘it is equally absurd 
to regard the soul ! as the ‘ proportion of the mixture’ (λόγος τῆς 
petEews). For the elements are not mixed in the same pro- 
portion in flesh as in bone; so that it will follow that there are 
many souls, and that too all over the body, if we assume that 
all the members consist of the elements variously commingled, 
and that the proportion (λόγος) determining the mixture is a 
harmony, that is, soul. This is a question we might ask Em- 
pedocles, who says that each of the parts is determined by a 
certain proportion (Acyw).? Is the soul, then, this proportion, 
or is it rather something distinct which comes to be in the 
members? And further, is the mixture caused by Love a 
random mixture, or a mixture in the right proportion ; and if 
the latter, 1s Love the proportion uself or something distinct from 
the proportion ὃ 3 

The answer, not given by Aristotle, to the last question, is 
that it is both the proportion or harmony, and also something 
which Anistotle, but not Empedocles, would regard as ‘ distinct,’ 
namely, a substance. It is once more the group-soul, the soli- 
darity of a group still conceived, as it had been by primitive 
man, as a material medium. 

In the Purtfications, God (that is, Love) is further described 
as ‘a sacred mind (φρὴν ἱερὴ), unutterable, flashing through 
all the order of things with swift thoughts ’ (frag. 134)—words 
which show that this God is, in this respect, identical with the 
Nous of Anaxagoras. He 18 also, like the Logos of Heracleitus, 
the Law for all (τὸ πάντων νόμιμον) which ‘stretches every- 
where through the wide-ruling air and the infinite light of 
heaven ’ (frag. 135). 

This primary state of the world has its mythical counterpart 

1 Aristotle is of course discussing the indsridual soul. 

* Arist. de Anim. a5, 410a 1, gives Empedocles’ formula for bone, which 
consists of 2 parte Earth, 2 Water, 4 Fire, ἁρμονίης κόλλησιν ἀρηρότα. At 
de Part. Anim. al, 642a 17, he says that this proportion (λόγος) 18 the 


easence (οὐσία) or nature (φύσις) of bone. 
4 De Anim. a4, 4084 13. 


236 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


in the Purifications, which describe the earliest age of man 
as the Reign of Aphrodite, the Queen of Love. In that age 
Strife was not: ‘ they had no Ares for a God, nor Kydoimos, no, 
nor King Zeus, nor Kronos, nor Poseidon, but Kypris the 
Queen ’ (frag. 128). Her alone they worshipped with nites pure 
from the taint of bloodshed, and ‘all things were tame and 
gentle to man, both beasts and birds, and the flame of loving- 
kindness burned * (φιλοφροσύνη δὲ δεδήει, frag. 130). 


124. The breaking up of the Sphere and the Fall of the Soul 


How was this state of bliss broken up? Here again, we shall 
find the religious doctrine coincide with the physical system. 
The wheel of Time and Justice cannot stand still; and, as it 
turns, ‘in the fulness of the alternate time set by the broad oath, 
Strife leapt to claim his prerogatives, and waxed mighty in the 
limbs of the God, and they all trembled in turn.’! As Strife 
poured in on all sides into the mass, Love rushed out to meet it. 
The bodily elements, too, are swept towards their proper regions, 
and from the meeting and mixing of all these streams arise all 
the individual things in the world. The elements ‘ prevail in 
turn, as the circle comes round, and pass into one another, waxing 
small and great in their appointed turn; for they alone really 
are (ἔστι), but as they run through one another they become 
(yeyvovra:) men and all the tribes of beasts ’ (frag. 26). They 
can only be said to ‘ become,’ and not to have an ‘ abiding life,’ 
in the sense that ‘ they grow from many into one, and again are 
divided and become many ’ ; but ‘in so far as, in this perpetual 
change, they never cease, in that respect they are for ever im- 
mutable in the circle ’ (διά). 

Can this doctrine of the becoming of individual things, as a 
mixing and separation of portions of the elements, be reconciled 
with the religious belief in an immortal, migrating soul? 1 not, 
we must accept the common view that Empedocles’ physical 


1 Frag. 30: αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ μέγα Neixos ἐνιμμελέεσσιν ἐθρέφθη 
és τιμάς 7’ ἀνόρουσε τελειομένοιο χρόνοιο, 
ὅς σφιν ἁμοιβαῖος πλατέο: wap’ ἐλήλαται Spxov. . .. 
Frag. 381: πάντα γὰρ ἐξείη: πελεμίζετο γυῖα θεοῖο. 
8ο Plato, Rep. 545p, describing the fall from the perfect form of govern- 
ment to Timarchy, invokes the Muses to say, ὅπω; δὴ πρῶτον στάσι: ἔμπεσε. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 237 


system did not square with his religion. But it will soon appear 
that there is no discrepancy. 

Empedocles uses, once in each poem, a curious phrase which 
seems to be a cross-reference,! hinting that the doctrine of the 
Purifications can be interpreted in physical terms. The appointed 
moment of ‘alternate time,’ at which Strife leaps to claim 
his privileges, is ‘ set by a broad oath’ (πλατέος map’ ἐλήλαται 
ὅρκου). After what has been said above (p. 23) about Styx, it is 
easy to recognise in this oath the Great Oath of the Gods, which 
secured their privileges in the dasmos, and to understand that 
it is called ‘ broad ᾿ because it is a barrier or fence (herkos.)* 
This broad barrier is actually identical with the enveloping 
stream of Neikos, which enfolded the Sphere during the reign of 
Love—that chill stream which makes all the limbs of the God 
shudder when it begins to pour into the mass, just as Styx 
paralysed the God to whom her water was administered as an 
ordeal for oath-breaking, ‘whenever quarrel and strife arose 
among the immortals.’* Neikos, the daemon of strife and 
division, has for his vehicle the icy stream of Styx. The meeting 
of the opposed currents of Love and Strife attends the formation 
of individual existents. 

If we turn now to the famous Oracle of Necessity in the Purt- 
fications, we find that this eternal decree of the Gods is ᾿ sealed 
by broad οαἰλιδ᾽---πλατέεσσι κατεσφρηγισμένον ὅρκοις (frag. 
115. 2). The oracle decrees the banishment from the Blessed, 


1 See p. 225. 

3 Empedocles’ ἐλήλαται is reminiscent of Hesiod, Theog. 726, τὸν (Τάρταρον) 
πέρι χάλκεον ἕρκος ἐλήλαται, in the same context with the description of Styx. 
His term for the elements, ῥιζώματα, comes, through the formula of the 
Pythagoreans’ Great Oath, tho tetractys (πηγὴν devdou φύσιος ῥίζωμα τ᾽ ἔχου- 
σαν), from the words which follow those just quoted from the Theogony ; 
ἀμφὶ δέ μιν Νὺξ τριστοιχεὶ κέχνται περὶ δειρήν᾽ αὐτὰρ ὕπερθεν γῆς ῥίζαι πεφύασι 
καὶ ἀτρυγέτοιο θαλάσσης. (Cf. Olympiod. in Anst. Meteor. 286 a: γῆς ἔλεγον 
(ol ἀρχαῖοι) πηγὰς ὥσπερ τινὰς ῥίζας.) Plut. de Js. ef Os. 381: ἡ δὲ καλουμένη 
τετγρακτύς, τὰ ἐξ καὶ τριάκοντα, μέγιστος ἦν ὅρκοι. . . καὶ κόσμος ὠνόμασται. 
For Styx-Horkos associated in Orphic theogony with the heaven-stream, 
Okeanos, cf. Arist. Met. 3, 9830 27: εἰσὶ δέ reves of καὶ τοὺς παμπαλαίονς 

. καὶ πρώτους θεολογήσαντα! οὕτως (like Thales) οἴονται περὶ τῆς φύσεως 
ὑπολαβεῖν" 'Ὠκεανόν τε yap καὶ Τηθὺν ἐποίησαν ris γενέσεως πατέρας καὶ τὸν ὅρκον 
τῶν θεῶν ὕδωρ τὴν καλουμένην ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν Στύγα τῶν ποιητῶν᾽ τιμιώτατον μὲν γὰρ 
τὸ πρεσβύτατον" ὅρκος δὲ τὸ τιμιώτατόν ἐστιν. 

* Hes. Theog. 182 : ὁππότ᾽ Eps καὶ νεῖκο: ἐν ἀθανάτοισιν ὄρηται. 


238 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


for a great year of thirty thousand seasons, of certain daemons 
for shedding blood or for oath-breaking.' The offence is also 
described as ‘ consorting with Strife,’ ‘ putting trust in Strife.’ 2 
The fall of the individual soul thus means its separation from 
the original unity of God, the principle of Love and Harmony, 
and its passing into an impure state, in which it is mixed and 
tainted with the evil principle of Stufe. 

Mythically, the Fall of Man may be regarded as the passage 
from an original state of innocence, through a primal sin, into the 
troublesome condition of his present life. This myth is given 
in the description, eontamed τῇ the P-rifcet).-: of che ' eak- 
ing up of the Reign of Aphrodite, which was tiie Golden Age 
before evil came into man’s existence. It is fairly clear that 
bloodshed was the sin which caused the fall of man, as it was 
for bloodshed that the daemon is banished by the oracle of 
Necessity. In those days, we are told, ‘the altar did not reek 
with pure bull’s blood, but this was the greatest abomination 
(μύσος μέγιστον) among men, to eat the goodly limbs after 
tearing out the life’ (frag. 128).? Filesh-eating and the worship 
of the Gods of Strife, Ares and Kydoimos, were introduced 
together (frag. 128), and marked the fall of man and the end 
of the reign of Love. The ‘burning flame of lovingkindness’ 
(frag. 130) was extinguished, and the soul put its trust in Strife. 

The exact correspondence between this fall of the soul and 
the physical theory of the breaking up of the Sphere is now 
obvious enough. When the Sphere is invaded by the inrushing 
streams of Nevkos, all the elements combine to make mortal 
forms. The four bodily elements compose their bodies; the 

1 Cf. Hes. Theog. 793: ὅς κὲν τὴν ἐπίορκον ἀπολλείψας ἐπομόσσῃ 

ἀθανάτων. 
κεῖται νήυτμος τετελεσμένον εἰς ἐνιαυτόν. 
The offender is sundered (ἀπομείρεται) from the Gods for a great year of nine 
ordinary years, and in the tenth he mixes (émployera:) with them again 
801-4). 
| ΡΒ 115, 4 and 14; 
«Νείκεϊ θ"» ὅς x’ ἐπίορκον ἁμαρτήσας (Ξ-- ὁμαρτήσαΞ) ἐπομόσσηι . .. 
Νείκει μαινομένῳ πίσυνος. 
5 We seem, by the way, to discern behind this passionate disapproval of 
the tearing and eating of flesh, besides the condemnation of Olympian 
sacrifices, ἃ rejection of those primitive Bacchic rites of raw-flesh-eating 


(ὠμοφαγία) which the Cretan Kouretes had still retained, though they 
forswore the eating of flesh on other occasions. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 239 


two soul-substances compose a fallen, impure soul, in which a 
portion of Love, now scattered like a fluid broken into drops, is 
mixed with a portion of Strife. The principle of division has 
broken up the one all-pervading God, or Soul, of the Sphere 
into a plurality of daemons, each composed of Love and Strife, 
of good and evil. Such a daemon can pass from one body to 
another and go the round of the elements, which all ‘ loathe ’ it 
—for, does it not contain an admixture of loathsome Styx ? 2 
It will find no rest till it is purified of this evil principle, and 
the Love in it is freed from Strife once more, and gathered back 
into the unity of God. This day will come at the end of our 
world’s existence, when the bodily elements are given over to 
the rule of Strife, and Love passes out of the mass to form a 
continuous fluid, enveloping it, as Neikos had done at the 
opposite pole. 

Aristotle’s statement that Empedocles makes the individual 
soul consist of all the elements—‘ for with earth we see earth, 
etc.’—is not inconsistent with the view we have stated, that 
the zmmortal part of the soul consists only of Love and Strife. 
It must be remembered that Aristotle also seems to think of 
Empedocles’ soul as the ‘ proportion (Aoyos) of the mixture,’ 
or the principle of harmony, which for a time holds the body 
together. In any case, the bodily elements included in the 
soul’s nature during each incarnation will, of course, be dissolved 
when the body decays. These compose its mortal part, con- 
stituting its powers of sense-perception, by which the soul per- 
ceives the bodily elements (but not Love and Strife), while it 
lives in that body. The individuality resides, not in them, but 
in the mixed portions of Love and Strife, which remain combined 
so long as the soul is impure, and migrate to other bodies. That 


1 Hence Plutarch, de anim. trang. Ὁ. 474B: μᾶλλον, ws ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς, 
διτταί τινες ἕκαστον ἡμῶν γενόμενον παραλαμβάνουσι καὶ κατάρχονται μοῖραι Kal 
δάίμονες, #.€. ἃ good one and an evil, a portion of Love and a portion of 
Strife. Porph. de abst. in. 27: εἰ δὲ μή, ἀλλ᾽ ἐντεῦθέν γε τὸ τῆς φύσεως ἡμῶν 
ἐλάττωμα, ἐντεῦθεν τὸ θρηνούμενον πρὸς τῶν παλαιῶν, ὡς “ τοίων ἔκ τ᾽ ἑρίδων ἔκ 
τε νείκεων γενόμεσθα,᾽ ὅτι τὸ θεῖον ἀκήρατον καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν ἀβλαβὲς σῴζειν οὐ 
δυνάμεθα. 

3 Frag. 116. 12: ἄλλος δ' ἐς ἄλλου δέχεται, στνγέουσι δὲ πάντες. Cf. Ps. 
Phokylidea, 15: 

μηδ᾽ ἐπιορκήσῃς μήτ᾽ ἀγνὼς μήτε ἑκοντί᾽ 
ψεύδορκον στνγέει eds ἄμβροτος ὅστις ὀμόσσῃ. 


240 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


there is no contradiction or difficulty in regarding the senses as 
bodily and mortal, while another part of the soul is unseen and 
immortal, is clear from Plato’s Phaedo,! where Socrates states, 
very precisely, just this Orphico-Pythagorean view of soul and 
body, and draws a clear line between the higher, immortal 
faculties, which know unseen things, and the senses and desires, 
which belong to the body and perish with it. To Empedocles 
the flesh is an ‘alien garment,’ and the senses belong to it.” 
That of which it is a garment persists and migrates to other 
forms, as a Weaver wears out many coats.® 
When we think of the immortal soul as a ratio (λόγος), or 
proportion of numbers, it is easy to interpret the mixture in it 
of Love and Strife on Pythagorean lines. A ratio, or harmony, 
is a complex held together by a principle of unity. In so far as 
it is one, it is bound together by Love ; in so far as it is complex, 
it contains the principle of plurality, division, disunion, Strife. 
As Heracleitus says,* ‘ Combinations are wholes and not wholes, 
drawn together and drawn asunder, consonant and dissonant, 
one out of all things and all things out of one.’ 


125. The consistency of Empedocles 


It appears, then, that there is no more inconsistency in Em- 
pedocles’ doctrines than was already involved in the conception, 
which he inherited from the Pythagorean tradition, of the soul 
as both a ‘harmony,’ or ratio, and a fluid substance. This 
inconsistency, or rather want of distinction, makes no discrepancy 
between the scientific poem and the religious; it lies equally 
behind both. The two poems show us a religious doctrine, and 
a translation of it nto physical terms, which stands out as extra- 
ordinarily ingenious and successful. We hope that it is also 
clear that the physical system is simply the cosmology of Anaxi- 


1 688 ff., especially 65 0-66 a. 

3 Frag. 126: σαρκῶν ἀλλογνῶτι κεριστέλλουσα χιτῶνι. 

3 The illustration used by Kebes in Phaedo, 81] 0 (see Burnet ad loc., who 
connects it with the Orphic χιτών), The analogy between Empedocles’ soul 
and the soul as conceived by Chinese Taoism (above, p. 99) is remarkable. 
The two systems are based on the same fundamental ideas. 

4 Frag. 59: συνάψιες ὅλα καὶ οὐχ ὅλα, συμφερόμενον διαφερόμενον, συνᾷιδον 
διᾶιδον, καὶ ἐκ πάντων ἕν καὶ ἐξ ἑνὸς πάντα, 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 241 


mander, with such modifications as were dictated by Empedocles’ 
religious beliefs, together with the new notion of elements as 
‘ things,’ which Empedocles had taken from Parmenides and 
turned against its author. Given that notion, it is hardly too 
much to say that a very acute critic, with a sufficient knowledge 
of the mystic tradition, and nothing but the Purifications to go 
upon, could have deduced the changes that Empedocles would 
make in Anaximander’s scheme, and reconstructed all the main 
lines of the new system. So far are we from accepting the view 
that “all through this period there was a gulf between men’s 
religious beliefs, if they had any, and their cosmological views.’ 
Empedocles, as we read him, exemplifies, in a most remarkable 
way, the opposite view, that men’s cosmological views were 
almost entirely dictated by, and deduced from, their religious 
convictions. 

Empedocles is a candid dualist, and consequently annoying 
to philosophers like Aristotle, who imagine that they have 
evaded dualism by the fallacies of the ‘ final cause,’ and escaped 
from mythology when they make ‘God’ the prime mover. 
Aristotle! complains that Empedocles does not explain the 
reason of the change which brings Strife back to the possession 
of his privileges, but only says that ‘ that is how it is’ (οὕτως 
πέφυκεν), and speaks of the ‘fulness of time, fixed by the 
broad oath,’ implying that the change was necessary, but not 
explaining why. The only reason is that the wheel of Time, 
Justice, and Destiny must turn and bring in its revenges. 
If we ask further why this must be, we can hardly expect an 
answer. It is an oracle of Necessity, or Moira; and when 
modern writers echo Aristotle’s complaint, we may fairly ask 
them how they propose to explain the presence of necessity in 
the universe, without recourse to mythical representations. 
To set up ‘God’ beyond Necessity or Destiny—Zeus above 
Motra—is only to add one more story to a tower of Babel, 
whose top is already lost in the clouds. The dualist who is 
content to match God and Destiny, as a pair of equal anta- 
gonists, is no more, if no less, mythological ; and he does not 
entangle himself in the difficulties which beset those who have 


1 Met. B 4, 1000b 12. 
Q 


242 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


to make out that a world, half good and half bad, was designed 
by pure benevolence united with omnipotence. 

The later followers of Empedocles, attacked by Plato in his 
Laws,! seem to have fallen into line with the scientific tradition, 
keeping the four bodily elements of fire, air, earth, and water, and 
dropping the two soul-substances Love and Strife. They held, 
accordingly, that the world arose ‘by nature and by chance” 
(φύσει καὶ τύχη), and not ‘by art’ or design (τέχνη, διὰ νοῦν) 
which they regarded as a human thing. The four elements they 
declared to be physis, and the soul to be a compound of them, 
and secondary. Their position was thus, in this respect, 
identical with the Atomists’, and, in their system, Chance (τύχη) 
holds the place of Mozra. 


126. Piato: the Socratic and Mystic dialogues 


The last and greatest attempt to formulate the mystical 
faith in rational terms was made by Plato. It is impossible, 
at the end of this essay, to do justice to the Platonic system ; 
we can only try to indicate how it is related to the two main 
tendencies we have traced in Greek speculation. Platonism, 
if we take it to mean principally the theory of Forms or 
“ Ideas,’ will turn out to belong to the mystic tradition. We 
regard it as another offshoot of Pythagoreanism, another at- 
tempt to succeed, where Parmenides had failed, in relating the 
one God, who is good, to a manifold and imperfect world. 

It is now generally agreed that we may distinguish a group 
of early dialogues, commonly called ‘Socratic,’ from a later 
group in which the doctrines characteristic of Orphism and 
Pythagoreanism for the first time make their appearance.® 
Typical of the Socratic group are the Apology, Laches, Char- 
mides, and other minor dialogues, written within ten years after 
the death of Socrates (399 B.c.). The mystical group, heralded 
by the Gorgias, includes the Meno, Symposium, Phaedo, Republic, 
Phaedrus. It is held that the Gorgias was composed shortly 


1 8898 ff. Cf. D.F.V.*, p. 161. 48. 

2 8010: wip καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ γῆν καὶ ἀέρα πρῶτα ἡγεῖσθαι τῶν πάντων εἶναι καὶ 
τὴν φύσιν ὀνομάζειν ταῦτ᾽ αὐτά, ψνχὴν δὲ ἐκ τούτων ὕστερον. 

5. For these questions Hans Raeder, Platons philosophische Enturckelung, 
Leipzig, 1905, should be consulted. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 243 


before or after 387 B.c., the year when Plato, at the age of forty, 
set up his school at the Academy. Before he thus settled at 
Athens, Plato, who went abroad after the death of Socrates, 
had almost certainly spent some time with the Megarian 
Socratics,! and also travelled in Sicily, where Pythagorean 
thought must have survived the dispersion of the communities. 
We have every reason to connect the change of tone and of 
doctrine from the Socratic to the mystic group with these oppor- 
tunities of contact with Pythagoreanism, a type of philosophy 
which seems to have been little known to the Athens of Plato's 
youth. The point we seek to bring out is that Plato’s develop- 
ment obeys the general rule we have seen at work throughout 
pre-Socratic philosophy—the rule that the view taken of the 
“nature of things’ reflects and is determined by beliefs about 
the nature and destiny of the soul. The theory of Ideas makes 
its appearance at the same moment with the doctrine of the 
soul’s immortality and divinity; and the whole argument 
of the Phaedo is that the two doctrines stand or fall together.* 
There is therefore a strong prima facie case for holding that the 
Theory of Ideas should be interpreted from the mystic stand- 
point, and as inspired by the same view of the world and of life 
and death that gave rise to the systems of Parmenides and 
Empedocles. 

The contrast between the two groups of dialogues comes out 
strongly, when we compare the Apology, Plato's version of 
Socrates’ speech at his trial, with the earlier part of the Phaedo, 
which professes to record Socrates’ last conversation with his 
intimate friends. The comparison involves a problem which 
has been solved in various ways. Before we state our own 
solution, the facts must be briefly reviewed. We need only 
premise that it is extremely difficult to believe that Plato can 


1 Hermodorus ap. Diog. L. n. 106, iii. 6; see Burnet’s edition of the 
Phaedo, Oxford, 1911, Introd. I am glad to find myself largely in agree- 
ment with the views stated in this valuable introduction, and with the 
similar views of A. E. Taylor, Varia Socratica, i., Oxford 1911. I have 
long been working towards the conclusion that Plato’s system is funda- 
mentally Pythagorean ; and I owe to these books much that has helped me 
to form a clearer opinion. 

2 76 8: ἴση ἀνάγκη ταῦτά (τὰ εἴδη) τε εἶναι καὶ τὰς ἡμετέρας ψυχὰς πρὶν καὶ ἡμᾶς 
γεγονέναι, καὶ εἰ μὴ ταῦτα, οὐδὲ τάδε. 


244 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


have substantially misrepresented what Socrates said on either 
of these occasions.1 He was present at the trial, and had ample 
opportunities of learning what had happened in the prison. 


127. Immortality in the Apology 


The Apology has two passages in which Socrates speaks of the 
nature and significance of death. In the former (p. 294), 
Socrates says that to be afraid of death is the same thing as 
to think one is wise, when one is not; for it is to suppose that 
one knows what one does not know. No one knows even so 
much as whether death may be the greatest of all goods for 
man, and yet men fear it, as if they knew it to be the greatest of 
evils. Herein, if anywhere, may lie Socrates’ own superiority 
in wisdom: having no sufficient knowledge about the things 
in Hades, he does not suppose himself to have any; what he 
does know, is that it is bad to do wrong and disobey him who 
is the better, be he God or man. He fears this evil which he 
knows, rather than that other evil which may possibly be a 
good. 

In his final address after his condemnation (p. 40 c), he says 
that there is considerable hope that his fate, after all, may be a 
good one. Death is one of two things. Either it is ‘like being 
nothing ’ 5 and having no consciousness of anything ; or it may 
be, as certain accounts say, a shift, or change of abode, to another 
place. If it is like a dreamless sleep, that would be a great 
gain ; for few indeed of our waking days and nights are better and 
pleasanter than dreamless sleep. If, again, it is like a journey 
to another country, and the accounts are true which say that 
all the dead are there, what greater good could there be ? 
Suppose that, on arriving in Hades, one will be rid of these men 
who profess to be judges here, and find the true judges, Minos 
and Rhadamanthus and Aeacus and Triptolemus, and other 


1 This point has been brought out with great force by Burnet and Taylor, 
opp. citt, I am, however, inclined to think that in the Phaedo Plato would 
allow himself considerably more freedom than these writers will admit. 

2 οἷον μηδὲν εἶναι. This does not mean sheer annihilation, complete non- 
existence; but being a shadow, a cipher, something that does not count ; 
as when the dying hero in Tragedy says, οὐδέν ely’ ἐγώ. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 245 


demigods who proved themselves just in their lives! Who, 
again, would not give much to be in the company of Orpheus, 
Musaeus, Hesiod, and Homer? If that is true, Socrates would 
gladly die many times. The company there would suit him to 
a marvel; for he would meet others who had been unjustly 
judged, such as Palamedes and Ajax, and compare his experi- 
ences with theirs. Also, he could go on spending his time 
examining people, to find out who was wise, and who thought 
he was, and was not. It would be great happiness to question 
Agamemnon, and Odysseus, and Sisyphus, and countless other 
men and women. Anyhow, the dead are happier than the living, 
for, if all that is said be true, they are deathless, and therefore 
cannot be put to death for practising dialectic ! 

It will hardly be denied that this passage, with its ironic tone, 
leaves the impression that Socrates’ attitude is agnostic; but 
we must remember that Socrates may not have chosen to express 
his private convictions to such an audience at such a moment. 
We can accept the Apology as a faithful report, without conclud- 
ing that the totally different attitude towards death taken by 
the Socrates in the Phaedo is not, in the main, historic. 


128. Ideas and Souls in the Phaedo 


The setting of the Phaedo marks it as dedicated to the Pytha- 
gorean community at Phlius ; 5 and the principal interlocutors, 
the Thebans, Simmias and Kebes, were alike Socratics and pupils 
of Philolaus, the Pythagorean who settled at Thebes. Socrates 
now declares? that he dies willingly, because he thinks he will 
go to the company of good and wise Gods, and perhaps he will 
find there also dead men who are better than men on earth. 
Of this last he cannot be certain; but that he will go to the 
presence of Gods who are good masters, he is as sure as he can 
be about any such matter. He has good hope that death is not 
nothingness, and that, as the ancient accounts say, it is much 
better for the good than for the bad. 


1 It Has been pointed out that these demigods may simply be judges 
among the dead, because they were exceptionally just, without any idea of 
a ‘last judgment ’ of souls or of a distribution of rewards and punishments. 

* For details see introductions to Ferrai’s and Burnet’s editions, 

ὃ Phaedo, 08 Β, 


246 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Plato seems careful to mark that the discourse, opened by this 
statement, is a sort of retractation of the Apology! It contains 
a statement of the Pythagorean view of life and death, with 
which we are already familiar. Plato also indicates that it is 
to be taken rather as an expression of faith—a thing which is 
earnestly believed, in its general outlines, to be true—than as a 
theory which can, as yet, be certainly established by argument. 
It is a mythos, not a logos.? 

The famous sermon is too familiar to be repeated here. What 
specially concerns us is the analogy between the soul and the 
true ‘natures’ or Ideas. The immortal thinking soul, which 
alone knows reality, is sharply distinguished from the body, 
with which are associated the lower faculties of sense, emotion, 
and desire. Death is the complete release of the soul from the 
infection and impurity of that lower nature; philosophy is the 
rehearsal of death, in which the soul retires by herself, shaking 
off, so far as she can, the senses and lusts of the body, to com- 
mune with those invisible and passionless existences, Justice, 
Beauty, Goodness, and the rest. 

The ruling conception of this new Apology is the already 
familiar contrast of the two worlds. There is a supersensible 
world, to which soul ‘ by herself’ and the objects of true know- 
ledge belong; and there is the sensible world of body, and of 
visible and tangible things. The world of the body is a prison, 
or a tomb; that other world of the soul and of Ideas is the 
realm of true life and reality, in which all worth resides. 

In the course of the arguments that follow, it becomes still 
clearer that souls and Ideas are things of the same kind. The 
first two arguments aim at persuading us that the soul exists 
before birth and after death, and that, before her birth into this 
world, she not only existed, but had consciousness. The third 

1 It begins, 63 8, with the words φέρε δὴ πειραθῶ πιθανώτερον πρὸς ὑμᾶς 
ἀπολογήσασθαι ἣ πρὸς τοὺς δικαστάς, and ends, 698, εἴ τι οὖν ὑμῖν πιθανώτερός 
εἰμι ἐν τῇ ἀπολογίᾳ ἣ τοῖς ᾿Αθηναίων δικασταῖς, εὖ ἂν ἔχοι. 

2 This, I believe, 18 part of the significance of the passage (60D) about the 
dream in which Socrates has been warned to ‘ work at music’ (μουσικὴν ποίει 
καὶ ἐργάζου). Socrates had hitherto taken ‘music’ to mean philosophy—his 
own rationalising dialectic; but now he thinks it may mean literal ‘music,’ 
fables not loyo:. Not being μυθολογικός, he borrows the fables of Aesop and 


turns them into poetry (613). At 6] he describes the discourse which 
ollows as μυθολογεῖν. Cf. 708, διαμνθολογῶωεν. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 247 


tries to dispel Kebes’ fear that the soul (which, hike other 
Greeks, he conceives as an extended gaseous substance) may be 
dissipated, like smoke, when it leaves the body. This argument 
(p. 77 ff.) may be resumed as follows : 

We have to ask, what sort of objects can suffer dissolution, 
and what cannot ; and to which class soul belongs. Only that 
which is composite, or consists of pieces that have been put 
together (τὸ συντεθὲν καὶ σύνθετον ὄν), can be dissolved ; and 
it is probable that immutable objects like the Ideas are in- 
composite, and so indissoluble, whereas the particular things, 
belonging to the groups called after them, are always changing 
and passing away. 

Let us, then, divide things into two classes—the unseen, which 
never change, and the seen, which are changing perpetually. 
The body is more ‘akin’ (συγγενής) to the seen, the soul to 
the unseen. The soul is invisible; she is distracted and dazzled 
by the perception of sense-objects through the bodily faculties ; 
whereas, when she is withdrawn by herself, she finds rest in 
contemplating those eternal, pure, immortal objects to which 
she is akin. Moreover, soul rules over body ; and to rule is the 
function of that which is divine. Hence, the soul may be ex- 
pected to be altogether indissoluble, ‘or nearly so’; for even 
the body holds together for a long time, and some parts of it 
are ‘ practically immortal.’ Surely soul, the unseen thing, which 
goes pure to the good and wise God, cannot be dissolved ; but, 
if she escapes free from bodily contamination, she reaches ‘ that 
which is like herself, divine, immortal, wise,’ and becomes, in 
the mystical sense, ewdazmon. 


129. Plato’s conversion to Pythagoreanism 


How are we to account for the apparent change of view from 
the Apology to the Phaedo*? Professors Burnet and Taylor 
have made out a strong case for believing that both dialogues 
must be, in the main, historical ; and we have already remarked 
that there is no difficulty in supposing that Socrates would 
speak very differently to the judges in the court and to his 
intimate friends in the prison. The argument points to the con- 
clusion that Socrates was more familiar with Pythagorean ideas 


248 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


than has commonly been supposed ; though it must be noted 
that none of the positive arguments advanced in the early part 
of the Phaedo is regarded as conclusive, except the argument 
from anamnesis—that all true knowledge is recollection, in this 
life, of knowledge of the Ideas, acquired by the soul in the other 
world.? 

The problem that remains to be faced is this: If Socrates 
Teally talked in this way, and discussed the mystic view of im- 
mortality as bound up with the theory of Ideas, why is there no 
trace of this association of doctrines in the earlier Socratic 
dialogues? If Plato learnt all this from Socrates, how could 
he possibly have kept it out of the Charmides, Laches, and the 
rest ? 

To this question the most probable answer seems to us to 
be, that Plato did not learn it from Socrates, but from Pytha- 
gorean friends after his master’s death. Professor Burnet 
points out that, though Plato must from his childhood have 
known Socrates, and heard him talk, we have no ground for 
supposing that he belonged to the inner circle of Socratics.? 
As a young man, he may have been chiefly interested in the 
very exciting politics of that troubled time; and the rationalis- 
ing, dialectical side of Socrates may have been all he knew. 
Suppose that this was so, and that after the death of Socrates, 
when he was twenty-eight, he set himself to defend Socrates’ 
memory from the charge of having corrupted the youth of 
Athens, by describing the sort of conversations he had witnessed 
in the porticoes and gymnasia. The subject of these early dia- 
logues is the definition of virtue, or of particular virtues, such 
as courage and temperance; the thesis they illustrate is the 
Socratic doctrine that virtue is knowledge. Knowledge meant 
clear thinking—both that self-knowledge which refutes the 
false conceit of wisdom, and the attempt to conceive clearly 
and isolate in definition the meaning of a name like Justice, as 
distinct from the many things called by that name. There is 
no hint in these earlier dialogues that such a ‘ meaning’ (λόγος) 


1 See Phaedo, 90 & ff., where Socrates admits that he has been arguing as 
one who has an interest in the conclusion, and not dispassionately, and 91 x, 
where the anamnesia argument alone is reaffirmed as valid, 

ὃ Barnet, Phaedo, 1911, Introd. p. xxvi, 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 249 


or ‘form’ (εἶδος) is regarded as a substantial, existing thing, 
or as more real than the things called after it, or as in any sense 
ἃ cause of their existence. Probably Plato, in this first period, 
thought of it as a secondary and unsubstantial thing, like the 
Atomist’s evdolon, or wraith ; and, like other Greeks, imagined 
the soul as a shadowy phantom of the same kind. The appar- 
ently agnostic attitude of Socrates in the Apology may well 
represent Plato’s own standpoint at that moment, and all that 
he then knew of Socrates’ beliefs on the subject. 

Now, consider the effect upon him of becoming familiar, within 
ἃ few years of Socrates’ death, with those mystic friends of the 
inner circle who had sympathised with a different side of the 
master’s thought. Hitherto, Plato had known little about the 
mystics. There was no Pythagorean community at Athens ; 
Orphism existed there only in a degraded form, which moved 
Plato to the contempt freely expressed in the Republic. It might 
well be some time before he could whole-heartedly assimilate the 
new view of Socrates now put before him. He may have been con- 
verted at the moment when it flashed upon him that the ‘ forms ’ 
or ‘meanings’ which Socrates had sought, were not unsubstantial 
wraiths, but the very living natures and indwelling souls of their 
groups ; when he saw in them the mediators which would take 
the place of the Pythagorean ‘numbers,’ and once more fill the 
gap, left by Parmenides, between the immutable One and the 
manifold world of sense. It would be very human and natural 
that the sudden and tremendous illumination of this idea should 
mark the crisis of his conversion to mysticism, and carry with it 
the conviction that this, after all, must have been what Socrates 
was feeling after. His first duty would then be to wmite dia- 
logues like the Symposium and the Phaedo, in which Socrates 
figures as the exponent of the new theory.! 


130. Ideas as Soul-substances 


To our minds, the doctrine that souls are like Ideas, and 
Ideas like souls, is strange and paradoxical. A soul and a con- 


ΔΙ would not leave the impression that I hold Socrates to have been 
either an Orphic or a Pythagorean. I only suggest that Plato, helped by 
his mystic friends, may have read his new Pythagoreanism back into the 
thought of Socrates, 


250 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


cept, such as Beauty or Equality, seem to us to have little in 
common. Hence we are inclined to assume, as a matter of 
course, that the distinction must have been equally obvious to 
Plato, and, proceeding on that assumption, to interpret him 
as discovering analogies between very different classes of things. 
This is to reverse the true state of the matter. Plato's task 
was, not to find resemblances, but to differentiate two kinds of 
supersensible reality, which had originally been almost or quite 
indistinguishable. We need only recall the fact that his contem- 
porary, Democritus, explained visual perception by the entrance 
of ‘images (εἴδωλα) which flow off (ἀπορρέοντα) continually 
from the objects seen, are of like form (ὁμοιόμορφα) with them, 
and impinge upon the eye.’! Democritus seems to have called 
these images devkela, “ semblances,’ ‘ appearances ’ ; 2 they were 
nothing but soul-phantoms or wraiths, reduced, as Atomism 
demanded, to filmy tissues of atoms. At this stage of thought, 
images and concepts could still be credited with the properties 
ascribed to phantoms or souls—objective reality, existence in 
time, extension and localisation in space, and even bodily 
properties such as resistance. The task of philosophy was to 
get concepts clear of these soul-properties. Plato still conceives 
Ideas as soul-substances, and assigns to them the same pro- 
perties he now assigns to souls: both alike are immutable, 
uniform (μονοειδῆ), incomposite, immortal, divine. 


131. T'wo grades of supersensible existence 


Further, in his present stage, Plato seems to recognise two 
grades of supersensible existence: (a) pure, unmixed with 
body, and (6) «mpure, mixed with body. Moreover, he seems 
to think that both Ideas and souls may be on either grade. 

(a) The Soul may be withdrawn ἡ by itself’ (αὐτὴ καθ᾽ αὑτήν), 
and retire to that which is pure, ever-existent, immortal, and 
unchangeable, and be with this for ever, being akin (συγγενής) 


1 Alex. in Arist de Sens p. 56; Beare, Greek Theories of Elem. Cognation, 
p. 30. 
2 Hesych : δίκηλον---φάσμα, ὄψις, εἴδωλον, μίμημα. Cic. ad Fam. xv. 16. 1: 
quae ille Gargettius et iam ante Democritus εἴδωλα, hic (Catius Insuber, 
the Epicurean) spectra nominat. For the religious use of δίκηλον see M. P. 
Nilsson, Der Ursprung der Tragodie, Neue Jahibucher (1911), xxvii. p. 692. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 251 


to it! This retreat into the unseen world means a purification 
of soul from the lower and bodily affections. Complete deliver- 
ance from these is not attainable till death, when soul is separated. 
from body, and then only if the soul has been purified in life by 
the pursuit of wisdom. 

(Ὁ) During this mortal life, and even after death, the soul- 
substance may be infected and permeated by the bodily.? In 
life, it is tainted by passions and desires; and, after death, if it 
has not departed pure, it remains as a visible ghost, ‘ wallowing 
about graves and tombs, where certain shadowy phantoms of 
souls are seen, the eidola of those souls which have not been 
released in purity, but partake of the visible, and are therefore 
seen.’ > The substance of the soul is, again and again, spoken of 
as if it were capable of being ‘tainted,’ ‘ mixed,’ ‘ permeated ’ 
with bodily substance. The possibility of its remaining in this 
impure state even after death is necessary to account for its 
reincarnation ; for, if 1t escaped pure, ‘not dragging with it 
anything of the body,’ there would be no reason why it should 
fall back into another mortal form. The language throughout 
this part of the Phaedo indisputably describes the substance of 
the soul as if it were spatially extended and capable of literal 
admixture with bodily elements. Every term appropniate to 
such a conception is used, and there is not a hint that it is all 
mere metaphor. To treat it as such 1s arbitrary and baseless. 


1 Phaedo, 79D. 

2 Phaedo, 67A: μηδὲ ἀναπιμπλώμεθα (infected) τῆς τούτου (τοῦ σώματος) 
φύσεως, ἀλλὰ καθαρεύωμεν. GHB: ἕως ἄν τὸ σῶμα ἔχωμεν καὶ συμκεφυρμένη 
ἢ ἡμῶν ἡ ψυχὴ μετὰ τοιούτον κακοῦ, SOE: ἐὰν μὲν καθαρὰ ἀπαλλάττηται, μη δὲν 
τοῦ σώματος συνεφέλκουσα, ἅτε οὐδὲν κοινωνοῦσα αὐτῷ ἐν τῷ βίῳ ἑκοῦσα εἶναι. 
818. μεμιασμένη καὶ ἀκάθαρτος τοῦ σώματος. 81C: διειλημμένη (distended, 
permeated) ὑπὸ τοῦ σωματοειδοῦς. 

ὁ Phaedo, 81 v. Compare my interpretation οἵ Empedocles’ view of soul 
as consisting of an immortal part, composed of the good principle (Love) 
tainted during the cycle of reincarnations with an admixture of the evil 
principle (Strife), and a mortal part (senses) consisting of the four bodily 
elements, p. 239. 

4 Phaedo, 81c. The soul which 1s ‘ permeated by the bodily’ and by con- 
tinual association (συνουσία) with it has worked the bodily into ws nature or 
substance (ἐνεποίησε σὐμφυτονῚ, is weighed down and dragged back into the 
visible world by this bodily admixture, which is ἐμβριθές, βαρύ, γεῶδες, 
ὁρατόν. Hence, in the Phaedrus, 248, the disembodied soul retains the two 
lower ‘ parts,’ symbolised by the two horses of the chariot, and by these it 
is dragged down again to earth. In these representations, however, strict 
consistency is not to be expected. 


252 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Now, the Ideas are described in very similar language. They 
too may exist in transcendental purity, or as embodied, ‘ present,’ 
in the things which they inform. In the second case, they are 
what we should call ‘ instances ’ of the Idea—the instances, for 
example, of Beauty which are somehow ‘communicated’ to 
beautiful things in the world of sense.’ 

(a) As the soul in its pure state is said to be ‘ by itself’ (αὐτὴ 
καθ᾽ αὑτήν), steadfast, immutable, divine, and immortal, so 
in the Symposium the Idea, when it is ‘by itself’ (αὐτὸ καθ᾽ 
αὑτὸ) and free from matter, is called uniform, unmixed, pure, 
divine.2 The conclusion of the argument at Phaedo 80 Ὁ states 
that soul is most like the divine, immortal, intelligible, uniform, 
indissoluble, unchangeable Idea ; while body is like the human, 
mortal, multiform, unintelligible, dissoluble, and perpetually 
changing. 

(b) The immanent Idea, on the other hand, is described in the 
same terms as the embodied soul which is permeated with 
earthly substance. As the soul is ‘filled by the body with 
passions and appetites and fears and all sorts of phantoms and 
rubbish,’ so the Idea, when it is involved in its visible embodi- 
ments, is ‘infected with human flesh and colours and all sorts 
of mortal rubbish.’ 

This comparison shows that the process of differentiating 
concepts from souls has not yet gone very far in Plato’s mind. 
We believe that, both in the early Socratic period and in these 
mystical dialogues of his middle life, Ideas and souls are things 
of the same kind, or barely distinguishable ; and that, precisely 
for that reason, his view of the nature of the Ideas changed 
simultaneously with his view of the nature of soul, when he was 


1 Huthyd. 300 ΚΕ: The many beautiful things are different from Beauty 
iteelf (αὐτὸ τὸ καλόν), but a certain beauty (κάλλος τι) is present (πάρεστι) to 
each of them. Phaedo, 100D: οὐκ ἄλλο τι ποιεῖ αὐτὸ (a beautiful thing) καλὸν 
4 ἡ ἐκείνου τοῦ καλοῦ εἴτε παρουσία εἴτε κοινωνία εἴτε ὅπῃ δὴ καὶ ὅπως προσγενο- 
μένη. Throughout the concluding argument, the instance of the Idea in us 
(e.g. τὸ ἐν ἡμῖν μέγεθος, 102 Ὁ) is in some sense distinguished from the Idea 
itself (αὐτὸ τὸ MéyeOos), which is in nature (ἐν τῇ φύσει). 

® Symp. 211: μονοειδές, εἰλικρινές, καθαρὸν, ἄμικτον, θεῖον. See the whole 
context. 

8 Phaedo, 660: (soul) ἐρώτων δὲ καὶ ἐπιθυμιῶν καὶ φόβων καὶ εἰδώλων παντο- 
δαπῶν καὶ φλναρίας ἐμπίμπλησιν ἡμᾶς πολλῇ: (τὸ σῶμα). Symp. 211: (Idea) 
ἀνάπλεων σαρκῶν τε ἀνθρωπίνων καὶ χρωμάτων καὶ ἄλλη: πολλῇ! φλναρία: θνητῆς, 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 253 


converted to Pythagoreanism. The Phaedo announces this 
conversion as fully accomplished. 

According to his new view of the constitution of reality, the 
“nature of things ἡ + is to be found in these supersensible Ideas, 
each of which is the centre, and indwelling soul, of a group of 
objects in the sense-world. 


132. The Idea as Daemon and the nature of ‘ Participation ’ 


We have seen how, in the Phaedo, the Platonic ‘ Forms’ or 
“ Ideas ’ are declared to be objects of the same kind with souls. 
But the Ideas, it must be noted, are not individual souls, but 
souls of groups, or classes of things, called by their names. They 
are, in fact, descended from entities of the same order as the 
daemons described above (Chapter 111.)—the impersonal spirits 
of human groups or natural departments.” Justice, for in- 
stance, is the one collective soul-idea which is somehow shared 
in common by all just persons and things. How is this relation 
to be conceived ? How is it possible for one form or nature 
to be present in a plurality of things, and yet to remain one ? 


1 φύσις in Plato means the World of Ideas; cf. Rep. 5974 : (ἡ κλίνη) ἡ ἐν 
Ty φύσει οὖσα, made by God, identical with τὸ εἶδος 8 δὴ φάμεν εἶναι ὃ ἔστι 
κλίνη. Phaedo, 1038: τὸ ἐν τῇ φύσει (ἐναντίον) contrasted with τὸ ἐν ἡμῖν. 
Parm. 1328: τὰ μὲν εἴδη ταῦτα ὥσπερ παραδείγματα ἑστάναι ἐν τῇ φύσει. 

3. See Plato's description of the rule of the daemons in the age of Kronos 
(above, p. 35), each daemon presiding over one kind. The close analogy 
between Plato’s Ideas and the ‘ species-deities,’ of which Tylor, Prim. Cult. 
(1903), ii. p. 243, gives examples, has long been pointed out, especially the 
Finnish haltiat: ‘ Every object in nature has a “‘haltia,” a guardian deity or 
genius, a bemg which was ite creator and thenceforth became attached to 
it. These deities or genii are, however, not bound to each single transitory 
object, but are free personal beings which have movement, form, body, and 
soul. Their existence in no wise depends on the existence of the individual 
objects, for although no object in nature is without its guardian deity, this 
deity extends to the whole race or species. This ash-tree, this stone, this 
house has indeed ita particular ‘‘haltia,” yet these same “ haltiat” concern 
themselves with other ash-trees, stones, and houses, of which the individuals 
may perish, but their presiding genii live on in the species’ (p. 245). These 
haltiat are obviously group-souls or daemons arrested in an earlier stage 
than Plato’s Ideas, retaining more soul-properties, which the Ideas have shed 
on their way towards becoming mere concepts. The obscurity about the 
relation of the ‘species-deity’ to the particular instances of it present in 
members of the group is precisely that which besets the relation of αὐτὸ τὸ 
MéyeOos to τὸ ἐν ἡμῖν μέγεθος in Plato’s Phaedo, 1020 ff. 


254 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


This is the much-vexed problem of ‘ participation’ (μέθεξις), 
which Plato could never solve to his satisfaction. 

We understand the problem and its insolubility, when we 
grasp that this relation called ‘ participation ’ (methezxis) is, from 
the first, a mystical, non-rational relation, which defies rational 
analysis. The Idea is a group-soul, related to its group as a 
mystery-daemon, like Dionysus, is related to the group of wor- 
shippers, his thasos. The worshippers of Dionysus believed 
that, when they held their orgiastic rites, the one God entered 
into each and all of them; each and all became entheor; they 
‘ partook ’ of the one divine nature, which was ‘ communicated ’ 
to them all, and‘ present’ in each. It is thus we must interpret 
the three terms—methexis, parousia, kounonia—by which Plato 
tries to describe the relation of an Idea to its group. Another 
term—mimesis—has the same significance. Jfimesis is not 
‘imitation ’ in the sense of an external resemblance: there is 
no ‘likeness’ in this sense between the Idea ‘Man’ and a 
human being, and Plato never could suppose that there was. 
Mimesis has its old sense of ‘embodying,’ ‘representing’: it 
is like the relation which an actor has to the character he im- 
personates, only that it is essentially between a group and a 
unity. A better illustration is to be found in a variety of sym- 
bols, all of which embody or represent one meaning. This sense 
of mumesis was preserved by the Pythagoreans. Aristotle 1s 
exactly ght when he says that ‘ whereas the Pythagoreans say 
that things exist by “‘ representing ” numbers, Plato says it 18 
by “ participation ’’; he merely changed the name.’ ! 


133. The problem of ‘ Participation 


We have seen how the conception of this relation, subsisting 
between a divine or daemonic being and a group, had been kept 
alive by the Pythagorean community, which, during its founder's 
life and after his death, believed itself to be continuously ani- 
mated and inspired by the master’s spirit. We have seen also 


1 Arist. Met. avi. 98709: κατὰ μέθεξιν γὰρ εἶναι τὰ πολλὰ τῶν συνωνύμων 
τοῖς εἴδεσιν. τὴν δὲ μέθεξιν τοὔνομα μόνον μετέβαλεν" οἱ μὲν γὰρ Πυθαγόρειοι 
μιμήσει τὰ ὄντα φασὶν εἶναι τῶν ἀριθμῶν, Πλάτων δὲ μεθέξει. τὴν μέντοι γε μέθεξιν 
ἣ τὴν μίμησιν ἥτις ἂν εἴη τῶν εἴδων ἀφεῖσαν ἐν κοινῷ ζητεῖν. 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 255 


how, in such cases, the image of the human prophet recedes and 
gathers about it the glories of miraculous legend. Once more 
the old story is repeated. Just as the Gods in their day ceased 
to be functional daemons in close and perpetual relations with 
their worshippers, and drifted away to Olympus, and finally to 
the utmost heaven, so Pythagoras had passed from being a 
marvellous man (δαιμόνιος ἀνήρ, θεῖος ἀνήρ), up the ladder 
which leads from earth to heaven, to become identified with 
Apollo himself. The penalty of this Olympian exaltation 
is always the same: the old sense of intimate communion, 
based on community of nature, must fade and die. What was 
once a collective soul, becomes a distinct individual, removed 
by an impassable gulf from its group. 

The same fate awaited the Platonic Idea. The relation 
called methexis will not bear rational analysis. Amnstotle, after 
saying that Plato adopted this relation from the Pythagoreans 
and merely changed the name, adds that both alike ‘left it an 
open question what on earth this participation or representation 
may be.’ As regards Plato, the statement 1s hardly true. 
Already in the Phaedo he has become uncomfortable about 1t, 
and declines to commit himself to the terms * presence ’ and 
“communion.'! Later, in the Parmenides, he raises the intel- 
lectual difficulties.* Parmenides asks whether we are to under- 
stand that the whole Idea, or only a part, is present in each 
thing which ᾿ partakes° of it. Hither alternative is beset with 
difficulties. The problem cannot be solved, until the Ideas alto- 
gether cease to be indwelling group-souls, or daemons, which 
can impart themselves to a whole group, and yet remain one. 
Their fate must ultimately be to dry up into mere‘ concepts,’ or 
logical objects of thought, immutable still and mdependent of 
the subject which knows them, but without life and power. 
The relation of metheris must be reduced to the relation of 
logical subject to universal predicate. From the point of view 
of logical theory, this step 1s an unmitigated gain; but, although 


1 Phaedo, 100D: οὐκ ἄλλο τι ποιεῖ αὐτὸ καλὸν ἢ ἡ ἐκείνου τοῦ Καλοῦ εἴτε 
παρουσία εἴτε κοινωνία εἴτε ὅπῃ δὴ καὶ ὅπως; προσγενομένη (προσαγορευομένη, 
Wytt )° οὐ γὰρ ἔτι τοῦτο διισχυρίζομαι, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι τῷ Καλῴ πάντα τὰ καλὰ [γίγνε- 
rat} καλά. 

3 Parm., 131. 


256 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Plato, as a logician, is irresistibly driven towards it, the mystic 
in him cries out against it. In the midst of his later and most 
severely logical work, the protest breaks out: ‘Can we ever be 
made to believe that motion, and life, and soul, and consciousness, 
are not present in that which is perfectly real ? Can we imagine 
it as neither alive nor conscious, but, in all its irreproachable 
solemnity, a senseless, immovable fixture ?’! 

The trouble is that, if the Ideas are allowed to cease to be 
souls, and to become mere concepts, they can no longer be re- 
garded as the causes—the only true causes—of the world. The 
Socrates of the Phaedo describes how he has turned his back 
on all such causes of becoming and perishing as the earlier 
physicists had alleged, and resorted to one type of explanation 
for everything. If he is asked, for instance, why a thing is 
beautiful, he will not say, ‘ because its colour, or its shape, is 
so-and-so’; his only answer is: ‘for no other reason than that 
it partakes of the Beautiful.’* This is well enough, so long as 
it means that ‘the Beautiful Itself’ is a divine substance, which 
imparts its nature to all beautiful things, and is somehow 
“present in them. But, if ‘the Beautiful Itself’ is to be a mere 
universal predicate, and “ partakes of’ is to mean nothing but 
the subject-predicate relation, what becomes of Socrates’ sole 
and sufficient reason, why things are beautiful? ‘This is 
beautiful because it partakes of the Beautiful ’ will now mean 
exactly the same as ‘ This is beautiful because it is beautiful ’ : 
“ partakes of’ is a mere synonym of this sense of ΄ 18. 2 The 
Idea is ἃ cause no longer. 

In the latter part of the Phaedo, it is clear that, partly owing 
to the ambiguity of the word ata, which means ‘ explanation,’ 
“reason, ‘ground,’ and ‘cause’ of existence or of becoming, 
Plato confuses two very different theories. Qne is logical, and 


1 Sophist, 248": τί δὲ πρὸς Διός ; ὡς ἀληθώς κίνησιν καὶ ζωὴν καὶ γνχὴν καὶ 
φρόνησιν ἢ ῥᾳδίως πεισθησόμεθα τῷ παντελῶς ὄντι μὴ παρεῖναι, μηδὲ ζῆν αὐτὸ μηδὲ 
φρονεῖν, ἀλλὰ σεμνὸν καὶ ἅγιον, νοῦν οὐκ ἔχον, ἀκίνητον ἑστὸ εἶναι ; 

3 Phaedo, 100c. 

8 This obvious difficulty seems to escape those critios of the Phaedo who 
speak as if Plato, when he wrote that dialogue, realised that methexis was 
only a figurative expression for a clearly conceived subject-predicate rela- 
tion. We must remember that Plato has no words for ‘subject’ or ‘ predi- 
cate’ or ‘relation.’ 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 257 


states that the explanation, or account, to be given of the pro- 
position * this thing is beautiful,’ is that there is an Idea, Beauti- 
ful, and this thing partakes of it. In modern terminology this 
is no more than to say: ‘ Every proposition of the type “ὦ 
18 A” implies that there is a concept, or universal predicate, A, 
and that 2 has to it a certain relation.’! Taken simply as an 
analysis of the subject-predicate proposition, this account is 
unexceptionable ; though it does not hold of the numerical 
and relational propositions (‘ one and one are Two,’ ‘ Phaedo is 
taller than Socrates’) to which Plato also applies it. But that 
is not all. The logical theory is not distinguished from a meta- 
physical doctrine, which may be stated thus: ‘ This beautiful 
thing exists (or begins to exist, γίγνεται) for no other reason than 
that Beauty exists, and this thing partakes (or comes to partake) 
of its nature.’ Qn this interpretation, the existence of Beauty 
Itself (αὐτὸ τὸ καλόν) is asserted to be the cause of the existence 
of all particular beautiful things in the world of sense. The 
relation called methezis is not here the logical relation of subject 
to predicate in ἃ proposition, but a causal relation. The Idea 
is to be, somehow, the supersensible ground (αἰτία) of the 
existence of sensible things which become and perish in time. 
In order to be so, it must impart its nature in some inexplicable 
way, which can only be described figuratively. It is like an 
original (παράδειγμα) which casts a copy (μίμημα), or like- 
ness (εἰκών), of itself into a mirror, or some other reflecting 
medium. The supersensible world is an immutable hierarchy 
of Ideas, or Types, which throws its image upon the ever- 
flowing stream of time. Or, itis a heaven of divine souls, which 
impart themselves to the groups of transitory things that bear 
their names. The whole conception is manifestly mythical, 
but it is of the essence of the theory. ᾿ The logical interpretation 
18 struggling to get clear of the mythical; the Idea threatens’ 
to pass from being an indwelling group-soul to bemg a mere 
universal concept, which does not exist at all, and, if it did, 
could not cause the existence or becoming of particular things. 


1 The characteristics of the relation are that 1t holds only between a 
‘particular’ or thing and a concept; that it holds from the thing to the 
concept, and not in the reverse sense ; and that every thing has this relation 
to some concept, 

R 


258 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Plato did not realise that he was only making an important 
discovery in logic; he thought he was discovering the causes 
—the sole, true causes—of the existence of the world. 


134. The Olympianisation of the Ideas 


It is curious to observe how the development of the Platonic 
Ideas corresponds to other developments already described. 
Originally inherent in their group, they are, at first, partly dis- 
engaged from it, and yet remain immanent throughout its 
extent, and related to it as causes. Then, in the second stage, 
they become completely distinct, and only externally related to 
their logical extension. The process is like that by which the 
myth, from being a verbal counterpart of the ritual action, 
comes to be a generalised representation of it, as it were a uni- 
versal, detached from the unlimited series of particular cele- 
brations of the rite. It then becomes an ‘ explanation ’ (az/ton), 
professing to account for the existence and practice of the ritual, 
just as the Idea is erected into an explanation or account (logos) 
of the things that partake of it. Again, as we have pointed out, 
the Idea is like the group-soul, at first projected as an ideal (para- 
deugma) of the group, and then becoming a daemon, which is 
regarded as something partly distinct, and yet the source, or 
cause, of the supernatural powers of the group. Once more the 
history of rational civilised philosophy repeats the history of 
pre-rational religious representation. 

For, it 18 in this way, as M. Lévy-Brubl points out,! that 
‘causes’ were first sought and discovered by primitive man. 
The process is not one of associating two things or events, first 
conceived as distinct, and then brought into connection as cause 
and effect. “ We ought not to say, as is often said, that primitive 
men associate with all objects that strike their senses or imagina- 
tion, occult forces, magical properties, a sort of soul or vital 
principle, and that they add animistic beliefs to their perceptions. 
There is here no association. The mystic properties of persons 
and things are an integral part of the representation which the 
primitive man has of them—a representation which, at this 


1 Fonctions mentales, etc., p. 39. 


THE MYSTIOAL TRADITION 259 


stage, is an indecomposable whole. Later, at another period 
of social evolution, what we call the natural phenomenon will 
tend to become the sole content of the perception, to the ex- 
clusion of other elements, which will then take on the aspect 
of beliefs, and even, finally, of superstitions. But, until this 
“dissociation” takes place, the perception remains an un- 
differentiated unity. We ought never to ask, ‘What ex- 
planation must the primitive mind give itself of such and such 
a natural phenomenon?’ The statement of the problem 
implies a false hypothesis. There are, for the mentality of the 
lower societies, no natural phenomena in our sense. For them, 
the explanation has no need to be sought ; it is implicit in the 
mystical elements of their collective representations. The 
question that has to be asked 1s, how the phenomenon, little by 
little, detached itself from the complex in which it was at first 
enveloped, so as to be separately apprehended, and how what 
was once an rntegral element in it, became later an ‘ explanation.’ 

The Platonic Ideas seem to owe their existence to a process 
of dissociation, like that which M. Lévy-Bruhl suggests. Their 
genesis is, accordingly, parallel to the genesis of ‘souls,’ which 
we have already described. They emerge from their class, as 
the daemon or the king emerged from the social group, to be 
the depositary of its collective consciousness, the externalised 
and projected vehicle, or source. of its power. Finally, as the 
group-soul gave place to the individual soul, a corresponding 
fate is reserved for the Ideas, at the hands of Anistotle. 
Plato's greatest follower will not shrmk from declaring the 
truth, that the ‘ Ideas ’—these Forms, originally endowed with 
the attributes of soul—are really nothing but forms. They 
have no independent existence, no life, no power of causing any- 
thing to come into existence.! The highest degree of reality 
will be taken away by Aristotle from that other world of im- 
material Ideas, and restored to the world we see around us. 
To him, the forms, or essences, of individual things will be 
substances, realities, in the fullest sense. 

In proportion as the Ideas cease to be causes and become mere 
logical concepts, Platonism is threatened with the inevitable 


1 Met. a 9. 


260 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


fate of a system which attempts to place the source of life outaide 
and above Nature, in ἃ metaphysical world of immutable reality. 
When we consider this world of Forms, it turns out to be nothing 
but a vast scheme of classification (moirat), a hierarchy of kinds, 
broadening downwards from its highest genus to its lowest 
individual species. It is the characteristic construction of the 
Intellect, which can divide and analyse, but not create. At the 
apex is enthroned that very Intellect itself. We call it Reason, 
God, the Good ; but it is idle to pretend that it can create the 
world. It is as impotent as the Parmenidean One, and for the 
same reason—its immutable perfection. The hierarchy of forms, 
by which we seek to link this One to the manifold world of 
change, is a channel without a stream. Plato, in his final 
attempt to formulate a cosmology, falls back on the mythical 
horn of the dilemma, which Parmenides had the courage to avoid. 
He is forced to attribute to his deified Intellect an impossible 
impulse of desire. It is the old religious necessity, realised long 
before by Pherekydes, who said that, when Zeus set about 
making the world, he changed himself into Eros. This Desire 
is the mythical Demiurge of the T:maeus, who, being good and 
therefore without jealousy (φθόνος), ‘desired that all things 
should be as like unto himself as possible. This is that most 
sovereign cause of becoming and of cosmic order, which we shall 
most surely be right in accepting from men of understanding. 
For God, desiring that all things should be good, and that, so 
far as this might be, there should be nothing inferior, having 
received all that is visible, not in a state of rest, but moving 
without harmony or measure, brought it from its disorder into 
order, thinking that this was in all ways better than the other.’ ? 

The mythical form of this whole cosmology is not a poetical 
dress, in which Plato arbitrarily chooses to clothe a perfectly 
definite and rational scheme, such as modern students set them- 
selves to discover in it. If Plato could have stated it as a 


1 Pherek. frag. 3=Procl. ad Tsm. 32c: ὁ Φερεκύδης ἔλεγεν els "Ἔρωτα pera- 
βεβλῆσϑαι τὸν Ala μέλλοντα δημιουργεῖν. 

* Plato, Timaeus, 29Ε. The language supports the view held by J. Adam 
that the Timacus gives a picture of a reconstruction of the universe at the 
beginning of one of the alternating periods, like those of Empedooles and of 
the Politicus myth. Cf. A. E. Taylor, Plato, p. 144, London, 1908. 


THE MYSTIOAL TRADITION 261 


logos, he would have done so, only too gladly ; but he cannot. 
It is not rational, but mystical—a mythos in substance as well 
as form, and drawn from mythical, mystical sources. There is 
no tolerable explanation in rational terms. An immutable, 
passionless Reason may trace the outlines of a scheme of classi- 
fication, and divide its concepts into duly subordinated genera 
and species; but it can do no more. To account for the exist- 
_ence of anything whatever, we have to ascribe to it the unworthy 
and lower faculty of desire, and give this desire an unworthy 
and lower object—the existence of an imperfect copy of per- 
fection. But that is the language of religion, not of science. 


135. The Flight of the Philosopher 


When Greek philosophy deified the speculative intellect, it 
made the supreme effort to work clear of all that was vague 
and mythical in religion, only to find that the intellect had 
become a deity and followed the elder Gods of emotional faith 
to the seventh heaven. In the system of Aristotle (which it is 
not within our scope to examine in detail), God is sublimated 
to the topmost pinnacle of abstraction, and conceived as Form 
without Matter—a pure Thought, cut off from all active or 
creative energy, for the Ultimate End can have no other end 
beyond itself. It cannot even think of anything but itself, for 
no other object is worthy of its attention. It is shut up in 
unceasing and changeless contemplation of itself. We are 
asked to believe that this condition is worthy of the names of 
perfect activity, of life, of blessedness ; and that such a God, 
though he cannot condescend to move the world in any other 
way, can move it as being himself the object of love (κινεῖ ὡς 
ἐρώμενον). God cannot love the world, or send forth his Logos 
into it; but the world is expected to love him, and all ite life 
is to be caused by desire for this monastic and self-hypnotised 
abstraction. It may be doubted whether this passion has ever 
been genuinely felt even by the most intellectual of mystics, 
much less by the rest of creation. It is only by calling it 
“God,’ and persuading ourselves that it is alive, and active, 
and bleased—all which is manifestly mythical—that we can 
induce the faintest feeling of attraction towards it. 


202 FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


In the system of Aristotle, the two factors of our original 
complex—the outline, shape, or etdos of the moira, and the 
functional force, the behaviour and nature (physis) pervading it— 
fall completely asunder at the two poles of existence. The form 
has escaped from its content, and the life has passed out of it, 
by @ process analogous to that by which the Olympian Gods 
shed the functional utility of their daemonic phase, and became 
idle and impotent forms, floating above a world in which all the 
processes of life and change go forward without their help. 

Religion, indeed, left them with individual attributes and 
capricious wills. But, now that science has left no room in nature 
for such wills to operate, the divine loses every vestige of desire 
and power, and is reduced to pure exdos—a strengthless esdolon. 


The philosopher, too, not obscurely aspires to imitate his 
divine counterpart, and ‘ follow where all is fled.’ At the con- 
clusion of his Ethics,! Aristotle’s ideal for humanity is clearly 
enough disclosed. Of all moral, practical activities, he argues, 
‘war and politics are the noblest and on the grandest scale ; 
but even these are incompatible with leisure, and chosen only 
as a means to some end beyond themselves. The activity of 
Reason is of higher worth, being speculative, and looking to no 
further end. It has also a pleasure which 18 peculiar to it, 
and enhances its activity. That being so, this activity is self- 
sufficient ; it is free (so far as may be for man) from cares 
and weariness ; it has all the other attributes of felicity. This, 
then, will be the perfect wellbeing of man. 

‘Such a life as this, however, is higher than the measure of 
humanity ; not in virtue of his humanity will man lead this 
life, but in virtue of something divine within him ; and, by 88 
much as this something is superior to his composite nature, 
by so much is {ts activity superior to the rest of virtue. If, 
then, Reason is divine in comparison with man, the life of 
Reason is divine in comparison with human life. We ought 
not to listen to those who exhort man to keep to man’s thoughts, 


1 Μιὰ, Nic. κ vii. Tam not convinced by those interpreters who deny 
that the wise man, as here described, ‘exists as an individual,’ and say 
that he is only ‘the formal element (of man’s eudasmonsa) abstracted and 
personified’ (J. A. Stewart, Notes on the Nicom. Eth., vol. ii. p. 443 (1692)). 


THE MYSTICAL TRADITION 263 


or a mortal to the thoughts of mortality ; but, so far as may be, 
to achieve immortality, and do what man may to live accord- 
ing to the highest thing that is in him; for, though it be little 
in bulk, in power and worth it is far above all the rest. 

‘Tt would seem, too, that this is the true self of every man, 
since it is the supreme and better part.! It will be strange, then, 
if he should choose not his own life, but some other’s. What we 
said before will be appropriate again here: that what is natur- 
ally proper to every creature is the highest and pleasantest for 
him. And so, to man, this will be the life of Reason, since 
Reason is, in the highest sense, a man’s self. Therefore, this 
life will also be most blessed.’ 

The ideal for the individual, then, is to escape from society, 
as God has escaped from his functional utility in Nature. Man’s 
soul rises, as the daemon had risen, above his social group. He 
will withdraw, like the Stoic, into autonomous self-sufficiency 
and Olympian contemplation. 

It is only a step further to the mystical trance of neo- 
platonism, in which thought is swallowed up in the beatific 
vision of the absolute One, above being and above knowledge, . 
ineffable, unthinkable, no longer even a Reason, but ‘ beyond | 
Reason’ (ἐπέκεινα vov)—‘the escape of the alone to the’ 
alone.’? In this ecstasy, Thought denies itself; and Philo- 
sophy, sinking to the close of her splendid curving flight, 
folds her wings and drops into the darkness whence she arose 
—the gloomy Erebus of theurgy and magic. 


1 1178a 2: δόξειε δ᾽ ἂν καὶ εἶναι ἕκαστος τοῦτο, elwep τὸ κύριον καὶ ἄμεινον. I 
incline to read εἴπερ καὶ κύριον τὸ ἄμεινον, 6 ‘since the better part 18 also 
that which makes him in the fullest sense («<vpws) what he is—his truest 
self.’ 

3 Plot. Han. vi.ix 11] καὶ οὗτος θεῶν καὶ ἀνθρώπων θείων καὶ εὐδαιμόνων βίος, 
ἀπαλλαγὴ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν τῇδε, βίος ἀνήδονοι τῶν τῆδε, φυγὴ μόνον πρὸς μόνον. 


ADDENDUM 


P. 106, 1. 19. Since this passage was printed off, 
Mr. H. M. Chadwick has criticised Professor Bethe’s 
theory in The Herow Age, chap. xiu (Cambridge, 
1912). 


INDEX OF CITATIONS 


AESCHINES— 
an Cles 111, . 

Aeschylus— 
Agam 655, 
— 1451 ff, 
Choeph. 128, 
Kum. 172, 
—— 730, 


ii. 81 4, 

Alexander Aphrod,— 
in Ariat. Afel. 9850, 
—— 985d 26, 


in Arist de Sens p. 56, 


Alkman— 
Parthenewn, 18, 


—— 12, 
Anaximenes— 
frag. 2, : 
Apollonius Rhodius— 
i, 496, 
Archytas— 
Frag. Phil. Gr. 1. 509, 
Aristophanes— 
Birds, 698, . 
Clouds, 1078, 
Knights, 406 Schol., 
Lysistr., 772, 


PAGE 


Qn 


129, 148 


67 


Aristotle— 


de Anum, au. 2, . 
—an. 2, 6, 21, 
— ais. 3, 

— ais 14, 

— av. 15, 

— αν. 17, 

—— 4036 31, 

— 404a 4, 

— 4046 18, 

—— 405a 21, 

—— 407) 21, 

—— 408a 13, 

—— 408) 1, 

—— 400} 7, 

—— 110a 1, 

—— 410 25, 

de Caelo, ϑῦϑα 8, 

Μιὰ, Nv. v. 3.13, 
——~ 1147a 18, 

--- KYL, 

de Gen, εἰ Corr 818) ϑ, 
— 3252 13, 

—— $25a 34, 

—— 3306 19, 

—— 8886 16, 

— 336a 3, 

— 3372 1, oo, 
Met. a4(Atomusts), . 
—— a δ (Empedocles), 
—— a5 (Pythagoreans), 
—— a5 (Empedocles), 
- ~ a9(Platomsm), . 


---- a5, '986a 15, 
—— 986d 35, 

—-— 98709, 

---- a6, 988α 8, 
—-— 996a 7, 

—— 1001α δ, 
—— 10716 26, 


266 


Aristotle—continued. 
Met. 1074 1, 
—— Ἰο7ῦ 2, 
—— 10800 18, 
—— 1091} 4, 
de Mundo, 5, 
de Part. Anim 642a 17, 
Phys. 187a 20, 
---- 208 6, 
--- 2035 12, 
—— 204d 22, 
—— 213d 22, 
—— 265b 32, 
Pol. 12874 28, 
Rhed.al3.2, . 
de Sensu, 442a 29, 
frag. 45, 
—— 186, 
—— 625, 
Aristoxenus— 
ap Cramer An. Par 1 172, 


BaccHYLIDES— 
Vv. 26 ) e 
xiv. 60, 


CIckRo— 
ad Fam. xv.16 1, 


DikaIARCHOS— 
ap. Porph. Vit Pyth, 18, 
Diodorus— 
v. 64, 4, 
Diogenes of Apolloma— 
frag.5, =. 
Diog. Laert.— 
proem, 13 
1. 106, 
m.6,. =. 
vin. 1. 27, 
ἷχ. 7,. 
ix, ὃ,. 
1x, 22, 
Dion. Hal — 
Ant. ii. 15, 
—— 11. 62, . 


EMPEDOCLES— 
frag. 2, 


PAGE 


168 


250) 


13h 


129, 175 


FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


Empedocles—continued 


—— 154, 
Eratosthenes— 

Catast, xxiv , 
Eudemus— 

Phys 5], 
Eunpides— 

Elec 726, 

I T 1486, 

Med. 410, 

Melanippe, frag 484, 

Phoen 538, 

Suppl 406, . 

Troarles, prologue, 


HeERacteipes Ponticus— 
ap Cic. Tusc. v 3, 
ap. Diog. viii. 4, . 


227 


238 


. 285 
182, 235 


INDEX OF OITATIONS 


PAGE 


Heracleitus— 
fray. 1(Byw), . . . . 185 
— 4, a ae 186 
— 10, . 186 
— 11, . 187 
—— 16, 186 
— 19, . 187 
—— 20, 186, 188 
22, . 188 
—— 28, 188 
—— 25, 185 
— 29, 19, 189 
—— 82, 196 
— 34, 187 
—— 35, 187 
— 36, 187 
—— 43, 190 
— 44, 190 
—— 45, 191 
—— 47, 191 
— 49, . 186 
—— 59, 185, 240 
-— 60, 190 
—— 62, . 190 
—— 65, 186 
—— 67, 185 
—— 68, 184 
— 70, 184 
— 78 164 
—— 80, . 186 
—— 915, 182, 19] 
— 92, . 191 
— 94, 191 
—— 95, 191 
—— 106, 186 
— 110, 191 
—— 126, 186 
—— 127, 185 
Herodotus— 
1 91;..». “yr. G's 13, 14 
1, 11,.. .. ες, 177 
i. 139, . : . 175 
i, 207,. . 171 
u. 52, . -.. a 37, 98 
vi. 1389, : ξ 
vii. 104, .  . 108 
ix. 14,. a ug OX 48 
Hesiod— 
rga, ὃ, a ΟΣ 167 
—ll7, . 167 
—~— 125, . 107 
—— 166, . 109 
— 225, . . . δ 
----286,.. 18 
—— 276, 35, 173, 182 


Hesiod—continued. 
Erga, 820 
—— 403, 
— 744, 
Theog. 71, 
— 104, 
— 112, 
—— 116, 


—— 116 and Schol., 


Hesychius— 
8 δίκηλον, 
Hippocrates— 
de Nat Hom. 7, . 
de Victu, i 5, 
— 1), 
Hippodamus— 
ap. Stob. Flor 98. 71, 
Hippolytus— 
Ref. i 7, 
—il2,. 
—— vil, 29, 
Homer— 
IL. i. 238, 
——vi 487, 
— xv 36, 
—— xv. 165, 
—— xv. 186, 
— xv 19], 
— xv 197, 
—— xvi 433, 
—— xvi. 780, 
— xvii. 321, 
— xvui. 483 
—— xx. 249, 
Od.1 32, 
—— in 236, 
—— vi. 188, 
—— x. 143, 
—— xi. 218, 
—— xi. 315, 
—— xvii. 565, 
—— xix. 589, 


229, 238 
OF 


117 
171 
182 


167, 208 


208 


Homeric Hymn— 
Ap. 88, 
Dem. 18, 
Horace— 
Carm. i. 34.12, . 


TaMBLICHUS— 
Vit. Pyth. ix. 18, 


frag. 28, 

Isocrates— 
Areop. 38, . 
ix. 25,. 


JOHANNES D1aconvus— 
in Hes. Theog. 886, 


Kovureres, Hymn of, 
Knitias— 
frag. 18, 


LEUKIPPUS— 


i. xvui. 6, 
Lucretius— 
i, 72, . 
Lyr Frag. Adesp. (Bgk. 3), 140, 


Macrosius— 

Somn, Scup, 1. 14, 19, . 
Musacus— 

frag. 5, 


OLYMPIODORUS— 
in Arist. Meteor. 28), 
Orphic Tablet, 


PaRMENIDES— 


PAGE 


Parmenides—continued. 
23 | frag. 8. 84, 
16) ---- 8. 37, 
—— 8. 38, . 
167; -——8 44,. 
—— B. 50, 
— 8. 62, 
421, —9, 
_ 64} —19, . 
200 Pherekydos— 
. 408] frag. 1, 
. 202 — 3, 
174 | Philolaus— 
168, 911 | frag. 1], 
902 | Pindar— 
sth. ui, 18, 
66] Nem. 1. 56, . 
— 1ii. 55, . 
78] —— iv. 6], 
110) ——vi.l, 
Οἱ, 11., 
—n.17,. 
99 — Vi, 
— vu 54, 
—— vu, 94, 
πὸ vin, 86, 
——x (xi ), 45, 
W2), “" 58, 
— xiii. 6, 
Paean vi 94, 
157 | Pyth. u 30, 
— un. 43, . 
33 | —v. 90,. 
32} —— 1x 69,. 
— xu 80, 
. 159] frag 104c, . 
. 168; —— 126, 
Plato— 
Apol. 29a, . 
. 213) __ 49 oO, . 
Axweh, 3718, 
- 166) Cratylus, 397 ¢, 
——~ 4024, . 
—— 408 a, 
237 | —— 4080, . 
179, 219; W—4l0p, . 
— 4120, . 
Huthyd. 3008, 
. 215| Kuthyphro, . 
. 215| Gorgias, 483, 
155,215 | ——503ef, 
217| Kritias, 109, 
215; ——119D,. 
. 216] Laws, 625 (Schol. ), 
. 217) ——718D,. 


FROM RELIGION TO PHILOSOPHY 


INDEX OF CITATIONS 


PAGE PAGE 

Plato—contenued. Plato—continued 
Laws, 7135, 173| Rep. 4824, . 211 
—— 7458, 28] ——529a, . . 200 
— 8855, . 177| ——530a,. 212 
—— 8898, 242| ——545p,. . 236 

— 891c, 242; -—— 546a, 167 

-—- 892¢, 128} —— 5974, 253 
-—— 896 4, 1381) —— 6168, . 222 
—— 8998, 131 | Soph 2420, 65 
—— 904 F, 12] ——248k, . 256 
— 906 c¢, 121| Symp. 186ff., 121 
Meno, 81 c, 201 — 1884, 117 
Minos, 817}, 29| —— 202k, 122 
Parm. 131, 255) —— 2038, 120 
——- 1328, 253 | ---- 207, 204 
Phaedo, 60D, 246| -“---- 211, 252 
—— 688 ff., . 240,245) Theaet. 176, 200 
—— 64a, . 200; —179r, . 193 
—— 668, 251 Tim 298, 260 
—— 660, 252; - -810, 209 
—— 674, 251] ---- 8368, 210 
— 698, 246} ---- 398, 160 
— 700, 163; ---- 42}, 166 
—— 728, 163, —— 484, 157 
— 168, . 248) —5d0c, 71 
— 77ff, , 247) —— 63B, 132 
—— 79D, 251 | Pliny— 
—— 80p, 252} Nat Hist. xu. 1, 91 
—— 80Ε, 251 | Plotinus— 
—— 8] Β, . 201; Ennead iv. 8.1,. 179, 186 
—— 81D, 251) ——vi.9 11, , 263 
— §3pD, . 166 | Plutarch— 
—— 870, . 240) dean. trang, 4748, .  . 389 
— 90K, . 248 | Consol. ad Apoll. 10, . « 164 
---- 980, : 211 | ——1043B,. »  « 165 
—— 988, . 154; Def. Orac, 4154, ‘ 122 
—100¢, . : . 466] Js.ef Os.370, . . . . 196 
—— 100D, 252, 255; — 3818, 237 
—— 102D, . ; . 252) —— 384s, . ee ey ee | 
—— 1038, .  «  « 208) de prem, frig. 9485, . » 18 
Phaedrus, 244 D, . δ] -——9523,.. . 233 
—46E,.. . 178] desoll. anu. 9648, . 86 
—— 248, . 251) Symp. Qu.vli,2.2,. . «. 21] 
—— 248p, . ~  .  « 2299) Vit, Romxi, 2. .  .. BB 
——248E,. . . . 210 | Porphyry— 
—— 250c, . ‘ 218; de adst. i. 5, 86 
ῬΡοϊείνονι5, 268 Κ, 172; ——1. 36, 193 
— 2715, . 173 | ——in. 27,. 167, 239 
——271D, . 35; ——iv. ll,. 161 
—— 2728, . 201| Wut Pyth. 18, 19, 201 
—— 2728, . 166) —— 20, . 204 
Protag. 8200, 87] —— 24, 201 
—— 820D, . 182) ---- 41, ἱ 176 
Rep. 358 8, . 188 | Proclus— 
—— 3645, . 114] tn Huel. i. 419, . 208 


210 FROM RELIGION 


PAGE 
Proclus— continued. 
Μέλισσα, Anec. G. et L.u 25, . 210 
inTim Ὁ, . . . . 80 
Ps.-Phokylidea, 15, . 289 
Ps -Timaeus— 
w. ψυχᾶς κόσμω, 104, . . 88 


SaLLUsti0s— 
de Dus εἰ Mundo, ὃ, 187 
Sextus Empiricus— 
Math, vu. 127, . 129 
— 1x. 127, 202 
— x. 46, ; go. cg 917 
—— x. 216, 184 
Simplicius— 
de Caelo, 608, . 141 
Phys, 24,13, . . 42 
—— 25, 21, 230 
—— 28,4, . . 155 
— 39, 18, . 222 
Solon— 
frag. 13, 168 
— 36, . 174 
Sophocles— 
Ajax, 646, . 168 
—669, . . . . . 169 
Antig. 449, . . . 64 
Elec. 86, ee . 64 
Oecd, KR. 25, 2. ae AD 


TO PHILOSOPHY 


Sophocles—continued. 
Oecd. R. 863, 
Trach. 125, 
frag. 226 N2, 
— 787 N23, 


TaciTus— 

Germ, 11, 12, 
Theognis— 

17, .. ᾿ 
Theol. Arith p. θ(Α8ι),. 
—p. 17, 

—p32 . . . - 
Theon Smyrnaeus— 

π. rerpaxr p. 151 (Dupuis), 

π. ἀριθμ p. 29, 5 

—p 18, 

—— p, 34, . 
Theophrastus— 

ap. Simpl. Phys. 6" 24, 4p, 

de Sensu, 3, 


Trag. frag. adesp (Nauck?), 483, . 


VaRRO— 
Ling. Lat. vu, 6, 


XENOPHON— 
Cyrop vii. 7. 17, 


$1 


. 229 


GENERAL INDEX 


A priori methods, 126; in treatment of 
Physis, 137. 

ἀδύνατον τὰ Homer, 14 

Agricultural Magic, 167. 

Aisa, 120 

Aitia as explanation, 141, ambiguity in 
Plato, 256; priumtively discovered by 
‘ dissociation,’ 258. 

Anamnesis, 248. 

ἀναποδόω,͵ 208 

Anaxagoras, 144; system discussed, 153 ff. 

Anaximander, his cosmology, 7 ff. ; ac- 
cepts conception of primary world- 
order, 19; cosmic structure compared 
to clan organisation, 62; Limitless as 
divine, 185; system discussed, 144 ff. , 
order of Time and Justice, 176; his 
scheme adapted by Empedocles, 231 

Anaximenes, Air as God, 135; system 
discussed, 148 ff. 

Animism, 101. 

ἀνταπόδοσις, 163, 167. 

Anthesteria, 165. 

Aphrodite in Parmenides, 222 

Apollo, 195, and Pythagoras, 204. 

Apology of Socrates, 244. 

Aristotle, ‘like knows like,’ 134, treat- 
ment of Plato’s Ideas, 259; Form and 
Matter, 261; ideal for man, 262. 

Asha, 172 ff. 

Atomism, 187 ; as goal of Science, 144. 

—— of Leukippus, 155 ff. 

—— —— like number doctrine, 213. 


Boop of totem-clan, 57; of group-kin, 
87. 

Blood-feud, 57. 

Blood-kim: differentiated from magical 
group, 98; collective responsibility, 
96, 

Blood-soul, 109. 

Broad Oath in Empedocles, 237. 

Bronze Age (Hesiod), 109, 

Buddha, 113, 193. 


CALENDARS, succession of, 170. 
Callicles, 183. 


Causality, at first spatial, 140 ff., and 
hkeness, 86. 

Causes, discovered by ‘ dissociation,’ 258 , 
and explanations, 139 ff. 

Chance, 242; world left to, 214. 

Chaos, meaning of, 66; in Chinese cos- 
mogony, 99, and Eros, 70, and 
Poros, 120. 

Chronos, 172; of Orphics, 146. 

Classification and tnbal structure, 57, 
of tribe, including all Nature, 59, basis 
of magic, 140, Plato’s Ideas as system 
of, 260. 

Collective emotion, 77 ff. ; representation 
defined, 43; responsibility, 57. 

Comitium, 53. 

Communion in mystical religion, 112. 

Conscience, 81. 

Contraries: grouped in pairs, 63; sepa- 
ration of, 65; elemental, 116. 

Cook, A B, 82. 

Cosmogony: Babylonian, 67 ; Egyptian, 
67; Orphic, 67; Chinese, 67; Pytha- 
gorean, 70, 

Cosmology of Plato's Timaeus, 260. 

Cosmos, as political term, 53; basis of 
Pythagorean ethics, 211. 

Crawley, A. E., 109. 


DAEMON, rule m Golden Age (Plato), 
35; τὸ primitive Greece (Herod.), 37 ; 
of house ἢ Pindar, 58; explains 
hereditary guilt, 58; of Magical 
Society, 95; of Gens, 96; of natural 
departments, 96; Good Spirits, 98, 
reign of (Plato), 98; four types of 
Greek daemon, 100; blendea with 
hero, 107 ; of individual, 110, rule in 
Golden Age, 173 ; Pythagoras as, 201 ; 
in Empedocles, 228 ff.; good and evil 
genit, 239 ; and Platonic Idea, 253. 

Dasmos, of three sons of Kronos, 15, 17 ; 
of the Gods, 21; secured by oath, 22; 
of seats of worship, 36; cosmic dasmos 
a late doctrine, 38; of Rhodes, 53; of 
elements, 116 ; effected by dof or strife, 


291. 
271 


272 FROM RELIGION 

Decad, as perfect number, 207. 

Detkela, 158 ; in Democritus, 250. 

Destiny. See Moira. 

Deussen, 2. 

Dharma, 174. 

δίκαιον, 189. 

Dike, reflection of Nomos, 54; avenging 
Justice, 82; in mysticism, 160 ff.; in 
Hesiod, 167 ; as Season, 168 ; as ‘ Way,’ 
172; only among men, 182; in Hera- 
cleitus, 189 ; in Parmenides, 215, 216, 
222. 

Diogenes of Apollonia, 183; Aur as God, 
135. 

Dionysus as Mystery God, 111; and 
Orpheus, 195. 

Διὸς aloa, 26 

Totima, 121. 

Divine, meaning of, 96; as attribute of 
Physis, 129. 

δόξα, in Parmenides, 220, 

Dream-image and soul, 109. 

Dualism, of Orphism, 197; in Pytha- 
goreanism, 218 ; of Empedocles, 241. 


EaRts, sacred to agriculturalist, 98. 

Exdola, of Atomists, 158 ; in Democritus, 
250. 

Eidolon-soul, 109 ; visible ghost, 251. 

Eleatics, 137 ; ignore senses, 155. 

Elements, separated out of Physis (An- 
aximander), 8ff.; provinces of, 10, 
in Hesiod’s Theogony, 17; equated 
with Gods, 18; and clans, 52; four in 
Greek cosmology, 60 ff. ; divided among 
Gods, 116 ; as ‘things,’ 152. 

Empedocles, Philia and Nevkos, 63 ; Sou] 
and elements, 133 ; as man of science, 
150 ff.; umity of life, 182; system 
discussed, 224 ff.; successors of, 242, 
view of soul compared with Plato's, 
251. 

Eniautos, 168. 

ἔννομος, 80, 

ἔνθεος, 112. 

Enthusiasm, 112. 

Epimenides, 215. 

Erinys, 110. 

Eros and marriage of opposites, 70 ; and 
world-egg, 70; Olympian and mystic 
views of, 119; in Symposium, 121 ; m 
Parmenides, 222; and demuurge of 
Timaeus, 260. 

Esoteric writing, 225, 237. 

ἤθεα, as range, 64; haunts, habits, 84. 

Eurytos, 210. 


TO PHILOSOPHY 


Exogamous segmentation, 68, 210. 
Exogamy, 58. 


FaLt of man in Empedocles, 238. 

Fate. See Moira. 

Fertility spirits, local, 38. 

Fire, primary in mystic philosophies, 197. 
Following God, 200. 

Form and matter as male and female, 71. 
Frazer, J. G., 31, 55, 103 ff. 

Freedom of Greek Thought, 2, 20, 44. 


GEOMETRY, influence on Science, 142, 
149, 15] 

God, a representation mherited by phil- 
osophy from religion, 4; notion de- 
veloped, 88; offshoot of ‘Soul,’ 90; 
advances with worshippers’ develop- 
ment, 92; elimmated by Science, 142, 
as Intellect cannot create, 260, 

Gods, subject to Moira, 12; arise out of 
elements (Hesiod), 18; equated with 
elements, 18, supersede Destiny, 21 ; 
episodic character of, 39; Mystery 
Gods, 110 ff. 

Golden Age in Plato, 35; in Empedocles, 
236. 

Good Spirit of Fertility, 98, 

Great Oath of Gods, 22 ff.; in Em- 
pedocles, 236 ff. 

Great Year, 178, 238. 

Group, primary in totemic society, 56; 
prior to individual, 58 

Group-consciousness, 77; superindi- 
vidual, 80; content of religious repre- 
sentation, 82. 

Group-soul as group-functions, 94; and 
rebirth, 161. 


Haltvat of Finns, 253. 

Harmonia, virtue as, 211; =Phidw m 
Empedocles, 234. 

Harmonic proportions, 209. 

Harmony, of opposites, 64; in Hera- 
cleitus, 190; of Plato’s world-soul, 
206 ; rejected by Parmenides, 217. 

Headlam, Walter, 16. 

Heaven-worship, 170; revived by Or- 
phism, 177 ; of Persians, 177. 

Heracleitus, universal law, 182; system 
discussed, 184 ff. ; Dionysiac, 183 ; con- 
trast with Pythagoras, 193; Fire as 
Soul, 182; Logos as soul-substance, 
234, 

Herd-suggestion, 47, 49, 80. 

Hereditary guilt, 58. 


INDEX 


Hermes, Pan, Logos, 187. 

Hero: Eponymous, 106; worship of, 107 ; 
blended with Good Spirit, 107. 

Hestia, of Pythagoreans, 212, 228, 

Hippasos, 208. 

Horas, 168, 170. 

Horkos, as Herkos, 24, 287. See Great 
Oath. 

Hylozoism, 89, 150. 


IpaEaNn DaxkTY1s, 94, 

Ideas: theory of, 242 ff. ; like souls, 246, 
249 ff. ; communicated to things, 252 ; 
immanent, 252; as Daemons of groups, 
253 ; 88 causes, 256 ; as concepts, 257 ; 
as paradeigmata, 257, 258. 

Imitation in magic, 76. 

Immateriality a late conception, 83. 

Immortality, of chiefs and heroes, 108; n 
mystical religion, 112 ; Dionysiac and 
Orphic, 179; individual in Orphism, 
196; m Heracleitus, 196 ; as conceived 
by Pythagoras, 203; in Empedocles, 
228 ff ; Plato's views of, 248 ff. ; as 
assimilation to God, 268. 

Individualism of Orphism, 179; 
Sophistic, 183. 

Individuality merged in social conscious- 
ness, 47; weak in primitive mind, 77, 
101; of the chief, 108. 

Initiation enforcing morality, 46; in 
Central Australia, 79; as new birth, 
95; grades of, 164. 

Injustice of individual existence, 147, 

Ionian Philosophy and Olympianism, 122. 

Ixion, 120. 


of 


JEsus, 193; as daemon, 118. 

Justice, of elemental order, 8, 11, 64; 
guarding world-order, 19; assailed as 
‘conventional,’ 183; identified with 
Fire, or Sun, 189; and Logos, of 
Heracleitus, 191; Reign of, m An- 
aximander, 232. 


Ker, 110. 

King, emergence of, 102; temporary 
kings, 103; as magician, 104; depart- 
mental kings of Nature, 105; repre- 
sents world-order, 105; as first indi- 
vidual, 108. 

Kinship, primitive type of likeness, 86. 

Knowledge, as action at a distance, 132; 
as power, 14]. 

Koinonwa, of Ideas in Plato, 254. 


273 


Korybantes, 94, 
Kouretes, 94; hymn of, 168, 
Kronos=Chronos, 171. 


LAOHESIS at Dasmos, 22, 

Laflesche, 69. 

Language, as means of power, 141; in 
Heracleitus, 192, 

Law, administered by group, 102; as 
sovereign, 108. See Nomos, 

Lawgiving, of Zeus, 26, 

Law of Nature, 55, 181; in Heracleitus, 
191 ; in Empedocles, 235. 

Leukippus, system discussed, 155 ff. 

Life, squeezed out of matter by Science, 
151, 158, 230. 

‘ Like acts on like,’ 61, 86, 132. 

‘Like knows like,’ 182. 

Likeness, as kinship, 182, 140. 

Limitless, of Anaximander, meaning, 
145. 

Logos, ‘ proportion of mixture’=soul, in 
Empedocles, 235, 2389; as ‘meaning,’ 
248 ; in Heracleitus, 186 ff. 


Maaio, in agriculture, 167; primary 
sympathetic, 75; ‘imitative,’ 76; as 
pre-presentation, 76; distinguished 
from religion, 79; involves classifica- 
tion, 85; based on classification, 140. 

Magical compulsion, superseded by sacri- 
fice, 114, 

Magical societies, 93. 

Mana, described, 84 ; of magical society, 
94; of Gods and elements, 117; and 
blood-soul, 131 ; and divinity, 129. 

Marett, R. RB , 25, 81, 110. 

Marriage, of Sky and Earth, 66; with 
God unlawful, 119. 

Metensomatosis, 166. 

Methexis, 204; in Plato, 254 ff.; as 
logical relation, 257. 

Microcosm, tribe as, 53. 

Mumesis, in Pythagoreans and Plato, 
254, 

Moira, above the Gods, 12; 88 moral, 18 ; 
as system of provinces, 15; older than 
Gods in Hesiod, 18; impersonal, 19; 
negative aspect, 34; origin of, 40 ff. ; 
projected from social structure, 51 ; 
and Moros, 59; repressive, 82 ; classi- 
fication survives social structure, 98; 
above the Olympians, 104; as indi- 
vidual fate, 110; spatial, 128; domi- 
nating Science, 143; in Anaximander, 
146 : eliminated by Anaximenes, 148 ; 


274 FROM RELIGION 
and Ananke of Atomists, 157; and 
Horas, 168; in Olympian morality, 
181 

Moirai, 16,28 ; superseded by Gods, 73 ; 
and marriage with Gods, 120. 

Moon and fate, 170. 

Moral, meaning of, 46. 

Moral Order of Nature, explained, δ ff. 

Mundus in conitium, 53. 

Myres, J. L., 30, 74. 

Mystery, as secret doctrine, 46. 

Mystery God, 110 ff. 

Mystic doctrmes, why secret, 198, 

Mystic Philosophy and mystical religion, 
114. 

Mystic Religion, temporal framework, 
111. 

Mystic ritual, 77, 91. 

Mystic Tendency, 
scientific, 159. 

Myth, aetiological, 139, 141, 258. 


contrasted with 


NaMEs, as souls, 141; mystic ‘deriva- 
tions ’ of, 192. 

Nature, as a moral order, 5, 10; moral 
order survives Gods, 42; static and 
dynamic senses, 73; opposed to 
custom, 74; primitive identity with 
custom, 74; opposed to Justice, 183. 

‘Nature of Things.’ See Physis. 

Necessity in vision of Er, 222 

Neikos and Philia, social origin of, 63. 

Nemesis, as resentment at encroachment, 
16, 82; and Nemos, 31; of Gods, 118. 

Nemos and Nemesis, 31. 

Nietzsche, 193. 

vowels, νομή, νομός, 30. 

Nomos, as dispensation, 27 ff.; province 
and behaviour, 34; dispensation of 
Reason (Plato), 36; negative and posi- 
tive aspects, 73 ; as group behaviour, 
74; opposed to Nature, 74; primitive 
identity with Nature, 74; mystical 
conception of, 181. 

Nous of Anaxagoras, 154, 189. 

Numa, 28, 83, 

Number-Atomism, 212. 

Number-doctrine, 205. 


Oata of Pythagoreans, 205. 
Okeanos, 237. 


TO PHILOSOPHY 


Olympianism and Science, 148. 

Omeha Camp, 69; Wakonda, 85. 

Omophagia, 238. 

One and Many, 114, 204. 

Opposites, elements grouped as, 9. See 
Contrarves. 

Orenda, 84. 

Oriented clans, 52. 

Orpheus worships Sun, 177; as reformed 
Dionysus, 196. 

Orphic cosmogony, 67. 

Orphism: doctrine of fall of soul, 162 ff. ; 
reformation of Dionysiac religion, 163 ; 
revives Heaven - worship, 177; in- 
dividualistic, 179; dualism, 180, 197; 
sense of sin, 180; as reformation, 195 ; 
reformed by Pythagoras, 198. 


Patrs of Contraries in Parmenides, 219. 

Pan and Logos, 187, 192. 

Panspermia, 153, 166. 

Parmenides, system discussed, 214, 

Parousta in Plato, 254. 

Participation, problem of, in Plato, 254; 
of group in daemon, 204. 

Patriarchal family, 109, 115. 

Persia, 175; influence on Orphism, 162 ; 
Heaven-worship, 177. 

Personality of Gods, 115. 

Pherekydes, 18, 172, 178, 260. 

Philia and Nevkos, 151, 280 ff. ; social 
ongin of, 68. 

Phalosophia, as Way of Life, 200. 

Philosophy: its first object not external 
Nature and inner experience, 3; 
analyses religious material, 125 ; causes 
of philosophic systems, 138. 

φθόνος, 118 ; God free from, in Timaeus, 
260. 

Physis, ἃ pre-philosophic representation, 
4; implying hfe, 7; as natural in- 
stincts, 74; as ‘essence’ of group, 74; 
as material, 127; as soul-substance, 
128; as divine, 129; homogeneous 
with Soul, 133, 134; and mana, 89; 
and sympathetic continuum, 128 ; and 
Ether, 186; distinguished from element 
by Anaximander, 145; confused with 
element, 145, 149; as process of birth 
and growth, denied, 151, 158 ; as world 
of Ideas in Plato, 253. 


Olympian Gods, 114; their psychology, | Plain of Truth, 215. 


118. 

Olympianisation of Pythagoras, 255; of 
Plato’s Ideas, 255 ; of the philosopher, 
263. 


Plato, system discussed, 242 ff. ; Socratic 
and mystic dialogues, 242; contact 
with Pythagoreans, 243 ; immortality 
in Apology, 244; in Phaedo, 245 ; con- 


INDEX 


version to Pythagoreanism, 247; cos- 
mology in Timaeus, 260. 

Plurahty of Worlds, 143. 

Polydaemonism, Chinese, 99. 

Poros, 120. 

Procession of Numbers, 207 ; reyected by 
Parmenides, 217. 

προποδισμός, 209. 

Psychology of Homer, 109; of pre- 
Aristotelians, 110; of Olympian God, 
118. 

Pythagoras, 113; contrasted with Hera- 
cleitus, 193; school of, 194 ff. ; reforms 
Orphism, 198; as daemon, 201, 254; 
source of all inspiration, 203. 

Pythagoreans, table of contraries, 69, 
unity of all life, 182. 

Pythagorean Way of Life, 181, 199, 
202. 


QUANTITY and Quality, 148. 


REASON supersedes Mora, 36 
Reincarnation, 161 
Religion: obligatory, 46, 81; epidemic, 


49; derived from social custom, 54, 
absent in lowest societies, 78; col- 


lective, 80; succeeding magic, 90 ff. 
Rhapsodic Theogony, 178. 
Rhea=‘ flow,’ 171. 
Rites de Passage, 164. 
Ritual myths, 107. 
Rivers, W. H. R., 161. 
Bia, 172 ff. 


SAORED, meaning of, 46 ff. 

Sacrifice, commercial, 114. 

Satyrs, 94. 

Science and commerce, 143; practical 
character of, 143. 

Scientific Tendency, 139 ff. 

Seeds, elements as, 153; souls as, 165. 

Segmentation of society, how caused, 62. 

σῆμα, 187, 218. 

Sense of sin, 180. 

Separation of Sky and Earth, 66; social 
origin, 68. 

Sex, contrariety of, 68; type of contra- 
riety, 65. 

Social Contract, 188. 

Socrates in Apology and Phaedo, 248 ff. 

Solidarity of Totemic Group, 56 ; organic 
and mechanical, 62. 

Soul: a representation inherited by philo- 
sophy from religion, 4; notion de- 


275 


veloped, 88; new Soul at Initiation, 
95; individual soul, 101, 108; as 
nature or essence, 109; dream or 
memory image, 109; as moving and 
knowing, 110; and Physis, 128 ; ani- 
mating universe, 180; as moving, 131; 
as knowing, 132; in Timaeus, 138; 
as name, 141; reduced to mechanical 
motion, 142; reduced to atoms, 157; 
conferred by initiation, 165 ; as seeds, 
165; heavenly origin and fall of, 178; 
as Harmony, 213, 234; exile of, m 
Empedocles, 228, 237 ; as ‘proportion 
of mixture,’ 235, 239; mortal soul, 
239 ; as proportion, 240; like Platonic 
Idea, 246, 249 ff ; infected by body, 
251, 

Soul-substance, 128, 

Species-deities, 253. 

Stoics, 263. 

Strife of Elements, 64; of Opposites, 
116. 

Styx= Nevkos 11 Empedocles, 237 ; and 
Nevkos, 239; as Oath, 23; as Taboo, 
25 ; confers Kratos on Zeus, 26. 

Subject-Predicate Relation m Plato, 256. 

Sun-worship, 196. 

Sympathetic Continuum, 83; splits into 
two pools, 92; combining blood and 
mana, 109, 

Sympathetic Magic, 139. 


Tao, Way of Man and Way of Universe, 
100; 172 


Taoism, 99; analogy with Empedocles, 


240, 

Taylor, A. Εἰ, 37, 248, 244, 247, 260 

Telchines, 94. 

Templum and grove, 31. 

Tetractys, 204 ff. ; as Great Oath, 237. 

Thales, three doctrmes, 127. 

Theagenes of Rhegium, 18 

Themis, reflection of Nomos, 54; as 
‘doom,’ 105. 

Theor: of Pythagoreans, 176; of Or- 
phic, 198; of Pythagoras, 200. 

Thiasos, of Mystery God, 111. 

Thrasymachus, 183. 

Oupbs-soul, 109. 

τιμή, shift of meaning, 118. 

Time, importance in mystical systems, 
160 ff. ; identified with Physts, 184. 

Time-God, 172; of Orphics, 146. 

Titanomachia, 116. 

Tityos, 120. 


216 FROM RELIGION 

Totem defined, 56. 

Totemism: illustrating projection of 
Nomos, 55 ff.; identity of clan and 
species, 75; how broken down, 91, 93. 

Transmigration, 164, 166 ; in Empedocles, 
229. 

Trinity, 118, 

Tyche as power of Earth, 98. 


Untry of Cosmos, 148. 

Unity of Life, 118; in Pythagoreanism, 
201. 

Universals, 75. 

ὑπὲρ μόρον (alcay), 13. 


VIRGIN Birts, 204. 


TO PHILOSOPHY 


Wakonda, 85. 

Way of Righteousness, 181. 

Wheel of Birth in Empedocles, 228. 
Wheel of Dike, 168 ; in Pindar, 171. 
Wheel of Life, 161 ff. 

Wheel of Ria, 175. 


XENOORATES, 213, 
Xenophanes, 177; parent of Eleaticism 
216. 


Yang and γι, 99. 
Zén, 186, 


Zeus, supremacy conferred by Styx, 25. 
Zufis, δ]. 


Printed by T and A Coxstasis, Printers to His Majesty 
at the Edinburgh University Press 


- 111011 


