The Rise of the House of Rothschild (Egon Caesar Corti (1886-1953), translated by Brian and Beatrix Lunn, 1928)
===============================================================================================================
Count Egon Caesar Corti — the first volume of his documentary history of the Rothschild banking house. Public domain (published 1928; US PD since 1 Jan 2024). Scan via Internet Archive (riseofhouseofrot0000coun) — Blue Ribbon Books edition, New York, copyright 1928.

> ake
at


Tete


i


FROM THE LIBRARY OF |
DR. ROBERTSR. ERGANG


The Rise of
the House of Rothschild


ae an]


reap ien “evant werataggedsn
seine


PR Kaifencter fbr
Bazgf lente,


OD rencht Comktpey


fx often Hwee,


The Pedler on Horseback
Caricature of the House of Rothschild


The Rise of
the House of Rothschild


COUNT EGON CAESAR CORTI


Translated from the German by


Brian and Beatrix Lunn


eee


RETAILED BY,
js m & ee," )9&


ane ae |


Blue Ribbon Books
New York


THE RISE OF THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Printed in the United States of America


PRINTED BY THE CORNWALL PRESS, INC,
CORNWALL, N. Y.


FOREWORD


Historians, in interpreting the nineteenth century, have
laid stress on many and various aspects of the period
under study; and descriptions of isolated periods, single
episodes, and individuals are scattered amongst hundreds
and even thousands of books. On the other hand, certain
special features of the period under consideration have
been, for various reasons, entirely neglected.

An example of such neglect is the ignoring by histo-
rians of the rdle played by the Rothschild family in the
history of the nineteenth century, and the object of this
work is to appraise the important influence of this family
on the politics of the period, not only in Europe but
throughout the world. For, strangely enough, the influ-
ence of the Rothschilds is barely mentioned, or at the most
casually referred to, in otherwise comprehensive and
painstaking historical treatises.

Special literature dealing with the House of Roths-
child usually falls into one of two groups, either fulsome
peans of praise commissioned by the House itself, or
scurrilous pamphlets inspired by hatred—both equally
unpleasant. There are, however, two works of serious
value in existence, which are partially compiled from
legal documents, but they are of small scope. One is by
an employee of the Rothschilds, Christian Wilhelm Berg-
hoeffer, and the other is the impartial work of Dr. Rich-
ard Ehrenberg; but these treat only of isolated incidents
in the history of the House, and throw no light on its
pan-European importance.

The object of the present work, which deals with the
period 1770-1830, is to trace the rise of the House of
Rothschild from its small beginnings to the great position
it attained, culminating in the year of its great crisis.

{ Vv


CONCORDIA COLLEGE LIBRAR®


Tau = ae a a eet ~aara=ZANM


vi The Rise of the House of Rothschild


In the course of my researches I found that references
to the name of Rothschild in official documents and in
books of memoirs were as common as they are rare in
contemporary textbooks. I made a point of collecting all
available data until my drawers were literally crammed
with letters, deeds, and documents containing the name
of Rothschild, and bearing dates of almost every year of
the nineteenth century. My next step was to visit the
various European capitals which had been the scene of
the family activities, in order to enrich my store of refer-
ences with all the relevant literature. The subject is in-
deed inexhaustible, but the material I had amassed en-
couraged me to essay a complete picture.

The subject required the most delicate treatment, but
my determination to undertake the work was accom-
panied by the definite intention of according it complete
impartiality, for I was convinced from the beginning that
a prejudiced outlook would render the work utterly value-
less,

The House of Rothschild, as will be readily under-
stood, did not throw open its archives to my inspection,
for it is particularly careful in guarding its more
important business secrets. But this was not entirely with-
out its advantage, for it left me completely free from
political considerations and uninfluenced by racial, na-
tional, and religious predilections or antipathies. I was
thus enabled, in accordance with my wish, to begin an
independent historical research into the part played by
this House in the nineteenth century, which I knew to be
far more important than is commonly thought.

The general scheme of this work will be built upon
facts alone, in a practical way such as will help us to
form our own judgment on individuals and the part they
played in world events.

I should like to take this opportunity of expressing my
special sense of gratitude toward all those whose advice
and assistance have been so valuable to me in my work.


Foreword . Vii


Above all I have to thank Dr. Bittner, Director of the
State Archives at Vienna, as well as his exceedingly help-
ful staff, Professors Gross, Antonius, Reinoehl, Schmidt,
Wolkan, and his Chief Clerk, Herr Marek. I should
also like to thank Lieutenant-Colonel von Carlshausen,
grandnephew of the man who helped the Rothschilds up
the first rung of the ladder, and the Director of the Prus-
sian Secret State Archives at Berlin, Geheimrat Klinken-
borg. My thanks are also due to Dr. Losch of the Prus-
sian State Library in Berlin, Dr. A. Richel at Frankfort
and the staff of the Municipal Museum in that city who,
together with the Director of the Portrait Collection in
the Vienna National Library, Hofrat Dr. Rottinger and
Dr. Wilhelm Beetz, who so kindly assisted me with the
illustrations.

The material was collected for over a period of three
and a half years, and only after much care has been spent
on it do I now offer it to the public. It is submitted in
the hope that it will be judged in accordance with its
intentions. It is inspired by an intense love of truth, and
it relates the story of an unseen but infinitely powerful
_ driving force which permeated the whole of the nine-
teenth century.

The Author
Vienna, July, 1927.


i= ’ 3 > * y : aie var
tiv 2 Mi me tthe itera
i ‘a


TT shee ae ein
Wess soul atiooedy oO aad


4 _ ‘ re : ¢ Poe ‘ “ ee : “ay
fied ib Sidi dee, " hay) 2%) rest yt f HK oe
: sahicgdo@ dhocmiad comets eat RPE
{ r 0 Lo ae eee }
fit) Li aioe 32> eS ‘st¢, 2) eae
5 i
me PRED Baek TICS Siete Pw ti.
. Hf j i. bo
; a 4 i f fj <_ t 4
' £ ‘ if
- ry i} aa : “ Peas ie : 4
an eT
‘ ‘7 { z y Se, i)
aN r ee on C9 SUED. «3 ain eerene


*
Vib}


ede ae) ee ee pral WSs): Rus i a § 3


unre Pag ft vere wine


ie srlne 2, |


CONTENTS


CHAPTER I The Origins and the Early Activities


of the Frankfort Family Rothschild Page


CHAPTER I The Rothschild Family During the
Napoleonic Era

CHAPTER 11 The Great Napoleonic Crisis and Its
Exploitation by the House of Roths-
child

CHAPTER IV The Brothers Rothschild During the
Period of Congresses, 1818-1822

CHAPTER V The Rothschild Business Throughout
the World

CHAPTER VI The House of Rothschild Rides the
Storm

NOTES

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

BIBLIOGRAPHY


“


“


I


28


109
187
277
343
409


425
429


‘~ A Ne
te j es
. nal * hal
re oe apey ¥
‘ ab
- +f 4
ef a 4
ae.
‘
Pr cr °
{
_ 8 RRR YOY
‘
= '
a ‘ se ay
hay
‘
: ‘ 1. + 4 a
} , WIV . F
\ ry] «Sf
i t
vi )
q a 4 , f \
; yey Sloe *
t * } \ +3
‘ ae | + a N Pad
e 1y
‘ 4 ‘ ' “7 ‘
¥ wet" é
‘ 4
‘ * ‘' \ ‘
‘ A . :


+ 4 Aa


? ‘ VU
ma fn 5 "as
|
*


: oe 75 ? 7
Si m4OtG


The Rise of
the House of Rothschild


| ho ye
ga


, y q
TL da aoe
3 " t ti A Ka fi a* } y a i ae) > ie 8 G


The Rise of the
House of Rothschild


CHAPTER I


The Origins and the Early Activities of the Frankfort
Family Rothschild


RANKFORT-ON-THE-MAITN, seat of the Im-
perial Elections since the Golden Bull of 1356, ac-
quired a dominating position amongst the great cities of
Germany during the second half of the eighteenth cen-
tury. Formerly the capital of the kingdom of the East
Franks, it had become subject to the empire alone as early
as 1245, and in spite of many vicissitudes it had main-
tained its leading position throughout the centuries. It
expanded considerably during the last few centuries be-
fore the French Revolution and now numbered some
35,000 inhabitants, of whom one-tenth were Jews. By
virtue of its natural position, lying so close to the great
waterway of the Rhine and to the frontiers of France and
Holland, it had become the gateway for the trade of Ger-
many with the western states. Trade with England too
constituted an important element in the activities of its
inhabitants.
It was natural that members of the Jewish race, with
their special gifts for trade and finance, should be par-
ticularly attracted to this city. Moreover, towards the


end of the Middle Ages the Jews in Frankfort enjoyed a


—


great measure of freedom, and at first no difficulties were
placed in the way of their settlement. It was not until
I


2 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the non-Jewish members of the business community at
Worms saw that they were suffering from the competition
of these enterprising people that the Christian citizens
combined in their superior numbers.

Now began a period of harsh oppression for the
Jewish inhabitants. In order that they might be removed
from the neighborhood of the most important church in
the town, they were ordered by a law passed in the year
1462 to leave the houses they had been living in and to
settle in a quarter set aside for the purpose—the so-called
Jewish City.* This, however, consisted only of a single
dark alley, about twelve feet broad, and lay, as described
by Goethe, between the city wall and a trench. For
more than three hundred years this continued to be the
sole residence of the Frankfort Jews, whose continuance
in the city became more and more unpopular with the
other inhabitants. As early as the second decade of the
seventeenth century a rising broke out under one Fett-
milch, one of the objects of which was to drive the Jews
out of Frankfort. This object was indeed achieved
through murder and pillage. Although the Jews soon
returned to the city, they had to submit to innumerable
restrictions and regulations embodied in a special law
dealing with the so-called “Status of Jews.” ‘They were
made subject to a poll-tax, and were compelled, as being
a foreign element in the town, to purchase the “protec-
tion” of their persons and property. Hence they came to
be called “protected Jews.” ‘The number of their fam-
ilies was to be limited to five hundred and only twelve
marriages a year were allowed, although this number
might be increased if a family died out. The Jews were
not allowed to acquire land, or to practice farming or
handicrafts. They were also forbidden to trade in vari-
ous commodities, such as fruit, weapons and silk. More-
over, except during fairs, they were forbidden to offer
their wares anywhere except outside the Jewish quarter.
They were forbidden to leave the space within the ghetto


The Origins of the Rothschilds 3


walls by night, or on Sundays or holy days. If a Jew
crossed a bridge he had to pay a fee for doing so. They
were not allowed to visit public taverns and were ex-
cluded from the more attractive walks in the city. The
Jews accordingly did not stand high in public esteem.
When they appeared in public, they were often greeted
with shouts of contempt and stones were sometimes
thrown at them. Boerne has stated that any street urchin
could say to a passing Jew, “Jew, do your duty,” and the
Jew then had to step aside and take off his hat. However
that may be, the oppressed condition of the Jews and the
bent of many of them to usury, combined with the natural
hostility of the Christians and their feeling that they were
not as sharp in business, created an atmosphere of mutual
hatred that can scarcely have been more painful any-
where than in Frankfort.

The progenitors of the Housé of Rothschild lived un-
der conditions such as those in the ghetto of Frankfort.
The earlier ancestors of Meyer Amschel Rothschild, who
laid the foundations of the future greatness of the house,
existed in the middle of the sixteenth century; we know
their names, and their tombs have been preserved in the
old Jewish cemetery at Frankfort. Formerly the houses
in the Jewish quarter were not numbered, each house
being distinguished by a shield of a particular color or by
a sign. The house in which the members of the Roths-
child family lived bore a small red shield. There is no
doubt that it is to this fact that they owe their family
name; it is first mentioned in 1585 in the name “Isaak
Elchanan* at the Red Shield,” his father’s tombstone
simply bearing the name Elchanan. About a century
later Naftali Hirz at the Red Shield left the ruinous old
building from which the family had derived its name,
and occupied the so-called Haus zur Hinterpfann, in
which the Rothschilds were now domiciled as protected
Jews.

Until the time when Meyer Amschel Rothschild—who


4 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


was born in the year 1743, six years before Goethe—
reached manhood, the family were principally engaged
in various kinds of retail trade. At the beginning of the
eighteenth century they had become money-changers in
a small way. From the occasional records of their tax
payments which have been preserved, it would appear
that they were not a poor Jewish family, but that they
were only reasonably well off.

In any case it is clear that Meyer Amschel came into
some small inheritance when, in 1755, in his twelfth year,
he lost his father and mother, of whom he was the eldest
son; this gave him the incentive to throw himself into the
battle of life with that vigor and industry which his
parents had implanted in him in his early childhood. In
the conditions of those times the struggle was certainly
much more severe for a young Jew than for his more for-
tunate Christian neighbors.

When he was a boy of ten Meyer Amschel had been
employed by his father in changing coins of every kind,
that is, in exchanging gold and silver for the appropriate
amount of copper known as coarse money. In the chaotic
conditions prevailing in Germany—divided as the coun-
try was into innumerable small principalities, cities and
spiritual jurisdictions, all of which had their own cur-
rency systems—the business of money-changing offered
magnificent opportunities of profit, since everybody was
compelled, before undertaking even the shortest journey,
to call for the assistance of the exchange merchant. As
the boy grew up, an important side interest developed
out of this occupation, as he occasionally became pos-
sessed of rare and historically valuable coins, which
awoke in him the instincts of the coin collector.

After leaving the school at Fiirth, where he was edu-
cated in the Jewish faith, Meyer Amschel entered the
firm of Oppenheim at Hanover. While there he hap-
pened to make the acquaintance of the Hanoverian Gen-


The Origins of the Rothschilds 5


eral von Estorff, an ardent coin collector, who employed
him to obtain many valuable coins for his collection. As
the general was connected with the ruling house in Hesse,
this acquaintance was to have fruitful results. In his
spare time Meyer Amschel now devoted himself more
and more to numismatics. He got hold of any papers
about the subject that he could, and in course of time
became an expert in his subject, although his general
education left a very great deal to be desired. Ata com-
paratively early age he returned to his native city of
Frankfort, in order to take possession of his inheritance,
and having done so, to lay the foundations of a business of
his own. For this he had received a practical education
from his earliest youth, both at home and at Hanover.

About the same time General von Estorff left Hanover
for the court of Prince William of Hesse, the grandson
of the old Landgrave William VIII, who resided at


’ Hesse; he proceeded to the small town of Hanau, which


‘
4


lies quite close to Frankfort. The prince’s father Fred-
erick II of Hesse had married a daughter of King
George III of England of the House of Hanover, and
the two rulers used their family relationships to consoli-
date their dynastic and political interests. The sale of
soldiers for service under foreign governments, practiced


by so many German princes at this time, was an impor-


tant part of their activities; England, being particularly
accustomed to carrying on wars with foreign mercenaries,
was an exceedingly good customer.

Unfortunately Frederick II fell out with his‘wife, his
father, and his father-in-law, because he changed over
from the Protestant to the Catholic faith. In order to
protect his grandson from his father’s influence the old
landgrave decided that William was to be kept away
from Cassel,-and allotted the county of Hanau to him.
Until he should be able to assume the rulership of that
province he was sent to King Frederick V of Denmark,


7


6 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


who had married the second daughter of the King of
England, and whose daughter was destined to be the
future bride of young William.

The relations of the ruling House of Hesse with Eng-
land and Denmark were to be fraught with the most
important consequences for the rise of the House of
Rothschild, which was enabled to make use of the close
business connection that it succeeded in establishing with
the ruling House of Hesse, to get into touch with the
courts and the leading statesmen of Denmark and Eng-
land.

The old Landgrave William VIII died in 1760, Fred-
erick assumed the government at Cassel, and William
became crown prince; and as the bridegroom of the
Danish princess he became, in accordance with the will
of his grandfather, independent ruler of the small county
of Hanau with its 50,000 inhabitants, to whose interests
he devoted himself with the greatest zeal. William was
a thoroughly active person, and was never idle for a mo-
ment. He read a great deal, and actually wrote some
essays on matters of local historical interest. He also
tried his hand, though without any great success, at
etching, modeling and carpentering, and he had a very
definite flair for collecting.

It would appear that General von Estorff aroused his
ruler’s interest in coin-collecting; in 1763 William
adopted this hobby with great enthusiasm, and it af-
forded him much pleasure and satisfaction. Estorff
spoke to him about Meyer Amschel Rothschild, who had
bought coins for him in Hanover in former days, as being
a great expert in that line.* On the strength of this intro-
duction Rothschild selected some of his finest medals
and rarest coins, and went to Hanau to offer them to the
young prince. He did not succeed in seeing him per-
sonally, but he managed to hand them to someone in the
prince’s immediate entourage. This offer proved to be
the starting-point of a lasting business connection, even


The Origins of the Rothschilds 7


though at first it was of a quite loose and impersonal
nature.

At that time a large number of foreigners used to visit
Frankfort every spring. The town fairs were widely
famous. The latest products of the whole world were on
view there, and young William of Hanau, who had a
talent for business, took a special interest in these fairs
and constantly attended them. Meyer Amschel always
managed to get advance information about these journeys
from the prince’s servants, and profited by these occa-
sions to offer William while he was in Frankfort not
only rare coins but also precious stones and antiques.
Although this was principally done through the prince’s
retinue, he sometimes managed to conduct these transac-
tions personally, and in any case he managed to establish
a regular business relationship. He was fortunate in
that the prince did not share the general aversion to Jews,
and appreciated anyone who seemed intelligent and good
at business, and whom he thought he could use in his
own interests.

At that time titles and honors were of far greater prac-
tical importance than they are today; unless a person had
some kind of prefix or suffix all doors were closed to him,
and everyone who did not have a title of nobility by the
accident of birth would endeavor to obtain an office, or
at any rate an official title, from some one of the innu-
merable counts or princelings who in that day still en-
joyed sovereign rights. Meyer Amschel Rothschild,
being a shrewd man with an astonishing knowledge of
human nature for his years—he was only twenty-five—
concentrated on using his connection with the Prince of
Hanau to obtain a court title. He hoped thereby not
merely to raise his prestige generally, but more particu-
larly to.advance his relations with other princes interested

in coins,
In 1769 he wrote a most humble petition * to the Prince
of Hanau, in which, after referring to various goods


8 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


delivered to the prince to his Highness’s most gracious
satisfaction, he begged that he might “most graciously
be granted the advantage of being appointed court agent.”
Meyer Amschel promised always to devote all his energy
and property to the prince’s service, and he concluded
his letter with a perfectly sincere statement that if he
received the designation in question he hoped thereby to
gain business esteem, and that it would otherwise enable
him to make his fortune in the city of Frankfort.

This letter, which was written in a style expressive of
extreme humility, was the first of an almost endless series
of petitions which the various members of the House of
Rothschild were to address in the course of the nineteenth
century to those occupying the seats of the mighty.
Many of these were favorably considered, and assisted
no little in establishing the fortunes of that House. This,
the first of the series, was granted, and the nomination
was duly carried into effect on September 21, 1769.
Henceforth to the name of Rothschild was attached the
decorative suffix “Crown aan to the Principality of
Hesse-Hanau.”

This more or less ean nonden with the present-day
practice under which a tradesman may display the royal
coat-of-arms with the legend “By special appointment,”
etc. It was a mere designation carrying no obligation,
and although it gave expression to the fact that a busi-
ness man enjoyed the patronage of a customer in the
highest circles, it did not imply any official status what-
ever. Nevertheless this first success gave much joy to
Meyer Amschel, since it not only enabled him to make
great profits in his old coin business, but gave his firm a
special prestige with the world at large, as even the
smallest prince shed a certain glamour upon all who came
anywhere near his magic circle; and the Prince of Hanau
was grandson of the King of England, husband of the
daughter of the King of Denmark, and destined to be the
ruler of Hesse-Cassel.


The Origins of the Rothschilds 9


At the age of twenty-five Meyer Amschel was a tall,
impressive-looking man of pronounced Hebraic type; his
expression, if rather sly, was good-natured. In accord-
ance with the custom of those times he wore a wig, al-
though, as he was a Jew, he was not allowed to have it
powdered, and in accordance with the customs of his
race he wore a small, pointed black beard. When he
took stock of his business and his little property, he
could say to himself with justice that he had not merely
administered his inheritance intelligently, but substan-
tially increased it. Although he could certainly not
be classed amongst the wealthy men of Frankfort, or
even amongst the wealthy Jews of that city, he could
assuredly be described as well off, and was in a position
to think of founding a family.

He had been attracted for some time by the youthful
daughter of a tradesman called Wolf Solomon Schnapper,
who lived not far from the Rothschilds’ house in the
Jewish quarter. She was seventeen years old when
Meyer Amschel courted her, had been brought up in all
the domestic virtues, was simple and modest, and ex-
ceedingly industrious, and brought a dowry with her
which, though small, was in solid cash. Meyer Amschel’s
marriage was celebrated on August 29, 1770. After his
marriage he would have liked to move from the house
zur Hinterpfann, which he rented, into a house of his
own, but he could not yet afford to do so. The young
couple’s first child, a daughter, was born as early as.1771,
after which followed three boys in the years 1773, 1774,
1775, who were given the names Amschel, Solomon, and
Nathan.

While his wife was fully occupied in bringing up the
children and running the house, Meyer Amschel devel-
_ oped his business, in which his invalid brother Kalman
_ was a partner until he died in 1782. Without neglecting
_ his ordinary business of money-changing, he bought sev-
_ eral collections of coins from needy aristocratic collectors


q


10 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


in the district, and he had an antique coin catalogue of
his own printed, which he circulated widely, especially
among such princes as were interested in numismatics.
He sent such catalogues to Goethe’s patron Duke Karl
August of Weimar, to Duke Karl Theodore of the Palat-
inate, and of course always to his own benefactor at
Hanau,° Prince William.

The prince’s mother still kept him away from his
father, Landgrave Frederick, who was ruling at Cas-
sel, and who made several unsuccessful attempts to get
into touch with his son. William had married Princess
Caroline of Denmark six years before Meyer Amschel’s
marriage; but from the first moment of their union they
had realized that they were not suited ° to one another.
Indeed so little physical or spiritual harmony was there
between the young couple that their marriage might be
regarded as an absolute affliction. It finally led to Wil-
liam’s entirely neglecting his wife and living with nu-
merous favorites, who bore him children. The families
Haynau, Heimrod, and Hessenstein are the descendants
of such unions, it being William’s practice to obtain titles
for his illegitimate children from the Emperor of Austria,
in return for the moneys he lent to him. It is difficult
to verify the fantastic figures” given as to the total num-
ber of his illegitimate children; but there is no doubt
they were very numerous.

When he assumed the government of his small terri-
tory, William of Hanau was in a position to play the
role of absolute ruler, and his highly marked individu.
ality immediately made itself felt. He was insolent ever
with the nobility, and often observed that he did not like
them to take advantage of any marks of familiar “con.
descension” ® that he showed them. On the other hand he
did not show any pride in dealing with persons who hi
thought would serve his interests. He was exceeding]
suspicious, quick to see a point, and easily made angry
especially if his divine right was questioned.


The Origins of the Rothschilds II


He held broad views in religious matters, associated
much with Freemasons and practiced complete religious
tolerance. Under his rule the Jews enjoyed all kinds of
liberties; they did not, for instance, have to display in
the market signs to distinguish them from Christian
tradespeople. Indeed William took pleasure in their
marked talent for business, for in this matter he felt him-
self to be a kindred spirit. Business considerations gov-
erned him even when he was specifically considering the
welfare of his soldiers. He would concern himself with
the smallest details of their equipment; would pass the
new recruits, and would give precise instructions as to
the length of the pigtail to be worn. He was particularly
fond of parades, and tortured his men with drill and but-
ton-polishing. One reason he was particularly anxious
that his troops should look smart was that he could make
a great deal of money by following the example of his
father and grandfather in selling his men to England.

His father Landgrave Frederick had in this way
gradually transferred to England 12,000 Hessians, and
amassed an enormous fortune in the process, In the same

way William sold to England in 1776 the small Hanau
regiment, which he had just formed. The conditions of
such “subsidy-contracts” were exceedingly oppressive to
the customer, as he had to pay substantial compensation
for any man who was killed or wounded. The crown
prince also increased his property considerably by this
means. After deducting all expenses he realized a net
profit of about 3,500,000 marks from this business, and
there being no distinction between the public and the
private purse of a prince, this money was at his absolute
personal disposal.

-In spite of his princely origin, such were the business
instincts of this talented young man that this financial
- success simply whetted his appetite for amassing greater
riches. Had William not been destined to succeed to the
throne of Hesse, he would have been an outstandingly


12 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


successful man of business. As it was he found such out-
let as he could for his commercial instincts within the
sphere of his princely dignity. Father and son continued
to accumulate large capital sums, and they refrained
from bringing over to the Continent substantial propor-
tions of the subsidy moneys, which they invested in Eng-
land itself. The management of these funds was entrusted
to the Amsterdam financial house Van der Notten. Eng-
land did not always pay in cash, but often in bills of
exchange that had to be discounted. For this purpose
the prince and his officials had to employ suitable middle-
men in large commercial centers like Frankfort; although
the middlemen had to get their profit out of the busi-
ness they could not be dispensed with in view of the re-
stricted means of transport and communication at that
time. Purchases and sales had to be carefully regulated
to prevent the market from being suddenly flooded with
bills, the rate of exchange being consequently depressed.

This work fell to the various crown agents and factors;
of these the Jew Veidel David was the principal one
attached to the landgrave at Cassel, Rothschild being
employed only by the crown prince at Hanau, and only
in exchange business and to a limited extent in conjunc-
tion with several others. His personal relation with the
prince was at first exceedingly slender, for, however en-
lightened he might be, a ruling prince did not easily asso-
ciate with a Jew, and only long years of useful service,
acting upon a temperament such as William’s, could
break down such natural obstacles. In the first instance
men of business had to deal with the crown prince’s offi-
cials; to get on good terms with them was a primary essen-
tial for anybody who wanted to do business with the
prince.

One of the most influential members of the crown
prince’s civil service was an official at the treasury
called Carl Frederick Buderus.® He was the son of a
Hanau schoolmaster, and had shown a special aptitude


——


The Origins of the Rothschilds 13


for the duties of a careful and accurate treasury clerk.
His father had been writing- and music-master to the
children of the crown prince’s mistress Frau von Ritter-
Lindenthal, ancestress of the Haynaus, and this had given
him the opportunity of bringing to the crown prince’s
attention a plan of his son’s for increasing the milk
profits from one of the prince’s dairies by the simple ex-
pedient of forbidding the practice, adopted by the office
concerned, of omitting fractions of a heller in the ac-
counts. Young Buderus showed that this would increase
the revenue by 120 thalers. ‘This discovery appealed so
strongly to the avaricious prince, who counted every half-
penny, that he entrusted Buderus with the accounts of
his private purse, in addition to his normal duties.

Buderus henceforth displayed the greatest zeal in look-
ing after the financial interests of the crown prince. He
is generally credited with having been responsible for
the introduction of the Salt Tax when the problem of
providing for the prince’s innumerable natural children
became pressing. ‘The resulting increase in the cost of
this important article of diet was heavily felt, especially
by the poorest inhabitants of Hesse-Cassel. There being
no distinction between the public treasury and the private
purse we can readily imagine how great this man’s influ-
ence was. Moreover, the officials of that period were al-
ways personally interested on a percentage basis in the
financial dealings which they carried through in their
official capacity. By arrangement with amenable crown
agents with whom they had to deal they could, without
any suggestion of bribery, or of acting against the influ-
ence of their master, easily so arrange matters that their
personal interests would be better served by a clever agent
than by one who was less adaptable.

Meyer Amschel brought to his work a certain natural
flair for psychology, and he always endeavored to create


- personal links wherever he possibly could. He naturally
made a special point of being on good terms with the


14 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Hanau Treasury officials, and especially with Buderus.
They, however, had not as yet sufficient confidence in the
financial resources of the Frankfort Jew Rothschild to
entrust to him anything except the smaller transactions.

Through the death of Landgrave Frederick, the
crown prince suddenly succeeded to the throne of Hesse-
Cassel, and to the most extensive property of any Ger-
man prince of that period. On October 31, 1785, his
father Frederick II had suddenly had a stroke during
his midday meal and had fallen off his chair, dying a
few minutes later. This news came as a complete sur-
prise to the crown prince, as his father had latterly
scarcely ever been ill. William of Hanau accordingly
succeeded to the throne of Hesse-Cassel as Landgrave
William IX. On reading his father’s will he learned
with pleasure that the country was free of debt, and that
he had come into an enormous property. The subsidies
received for the sale of mercenaries had been most profit-
ably invested, and estimates the value of the inheritance
varied between twenty ?° and sixty ** million thalers—un-
paralleled sums for those times.

The new landgrave united his private property at
Hanau with his inherited posssessions, and now found
himself disposing of an amount of money which con-
ferred far greater power on him than his new dignity.
He moved his residence from Hanau, which was close to
Frankfort, to Cassel, which lay much farther north, with
the result that Meyer Amschel Rothschild’s relations with
the Hessian court at first suffered from the greater dis-
tance which separated him from his patron. But the
Jewish tradesman was determined not to lose such a use-
ful connection without a struggle. In order to remind
the new landgrave of his existence he visited Cassel again
in 1787, bringing with him a remarkably beautiful col-
lection of coins, medals, and jeweled gold chains, and
offered these wares to the landgrave at exceptionally low
prices. The prince at once appreciated the real value of


The Origins of the Rothschilds 15


the articles, and eagerly did business with Meyer
Amschel, who took advantage of the opportunity to sub-
mit the humble request that he should not be forgotten if
any future bills of exchange required discounting, or the
prince wanted to purchase English coins.

Rothschild had deliberately made a loss on these small
deals in order to secure the chance of much more profit-
able business in the future, and his valuable articles were
readily purchased from him because they were cheap,
promises being freely made with regard to the future.
But two years passed without his services being asked for.
He stood by enviously, seeing other agents getting bills to
discount, and being asked to pay interest only after six or
eight months, or else to pay over the money in instal-
ments, an arrangement equivalent to allowing the firms
concerned substantial free credits. Rothschild had
closely followed the business dealings of these firms, and
had thought out a very useful way of transacting such
matters if he should be entrusted with them.

He decided to pay another call at Cassel. During the
summer of 1789 he wrote a letter to the landgrave * in


which he referred to the services that he had rendered


during a long course of years as Hesse-Hanau crown
agent, and asked to be considered in connection with the
bills-of-exchange business on a credit basis. In order to
put himself on a level with his rivals he promised always
to do business at a price at least as high as that offered
by any banker in Cassel.

The petition—which shows that Rothschild already
had control of considerable sums of money—was sub-
mitted to the landgrave by Buderus, but William decided
that he must first obtain further information about Roths-
child’s business. His inquiries all produced satisfactory
results; Meyer Amschel was described as being punctual


- in his payments, and as being an energetic and honorable


.


{ man, who therefore deserved to be granted credit, even
if precise figures regarding the extent of his possessions


16 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


could not be obtained. Nevertheless, Rothschild received
only a comparatively small credit transaction to carry
out, whilst simultaneously a transaction thirty times as
great was entrusted to Veidel David; but, though modest,
it was a beginning. Buderus, whose position in the mean-
time had been steadily increasing in importance, often
had occassion to travel between Cassel and Frankfort on
business matters. We have evidence of the fact that as
early as 1790 he had business dealings with Rothschild’s
father-in-law Wolf Solomon Schnapper, and it was
Schnapper who brought him and Meyer Amschel
together.

Rothschild would often get advance information of
Buderus’s journeys to Frankfort so that he could go and
see him when he came. The Hessian official heard from
other sources in Frankfort of the clever Jew’s rising
reputation, and of how he always met his obligations
punctually. Buderus was also gradually influenced by
Rothschild’s own persuasive powers. As early as Novem-
ber, 1790, Buderus’s accounts contain an entry regarding
a “draft of 2,000 Laubtaler to the order of the crown
agent Meyer Amschel Rothschild.” *°

Rothschild now urged Buderus, if occasion should
arise, to recommend him to the landgrave for substantial
dealings also. In 1794 an opportunity for this occurred.
The capital sums invested by Hesse in England had
grown to a very considerable amount, and the landgrave
gave instructions that a portion of them should be brought
over to Cassel. In addition to the Christian banking
firm of Simon Moritz von Bethmann, which had been
established in Frankfort for centuries, and four other
firms, Buderus put forward the name of the crown
agent Rothschild as suitable for carrying through this
transaction. The landgrave, however, attached far too
much importance to his old connection with Bethmann,
at that time the outstanding banking firm in Germany,
and with the other old established firms, and on this occa-


The Origins of the Rothschilds 17


sion too Rothschild was left out. But it did not occur
again. In the end Buderus’s efforts were successful in
overcoming the landgrave’s aversion, and henceforward
Rothschild also was employed to an increasing extent in
discounting bills and in other business.

His dealings with the court at Cassel soon became very
active, and as Meyer Amschel carried through the mat-
ters entrusted to him, not merely conscientiously but with
a shrewd eye to gain, the profits which he derived from
them increased considerably. It was necessary for the
young household that business should be brisk, for in 1788
another son, Carl Meyer, was born, and in 1792 a fifth
son Jacob, called James, and Meyer Amschel’s marriage
had also been blessed with five daughters. There was
the large family of twelve persons to feed; however,
Meyer Amschel’s flourishing business was not merely
adequate to support his family, but there was a consider-
able and constantly increasing surplus available for
increasing his business capital. In 1785, as an outward
and visible sign of his increasing prosperity, he bought
a handsome residence, the house known as zum griinen


Schild, while he transferred to a relative the house zur


Hinterpfann in which he had lived hitherto, and which
he had partially purchased since being nominated crown
agent.

The house into which the Rothschild family now
moved is still standing almost as it was then; it is the
right half of a building comprising two quite small fam-
ily dwellings, typical of the straitened circumstances of
the Jewish quarter. Only the three left windows of the
house front belonged to the Rothschilds, and above the
first door was a small, scarcely noticeable five-sided con-
vex green shield.'* The right half of the building, known
as the house zur Arche, belonged to the Jewish family


_Schiffe, who kept a second-hand shop in it; over the door


was a small carved ship representing the boat of
Columbus."°


18 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


As the door of the Rothschild house was opened, an
ancient bell was set ringing, sending its warning notes
right through the house. Every step one took revealed
the painful congestion in which the Jews of that period
were compelled to exist, the only quarters where they
were allowed to live being comprised within the small
and narrow Jews’ street. Everything in the house was
very narrow, and each particle of space was turned to
account. A creaking wooden staircase, underneath which
cupboards had been built in, led to the upper floor, and
to the little “green room” of Gudula, the mistress of the
house, so called because the modest furniture in it was
upholstered in green. In a glass case on the table was
the withered bridal wreath of Meyer Amschel’s wife.
Let into the left wall was a small secret cupboard, con-
cealed by a mirror hanging in front of it. In this matter,
too, space was carefully utilized, there being cupboards
built into the wall wherever possible, such as are now
coming into use again.

On the ground floor was the parents’ small bedroom,
while the numerous children had to share one other little
room. A narrow passage led to a kind of roof terrace—
a tiny roof garden with a few plants. As the Jews were
not allowed in the public gardens this roof garden
furnished a modest substitute, and served as the family
recreation ground. As it is laid down that the Feast of
the Tabernacle must be celebrated in the open air, and
there was no other place available, the little roof garden
was used for this purpose.

Behind the house, and overlooking the narrow court-
yard, was a room about nine feet square, which was
actually the first banking house of the Rothschilds. Its
most important article of furniture was a large iron chest
with an enormous padlock. However, the lock was so
contrived that the chest could not be opened on the side
where the lock was, but only by lifting the lid from the
back. In this room, too, there were secret shelves cleverly


The Origins of the Rothschilds 19


concealed in the walls. The kitchen of the house was
very modest, the room being about twelve feet long and
only about five feet broad; a tiny hearth, which could
accommodate only one cooking pot, a chest, and a bench
were about all that it contained. There was one fixture
that constituted a great luxury for those times, a primitive
pump which conveyed drinking water direct to the
kitchen.

Such was the scene of the early activities of Meyer
Amschel and his sons, whose energy and enterprise laid
the foundations for the future development of their
House.

Berghoeffer’s researches indicate that the annual
income of the House of Rothschild, before the war period
of the 1790’s, may be estimated at between 2,000 and
3,000 gulden.** We are better able to realize what this
meant when we consider that the expenditure of Goethe’s
family, who were people of position, was about 2,400
gulden a year. On such an income it was possible to live
quite comfortably at Frankfort at that time, although the
political disturbances which were developing soon began


to produce their effect. Events profoundly affecting the


course of all future history had taken place.

The repercussions of the French Revolution were felt
throughout Europe. There was no one, whether prince
or peasant, who did not directly or indirectly feel its
influence. The principle of equality which it proclaimed
aroused emotions of hope or dismay throughout the
world, according to the social position of each individual.
On the standards of the revolutionary armies was
inscribed their determination to extend the benefits of
their achievements throughout the world, and those who
had seized the reins of power were soon to aim at world
dominion. This fact constituted a special menace to the


_German princes whose territories bordered on France.


4
;
é


:


The refugees of the French nobility flooded Germany,


and many of them arrived at the Cassel court.


20 The ‘Rise of the House of Rothschild


Landgrave William had occasion to hear many of the
terrible stories told by the emigrants who had lost their
nearest relatives under the guillotine, and had been forced
to go abroad as homeless refugees reduced to absolute
poverty. The impression gained from the sufferers
themselves, the news regarding the threatened execution
of the king and his consort, and the reports of the cruel
treatment meted out to all who enjoyed princely or noble
privileges caused him to tremble for his crown, as all
the princes of Europe were trembling. He was also
concerned about his enormous wealth, a special source
of danger at such a time; and he therefore did not require
much pressing to join the great coalition of princes
against revolutionary France.

At the head of this coalition was Francis of Austria,
who was shortly to be elected emperor, and who had been
the first to ally himself with Prussia against France.
Landgrave William attached particular importance to
his relations with the man who was shortly to be emperor,
and in a letter * to the “Most Excellent, Most Puissant
King and highly honored cousin” he hastened to promise
his military help as a proof of his “most special devotion
to your high wishes.” Francis of Austria expressed his
gratitude and observed that this should serve as an exam-
ple to others, especially as “not only every territorial
prince and government of whatever kind they may be,
but also every private person possessed of any property,
or who has been blessed by God with any possessions or
rights acquired by inheritance or otherwise must realize
with ever growing conviction . . . that the war is a uni-
versal war declared upon all states, all forms of govern-
ment, and even upon all forms of private property, and
any orderly regulation of human society, as is clearly
proved by the chaotic condition and internal desolation
of France and her raging determination to spread similar
conditions throughout the world.” 28


The Origins of the Rothschilds 21


But the union of princes had much underrated the
offensive of revolutionary France. Under the handicap
of bad leadership and lack of unity the Allies were unable
to prevail against the revolutionary armies, inspired by
the ideals of liberty and nationalism. Prussia and Hesse
were forced to retire; and the French General de Custine
actually succeeded in crossing the Rhine in 1792 and
reaching Frankfort, with the result that William retired
in a panic to Cassel, greatly concerned about his crown
treasures. With rage and indignation he read the French
manifesto to the Hessian soldiers which urged them to
forsake the “tyrant and tiger who sold their blood in
order to fill his chest.” The landgrave finally succeeded
in driving the small French force out of Frankfort. This
cost him a considerable sum of money but his loss was
made good by a new subsidy contract under which he
delivered 8,000 Hessian soldiers to England, which had
joined the Coalition against France. Meyer Amschel
Rothschild and his rivals were kept fully occupied in dis-
counting the bills received from England in connection
with this transaction.

When, in 1795, Prussia withdrew from the war against
the French Republic, the Landgrave of Hesse followed
her example. His ambition now was to have the com-
paratively modest title of landgrave changed, and to
attain electoral rank. In the meantime he had been
created a field-marshal of Prussia, and in 1796, when
Napoleon’s star was in the ascendant, relations between
the two countries were particularly cordial. In spite,
however, of the secession of Prussia and Hesse, England
and Austria continued to carry on the war of the coalition
with varying success. Whilst Bonaparte was victorious in
Italy, the Archduke Karl gained a series of successes in
the south of Germany. Frankfort had to suffer again
from the vicissitudes of war; on July 13, 1796, it was
actually bombarded by the French with the result that


22 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


some of the houses in the Jewish quarter—156 buildings
including the synagogue, most of which were inferior
wooden structures—were set on fire.

‘The Rothschild house, which was one of the best-con-
structed buildings in the street, suffered only slight
damage. In view of the time required to rebuild these
houses a departure had to be made from the ghetto pre-
cinct, and the Jews had to be allowed to reside and trade
outside the strictly defined boundary. ‘The Rothschilds
were among those who took advantage of this favorable
opportunity, and transferred their merchandise business
—they were dealing increasingly in war requirements
such as cloth, foodstuffs, and wine—to the Schnur Gasse
which lay near the center of the town, renting accommo-
dation at a leather dealer’s.

The military developments of the first coalition war, in
which Meyer Amschel’s princely customer at Cassel was
actively engaged with varying fortunes, entailed con-
siderably increased activity on the part of the various
crown agents in the landgrave’s service. Although the
war had caused not a little damage to Frankfort ?® it
had brought the town certain indirect advantages. The
Frankfort Bourse benefited by the decline of the Amster-
dam Bourse, which had hitherto held a dominating po-
sition, and which almost completely collapsed when the
French conquered Holland in 1795. The result was
that much more business came the way of the Frankfort
bankers, and Meyer Amschel Rothschild’s financial and
trading business, which was closely associated with war
requirements, increased by leaps and bounds.

The war profits realized at that time formed the real
foundation of the enormous fortune that was later built
up by the House of Rothschild. It was of course im-
possible any longer completely to conceal such large
profits. Until 1794 the family property had for twenty
years been assessed at the constant figure of only 2,000
gulden, and they had paid taxes in accordance with this


The Origins of the Rothschilds ° 2


“assessment,” amounting to about thirteen gulden annu-
ally. Suddenly in the year 1795 this amount was doubled,
and in the year after that Rothschild was included
amongst those whose property was worth 15,000 gulden
or more, that being the highest figure adopted for assess-
ment purposes.

Meanwhile the three eldest sons had grown up, and
after the age of twenty were associated with their father
in the business to an increasing extent. Like their two
eldest sisters they were placed in responsible positions
and rendered active assistance to their father. A large
family, which to so many people is a cause of worry and
anxiety, was in this case a positive blessing as there was
abundance of work for everybody. It made it unneces-
sary for Meyer Amschel to take strangers into his busi-
ness and let them into the various secret and subtle moves
of the game. Since the number of available children
increased in proportion as the business expanded, it was
possible to keep all the confidential positions in the
family. The strong traditional community and family
sense of the Jews, reenforced by persecution from out-

side, compelling them to unite in their own defense, did
wonders. The two eldest sons had been zealously engaged
in the business from boyhood, and their father wisely en-
couraged them by letting them share personally in the
business, apart from the general family interest in its
prosperity.

When the eldest daughter married, in 1795, the son-
in-law Moses Worms was not employed in the business,
but when the eldest son Amschel Meyer married in 1796,
the daughter-in-law Eva Hanau was given a post.

In spite of the growing number of available members
of the family, Meyer Amschel found it necessary also
to engage bookkeepers with a knowledge of languages,

_as the Rothschild family at that time were all quite un-
educated, speaking and writing only a bad kind of

Frankfort Yiddish German, apart from Hebrew; and


.


24 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


in view of their expanding connections with persons in
the highest circles they had to pay particular attention
to matters of epistolary style. As the only person he could
find capable of carrying out this work was a Christian
girl, Rothschild did not hesitate to take her into the busi-
ness.

It was at this period that Meyer Amschel entered into
a highly elaborate deed of partnership with his two
eldest sons, which provided that profits and losses should
be divided between the three partners according to a
definite scheme.

The growing demands upon the treasury arising out
of the war served to develop the relations with the Land-
grave of Hesse. After the separate Peace of Basel
William of Hesse adopted the attitude of an impartial
observer of the warlike activities in Europe, and occu-
pied himself principally in the profitable administration
of his extensive possessions. He was no stranger to the
authentic delights of avarice. Great though his wealth
was, his appetite for increasing it remained keen. He
showed. the greatest ingenuity in effecting savings of
every kind, and spent all his spare time thinking out
schemes for the profitable investment of the large cash
resources which were accumulating in his treasury.

The ruling landgrave gradually became a banker to
the whole world, advancing his money not only to princes
and nobles, but also to small shopkeepers and Jews, and
even to artizans, where he could get good interest. The
amounts lent ranged from hundreds of thousands to a
- few thalers, according to the financial repute of his cus-
tomers. Cobblers and tailors paid the same rate of
interest for small advances as princes for heavy ones.
The debts were all accurately registered in account books,
making up an enormous number of volumes. Ifa banker
wanted to borrow from him he had to deposit govern-
ment securities with the landgrave. Thus his enormous


fortune consisted of cash, jewels, art treasures and coins, —


The Origins of the Rothschilds 25


as well as acknowledgments of sums lent and debenture
certificates deposited as security.

The withdrawal in 1795 of Prussia and Hesse from
the war against France had resulted in the temporary
estrangement of the Austrian Emperor Francis; but he
and the landgrave soon reestablished cordial relations,
for each of them had need of the other. William desired
support in the acquisition of territory, and in his efforts
to attain the dignity of elector, while the emperor was
sadly in lack of funds owing to the long war with France.
The landgrave therefore asked the emperor’s support in
his aims; the emperor wrote on September 8, 1797,”° to
say that he appreciated the efforts which his cousin was
making on his behalf, and was grateful to learn that the
landgrave was sympathetic to his need for a loan. “I
also believe,” he wrote, “‘as it is my duty to do, in your
sentiments of loyalty to me and to my house, of which
I have received special proof in the matter of the loan
that is being negotiated by Herr Kornrumpf. I flatter
_miyself that your Highness will carry this through to my
complete satisfaction. Your Highness may rest assured
’ that for my part I sincerely wish to be of service to you
also.”

The details of such transactions were generally nego-
tiated by Jewish agents, and although Meyer Amschel
was not employed on this occasion, he was soon to serve
as the middleman between the landgrave and the em-
peror.

This was made possible by the fact that Rothschild’s
wealth had increased rapidly during the last years of
the war. Towards the end of the eighteenth century it
cannot have been far short of a million gulden. The
transfer of bills of exchange, cash payments, and the
consignments.of merchandise from England, the prin-
_ cipal supply of the Frankfurter Platz, which in its turn,
_ supplied the whole of Germany, made it necessary to
appoint a representative on the other side of the Chan-


26 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


nel. As it was essential that any such representative
should be a trustworthy person, the obvious thing was
to appoint one of the five sons.

The two eldest, Amschel ** and Solomon, who, in 1798,
were twenty-five and twenty-four years old respectively,
were thoroughly initiated into the Frankfort business.
The third son, Nathan, a highly gifted young man of
twenty-one, intensely industrious and with a very inde-
pendent spirit, felt that his elder brothers did not give
him sufficient scope. In spite of his youth, he too bene-
fited by the wise arrangements of his father, and had his
own personal share in the business and in the family
property.

As the continental states, owing to war and revolution,
produced much less, but consumed a great deal more
than in normal times, English commercial travelers
swarmed over the Continent of Europe and in 1798, one
of them called at the Rothschilds’ house of business, and
was received by Nathan. English commercial trav-
elers of that period were exceedingly conscious of the
commercial and political supremacy of their country,
and they were wont to adopt an arrogant manner, as they
felt that the Continent was dependent upon their goods.
The Englishman’s manner annoyed Nathan Rothschild ;
and he met his arrogance with brusqueness, whereupon
the foreigner took his departure.

This incident was the immediate cause that decided
Nathan to propose to his father that he should go to
England himself, in order to become a merchant there
on his own account and also to represent the firm of
Rothschild generally. His father and brothers did not
show any opposition to the enterprising young man and
supported his decision in every way. Nathan took as
much ready money with him as was practicable and the
rest he had sent on after him; the capital which he
brought with him to England amounted altogether to a
sum of about twenty thousand pounds or a quarter of a


The Origins of the Rothschilds 27


million gulden. About a fifth of this sum was his own
money; the rest belonged to the business. The action of
his father and brothers showed great confidence in this
young man who did not even know the language of the
country he was about to enter as a complete stranger.
Their confidence was to be justified, for Nathan was
destined to become the outstanding figure in the Roths-
child business.

This first branch establishment of the House of
Rothschild resulted from the family relationships and
the requirements of the trade with England, without
any preconceived plan, and without the remotest idea
of the importance of this step for the future of the
business.

The Napoleonic epoch, which followed upon the
French Revolution, was to be the occasion for the foun-
dation of a second branch in Paris and for the first col-
laboration between the brothers Rothschild in Frank-
fort, London, and Paris.


CHAPTER II
The Rothschild Family During the Napoleonic Era


HE turn of the century coincided with an important

part of the wars against the French Republic, aris-
ing out of the revolution. The Peace of Lunéville, con-
cluded in 1801, had set the seal on the brilliant Bona-
parte’s territorial victories, thereby giving France the
leadership on land, while, however, England’s preemi-
nence at sea was confirmed. Although Bonaparte had
overcome all his other enemies, he was bound to admit
that sea-girt England had maintained its position. The
Treaty of Amiens, which followed upon that of Lune-
ville, merely marked.a transition stage, and was bound
to lead to a resumption of the struggle, until one of the
two great opponents should lie bleeding on the ground.

This struggle was the predominant feature of the next
fifteen years, and converted almost the whole of the main-
land of Europe into a theater of war. The result was
that innumerable substantial firms, banks, and private
persons lost their property, while on the other hand per-
sons possessing industry, energy, and resource, with a flair
for turning opportunity to account, were enabled to gain
riches and power.

At any rate within their own caste, the Rothschild fam-
ily had at that time achieved a position in which their
future was bound to be profoundly affected by political
developments. As early as 1800 their father Meyer
Amschel had been the tenth richest Jew in Frankfort;
the only question was as to the attitude that the head of
the business house and his sons would take in the stormy
times that were to follow.

28


The Napoleonic Era 29


Numerous competitors were richer than they, or as rich,
had better and older connections, and some had been re-
ceived into the Christian Church and no longer suffered
from the stigma of Judaism. The Rothschilds, on the
other hand, had the advantage of a chief who was indus-
trious, energetic, and reliable, and a man of intelligence.
He had to help him four hard-working sons who were
developing into first-rate business men under the guid-
ance of their father. One of these, Solomon, had just
married Caroline Stern, herself the prosperous daughter
of a Frankfort tradesman, and had thus been enabled to
found a home of his own. The third son Nathan was liv-
ing in the camp of Napoleon’s great enemy England.

In that country with its sea-power and its world-wide
commerce, his undertakings were far better protected
against Napoleonic interference than those of his father
and brothers on the Continent. He was able to form a
much more dispassionate judgment of the great events
which followed so rapidly upon one another during those
years, and was in a better position to turn them to account.
Moreover, Nathan was the most enterprising of the five
sons, of which fact his decision to go to England was it-
self an indication.

The commercial activities of the House of Rothschild
in Frankfort itself were not limited to one branch of busi-
ness. It took any chance of earning a profit, whether as
commission or forwarding agents, or in the trade of wine
and textiles, which had recently been declared free, and
in silk and muslin, not to mention coins and antiquities.
The wine business in particular expanded greatly; and
Meyer Amschel did not fail to use every opportunity for
extending his connections with princes and potentates
even beyond the sphere of the Duke of Hesse.

One of the most important connections established at
Frankfort was that with the princely House of Thurn
and Taxis, the head of which, Prince Karl Anselm, held
the important position of hereditary postmaster in the
~Holy Roman Empire.


30 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


This family was of Milanese extraction; in Italy it was
known as della Torre, in France as de la Tour. It had
invented the idea of a post, and had introduced a postal
system in the Tyrol, toward the end of the fifteenth cen-
tury. In 1516 it was commissioned by the Emperor Max-
imilian I to inaugurate a mounted postal service between
Vienna and Brussels. Even at that early date the digni-
fied rank of postmaster general was conferred upon one
of its members.

That was the starting point of the impressive develop-
ment of the Thurn and Taxis postal system, which came
to embrace the whole of Central Europe. The head of-
fices of the system were at Frankfort, but the family were
not satisfied with the normal development of their under-
taking. They turned the information obtainable from
the letters entrusted to their charge to profit.

The end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the
nineteenth centuries saw the development of the practice
of opening letters, noting the contents and then sending
them on to their destinations. In order to retain the
postal monopoly, the House of Thurn and Taxis offered
to place the emperor in possession of the information
derived from the so-called secret manipulation of letters.
If, therefore, one were on good terms with the House one
could easily and swiftly obtain news, and also dispatch it.

In the course of time Meyer Amschel had come to
realize that it is of the greatest importance to the banker
and merchant to have early and accurate information of
important events, especially in time of war. As his native
town was the headquarters of the postal and information
service, he had had the foresight to get into touch with
the House of Thurn and Taxis, and had transacted vari-
ous financial matters to their great satisfaction. It was
on this fact that he relied when he appealed to the foun-
tainhead of the Imperial Postal Service at Frankfort, his
Imperial Majesty himself.

In a petition to his Majesty that he and his sons should


The Napoleonic Era 31


be granted the title of crown agent, Mever Amschel
brought forward precisely those matters from which he
had derived the greatest profit, namely, his financial and
commercial transactions in the war against France, and
the services which he had rendered to the House of Thurn
and ‘Taxis. He had been honest and punctual in his busi-
ness dealings, as those witnesses would testify who in-
dorsed his petition.

The Roman-German Emperor, whose power at this
time was practically limited to the granting of honors,
did actually consent to grant Meyer Amschel the title of
imperial crown agent by a patent dated January 29, 1800.
Not only was this a passport to him throughout the whole
of the Roman Empire in Germany; it also carried the
right to bear arms, and liberated him from several of the
taxes and obligations laid upon the Jews of that period.
The patent and the title were signed and granted by
Francis II, simply as Roman-German Emperor, and had
nothing to do with Austria or Austrian Government de-
partments. It was not until much later that the brothers
Rothschild entered into actual relations with Austria and
her statesmen. Even as late as 1795, when the Landgrave
of Hesse lent the Emperor Francis a million gulden, and
in 1798 when he lent him an additional half-million,
other bankers conducted the transaction, the Rothschilds
having nothing whatever to do with it.

The dispensations enumerated in the imperial patent
were more or less paper ones, since most of the smaller
or greater territorial princes, of whom there was such a
plenitude in Germany in 1800, applied their own laws
and regulations. This, however, was a minor considera-
tion with Meyer Amschel; the important point was that
the new title “imperial crown agent” sounded much bet-
ter than Hessian Landgraviate, and was likely to attract
-a number of other titles. Prince von Ysenburg and the

German Order of St. John both conferred upon him court
titles in recognition of loans of money from the princi-


32 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


pality, negotiated by Meyer Amschel. In 1804. Roths-
child requested the Prince of Thurn and Taxis to bestow
a similar favor upon one of his sons, in view of the fact
that he himself bore the title of mperial crown agent.

It was characteristic that when asking the emperor for
a title he should mention the services rendered to the
House of Taxis, and that when he applied for a favor to
that house he should have based his claim on the fact
that his services had been recognized by the emperor.
Such promotions were necessarily of service to him, too,
in his relations with his old patron the Landgrave of
Hesse, who in spite of everything was still inclined to be
suspicious.

William of Hesse was in every way a most important
person to Meyer Amschel, for he was colossally rich,
richer than the emperor himself, and—a much more im-
portant point in those days than now—he was close at
hand. Moreover, he had family ties with England,
where Nathan was living, and with chronically penurious
Denmark, by lending money to which the firm of Rup- -
pell and Harnier, as well as that of Bethmann, had made
great profits.

Meyer Amschel advised the landgrave to participate
in this loan by buying stock. He did purchase a small
amount, Rothschild being commissioned to carry through
the transaction. This was done to the landgrave’s satis-
faction; but Meyer Amschel required a considerable sum
of ready money in order to take advantage of a favorable
opportunity for purchasing goods and bills of exchange.
Knowing that the landgrave, whose investments in Eng-
land as well as in Germany brought in very good returns,
had spare cash available, he asked, and obtained from
him on two occasions—in November, 1801, and July,
1802—160,000 thalers and 200,000 gulden as a guaran-
teed loan, the securities being Danish and Frankfort de-
bentures.

Although the security offered was exceptionally good,


The Napoleonic Era 33


William of Hesse was persuaded to lend the money only
after pressure had been brought to bear, and on the
special recommendation of his principal financial admin-
istrator Buderus. ‘The transaction certainly marked a
distinct advance in Rothschild’s confidential relations
with the landgrave.

The second amount was wanted, not merely for Meyer
Amschel himself, but also to assist his two eldest sons,
who were already beginning to acquire the titles of court
appointments wherever they could. As early as 1801 they
were appointed official agents for making war payments
on behalf of the State of Hesse.

Meyer Amschel had been enviously observing Rippell
and Harnier’s financial transactions with Denmark. It
was his ambition to do similar business with Denmark,
with landgraviate moneys, on his own account, independ-
ently of any other firm. He still lacked any large capital
sum, such as others had available, but he was accurately
informed by Buderus of the large amount of ready money
in the possession of the ruler of Hesse, which was seeking
investment. He was determined to put his competitors
out of the field by offering the prince better terms.

The Frankfort firms were accustomed to wait until
orders came to them, but he meant to get in and negotiate
personally. He had put through the secured loans at
Cassel personally; and he decided to go there again in
order to secure the cooperation of William’s counselors
with Buderus at their head, so that they might make the
landgrave disinclined to negotiate direct with Denmark.

An important point was that Denmark was not to know
where the money came from, because William did not
wish to be regarded as wealthy in his family circle, as he
was afraid that some of them might ask for special favors.
For this reason it was decided that a go-between who


_ had relations with Buderus, and through him with Roths-
child too, and who lived in Hamburg, which was con-


veniently near to Denmark, and far enough away from


34 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Hesse to allay suspicion, should be the first person to
make approaches to that country. This was a Jewish
banker called Lawaetz. |

Moreover, on Rothschild’s own suggestion, and con-
trary to the usual practice, the loan was to run over a long
period. Notice for repayment was not to be given for ten
years or more, and after that period payment could be
demanded only in quite small instalments, over a period
of twenty or thirty years. They did actually succeed in
securing William of Hesse’s consent to granting such a
loan; and no sooner were the conditions agreed than
Lawaetz showed his hand to the extent of making the
interest payable to Meyer Amschel Rothschild at Frank-
fort.

“The lender,” the Hamburg banker wrote to Denmark,
“Js an exceedingly rich capitalist, and exceptionally
friendly to the Danish Court. It is possible that even
greater sums and better conditions may be obtainable
from him.” 1 It is true that Lawaetz did not know Roths-
child personally at this time.

The successful conclusion in September, 1803, of this,
the first loan which he had carried through privately, not
only brought Meyer Amschel financial profit, but also
resulted in his obtaining the title of crown agent to the
Court of Hesse. His rivals had been highly displeased
to hear of this loan, and kept making representations of
a nature calculated to damage Rothschild, to the land-
grave. Riippell and Harnier were particularly assid-
uous. They drew attention to the fact that the last Danish
loan had been issued in the form of debentures, in the
name of Rothschild; and in order to rouse Danish na-
tional vanity they stressed the idea that this suggested
that “it was not the national credit of Denmark but
merely the Jewish name of Rothschild that had got these
obligations accepted in Hesse.” *

Rothschild’s fight with his rivals involved the officials


entrusted with the financial administration of the land-


_


nelioee.


The Napoleonic Era a5


graviate in the struggle. Buderus became increasingly
a partizan of Rothschild, whereas Lennep of the War
Office took the side of Riippell and Harnier. Rothschild
and Buderus, however, had the upper hand for the time
being, and by 1806 no less than seven landgraviate loans
were issued. The profit realized from this transaction
served to key up still further the hatred and enmity of
the rival firms and of Lennep, and led to awkward de-
velopments.

Rothschild had shown the greatest energy in these un-
dertakings. He did not even spare himself the journey
to Hamburg, an exceedingly difficult one at that time, in
order to get into personal touch with the banker, Lawaetz,
and to see that the Danish business was carried on as ener-
getically as possible.

A letter * from the Hamburg banker to Buderus con-
tains the following statement: “The Crown Agent Roths-
child is coming to see me tomorrow in order to settle up
our remaining accounts, and he intends to return the day
after. It has been a pleasure to me to make the acquaint-


_ance of this man, and I shall be glad to be able to do him


any service in future.”

The intrigues of the rivals, however, did not wholly
fail of their effect upon William of Hesse. His attitude
continued to be suspicious, and he several times refused to
have anything to do with other business propositions sug-
gested by Rothschild, agreeing to them only as the result
of much pleading and persuasion. Besides the Danish
loans, loans were issued for Hesse-Darmstadt and the
Order of St. John, these also being subscribed by land-
graviate funds through the intermediary of Rothschild.
The sums involved were already considerable, running
into hundreds of thousands.

The larger they were, the better pleased was Meyer


- Amschel, because his percentage profit rose in propor-
tion, while the risk was borne, not by him but by the
_landgrave, whose favorite occupation had always been


36 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the careful administration and development of his prop-
erty. The sums invested in England called for particu-
lar attention. Since the Peace of Basel, relations between
Hesse and England had been rather strained, although
they were not likely to become critical, as the landgrave
had cleverly succeeded in enlisting the interests of respon-
sible people on his side. He had lent the Prince of
Wales, afterwards King George IV, about £200,000 in
two instalments. The dukes of York and Clarence were
guarantors of this loan, but they also borrowed money
from the landgrave. In addition to this, William of
Hesse had put out £640,000 at interest in London in va-
rious ways, a fact which was to prove exceedingly useful
to him.

The example of their patron was a lesson to the House
of Rothschild, and they soon learned to copy his wise
practice of lending money by preference to persons in
the highest position. Even though William of Hesse re-
mained neutral in the second War of the Coalition, he
secretly wished success to the enemies of France for he
eagerly hoped for the resumption of his profitable sub-
sidy contracts with England.

The Peace of Lunéville, which extended France’s
boundaries to the Rhine, also conferred on William the
dignity of elector, which he had so much desired, and
which was duly proclaimed in 1803; but the meteoric
rise of Bonaparte and revolutionary France’s position in
the world seemed to him to be unnatural and menacing.
His friendship with Prussia was rather shattered, because
that state had succeeded in annexing considerable terri-
tory, but had left the Hessian prince in the cold.

The peace between France and England did not last
long. As early as May, 1803, the Island Kingdom again
declared war upon the usurper in Paris. It was not long
before William of Hesse was forced to take an attitude
toward the new world situation. In October, 1803, the
French, having invaded English Hanover, tried to get


The Napoleonic Era 37


money from the elector in exchange for Hanoverian ter-
ritory. His fear of offending England caused him to re-
fuse this offer, and thus the elector first gave offense to
the Corsican.

He had no true idea at the time how dangerous the
Corsican might be. The quiet times for Frankfort and
Hesse were now at an end. Stirred up by Napoleon’s
powerful genius Europe passed from one crisis to an-
other, and in such circumstances it was exceedingly dif-
ficult for William of Hesse to administer his enormous
property with foresight and wisdom. He felt the need
more and more of Meyer Amschel’s advice, so that Roths-
child’s journeys to Cassel became more and more fre-
quent. His eldest son had for some months been resid-
ing permanently in that town.

The preference shown to the Frankfort family aroused
the envy and hatred of the Cassel Jews against this out-
sider. They complained that not merely did he steal their
best business, but he was not even subject to the night-
rate and poll-tax which other Jews had to pay. Meyer
Amschel did his utmost to evade such payments as far


‘as possible, but in the end he was forced to pay some of


these taxes.

In August, 1803, he found it necessary to apply to the
elector for a letter of protection in Cassel for himself and
his sons, so that, although resident in Frankfort, he should
enjoy the same rights as the protected Jews of Cassel.
This would certainly entail obligations as well. His re-
quest was granted on payment of 400 reichsthaler, but the
document was not completed, possibly in accordance with
Meyer Amschel’s own wishes, for he would then have
been liable to pay taxes in Cassel also.

The Cassel Jews, however, soon got wind of this
maneuver, and in the end Meyer Amschel was required to


state in whose name he wished the letter of protection
_made out, whereupon he wrote the following letter to the


]


i


elector: *


38 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Most gracious Elector, most excellent Prince and
Lord!

Your Excellency has most graciously deigned
to grant that in return for the payment of roo florins
I should be exempt from night-rate, and that on the
payment of 400 florins one of my sons or I should be
admitted to protection.

I am now required to state in whose name the letter
of protection should be made out, and this is causing
me great difficulty, since the son for whom I had
intended taking it out has been settled for some time
with another of my sons in London, and is engaged in
doing business with him there.

I have therefore decided to take out the protection
for myself, if I may be most graciously: permitted to
pay an annual amount similar to that paid by other
Jews not residing in the town . . . as I only do busi-
ness here, and could do most of it quite as well from
another place; as I have now held the office of Crown
Agent for over forty years, your Electoral Highness
having even in my youth shown me such gracious
condescension, so I hope now, too, to receive your
most gracious consent, and remain with deepest re-
spect, your Electoral Highness

My most gracious Prince and Lord’s
most obedient servant,
MryYER AMSCHEL ROTHSCHILD.
Cassel, 21st April 1805.


This personal request, sent in by Meyer Rothschild in
rather inferior German, provoked a certain amount of
amusement at the electoral court. Meyer Amschel was
informed that his request could not be granted unless he
moved to Cassel with all his property; and that naturally
he was not prepared to do. In the end the letter of pro-
tection was made out in the name of Amschel Meyer
Rothschild, his eldest son.

Although Meyer Amschel had to fight for his position
in Cassel, his prestige at Frankfort rose, on account of


oe


The Napoleonic Era 39


his connection with the Hessian ruler, which was now
becoming generally known. This was made manifest in
various ways. When shops were put up to auction in the
electoral courtyard, to which Jews, even resident Jews,
were not admitted, an exception was made in favor of
Meyer Amschel. One of the shops was definitely ex-
cluded from the auction and reserved for Rothschild. It
is possible that ready money was a factor, as well as his
prestige in this matter.

This period saw the conclusion of the two last, and by
far the most substantial Danish loans, of 700,000 and
600,000 thalers. In these transactions too, Lawaetz
played a part of some importance. In spite of very
friendly business relations, he was still somewhat reserved
in his attitude toward the Rothschild family. Whilst in
talking to his friends he often declared that he had found °
“Herr Rothschild always to be exceedingly prompt and
businesslike and worthy of the most complete confi-
dence,” yet he felt that where such large amounts were
at stake, one ought to be very cautious, even in dealing
with Rothschild. The atmosphere then was full of sus-
‘picion, all the more so because the political barometer
in Europe pointed to stormy times, and the capitalists
were exceedingly uneasy as to the possible fate of their
wealth.

Bonaparte had already cast aside his mask and was
boldly grasping at the imperial purple; toward the end
of the summer of 1804 the whole of France was echoing
with the shout “Vive l’Empereur!’ ‘The prestige of the
German imperial system was suffering a corresponding
decline, an obvious symptom of which was the proclama-
tion on August 10, 1804, of Francis II as Emperor of
Austria.

Moreover, September, 1804, already saw Napoleon

_ touring the newly won Rhine provinces. He appeared in
full splendor and magnificence at Aix-la-Chapelle and
_ Mainz as if he were indeed the successor of Charles the


40 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Great. It was on this occasion that, with the assistance
of the Mainz Electoral High Chancellor, Dalberg, he
laid the foundations of that union of German princes
which was to be known as the Confederation of the Rhine.

Napoleon was already adopting the role of their pro-
tector, and invited William of Hesse, too, to Mainz, an
invitation which was exceedingly suggestive of a com-
mand to come and do homage. The elector pleaded a
sudden attack of gout. Napoleon replied coldly; he was
still polite, but he swore that William should pay for
having failed immediately to adhere to the confederation
which was being formed under Napoleon’s protection.
The French ambassador at Cassel had uttered the menac-
ing words, when he heard that the prince was not going
to Mainz, “On n’oublie pas, on n’oublie rien!” *

The Elector of Hesse was left feeling rather uncom-
fortable, and he secretly threw out cautious feelers toward
England and Austria—Austria was already showing a
marked inclination to side against France. The occasion
of the Emperor Francis’ assuming the imperial title con- _
nected with his Austrian hereditary territories, afforded
him an opportunity of expressing his most sincere and
devoted good wishes to the ‘‘most excellent, puissant,
and invincible Roman Emperor and most gracious Lord ’
for the continuous welfare of the sacred person of his
Imperial Majesty and for the ever-increasing glory of
the all-highest Imperial House.”

His pen was jogged by the need he felt for powerful
support, and incidentally the letter was to serve the pur-
pose of reminding the emperor of a request which the
writer had made on November 22, 1804, and which so
far had not been granted. The elector’s first favorite,
the apothecary’s daughter Ritter, whom the emperor had
raised to the rank of Frau von Lindenthal, and who was
ancestress of the Haynaus, was now out of favor, since she ©
had preferred 2 young subaltern to the aged landgrave.
For over a year her place had been occupied by Caroline ©


The Napoleonic Era 41


von Schiotheim, the beautiful daughter of a Russian
officer whom the emperor had been asked to create
Countess von Hessenstein.

In May, 1805, Austria finally joined the coalition
against Napoleon. Napoleon gave up his idea of landing
in the British Isles, and concentrated on Austria. This
resulted in great shortage of money, for the Austrian
Treasury had heavy burdens to bear from former wars;
coin was scarce and paper money much depreciated. It
was therefore decided that the interest on loans should
not, as had hitherto been the practice, be payable in hard
cash in all the principal exchanges in Europe, but should
be payable in paper in Vienna only. This was hard
for the elector personally, as he had advanced a million
and a half gulden to the Emperor Francis; and he
at once begged that an exception might be made in his
favor since “ill-disposed persons had suggested to him
that the Austrian state was going to go bankrupt, as far as
all external debts were concerned.” §

The imperial ambassador Baron von Wessenberg, nat-
urally wishing to turn the general situation to account,
‘sent this request forward under cover of a private dis-
patch of his own in which he wrote:

“Since avarice is the elector’s great weakness, it might
be possible, should you wish to do so, to obtain a still
greater loan from him if you agreed that interest in future
should be payable in cash. He would be more likely to
fall in with such a suggestion if his Imperial Majesty
would grant Frau von Schlotheim the title of Countess
of Hessenstein, without payment. The granting of this
request would particularly delight the elector.” °

In the second particular his wishes were granted, but
it was not possible to make an exception in the matter
of the interest charges. However, both Vienna and Lon-
_don endeavored to secure the elector’s accession to the
confederation, and he replied to these overtures with de-

mands for subsidies. Yet he was hard put to it to find


.
L


42 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


investments for all the money that he had at his disposal,
and as late as December 2, 1805, he had lent ten million
thalers to Prussia. He had hoped that the Austro-Russo-
English war against Napoleon would end in victory; but
Austerlitz put a speedy end to such hopes.

During the war, England sent financial assistance to
Austria in the shape of a monthly payment of a third
of a million pounds in cash, which was sent to Austria
by the most difficult and circuitous routes. The Roths-
child method of transferring large sums of money was as
yet unknown, and the only method in use was the dan-
gerous one of sending actual bullion by road. A consign-
ment of money was actually on the way when Austerlitz
was being fought, and, in fear of a defeat, orders were
issued from imperial headquarters instructing this con-
signment to be diverted in a wide circuit through Galicia
and the Carpathians.

The war complications in which Europe was involved
forced almost all states, whether they wished to or not,
to take sides. The Elector of Hesse characteristically
wished to attach himself to that party out of which he
could make the greatest profit. As Prussia was now
also being drawn into conflict with Napoleon, she at-
tempted to draw the elector in on her side. On the other
hand, the French Court gave him to understand that sub-
stantial advantages would be gained by the electorate if
he kept himself completely free from Prussian influence.
This suggestion was unpleasantly underlined by the gath-
ering of bodies of French troops in the neighborhood of
Hesse.

The elector bargained with everybody and secured
from Paris accessions of territory and the incorporation
of the town of Frankfort within his domains, The only
awkward point was that Napoleon demanded that the
British ambassador, through whom the subsidy arrange-
ments were carried on, should be sent home; and when


the elector delayed about doing this, Napoleon expressed —


—


The Napoleonic Era 43


his displeasure in no uncertain language, until the elector
gave way, and sent the ambassador away.

Annoyed at France’s threatening attitude the Hessian
ruler again endeavored to attach himself to Prussia.
Then, on July 12, 1806, the document regarding the Con-
federation of the Rhine was published, through which
Napoleon, with the assistance of Prince Theodor von
Dalberg, Electoral High Chancellor, won sixteen Ger-
man states by promising them separation from the Ger-
man Empire.

As a counterblast to this, Prussia attempted to bring
about a union of the princes of Northern Germany, and
to gain the support of the Elector of Hesse by offering
him the prospect of an accession of territory and the dig-
nity of kingship which he so much desired. These moves
were followed by threats and promises on the side of
France. The attitude of the elector remained undefined.
He now thought it best to preserve the appearance of
neutrality until the actual outbreak of war, and then
simply to join the side which was winning, although a
signed, if not ratified, treaty with Prussia was in ex-
‘istence.

He had, however, not reckoned sufficiently with the
forceful personality of Napoleon. It was impossible to
conduct a nebulous diplomacy with such a man. He had
long been tired of the vacillating attitude of Hesse. A
state of war was declared in early October, 1806. On the
14th of that month, Prussia was decisively beaten through
Napoleon’s lightning advance at Jena and Auerstedt.
Napoleon now scorned Hessian “neutrality.” He or-
dered that Cassel and Hesse should be occupied, and that
unless the elector and the crown prince left they should
be made prisoners of war as Prussian field-marshals,

“You will,” commanded Napoleon, “seal up all treas-
_uries and stores and appoint General Lagrange as gov-
-ernor of the country. You will raise taxes and pronounce
judgments in my name. Secrecy and speed will be the


44. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


means through which you will insure complete success.
My object is to remove the House of Hesse-Cassel from
rulership and to strike it out of the list of powers.” *° .

At Frankfort, Meyer Amschel Rothschild had been
watching the precipitate development of events with
terror; and his son Amschel, at Cassel, as well as he him-
self at Frankfort, took all possible measures to prevent
themselves and the elector from suffering too great finan-
cial loss. Business had just been going so exceedingly
well. The firm of Bethmann, which had felt that it was
being driven into the background, and had just been
making strenuous efforts to get a share in the elector’s
loan business with Denmark, was forced to withdraw
from the contest, on account of the political conditions
and the resulting shortage of money, and thereby left the
way open to Rothschild, who still had resources available.

In the meantime Lawaetz in Hamburg had definitely
decided in Rothschild’s favor. On July 2, 1806, he wrote
himself to Buderus !' to say that he would stand by their
good friend Rothschild as far as he could, saying: “I
hope that in the end people will realize that he is a good
fellow who deserves to be respected; the envious may say
what they like against him.”

In spite of all that Rothschild had hitherto done in
the service of the elector, he had not won his confidence
to the extent of being called in in a matter which had
become pressing on account of the developing military
situation; for although the elector continued to hope that
the notices naively posted on the roads leading to Hesse,
bearing the words “Pays Neutre’ would be respected, he
was sufficiently concerned for the safety of his treasures
to send away and conceal his more valuable possessions.
But it was no light task to deal with the extensive banking
accounts of the electoral loan office, and with his vast
accumulations of treasure, and after several months the
work was still far from complete.

There being no distinction between the treasury and


The Napoleonic Era 45


the prince’s private purse, it was necessary to get out of
the way, not only his own valuables, but also the cabinet,
war and chancery cash records, for a period covering
several decades; for so the books of his financial admin-
istration were called, in order to make it impossible to
examine into the state of his affairs. There were large
volumes of these records, representing vast sums; in the
war chest alone there was over twenty-one million thalers,
sixteen millions of which were out on loan in various
places, and bringing in interest to the tune of many thou-
sands of thalers. All this had to be concealed as far as
possible, and this business was done by trusty officials,
under the guidance of Buderus. But there is nothing to
show that any of the Rothschilds were employed in the
long-continued work of transport and concealment.

‘Time was pressing; some of the things were sent to
Denmark; but it was impossible to get everything out of
the country, and to have done so would have attracted
too much attention. So the elector, who gave the closest
personal attention to the plans for insuring the safety of
his possessions, decided that the most precious articles
should be buried within the walls of three of his castles.
Under the stairs of the castle of Wilhelmshéhe were
hidden twenty-four chests, containing silver and mort-
gage documents to the value of one and a half million
gulden, amongst which were certain Rothschild deben-
tures, while twenty-four chests with cash vouchers and
certain valuable volumes from the library were concealed
in the walls under the roof. A similar number of chests
were concealed in the picturesque castle of Lowenburg,
built in the Wilhelmshohe park, while further treasures
were conveyed in forty-seven chests to the Sababurg, sit-
uated in a remote forest.

The elector bad originally intended to send the last
consignment down the Weser to England, but he and the
shipowner disagreed over a matter of fifty thalers and
zo they were not sent away. It was impossible to carry


4


46 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


through such measures in secrecy, as too many persons
were involved in the transaction; and long before the
French invaded the country, there was general alarm
throughout the district, because the elector was said to be
hiding all his treasures.

Meanwhile Napoleon’s commands were being carried
out. French troops, coming from Frankfort, were al-
ready encamped on the night of October 31 on the heights
surrounding Cassel. The elector gazed anxiously from
the windows of his castle at the enemy’s camp-fires, and
sent adjutant after adjutant to Mortier, the French mar-
shal. In due course the French envoy was announced,
and brought an ultimatum from Napoleon, significantly
addressed: “To the Elector of Hesse-Cassel, Field-
Marshal in the service of Prussia.”

In short, biting sentences William’s double game was
exposed, and the occupation of the country and the dis-
armament of its inhabitants was proclaimed. The elector
immediately decided to throw in his lot with Napoleon
and to join the Confederation of the Rhine. But it was
too late; Marshal Mortier would no longer listen to the
elector’s messengers. The elector realized that there was
nothing for him but flight.

In the few hours before the French entered the country
he would have to move as many of his remaining posses-
sions as he could, and make the more urgent dispositions
regarding outstanding accounts. William gave Buderus
power of attorney to receive the interest payments due
from the Emperor Francis in Vienna; and Buderus trans-
ferred this power of attorney to Rothschild, who pro-
ceeded to collect these payments for the elector, through a
business friend in Vienna, the banker Frank.

Besides this, Buderus that night brought two chests con-
taining securities and statements of accounts to the house
of the Austrian ambassador at Cassel, Baron von Wessen-
berg, and begged him to take charge of them. In addi-
tion, a member of the elector’s bodyguard roused the


-
4


H


The Napoleonic Era 47


ambassador in the middle of the night ** to give him five
envelops containing one and a half million thalers in
valid bills of exchange and coupons, as well as the
elector’s compromising correspondence with Prussia and
England. He also gave him a casket of jewels, request-
ing that the ambassador deal with these things as he
would for a friend.

Baron von Wessenberg felt extremely uncomfortable;
his position as ambassador of a neutral power was being
seriously compromised, but he was fortunately able to
entrust the money to a chamberlain of his acquaintance,
who was traveling to Hanover that night. The letters,
however, were of such a compromising nature that he
burned them in terror. He had dealt with everything
excepting the jewels, when the trumpets and marching
songs of the French invading troops were heard in the
morning. A few minutes earlier the elector had left the
town with his son in a traveling coach and six. After
having been held up by French troops at one gate, he
escaped by another, and drove without stopping through
Hameln and Altona, to Rendsburg in Schleswig.

- Having entered Cassel, Marshal Mortier immediately
began to carry out all Napoleon’s instructions, and also
commandeered all the electoral moneys and possessions,
even including the stables and the court furniture. He
took over the electoral rooms in the castle for his own
personal use, and the electoral flunkeys as his personal
servants. He did not molest the elector’s consort, and
Wessenberg succeeded in sending her the jewels, which
she sewed into her garments and those of her servants.

Buderus felt that things might get rather warm for
him, and he left Cassel disguised as an apprentice, with a
knapsack on his back, to follow his master into exile.’*
His despairing family stayed behind.

_ While these events were taking place, neither Meyer
Amschel Rothschild nor either of his sons seems to have
been at Cassel.* They had long realized that the attitude


48 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


of the French toward the elector was critical, and that
their relations with him might get them into trouble.
Frankfort, too, had been occupied by the French, and
the headquarters of the firm, their house and their whole
property, were at the mercy of the enemy.


:
5


In his heart Meyer Amschel remained loyal to the :
elector, and saw that the position arising out of the }


French invasion and the flight of the elector was one in
which he could still be of great service to him. He pre-
sumably came quite rightly to the conclusion, that it was
in the elector’s own interest that he should stay away at
this critical period, so that he might, if possible, carry on
the elector’s business behind the backs of the French. In
following his natural inclinations, and not compromising
himself in the eyes of the French, and in keeping out of
the way of these dangerous companions as far as possible,
he was also following the course of the greatest practical
utility.

Even if Meyer Amschel or one of his sons had actually


been in Cassel, the moneys entrusted to Baron von Wessen-.


berg would not have been placed in their keeping. They
were, as yet, far from enjoying such a degree of confi-
dence; indeed, the ambassador actually stated in his re-
port to Vienna at the time that the elector had sent the
things to him “because of lack of confidence in his busi-
ness agents.”

The French immediately instituted investigations to
discover where the elector had hidden his wealth. Na-
poleon had received news at Berlin of the occurrences
at Cassel. At four o’clock on the morning of November
s, 1806, he sent the following orders to Lagrange: “Fave
all the artillery, ordnance stores, furniture, statues and
other articles in the palace of the court brought to Mainz.
Proclaim that this prince may no longer rule. I shall
not continue to suffer a hostile prince on my boundaries,
especially one who is practically a Prussian, not to say
an Englishman, and who sells his subjects. You must


‘


FY


The Napoleonic Era 49


completely disarm the inhabitants, and authorize an in-
tendant to seize the prince’s revenue. In general you may
treat the country mercifully, but if there is any sign of
insurrection anywhere, you must make a terrible example.
. . . Let yourself be guided by the principle that I wish
to see the House of Hesse, whose existence on the Rhine
cannot be reconciled with the safety of France, perma-
nently removed from power.” **

Such were Napoleon’s feelings toward the elector. The
latter sent messenger after messenger, and letter upon
letter to Napoleon, but the emperor refused to answer.
On the 1st of November, 1806, William of Hesse arrived
at his destination, the castle at Gottorp, near Schleswig,
belonging to his brother, who had also married a Danish
princess. A whole crowd of exile princelings from small
German states was gathered there. They had all been
suddenly wrenched from a comfortable and careless ex-
istence, and were suffering acutely, especially from finan-
cial distress.

“We are in the greatest misery here,’ wrote Buderus
to London,** on November 17, 1806. ‘‘Please help us’to
get some money soon, because we do not know what we
shall do otherwise, as we are not getting a farthing from
Cassel. God, how things have changed!”

Meanwhile the French occupied Hamburg and ad-
vanced unpleasantly close to the elector’s place of refuge.
He became exceedingly nervous and excited, and feared
that he might yet fall into the hands of the French, with
all the belongings that he had rescued; his possessions
were all packed in chests, ready for further transport.
He once got into such a state of panic that he wanted to
send Buderus straight off into the blue with as many valu-
ables and securities as possible, leaving it to him to make
such provision as he could for their safe custody. How-
ever, the outlook became less menacing; the French did
not come to Schleswig for the time being, and the elector
gradually recovered his composure.


*


)


50 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Meanwhile Lagrange was ruthlessly executing Napo-
leon’s severe commands at Cassel. Even Wessenberg,


SS


suspected of concealing electoral treasure, was placed
temporarily under arrest. Gradually all the treasures ©


that had been concealed in the castle, including the gold
and silver plate, the antiques, the whole collection of


coins and medals to which Rothschild had contributed ©
so many valuable specimens, and also the innumerable —


chests containing deeds and securities, were discovered.


The elector might well regret that for the sake of fifty
thalers, he had failed to have the silver carried down the
river. All his splendid silver was sent to Mainz to be


melted down. ;


Dazzled by the vast extent of the riches that were being


brought to light, Lagrange was moved to take steps to
feather his own nest. Although his imperial master well
knew that the elector was rich, he could hardly expect
his wealth to be as extensive as actually proved to be the
case.


Lagrange reported to Napoleon that the property dis- |


covered was only worth eleven million thalers, which of
course was not remotely in accordance with the facts; and
in return for a douceur of 260,000 francs in cash, he re-
turned to the Hessian officials forty-two of the chests,
including almost all those that contained securities and
title-deeds. Running great dangers, a brave electoral
captain brought the chests into safety, and conveyed nine-
teen of them to Frankfort, where they were stored, not
with Meyer Amschel Rothschild, but in the warehouse
of Preye and Jordis, in whose extensive vaults they could
be concealed without attracting attention.

For an additional 800,000 livres * paid to himself and
the intendant, the dishonest governor promised to return
other papers too, and not to carry out any further investi-


gation. Thereby countless chests were released, which


were distributed amongst various trusted persons, for safe-


* One livre equaled one franc; four francs were the equivalent of one thaler.


The Napoleonic Era 51


keeping. Four of these chests, containing papers of the
Privy Council, found their way to Meyer Amschel
Rothschild’s house with the green shield in the Jewish
quarter, during the Spring Fair of 1807. This was the
only part played by the House of Rothschild in the actual
saving of the electoral treasures.

Meyer Amschel Rothschild hid these chests, having
left one of them for a time with his son-in-law Moses
Worms, in the cellar of his house. In case of emergency
he could have recourse to a separate cellar behind the
house and under the courtyard, the approach to this
cellar from the house cellar being very easy to conceal.
The courtyard cellar, too, was connected by a secret pas-
sage with the neighboring house. The persecution of
the Frankfort Jews in earlier times, had led to many such
secret refuges being constructed. In this case it was
therefore reasonable to assume that if the house were
searched by foreigners like the French, the cellar under
the courtyard would not be discovered at all, and that
even if it were discovered there was a good chance of
getting its contents into the next house.

In the meantime political changes had occurred which
put an end to the political independence of Frankfort.
Karl von Dalberg, who had collaborated with Talley-
rand in the creation of the Confederation of the Rhine,
was nominated Primate of the Confederation on June
12, 1806, and by a decree of Napoleon was granted the
city of Frankfort and the surrounding territory as his
residence.

This was a fact of much importance, both to the elector
and to his devoted servants the Rothschild family, for
Dalberg was particularly well-disposed to the elector
and to his administrator Buderus, on account of his busi-
ness dealings with them in earlier times; and, although
he was an archbishop and a strict Catholic, he was known
to be tolerant in his religious views. ‘The incorporation
of Frankfort in the Confederation of the Rhine put an


52 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


end to its constitution as a state of the empire; and the
Jews, who had hitherto been subjected to oppression by
the hostile patrician families who had controlled the
senate, now hoped for the abolition of all those restric-
tions, prohibitions and special laws under which they
had suffered for centuries,

Under the new régime life in the great commercial
city took on an entirely different complexion. It had to
be ordered in accordance with the wishes, or rather the
commands, of the French. This was especially the case
when Napoleon, in order to deal a deadly blow at the
arch enemy England, declared the continental blockade
whereby all commerce and communication by letter or
otherwise with England was prohibited. As that coun-
try was practically the only emporium for such indis-
pensable colonial produce as coffee, sugar, and tobacco,
the prices of these articles rose enormously, and a clever
merchant could make large profits through timely pur-
chases or by smuggling goods through Holland and the
harbors of North Germany. .

In spite of the control exercised by France over the
trade of Frankfort, Meyer Amschel and his son con-
trived, with the assistance of Nathan in England, to make
a good deal of money in this way. There were certainly
risks attached to this form of commerce, for under Article
5 of the continental blockade, all goods of English ori-
gin were declared lawful prize. With the passage of
time this kind of business became more restricted, for as
Napoleon’s power increased he was able to make the con-
trol more effective.

Meyer Amschel well knew that in spite of his flight
and the loss of property which he had suffered at the
hands of the French, the elector was still in possession
of very considerable resources. ‘There was, moreover,
always the possibility of a sudden change in Napoleon’s
fantastic career, and such an event would immediately
alter the whole situation. He therefore adhered to his


The Napoleonic Era 53


policy of ingratiating himself to the best of his ability
with Napoleon’s nominee, the new lord of Frankfort,
while he continued faithfully to serve the elector in secret.
For this purpose it was necessary that he should remain
in constant communication with him.

On the 15th of December, 1806, Meyer Amschel sent
an account ™’ to Schleswig of his earlier sales of London
pills of exchange, and reported that the other bills which
1e held were unsalable at the moment. Although the
‘servile script’ was full of protestations of groveling
qumility, and was composed in the illiterate style and
full of the spelling mistakes of the old Meyer Amschel,
t revealed a certain pride, for Father Rothschild made
considerable play with the good relations which he had
sstablished with Dalberg.

Rothschild reported with pride that he had influenced
Dalberg in favor of the elector, and had induced the new
ord of Frankfort to intercede with the Emperor and
H#mpress of France on the elector’s behalf. He begged
‘o state, however, that Dalberg advised that the elector
should not stand so much upon his rights, but should
idopt towards Napoleon the attitude of a “humble peti-
ioner.’ Meyer Amschel concluded by assuring the
elector of his unswerving loyalty and devotion, and de-
slared that he hoped, through his influence with Dal-
erg, substantially to reduce the war contribution of one
nillion, three hundred thousand thalers imposed by Na-
soleon upon the elector personally. He also asserted
hat Dalberg had commended him to all the French mar-
hals and ministers.

Although this letter of Meyer Amschel’s was written
n a boastful vein, and although he exaggerated his in-
luence, as in point of fact he did not succeed in getting
he levy reduced (incidentally, the elector got the levy
ransferred to the estates of the realm of Hesse), yet the
‘eport contained an element of truth. It was certainly
nost remarkable that the Archbishop and Lord of the


54 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Confederation of the Rhine, who ruled over sixteen Ger-
man princes, and stood so high in Napoleon’s favor,
should have shown so much good-will to the Jew Meyer
Amschel Rothschild of Frankfort, who, although now a
rich man, had no claim to move in high and influential
circles. There appear to have been financial reasons
for this relationship, and it no doubt originated in loans
granted by Rothschild.

When the elector had come to feel reasonably secure
in his new place of refuge in Schleswig, he devoted him-
self again to his favorite hobby, and tried to set in order
his chaotic possessions. Buderus had control of this work
at every point. He had left Schleswig some time before
and returned to Hanau, where he was occupied in calling
in debts due to the elector, before they could accrue to
the French. There was, for instance, the claim on Prince
von Zeil-Wurzach, which was in great danger of being
lost. Buderus, however, succeeded in saving this item,
and in his report he referred with emphasis to the as-
sistance granted by Rothschild, mentioning his name re-
peatedly. :

“T owe it entirely to the efforts of the Crown Agent
Rothschild,” he wrote to his master on March 8, 1807,
“that I am still not entirely without hope; and he has
undertaken to arrange an interview between myself and
the Wurzach chancellor in a place which he will
selécty:3,*4

The eldest son of the princely debtor attended this con-
ference himself, and it resulted in the repayment to
Buderus of the outstanding amount, which Buderus as-
scribed to the fact that Rothschild had used his influence
to such good effect with the advisers and officials of the
prince. He added, as especially illustrating Rothschild’s
trustworthiness, that the French in Cassel had offered tc
pay Rothschild twenty to twenty-five per cent of the
amount at issue, if he would assist in diverting this deb


The Napoleonic Era 55


of nine thousand gulden in accordance with Napoleon’s
orders.

“Your Electoral Highness,” the letter continued, “may
certainly deign most graciously to realize, the labor in-
volved in saving this amount in the most dangerous cir-
cumstances.” Besides Buderus, Lennep at Cassel, La-
waetz at Hamburg, and the war commissioners, pay-
nasters and crown agents such as Meyer Amschel and
1is sons were looking after the financial interests of the
lector. ‘Frankfort is the center point of all my busi-
uess,’ Buderus, who directed all the operations, wrote
o the elector.’®

‘To an ever-increasing degree Buderus was entrusting
he elector’s business to the Rothschild family; indeed he
was now employing them almost exclusively. They
ooked after the correspondence with Cassel, with the
‘lector, and with Lawaetz at Hamburg, pseudonyms be-
ng employed for the more important persons and trans-
ictions. Thus the elector was known as “the principal”
yr “Herr von Goldstein.” The stocks in England were
cnown as “stockfish”;*° Rothschild himself was called
‘Arnoldi” in these letters.

Meyer Amschel was often sent to the elector by Bu-
lerus to convey accounts or other information. ‘These
even-day journeys in bad coaches over rough roads, with
he constant risk of falling into the hands of the enemy,
with the letters with which he had been entrusted, came
o be felt as exceedingly burdensome by Meyer Amschel
n the course of time. He was not more than sixty-four
years old, but his health had latterly suffered from the
-xtraordinary demands made upon the chief of the ex-
ensive business house. Henceforward he generally left
hese journeys to the north to his son Kallmann (or Carl),
is his two eldest sons, Amschel and Solomon, were fully
yccupied at the head office in Frankfort.

‘These journeys had now to be very frequently under-


56 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


taken, because Napoleon had entered upon a definite
offensive against the elector’s property; and this called for
counter-measures of all kinds, from the elector’s loyal
adherents. In accordance with Napoleon’s instructions,
the French attempted, as they had already done in the
case of Prince von Zeil-Wurzach, to divert the moneys
lent by the elector in his own country to the French Treas-
ury, by offering substantial discounts on the amount due.

It is true that Lagrange had valued these amounts at
only four million thalers, the equivalent of sixteen million
francs, but actually they amounted to about sixteen mil-
lion thalers. One can therefore readily imagine the dis-
may which the action of the French occasioned the
elector. A large number of princes belonging to the Con-
federation of the Rhine, who owed him money, took ad-
vantage of the opportunity of settling their debts at a
reduction. On Rothschild’s advice, the elector implored
the Emperor Francis at Vienna on no account to pay to
the French either the capital sum or the interest due in
respect of the million and a half gulden which he had
borrowed from the elector.

All the efforts to cause Napoleon to change his attitude
failed; and meanwhile the situation at Gottorp had be-
come impossible. The elector had arranged for his fa-
vorite mistress Schlotheim to join him, and his host’s
wife, who was a sister of the elector’s consort, was afraid
of causing pain to the latter if she associated with the
Schlotheim. Also the collapse of a rising in Hesse de-
prived him of a last hope.

“Fools!” exclaimed Lagrange in a proclamation to the
Hessians on the 18th of February, 1807. “Count no
longer upon your prince; he and his house have ceased to
rule. Whoever resists will be shot.”

William in the meantime had migrated to Rendsburg,
and later to Schloss Itzehoe. In moving language he
wrote to the King of Prussia and to the Emperor of
Austria,


The Napoleonic Era 57


To the former he wrote: “I have now been living here
for four months, groaning under the weight of intoler-
able grief, and filled with deep concern for the many
bitter experiences through which your Majesty is passing,
and which . . . affect me even more than my own mis-
fortunes. I have had to watch the land of my fathers
suffering an arbitrary rule, and my private property be-
ing squandered, and to see my loyal subjects suffering and
being gradually reduced to beggary, if they are not
speedily succored. It is indeed hard, your Royal Maj-
esty, to have to endure such experiences, and doubly hard
when one is conscious that one has always acted in a
manner which one could justify before God and men.” **

His letter to the Emperor of Austria was written in
exactly the same vein.”* In the opening sentence the epi-
thet “most invincible” was on this occasion, in view of the
battle of Austerlitz, not added to those of “most excel-
lent” and “most powerful.” He begged in the strongest
terms, for the emperor’s help and support.

These letters were written after the elector’s efforts to
conciliate Napoleon had merely resulted in the Emperor
of France showing his personal contempt and aversion
more clearly than ever. William of Hesse’s attitude con-
tinued to be completely unreliable and vacillating as far
as everybody was concerned. At the same time that he
was overwhelming Napoleon with supplications, he was
negotiating with England for landing on the coast for
combined action against the French. But in England,
his overtures to Napoleon were known. He was no
longer trusted, and the electoral funds invested in that
country were sequestrated, so that although he received
the interest, he had no power to dispose of the capital.

All these things had not helped to improve the elector’s
temper. Prince Wittgenstein, who frequently had occa-
sion to visit him in exile on behalf of the Prussian gov-
ernment, wrote: ‘‘Personal association with him is in-
describably unpleasant; the greatest patience is required


58 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


in order to put up with his endless complaints and sudden
outbursts.” 7°

Buderus and Meyer Amschel Rothschild were soon to
suffer in the same way. Rothschild had latterly been col-
lecting and accounting for the interest on the English
and Danish loans due to the elector. As this had not been
settled by the elector personally, he complained of the


arrangement. He again became suspicious, and suddenly »
required that Buderus should not allow this money to —


pass through Rothschild’s hands, but that it should be
paid direct into the reserve treasury at Itzehoe, an ar-
rangement which was more difficult to carry out. This
was galling, both for Buderus and for Meyer Amschel
Rothschild, who was just endeavoring through Dalberg’s
good offices to buy back the elector’s coin collection, con-
taining so many gold and silver specimens of priceless


value, which had been carried off to Paris. The follow-


ing events did not improve the elector’s temper.


————E——— eee


By offering the tsar the prospect of sharing the world —
dominion with himself, Napoleon had in the Treaty of —
Tilsit reaped the fruits of his campaign against Prussia. :


The result was that Hesse was allotted to the newly cre-
ated kingdom of Westphalia, and Napoleon’s brother


Jerome pitched his tent in William’s residence at Cassel. |


The exiled elector was filled with rage and indignation,
and his tendency to behave unjustly to those about him
became more marked. When Buderus was again staying
with his master at Itzehoe, and spoke of Rothschild and
the services that he had rendered, the elector indicated
that he noted the special favor shown to Rothschild with
surprise, as after all, he was a Jew of very obscure ante-
cedents, and expressed his concern to find Buderus em-
ploying him, as he had lately been doing, to the exclusion
of almost everybody else, in the most important financial


transactions. Buderus declared himself strongly in reply.


He pointed out how promptly Rothschild had always
paid, especially in the case of the moneys from London,


/


The Napoleonic Era 59


and emphasized the skill with which Rothschild had
succeeded in concealing from the French his English
lealings on behalf of the elector. He related how French
officials in Frankfort had recently been instructed to
carry out investigations at Meyer Amschel Rothschild’s,
n order to ascertain whether he did not collect English
noneys for the elector ; and how Meyer Amschel had im-
nediately produced his books, an inspection of which had
-evealed absolutely nothing of this matter.**

This fact proved that even then Meyer Amschel was
<eeping two sets of books, one of which was suitable for
nspection by the various authorities and tax collectors,
he other containing the record of the more secret and
»rofitable transactions.

Buderus pointed out that Bethmann, in view of his
tanding as a Frankfort patrician, and as the head of a
irm that was centuries old, could not so suitably be em-
yloyed in transactions which in the difficult political con-
litions of the time could not bear the light of day. He
idded that Bethmann’s financial resources had given out
n connection with the Danish loan in 1806, and that
Rothschild far surpassed him in determination and en-
rgy. He also suggested that Rothschild had given
rreater proof of loyalty, for they had hardly heard any-
hing of Bethmann since the elector had gone into exile,
whereas Meyer Amschel was constantly concerning him-
elf with the elector’s interests, and also, when necessary,
coming personally to Schleswig, or sending one of his
ons,

Buderus’s representations succeeded finally in allaying
his bout of suspicion against the Rothschild family, with
vhom he had now established very close personal rela-
ions. Through the efforts of the administrator of the
lector’s estates, all the other bankers were gradually
orced into the background, Rothschild taking their
ylace.2> From this time onwards he enjoyed the elector’s
-onfidence as far as such a thing was possible, and we


60 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


find Meyer Amschel becoming, not only William’s prin-


cipal banker, but also his confidential adviser in various
difficult matters.

As his health no longer permitted him to do full justice
to the strenuous requirements of the elector’s service, he
placed one of his sons at the elector’s disposal when neces-
sary. Up to this time the elector had turned down the
various proposals regarding the collection of interest and
the investment of capital that Nathan had made to him
from London. As late as June, 1807, he actually in-
structed his chargé d’affaires in London to vouchsafe no
reply whatever if Nathan should venture again to inquire
as to the elector’s financial affairs.*° In this matter too,
he was slowly and completely to change his attitude,
without any disadvantage to himself. Everybody who


es


possibly could was borrowing money from the elector, —
for the German sovereigns, and not least, the King of
Prussia, were suffering from extreme shortage of money —
after Napoleon’s victorious march through their country, ©
owing to the heavy war expenses and the subsidies which —


he imposed.


Prince Wittgenstein repeatedly urged the King of
Prussia to be very cordial to the elector, and as soon as |


it should be practicable to invite him to live in Berlin,
because it might then perhaps be possible to persuade him


to grantaloan. The invitation was actually sent, but the —


king had then himself been obliged to flee from his capi-


tal, and was suffering the most grievous misfortunes, so


that Berlin was out of the question. Meanwhile Den-
mark had also been forced by Napoleon to give up her
neutrality. The French invaded the dukedoms and the
Danish royal house found the presence of the elector, who
was such a thorn in Napoleon’s side, most embarrassing.

In these circumstances, the refugee was in constant
danger of being discovered and taken prisoner. Jerome
was ruling in Hesse, and it was of little use to the elector
that Lagrange’s double-dealing was brought to light, and


The Napoleonic Era 61


the general dismissed. In spite of an invitation from the
Prince of Wales, William did not wish to go to England,
since that would have meant a final breach with the
powerful usurper, for the elector continued to cherish an
inreasonable hope of Napoleon’s forgiveness.

There was still Austria. In his last letter °* the Em-
9eror Francis had expressed his “‘most heartfelt sympathy
n these sad circumstances,” with the hope that he might
ye of assistance to him. ‘The elector accordingly asked
or asylum in Austrian territory, and decided to continue
1is flight to Bohemia, stopping first at Carlsbad.

He did not part with his treasures, but took with him
111 the valuables and papers which had been saved, in-
sluding a chest full of deeds which Meyer Amschel had
sroposed to bring on afterwards from Hamburg. The
ravelers were carefully disguised on their journey. In
ye place where there were French troops they nearly
ost their most valuable belongings, as the wheels of the
-arriage in which they were packed broke in the market-
ylace, and they were forced to transfer them to another
rehicle. Fortunately nobody guessed what the bales con-
ained; the journey proceeded without further mishap;
nd on July 28, 1808, the elector arrived at Carlsbad,
where he awaited the emperor’s decision as to his final
lace of abode.

Meanwhile Meyer Amschel and his son were carrying
yn their business at Frankfort and developing the trading
is well as the purely financial side of it. All the members
yf the family were actively engaged in it, and Roths-
thild’s unmarried daughter sat at the cash desk, assisted
yy the wives of Solomon and Amschel. Meanwhile the
ifth son, Jacob, generally called James, had reached the
ize of sixteen, and like his elder brothers had begun to
ake an active part in the business. This had made it
ossible for the eldest son Amschel also to leave Frank-
ort fairly often, in order, like Carl, who was the firm’s
‘traveler,’ to visit the elector in Bohemia.


62 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Buderus in the meantime had arranged that the elec-
tor’s cash income, which it was really his duty to admin-
ister, should be collected by Rothschild and remain in
his hands at four per cent interest. Thus, during the
summer of 180828 he received 223,800 gulden against
bills at four per cent—a very respectable sum at a time
when ready money was so scarce, and the elector was re-
luctant to leave it all with him. However he found in
due course that Rothschild accounted with extreme accu-
racy for every penny of it.

In accordance with the wishes of Emperor Francis, the
elector moved to Prague toward the end of August, 1808.
That monarch knew well what he was doing in welcom-
ing the elector to his territories. Austria was chronically
in need of money; nevertheless plans were being made to
avenge her defeat. Count Stadion especially was the
prime mover in the idea of waging a new war against
the insolent Emperor of the French. .

Financial affairs in Austria were in a state of chaos,
as revealed by the Vienna Bourse of the period. A con-
fidential friend of Emperor Francis had sent him a re--
port on the subject in which he did not mince his words.
“T feel it my duty to observe,” he wrote,”® “that the
Bourse at the present time seems more like a jumble sale
than an Imperial Bourse. The dregs and scourings of
the population invade it, and decent business men, ca-
pable of handling such matters, are pushed into the back-
ground and shouted down, so that reasonable discussion
becomes impossible. Closer investigation will reveal the
fact that many of these people are paid by stock-jobbers,
systematically to create disorder at the Bourse.” The:
collapse in the value of the paper currency, the violent:
fluctuations in all quotations, the fear of war and the:
general unrest all contributed to this state of affairs. It
was in vain for Emperor Francis to “resolve that meas-
ures must be taken to prevent the Bourse from degenerat-
ing into a rowdy collection of persons of no position wh


Pa


The Napoleonic Era 63


sacrifice all considerations to the basest greed for
profit.” *° The fundamental cause of these conditions re-
mained unaltered.

The Austrian state hoped for some financial assistance
from the elector at Prague. He was living a retired life
at the Palace Liechtenstein, and Vienna set itself to dis-
cover the state of the elector’s purse. All kinds of con-
fidential persons and secret agents of the police, some of
them disguised under titles of nobility and wearing of-
ficers’ uniforms, were sent to Prague. One of them re-
ported ** that the Elector of Hesse had large sums at his
disposal, and was in communication with “particulters”’
through middlemen, regarding the purchase of state
obligations. He stated that it was not at all unlikely that
2 loan to the imperial court could be obtained under fa-
yvorable conditions, and suggested that it might be worth
while to make inquiries on this matter through confiden-
tial bankers and exchange merchants.

Immediately on receipt of this report, the emperor with
juite unwonted promptitude instructed the chancellor of
the exchequer Count O’Donnell to let him have his opin-
ion as speedily as possible on this report received “from
4 trustworthy source.” *

We now for the first time find the name of Rothschild
mentioned in connection with the Austrian court. Count
’Donnell reported that there was no doubt that the elec-
ror had rescued considerable sums and also had large
amounts to his credit in England, and that it was there-
fore worth attempting to induce him to subscribe to a
loan, either in “solid gold” or in “reliable bills of ex-
change on places abroad.” The count emphasized that
‘in order to achieve this object the best method would
probably be to approach the middlemen to whom the
slector entrusts his financial affairs, and this can best be
Jone through a reliable exchange office in Vienna or
Prague.”
~ O’Donnell recommended that such middlemen should


64 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


receive one, two, or three per cent commission, this being
in any case customary in such proceedings, and they
would then have an interest in stimulating the elector to
carry through the transaction. “The papers of the
Credits Commission reveal,” the count’s report continued,
“that the persons who appeared on behalf of the elector, —
then landgrave, in connection with the negotiation of the
loan of one million, two hundred thousand gulden in 1796
were the Frankfort firm Riippell and Harnier, and Privy
Councilor Buderus. At that time the interest on these
loans . . . was collected by the local firm Frank and
Company, on behalf of the Jewish firm at Frankfort of
Meyer Amschel Rothschild, who were authorized to col-
lect them by a power of attorney executed by Privy Coun-
cilor Buderus, and it appears to me abundantly evident
that this privy councilor is the principal person who-
should be moved, through some advantage, to smooth our
athe. 33

It was decided to put up to the intermediaries two pro-
posals: either that they should obtain a five per cent loan
on mortgage security, or that they should persuade the
elector to invest a considerable sum, at least one or two
million, in the lottery loan. Hereupon the following
resolution was issued by his Imperial Majesty: “In view
of the indubitable necessity for providing if possible for
the collection in hard cash of an adequate supply of
money I approve of an attempt being made to obtain a
cash loan from the Elector of Hesse. . . . The important
thing is to make use of a reliable and intelligent mediator
who may be relied upon to carry through the negotia-
tions cautiously and skilfully, so as to achieve the desired |
end on the most favorable terms possible.” **

In accordance with these instructions Buderus and
Rothschild were confidentially approached as mediators,
and they promised that they would do their best, but they
emphasized the fact that the ultimate decision lay solely
with the elector. They at once duly informed the elector


The Napoleonic Era 65


of the wishes of Austria, but he showed a reluctance to
meet them, and then war broke out and the negotiations
were postponed.

During the period which followed the elector, regard-
ing whose avarice and enormous wealth the most varied
stories were spread at Prague, was closely watched by
secret police specially sent from Vienna. He took an
active interest in current affairs, and closely followed the
powerful movement which was developing in Germany,
particularly in Prussia, its aim being to shake off the
foreign yoke. This movement could not as yet come into
the open, but in Kénigsberg, where the king and the gov-
ernment of Prussia were residing, the ‘“Tugendbund” was
formed, a league which ostensibly pursued moral-scien-
tific aims, but the ultimate object of which was deliver-
ance of Germany.

The principal protector of the league was the minister
Baron von Stein; and William of Hesse held an impor-
tant position in it. Its membership was so wide that it
also included Jews, and the Rothschilds appear to have
become members. At any rate they acted as go-betweens
for the elector’s correspondence on this matter, and made
payments in favor of the Tugendbund.

Through an intercepted letter from Stein which men-
tioned the elector,®° Napoleon learned of the desire for a
war of revenge, and of the plans for a rising in Hesse.
Stein had to flee, and Napoleon’s distrust of the elector
and of his servants was very much increased. The em-
peror saw clearly that the elector was implicated, that is,
was financing it. Further intercepted letters confirmed
this view.*® As a result several business men mentioned
in them by the elector were arrested; it was desired
through them to obtain further information regarding
the apparently inexhaustible resources of the elector.
Amongst these men of business Buderus was promi-
nent, and it was particularly desired to ascertain his pre-
cise connection with the bankers. One of these was


66 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Meyer Amschel Rothschild, whose relations with Bu-
derus had long been no secret to the French officials.
The Frankfort banker was accordingly cited to appear
before the Chancery of the Urban and District of Frank-
fort on August 13, 1808; but he could not obey his sum-
mons since he was confined to his bed.

He had fallen seriously ill in June, 1808, had been op-
erated on by a professor from Mainz, and, fearing that his
days were numbered, he had made his will. He there-
fore sent his son Solomon to appear in his place, telling
him not to let himself be drawn, and to make only such —
statements as were not likely to furnish the French with
any clue, or else to provide false clues. Solomon carried
out his mission with great skill. The French were
but little enlightened by the cross-examination, and in-
the end they dismissed the young Jew with the order that
he should immediately hand over to the court any letter
from Buderus to the firm of Rothschild.*”

Buderus and Lennep were themselves arrested in Sep- -
tember, 1808, and minutely examined for several days at
Mainz, this being only natural in view of the fact that
these men, who were the elector’s tools, were in the power
of the French at Frankfort, whereas their chief was liv-
ing in Prague, out of Napoleon’s reach.

Napoleon’s mistrust of William was fully justified, for
in October, 1808, the elector was carrying on negotiations
at Prague for promoting insurrections throughout the
whole of the northwest of Germany, with the view that
they should spread to the south as well. This matter was
certainly carried on with great secrecy; even the Austrian
secret police agents knew only in a general way that
something was in the wind. It is amusing to note the
naive manner in which they arrived at the conclusions
contained in their reports.

“The Elector of Hesse,” says one of these reports, “has
forty-one natural sons, all of whom he has decently pro-
vided for, but as the fall of the elector has disappointed


The Napoleonic Era 67


heir hopes of a brilliant career, they are endeavoring to
einstate their father. As the defeat of Prussia has de-
rived them of all chance of achieving their object by
orce, they have had recourse to a secret association which
; intended to extend its activities throughout the whole
f Germany under the protection of the English Masonic
sodge at Hanover. ‘This league will take a suitable cp-
ortunity to reveal itself in a public conspiracy in order
) attain its final object. . . . The probability of another
yar has aroused fresh expectations of making proselytes.
n small confidential circles something is occasionally
aid about the possibility of putting an end to the mis-
ries of the country by putting Napoleon and his brothers
ut of the way.” *8

Vienna, however, was not merely interested in the elec-
or’s high politics. Further information was also desired
s to his financial advisers, particularly as to Rothschild,
1entioned by O’Donnell. Urgent instructions were
nerefore sent to the chief of police of the city of Prague
» obtain as accurate information as possible regarding
nat man’s activities.

The chief of police reported: *°


Amsel Mayer Rotschild, living under the regis-
tered number 184 in the third main district, is agent
for war payments to the Elector of Hesse, and in
that capacity he has achieved mention, together with
his brother, Moses Mayer Rotschild, in the electoral
almanac for the year 1806. The father of these two
men appears in the almanac as a war paymaster.
According to information supplied by Major von
Thimmel, Amsel Mayer Rotschild, has come here
from Frankfort, where he has been living hitherto, in
order to look after the elector’s financial affairs,
which were formerly entrusted to Ballabom, who
seems to have shown a certain lack of diligence.

Be that as it may, we may assume that Amsel Mayer
-Rotschild renders the elector important services in


68 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


other matters too, and it is not entirely improbable
that this Jew is at the head of an important propa-
ganda system in favor of the elector, whose branches
extend throughout the former Hessian territories.

I have reasons for this opinion. ‘These supposi-
tions are based on the following fact: whenever I
enter the elector’s quarters, I always find Rotschild
there, and generally in the company of Army Coun-
cilor Schminke and War Secretary Knatz, and they
go into their own rooms, and Rotschild generally has
papers with him. We may assume that their aims
are in no sense hostile to Austria, since the elector is
exceedingly anxious to recover the possession of his
electorate, so that it is scarcely open to question that
the organizations and associations, whose guiding
spirit Rotschild probably is, are entirely concerned
with the popular reactions and the other measures to
be adopted, if Austria should have the good fortune
to make any progress against France and Germany.
Owing to his extensive business connections it is
probable that he can ascertain this more easily than
anybody else, and can also conceal his machinations
under the cloak of business.


This report was more or less in accordance with the
facts; for Rothschild was the connecting link between
Buderus, who lived in Hesse and could never come to
Prague, and the elector. Rothschild was also constantly
busy with the elector’s financial affairs, and these were of
a particularly wide scope at the beginning of 1809, since
with the passage of time the accumulations of money in
England, by way of interest and otherwise, had grown
so large that their supervision required particular care.
Buderus proposed that his master should acquire British
securities at three per cent,*® and suggested that Meyer
Amschel should be commissioned to effect the purchase
of them. Rothschild had naturally made this proposal
to Buderus in the first instance, and Buderus had duly
put it forward as his own suggestion.


The Napoleonic Era 69


The close relations between Buderus and Rothschild
had at that time actually been embodied in a written
agreement between them which virtually made the elec-
toral official a secret partner in the firm of Rothschild.
This highly important document runs as follows:

“The following confidential agreement has today been
concluded between the Privy War Councilor Buderus von
Carlshausen, and the business house of Meyer Amschel
Rothschild at Frankfort: Whereas Buderus has handed
over to the banking firm of Meyer Amschel Roths-
child the capital sum of 20,000 gulden, 24 florins, and has
promised to advise that firm in all business matters to
the best of his ability and to advance its interests as far as
he may find practicable, the firm of Meyer Amschel
Rothschild promises to render Buderus a true account of
the profits made in respect of the above-mentioned capital
sum of 20,000 gulden, and to allow him access to all books
at any time so that he may satisfy himself with regard to
this provision.” **

The agreement contained a provision for its termina-
tion on either side by giving six months’ notice.

Buderus now had a personal interest in securing for
Meyer Amschel Rothschild a monopoly in the conduct
of the elector’s business. What he had done had been
in the best interests of all concerned. His experience of a
period of years had proved to him the reliability and the
skill of the House of Rothschild; he harbored no preju-
dices against the Jews; and he was firmly convinced that
the elector, his master, was bound to gain by placing his
financial affairs in the hands of one firm, especially of
such an able firm as the House of Rothschild.

The Rothschilds on the other hand needed the support
of a man who could gain for them the confidence of the
suspicious and avaricious elector, who was an exceedingly
difficult person to handle. They had achieved this object
through Buderus, but they wanted to secure the relation-
ship for the future, and therefore gave him a personal


70 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


interest in the continued prosperity of the business.
Finally Buderus himself profited by this arrangement as
he fully deserved to do after the persevering and self-
sacrificing efforts that he had made; and he could never
hope that he would be regarded in accordance with his
deserts by the rapacious elector. Moreover, he was far too
scrupulous and honorable spontaneously to appropriate
money in the course of his administration of the elector’s
property; but he had a very large family, and by becom-
ing a secret partner in the firm of Rothschild he was
enabled to meet its requirements.

Buderus’s efforts with his master were successful. The
elector acted upon Rothschild’s recommendations regard-
ing British stocks, and he then actually ordered that
£150,000 of the stocks should be purchased on his ac-
count, which in fact exceeded the amount that Buderus
had suggested. The investment itself was entrusted to
Rothschild.

Up to this time the financial transactions in England
had been the most reliable as far as interest payments
were concerned; but the payments in respect of interest
due from members of the English royal house came in
at most irregular intervals and were often outstanding for
very long periods. The elector, however, did not agitate
to get these payments in, for he regarded the money laid
out in this direction less as an investment than as a means
of putting the members of the ruling house under an
obligation to himself.

The brothers Rothschild noted this practice of the elec-
tor with important personages; they had practical evi-
dence, from the experience of their princely client, of the
fact that transactions involving temporary loss may ulti-
mately result in very good business. The debtors’ uneasy
feeling on failing to make payments at the date when
they fell due sometimes led them to try to make amends
in other ways, through furnishing valuable information
or through political services, and such favors often pro-


The Napoleonic Era 71


duced cash results far exceeding the amount actually
owing.

At this time the bond between the House of Rothschild
and the elector had become a very close one; and this was
not due to Buderus only, but also to their loyalty; al-
though this quality resulted to their advantage, they in-
curred the risks that loyalty involved. The only really
unpleasant circumstance in this connection was the fact
that the frivolous heir to the elector, who was always in
need of money, exploited the situation and at every pos-
sible opportunity borrowed from his father’s faithful
Jewish servant. In any case that could not be a very
serious matter, as Rothschild was morally certain to get
his money back, the prince being the heir to the enormous
fortune which his father had amassed.

These large financial transactions did not put an end
to the dealings in small antiques between the elector and
Rothschild, which had been the starting-point of their
business relations. However, there was a difference:
their roles were reversed; the elector now sold to Roths-
child vases, jewels and antique boxes, etc. more often than
he bought them. These dealings constituted a peculiar
bond of sympathy between the elector and his Jewish
crown agent, and the elector enjoyed showing his talent
in this field, as far as was consistent with his high birth.

Meanwhile the relations between Austria and France
had become more acute. The Emperor Napoleon had re-
turned from Spain, and a new war between Napoleon
and the Emperor Francis was imminent. The elector
offered the emperor a legion of four thousand men, this
offer being coupled with a touching appeal that the em-
peror should secure his reinstatement in the rulership
of his territories.“* ‘The offer was thankfully accepted.

On April 9, 1809, the Austrians crossed the Inn; there-
upon Napoleon ceased to be a factor in the treatment
accorded to the elector at Prague. ‘The elector was
granted the honors due to a sovereign, and society was


72 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


commanded to call on his favorite at Prague, who until —
then had been very much slighted. They wanted to “get —
on the right side of him” in order to get as much money ~
and as many troops from him as possible. The elector,
however, put only one half of the promised forces in the ©
field. That cost him 600,000 gulden; and it was Roths-
child who saw to the collection and distribution of this
sum.

This work was full of danger for the Rothschilds as
they were at the mercy of the French in Frankfort. In
spite of the great scarcity of money at the time it was
Rothschild who from his own resources advanced to the
elector the cash amount of several hundred thousand
gulden required on short loan. The elector already saw
himself in possession of his states. “I come,” he wrote
somewhat prematurely in a proclamation of April, 1809,
“to loose your bonds; Austria’s exalted monarch protects
me and protects you. Let us hail the brave Austrians;
they are our true friends, and it is in their midst and with
their assistance that I come to you.”

It was with eloquence rather than with cash that he
called upon his Hessians to rise. When one of the local
leaders wanted to seize Cassel and take King Jerome pris-
oner, he applied to the elector in the first instance for
financial support. All that he received, however, was a
piece of paper, representing an order for 30,000 thalers,
‘payable only in the event of the rising being successful.”
When the attempt failed, the elector laid the blame, “up-
on the premature and unprepared nature of the attack.”

The immediate result of the attempt was that the elec-
tor’s servants in Hessian territory were subjected to more
stringent regulations. Notwithstanding that Buderus
and Rothschild were on such exceedingly good terms
with the Primate of the Confederation at Frankfort, the
fact that King Jerome’s position in Westphalia had been
seriously threatened caused the police at Cassel to watch
the movements of Buderus and Rothschild with renewed


The Napoleonic Era 73


assiduity, as they suspected them, not unjustly, of having
financed the rising.

This favorable opportunity was exploited by jealous
rivals at Cassel, who supplied the police and their noto-
rious chief, Savagner, with information. Moreover,
Baron Bacher, the accredited Westphalian ambassador
to Dalberg at Frankfort, was a bitter enemy of Roths-
child, and felt particular displeasure at the favor shown
by Dalberg to the Jew, since he had long been convinced
that Rothschild was in the elector’s confidence in all the
activities undertaken against the French. Savagner, who
thought that a prosecution of the rich Jew might accrue
to the benefit of his own pocket, concentrated all his ef-
forts on inducing King Jerome of Westphalia to author-
ize the issue of a warrant against Meyer Amschel Roths-
child on the ground that he had been a channel through
whom the elector’s money had passed to the rebels.

In this dangerous situation Rothschild appealed to
Dalberg to intervene on his behalf; Dalberg did what
he could, and it was only with great difficulty that the
French police in Cassel managed to obtain the warrant.
A certain Levy, the son-in-law of a rival of Rothschild,
informed Savagner as to the lines on which Rothschild
should be examined regarding his business dealings with
the elector.

On May 9g, 1809, Buderus was again arrested at Hanau,
submitted to searching cross-examinations, and was let
out on substantial bail only after an interval of several
days. On May ro Savagner set out for Frankfort with
the warrant which he had at last succeeded in obtaining,
but which authorized only a domiciliary search and a
close examination of all members of the House of Roths-
child.

They had been warned in good time; the prevailing
sentiment amongst the local inhabitants, both at Cassel
and at Frankfort, was one of solidarity against the for-
eign invader. It was only rarely that this feeling was


74. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


subordinated to commercial rivalry. Meyer Amschel


}
.


was also given a hint by Dalberg. He was particularly —
concerned about the elector’s four chests containing ac-
count books which were under his care; they were in
his house cellar, and he did not even know what they —
contained. As the cellar would naturally be searched, —
he would have to do his best to rescue the elector’s prop-
erty as speedily as possible in the general excitement


arising out of the sudden menace.

Old Meyer Amschel and his wife, Solomon and James,
and the wives of the two eldest sons were at home. Am-
schel, the eldest son, was staying with the elector at
Prague, and Carl was traveling on other business. ‘Those
members of the family who were at home now tried to
get the compromising chests through the connecting
passage to the yard cellar at the back, but they found
that the passage was too narrow for the chests. These
were therefore emptied, and their contents placed in
other cases, together with some coupons representing un-
realized obligations due to the firm itself. The family
then set about the work of hiding the compromising
account books and the secret records of the elector’s in-
timate affairs, as well as certain embarrassing corre-
spondence.

When the Westphalian commissioner of police arrived
on the roth of May, 1809, furnished with his exceed-
ingly limited warrant for summoning the Rothschild
family and searching their house at Frankfort, the most
important documents had already been well concealed,
and the individual members of the family had arranged
between themselves what they would say when they were
examined, so that they would not get involved in contra-
dictory statements.

Dalberg, the sovereign at Frankfort, had been watch-
ing the activities directed from Cassel with a certain
resentment; they constituted an infringement of his sov--
ereign rights, and they affected a valued financier to”


The Napoleonic Era 75


whom he would soon want to apply again for a personal
loan; on the other hand he felt that it would be exceed-
ingly unwise for him to oppose the wishes of King
Jerome’s great brother. At the same time, for financial
reasons it was only with reluctance that the King of West-
phalia himself had consented to the issue of the warrant.
It was therefore a foregone conclusion that the Roths-
child family would not suffer any serious harm. Dal-
berg also gave orders that one of his own police officials
should accompany Savagner. ‘The two commissioners
accordingly betook themselves to Rothschild’s business
house in the Jewish quarter where the whole family were
expecting them.

Old Meyer Amschel, who on this occasion too was
unwell, was placed under arrest in his own room, while
Solomon and James were placed under arrest in the of-
fice below, under the guard of police constables. In the
meantime all cupboards containing papers and business
correspondence were sealed, and a systematic search of
the whole house was instituted. Simultaneously the
home of Solomon, who also lived in the town, was sub-
mitted to a similar search. Thanks to the advance warn-
ings and to the well-concealed duplicate books, not much
incriminating matter was discovered.

The next step was to investigate the individual mem-
bers of the family. Meyer Amschel had to answer the
questions drafted by the Jew Levy on the instructions of
his rival, the banker Simon, at Cassel—questions affect-
ing the details of Rothschild’s financial dealings with
the elector. In many cases he replied that he had no
recollection of the matters referred to, pointing out that
he had suffered a severe illness and undergone an oper-
ation in 1808; he stated that this had had serious after-
effects, and more particularly, that it had affected his
memory. By this method of evasion he succeeded in

avoiding making statements which the commissioner of
police could have used as incriminating material.


aM
av


76 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


In these circumstances recourse had to be had to an
examination of the other members of the family, includ-
ing Meyer Amschel’s wife. The old mother replied **
that she knew nothing at all, as she only concerned her-
self with the house, never went out from one year’s end
to another, and had nothing whatever to do with the
business. The two sons made the statements which they
had previously arranged with their father, and in gen-
eral said as little as possible.

The examination of such books as were discovered
yielded very slight result, as the incriminating docu-
ments had been removed. Meyer Amschel cleverly used
an opportunity which proffered itself, of lending Savag-
ner three hundred thalers, and this helped considerably
to expedite the conclusion of the official investigation.
In any case, Savagner’s authority was of a limited kind,
and Dalberg’s commissioner, who was himself a Jew,
was well-disposed toward Rothschild, and used his in-
fluence to bring the examination to an end. As sufficient
material had been collected to show that the action which
had been taken was justified and necessary in the circum-
stances, the authorities at Cassel, too, were satisfied. For-
tunately for the accused, Rothschild’s enemy, Ambassa-
dor Bacher, was not in Frankfort at this time; so that
the whole painful business passed off well for the fam-
ily of Rothschild.

French reports ** on the matter reveal that the French
officials found the Rothschild family to be “exceedingly
wise and cunning,” and to have managed to secure friends
in all quarters. The only positive result of the inquiry
was to establish the fact that Amschel Rothschild was
staying at Prague and was directing the financial specu-
lations of the Elector of Hesse; and that the firm of
Rothschild had made small payments to individual lead-
ers of the insurrection. ‘The only circumstance noted
which was regaraed as of graver import was that the
brothers Rothschild had regularly paid considerable


The Napoleonic Era 77


sums to the elector’s consort, who was staying at Gotha,
and to her business manager Kunkel, who also acted as
an agent of the elector in promoting the revolution of
Hesse against France. ,

These facts in themselves furnished sufficient material
for dealing ruthlessly with the family—if that had been
seriously desired; but the Rothschilds benefited by the
inhibitions of the rulers of Frankfort and Cassel, who
at heart were pleased to have remained faithful to the
elector, although they had maintained practical relations
with the new French powers. Everything had resulted
happily, and the Rothschilds could breathe freely, but
it had been a warning to act with even greater precaution
in the future. The most important thing was to get the
chests belonging to the elector out of the house at once,
for in the course of another search the yard cellar might
perhaps be discovered. ‘The chests were therefore sent
successively through the mediation of a Jewish friend to
a business acquaintance of the Rothschilds at Darmstadt
—a certain Abraham Mayer—and they stayed with him
until the elector returned to his country.

While these events were taking place at Frankfort,
Napoleon’s campaign against Austria was proceeding.
Swift as lightning, Napoleon’s genius was thrusting
down the Danube to Vienna. He sustained a reverse
at Aspern, but on July 6 he made good this defeat by
the decisive victory at Wagram.

The elector at Prague had been anxiously watching
the changing vicissitudes of the campaign. He had
hoped that his tormentor would be speedily beaten and
he now saw him coming ever closer to his place of refuge
at Prague. When Napoleon was at the gates of Vienna,
the elector was seized with terror. He would have to-
flee again; and in great concern he took counsel with his
advisers, and with Amschel Rothschild, who was stay-
ing with him, and who was no less terrified than his
electoral master, as to whether they should not take refuge


78 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


in the fortress of Olmiitz. At any rate the more valu-
able articles were sent on there. Seven chests contain-
ing securities, and one containing jewelry were actually
sent off.

Then came Wagram; Napoleon advanced to Mahren,
and Olmiitz was seriously threatened. ‘The boxes had
to come back, and the elector set out for Berlin, as the
king had already offered to shelter him there. But the
king now rather regretted having made this offer; Na-
poleon was too powerful and might resent the elector’s
being granted asylum in Berlin. The king therefore
wrote on January 29, 1810, to put him off, on the ground
of “ménagements délicats”’ obtaining between himself
and Napoleon at the time. Meanwhile peace was signed
at Schonbrunn, no mention whatever of the elector being
made in the treaty. Napoleon returned to Paris, where-
upon William decided to remain at Prague.

‘The unsuccessful campaign of 1809 had resulted in
the retirement of Count Stadion, the Austrian Minister
for Foreign Affairs, and this brilliant man and bitter op-
ponent of Napoleon withdrew for some years into pri-
vate life. On October 8, 1809, he was succeeded by ©
Prince Clemens Metternich, who was to play such a
decisive role in the destinies of Europe during the fol-—
lowing half-century.

Metternich had only just entered upon his duties when —
he received a letter from the Elector of Hesse, requesting
the minister to support him, and “to restore to his or-—
phaned subjects their native prince, whose presence they
so ardently desired.” He had great hopes that Metter-—
nich would use his influence with the emperor, and he :
was bitterly disappointed when he learned that he had
not even been mentioned during the peace negotiations.

He wrote a bitter letter of complaint to Stadion:**
“So many worthless people, relying on French protec-
tion, are enabled to sin against me with impunity, and


The Napoleonic Era 79


nobody now feels that he has any duties toward me;
everybody does as he pleases and is actuated by base and
selfish motives. I have thus lost more than two-thirds of
a fortune that was never very large. That is hard, but
harder than everything else is my present condition.”

It was highly typical of the elector to suggest that he
was badly off; in spite of his losses he was still actually
one of the wealthiest princes of his time; but if there were
spoils to be divided, he did not want to be left out in
the cold on the ground that he was rich enough already.
The money motive was always the principal one with the
elector, and in this matter he had a perfect understand-
ing with his crown agent Rothschild. Rothschild always
advised the elector to ask concessions at every possible
opportunity—as, for instance, that claims on him in re-
spect of the troops should be waived, etc.—and the elec-
tor got more and more accustomed to following Roths-
child’s advice, and scarcely took any important financial
step without consulting him.

A sum of £150,000 had been invested as recently as
December 18, 1809, in three per cent British Consols
from interest received on behalf of the “poor” elector.
The business in connection with this transaction naturally
entailed voluminous correspondence, for the conveyance
of which between Frankfort and Prague Meyer Amschel
made himself personally responsible. He traveled in a
private post-chaise which contained a secret drawer.

The French were anxious to intercept if possible the
correspondence between the elector and his Frankfort
agents; once they did actually succeed in seizing a letter
destined for England which clearly revealed the fact
that the Rothschilds were responsible for the manage-
ment of the elector’s funds in that country.*®

In the meantime an important change had taken place
in general European politics. The new personality di-
recting Austria’s foreign affairs had brought about a


80 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


complete reversal of the policy followed previously. |
Nothing could be achieved against Napoleon by the use —
of force, and therefore Metternich tried other means. _

Napoleon’s marriage with Josephine was childless.
His union with an imperial princess would increase his ©
prestige and might produce the heir he so much de- |
sired. ‘The hitherto hostile states were thus reconciled —
by the prospect of a marriage, and in January, 1810, the —
imperial house of Austria gave Napoleon to understand —
that if he asked for the hand of Marie Louise, the eigh-
teen-year-old daughter of the emperor, he would not be ©
refused. The contract of marriage was signed as early —
as the 7th of February. |

One of the first to be informed of this complete change -
in the situation was the Elector of Hesse. He immedi-_
ately wrote again to Metternich to the following effect: —
“IT am writing to your Excellency trusting to enlist your —
sympathy for my most cherished desires. The marriage
which is to unite the two greatest monarchies causes me
to hope that I may regain the Emperor Napoleon’s good-
will, if our emperor . . . will but intercede in my favor.
One word from him to the plenipotentiary of France
will secure my happiness, and will at any rate establish
me as ruler of one of the liberated states in Germany,
even if I cannot regain my own Penates. . . . Surely that.
monarch will not be able to resist the intervention of his _
exalted father-in-law, and of an adored wife on behalf
of a prince who has never yet understood how he has
incurred his displeasure.” 47

The elector also repeatedly pressed Count Stadion to
use his influence with the Austrian ruler in William’s
behalf. The minister had great difficulty in dissuading
him from traveling to Vienna.

Although in these letters the elector gave such a woe-
ful account of his condition, he was faring exceedingly
well at Prague. He had bought a palace on the Klein-
seite where he held court, and he maintained a house-


The Napoleonic Era 81


hold of thirty-six persons. He had also acquired the
magnificent castle and grounds of Bubenetsch, which
was finely furnished throughout, but with due regard
to economy. The firm of Rothschild carried through
the business matters connected with these purchases.

The actual state of the elector’s affairs was well known
at Vienna. The financial affairs of the court and of the
public departments were getting steadily worse, and the
new friendship with France had done but little to lighten
the burdens of debt incurred under the recent peace
treaty. In the negotiations between France and Austria
the Austrian Treasury official Nikolaus Barbier had been
so vehement in his advocacy of Austria’s interests that
the French plenipotentiary on one occasion actually pro-
tested against his being present. ‘This clever financial
expert had played a considerable part in all the various
loan operations which Austria had had to carry out dur-
ing these wars.

At that time the imperial state had no business rela-
tions with the Rothschild banking firm. There were four
more or less official discount houses at Vienna, through
which the Austrian government arranged its loans and
other monetary business. They were the banking firms,
Geymiiller and Company, Arnstein and Eskeles and
Company, Graf Fries and Company, and Steiner and
Company. The Austrian government also dealt with
the banking firm of Parish at Hamburg in 1809, in mat-
ters relating to remittances and realizations—such were
the technical terms used at the time—of English subsidy
moneys.

The condition of the Austrian state finances was lam-
entable. The value of her bank notes had fallen stead-
ily during the wars, and the amount of paper money in
circulation had risen to the enormous figure of over a
thousand million gulden; it was already necessary to pay
five hundred paper gulden for one hundred gulden in
coin of the realm, this amount soon rising to twelve hun-


~


82 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


dred gulden. In June, 1810, the difficulties had become
so acute that an attempt was made to raise a loan of from
two to three million gulden on the contents of the Privy
Purse, which were deposited in the Vienna Treasury,
this loan to be carried out by the four discount firms
mentioned above, on the security of mortgage deeds. |
The banker Eskeles made a journey to Paris and Hol-
land in order to raise this money.

It was also suggested that the state lottery monopoly
should be mortgaged, but the four banking firms had not
great resources themselves, and were not particularly
successful in their attempts to raise credits. Eskeles was
forced to report from Frankfort that he had no hope of
success, “either in raising money or in mortgaging the
state lottery.”

In these depressing circumstances Vienna remembered
the wealthy Elector of Hesse whom it had been treat-
ing so shabbily, and it was suggested that he might be
persuaded through Rothschild to grant a loan to Aus-
tria. Barbier was entrusted with this mission, and dis-
cussed it personally with the elector, and also informed.
Rothschild of the matter. The elector replied evasively.
He said that he must first discuss it with his advisers;
and Buderus had pointed out to his master that so much
money was already on loan with private persons that it
was not desirable to make further investments.

Rothschild also advised against producing capital
sums of the amount required by the Austrian court, al-
though he felt that it was not desirable to give the em-
peror a rebuff. The elector and Rothschild hit upon the
idea of suggesting to the emperor that the elector should
transfer to him all his individual outstanding claims, and
that it should be the monarch’s own business to bring the
debtors to book. He suggested that the emperor might
have more influence and power to effect this, and that
he might be able to neutralize any opposition of the
French to collecting the debts. The advantage for him


The Napoleonic Era 83


would be that he would then have only one single debtor,
the Emperor of Austria.

The elector accordingly wrote to Barbier *® that he
would be happier than he could say if his Royal and
Imperial Majesty would take over the debts due to him,
mentioned in the accompanying schedule. He stated
that he was not in a position to grant a loan in any other
way than that suggested, as eighteen months earlier he
had purchased Austrian government stock of the value
of over a million gulden, and funds in England had been
sequestrated. If he recovered from his financial difficul-
ties he would be delighted to be of service to his Majesty.

He enclosed a list of thirty-three different clients who
owed him sums in varying amounts, ranging from 784,-
848 reichsthalers down to 6,951 reichsthalers. Apart
from several princely houses, the names of privy coun-
cilors and counselors of embassies figured in these Lists,
as well as ministers such as Hardenberg, who owed the
elector 140,000 thalers. The total value of all the claims
amounted to the sum of 5,832,532 reichsthalers,

This proposal, however, came to nothing. The scheme
put forward by Rothschild, and approved by the elector,
had been too subtle and complicated, and on the instruc-
tions of Emperor Francis a reply was sent to the elec-
tor *® declining the offer, on the ground that the collec-
tion of the money would be a process too difficult and
uncertain, and not consonant with the dignity of the Aus-
trian state. It was also pointed out that the moneys had
been attached by the French government, and that to
accept a transfer of these obligations would therefore
compromise Austria.

Although the proposal was rejected, it had the impor-
tant result that for the first time a high Austrian Treas-
ury Official negotiated with a member of the Rothschild
family.

In the meantime important political changes had
taken place at Frankfort. Dalberg’s Confederation of the


84 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Rhine had exchanged Hanau and Fulda for Regensburg, |
and the title of Grand Duke of Frankfort was conferred
on the overlord. Dalberg’s promotion furnished an op--
portunity to Meyer Amschel, who was in his favor, of
proving his gratitude to Buderus for his good offices in
the past, by services other than financial. q

Buderus had been continually molested by the French
police, and Rothschild decided to put an end to this by.
persuading Dalberg to recognize the electoral official a
a deputy of the estates of the Grand Duchy of Frankfort
on the occasion of the handing over of Hanau, and also
to appoint him director of the finance committee of the
diet. He hoped that when Buderus held this official po-
sition he would be left in peace. :

Dalberg acceded to Rothschild’s request. He steered
his course very cleverly between the former powers who
were now in exile and the new masters at Frankfort. It
was very necessary that he should do so, for he could not
uproot himself from the city of his birth. All his pos-
sessions were there, and the city was the principal com-
mercial and financial center of the Continent. The Aus-
trian ambassador Baron von Higel reported enthusias-
tically regarding the increasing prosperity of Frankfort,
which had conserved its wealth through all the difficul-
ties of the war period, and had actually grown richer.

“Luxury,” he wrote,°? “has increased incredibly. Cash
is turned over much more rapidly. Hospitals, libraries,
museums, etc. are provided on the most generous scale;
trade and industry flourish, and everyone is full of enter-
prise.”

Hiigel emphasized the fact that the city already gave
the impression of being one of the pleasantest and most
important towns of Germany. “The grand duke,” he
continued, “takes an active interest in everything. Since
I have been here, I have not seen a beggar or been asked
for alms. The roses in the gardens are never touched,


The Napoleonic Era 85


nd in spite of all difficulties the industry of the trades-
eople and bankers is exemplary. In fact their difficul-
ies seem to act as an incentive to further efforts. Dur-
ng the last twenty years there has been no bankruptcy
f any note. The volume of goods passing through the
ity is inconceivably great. Plutocratic standards obtain
t Frankfort, and persons are judged by the magnificence
f their establishments or by the appearances that they
nanage to keep up.”

Higel pointed out that Frankfort was a focus for
rade between northern and southern Germany, and the
ateway to France and Austria; and that no less than
ight hundred of its citizens had admitted to possessing
encumbered cash to the sum of 50,000 gulden or more,
vhile some hundreds enjoyed annual incomes of this
mount and upwards.

Although this description may have been painted
ather rosily, it was, in essentials, in accordance with the
acts. There were many people at Frankfort who had
rown rich, and the rapidity of the rise of the House of
.othschild to wealth and influence had been particularly
narked. In view of the progress of his business, Meyer
Kmschel now decided to define more clearly its internal
onstitution; and more particularly to regulate his sons’
hare with greater accuracy than had been done within
he framework of the existing concern.

On September 27, 1810, a new deed of partnership was
ccordingly drawn up between the father and his sons.°*
fhe main principle of this contract was that Meyer Am-
chel gave all his sons a substantial share in the business
n order to stimulate their industry. They became, not
nerely indirectly, but directly interested in its continued
rosperity. ‘To mark the change the name of the firm
vas altered to “Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons,”
ind Rothschild conveyed this information to all his busi-
ess friends in a printed letter, in which he emphasized


Zz


ne


86 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the fact that he was now associating his three sons wit
him in the direction of the business, which had been es-
tablished for forty years.

The contract assessed the capital value of the busines
at a total of 800,000 gulden, 370,000 gulden being al-
lotted to the father, 185,000 gulden each to the sons
Amschel and Solomon, and 30,000 each to Carl and James,
who had not yet come of age. These shares were allotte
to them as their absolute property, and it is noteworthy
that Jacob (James) Rothschild, who was barely eighteen
years old, was allotted shares to the capital value of
30,000 gulden, as duly earned through the “conscientious
carrying out of the business entrusted to him by the old
concern.”

For the purpose of dividing profit or loss, the busines:
was divided into fifty shares; a multiple of five, havins
the convenience of facilitating the future division of tht
business equally between the five brothers, while the
smaller fractions made it possible in the meantime t
allot shares with due regard to the varying ages and ca
pacities of the five sons. When the time came to dividi
up the inheritance, each son could acquire an equal fiftl
share.

On perusing the document, one is struck by the fac
that Nathan, who was living in England, is not men
tioned in the partnership deed and seems to have bee
left entirely to his own resources, although he was i
close business association with the parent concern, an
on the best terms with his family. Under the contrac
twenty-four of the fifty shares were for the next ten yeat
to belong to the father, twelve each to Amschel and Solc
mon, and one each to Carl and James. In point of fac
however, Meyer Amschel was holding the twelve-fi
tieths destined for Nathan; but for the sake of publi
opinion, on account of the French domination, the col
nection with Nathan, who was living in England, had
be kept secret. We may assume that there was a secr


The Napoleonic Era 87


ubsidiary agreement with Nathan, accurately defining
1is relation to the company.

Each partner of adult age was authorized to sign on
yehalf of the firm. The deed recited that “with the help
yf the Almighty, Meyer Amschel Rothschild has, through
he industry which he has shown from his youth upwards,
hrough his commercial capacity (i. e., business instinct)
ind through a tireless activity continued to an advanced
ge, alone laid the foundations of the present flourishing
tate of the business, and thereby provided for the
vorldly happiness of his children.” It was therefore
aid down that the decision in all transactions should
emain with him, as being the head of the business.
Vioreover, he expressly retained for himself alone the
ight to withdraw money from the capital of the busi-
ess as he might think fit, whereas the other partners
ould take out only their annual profits and what was
iecessary for their households.

It was also laid down that no daughters or children-
n-law should have any right to see the company’s books.
‘inally there were provisions against “vexatious litiga-
ion,’ and any partner who set the law in motion was
nade liable to a penalty for doing so. Before he could
ippear before the judge he was required to deposit this
mount. This article was cleverly designed to lessen the
possibilities of disputes between the five brothers; and
though they might perhaps have rendered it invalid
it law, they fully appreciated its wisdom, and all five
olemnly agreed to abide by it.

The deed of partnership gives some insight into the
raried nature of the business of the House of Rothschild,
ind the vicissitudes to which it was liable. As “bad and
inrealizable” mortgages, debentures, and outstanding
lebts of all kinds are mentioned, it is clear that in its
lumerous undertakings the House of Rothschild some-
imes suffered losses and made mistakes. These certainly
ways brought indirect advantages, as Meyer Amschel


z


88 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


continually emphasized to his sons that mistakes have
an educational value, and one must never lose courage.

Meyer Amschel was careful to nurse the old connec;
tions which the elector had facilitated for him through
his relations in high quarters, and to exploit them fot
the benefit of his house. Whereas previously he had
acted as the middleman between the electoral lender and
Denmark, he offered as early as December, 1810,” a loar
of 400,000 thalers to Count Schimmelmann, the Danisk
finance minister, which loan was to be advanced, not by
the elector, but by Meyer Amschel Rothschild and his
sons. It was another step towards his gradual financia
emancipation from the elector, although, having now ar
rived at the point of doing business on his own account
he continued to apply in his own interests the busines
principles so well proved by William of Hesse.

Rothschild carefully watched the general political sit
uation. Though by reason of his personality and origin
and his ignorance of language, he could not possess thos:
qualities which are normally required in a diplomat, h
had a sagacious understanding of human nature, entirel:
free of any preconceived ideas or prejudices. This wa
of particular advantage in a world which, at the time
was politically topsy-turvy. One really had to be a con
summate diplomatist in order to carry on one’s busines
without causing offense, either to the French or to th
powers which they were oppressing.

As long as Napoleon’s star was in the ascendant, th
Rothschilds acted as if they were well disposed to Franc
and her ruler; they lent money both to the French an
to the native authorities, delivered flour to friend an
foe alike, and hoped to be left entirely unmolested b
Napoleon. They felt, as we know today, more secut
than they really were. They were running great risks
for instance, in their commerce, or rather illicit trad
in merchandise with England. F

It was not till some time after the proclamation of th


Lhe Napoleonic Era 389


continental blockade that Napoleon realized that it in-
Hicted hardship not only upon England but upon France,
as France thereby lost her best customer, and the cost of
living in that country rose much higher. He accordingly
issued various decrees modifying the strict provisions of
the continental blockade, so as to permit of a kind of
official smuggling under departmental supervision, and
also to allow the import of colonial goods on the pay-
ment of a very heavy duty approximating fifty per cent
of their value, In spite of these alleviations, smuggling
was carried on on a large scale, and its direction was
1aturally concentrated in the commercial city of Frank-
fort. Napoleon had sent his own spies there, and on
receiving their reports he decided to take more active
neasures against Frankfort.

Buderus had just decided to give to the young crown
ygent, Carl Rothschild, who was about to attempt to
pring to Prague the property which the elector had left
n Schleswig, the final account for the year 1807, which
he elector required. ‘The official stated °° that he was
10t inclined to venture on the journey himself, because
1¢ was too closely watched, and feared a further arrest,
ind the possible confiscation of all his property.

His letter also contained news that would be welcome
o his avaricious master. “After long arguments, and
is the result of great efforts,” he stated, “I have per-
aded the crown agent, Rothschild, in effecting the
hird investment of £150,000 sterling, to charge one-quar-
er per cent less commission, so that he will deliver the
tock for 7334, involving a saving of £4,521. ... The
founger son of Crown Agent Rothschild will bring over
he document relating to the first purchase of stock, as
oon as means can be found for sending it safely.”

But this could not be carried out so easily; Napoleon’s
inger because Frankfort did not respect his blockade
egulations against England led to more stringent regu-
ations, and Buderus was forced to change his plans com-


i
go The Rise of the House of Rothschild ;


pletely. “The crown agent, Kallmann Rothschild,” he
wrote on November 2, 1810," “should proceed to Prague
at once, as several French regiments with artillery have
come into the town, as well as a host of customs officials.
All the gates have been occupied, and nobody is allowed
to pass out without being closely inspected; all ware-
houses have been sealed, and an extensive search for Eng-
lish and colonial goods has been instituted, severe penal-
ties being inflicted when such goods have been discovered.

“The extent of the general confusion and distress which
this has caused beggars descriptions. I myself have taken
every conceivable precaution, and I feel justified in stat-
ing my absolute conviction that the sons of Crown Agent
Rothschild deserve the highest praise for the tireless in-
dustry and zeal which they have shown in their devotion
to your Electoral Highness. Fresh proclamations have
been issued, promising a reward of fifteen per cent for
information regarding the investment of your Electoral
Highness’s funds, and the number of spies and traitors
under every guise is so great that it is impossible now
to trust anyone. From this mild account of conditions
here you may graciously be pleased to infer that it would
be as impracticable for me to leave as it was formerly}
to transport the effects in custody at Gottorp. I shal.
arrange for Crown Agent Kallmann Rothschild te
start as soon as it is possible to get a package out of Frank
fort.”

On instructions from Paris, a general domiciliary
search for concealed English-manufactured goods hac
been ordered at Frankfort. The city which had just bee!
described in such glowing colors by Higel was now i
a panic. Naturally the business House of Rothschilt
was also affected by this measure. A list was drawn wu
of two hundred and thirty-four tradesmen who had t
pay the heavy duties prescribed for the colonial ware
which were discovered.

Meyer Amschel Rothschild was the sixty-eighth nam


The Napoleonic Era gi


n this list,°° and was made liable for a payment of 19,348
rancs, which was certainly not a very large amount com-
yared with the sums payable by other tradesmen. Heb-
nstreit, for instance, paid nearly a million francs, and
3ethmann 363,000 francs. Altogether the French col-
ected a total of nine and a quarter millions on the co-
onial stores discovered at Frankfort. Half the amount
yayable by Rothschild was for indigo. In view of Meyer
Amschel’s relations with the grand ducal government
ind his cleverness at concealment, we may assume that
lis actual stores of colonial goods were much greater,
ind that through his connections he substantially reduced
he amount which he ought to have paid. Nevertheless
his sudden incursion, personally ordered by Napoleon,
iad distinctly alarmed him.

Meanwhile the elector at Prague had received Bu-
lerus’s letters, and sent the following reply to his trusty,
fficial :°° “It is a special satisfaction to me that you have
nduced the firm of Rothschild, in view of the prospect
f the further investment of £150,000, to reduce their
ommission by one-quarter per cent.

“Tn view of further representations made by the crown
gent Rothschild, and having regard to the favorable
rice, I have decided to increase this investment by a
urther £100,000 . . . but on the understanding that I
hall pay this amount in instalments, and that I am not to
ye worried about it in any way. At the same time you are
o see that the document regarding the first investment
eaches me as soon as possible, and that I receive the
thers shortly afterwards. I note with pleasure that the
douse of Rothschild has shown its traditional devotion
O me even in the present catastrophe at Frankfort. You
vill kindly convey to them my satisfaction and grati-

_ Meanwhile the Emperor of France had just experi-
nced one of the happiest hours of his life. On March
0, 1811, Marie Louise had presented him with the son


92 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


and heir he so much desired. The baptism of the French
heir, who had been created King of Rome while still in
his cradle, was an occasion of unexampled splendor and
magnificence. From all their domains, princely person-
ages swarmed to the festivities, to take advantage of the
opportunity of expressing their allegiance to the mighty
monarch.

The Grand Duke Dalberg, in Frankfort, also desired
to go to Paris to do obeisance, but there was a formidable
obstacle in the way of his doing so. The journey was
very expensive, and Dalberg could not visit Paris except
with a retinue such as befitted his rank. But he had no
retinue, and in the first instance he turned for assistance
to the association of Frankfort merchants, requesting
them to lend him eighty thousand gulden for the jour-
ney to Paris. é

The merchants, who disliked the Napoleonic régime,
and could not agree as to the proportions in which the
money should be subscribed, declined the request. Dal-
berg had not applied to Rothschild in the first instance,
because he thought the amount was too heavy for a single
individual to advance. Meyer Amschel learned of the
grand duke’s wish, and voluntarily offered to advance
him the sum at five per cent. Dalberg could now pro-
ceed to Paris.

While Rothschild had always enjoyed Dalberg’s favor,
this clever action gained for him the full confidence of
the grand duke, as is indeed specifically stated in a later
French police report regarding the Rothschild family :*’
“Through meeting him in this matter he was so success-
ful in gaining the grand duke’s confidence, and secured
himself so thoroughly in his good graces, that henceforth
the grand duke scarcely ever refused him any request.”

He asked for instance for a passport for young James.
who was then nineteen years old, and who was sen
through Antwerp to Paris, straight into the lion’s mouth
His presence was necessary there in connection with cer.


The Napoleonic Era 93


tain illicit business that Nathan was carrying out from
England, which will be described in more detail later.
For the present it will suffice to state that James actually
arrived in Paris on the 24th of March, 1811, took up his
quarters at 5 rue Napoleon without being hindered, and
duly reported himself to the police.

At this time the Rothschild family were kept very
much on the move. Apart from their own business, all
the members of the family who were capable of travel-
ing were constantly on the road, in order to transact per-
sonally the important business of the elector at various
places. This is most clearly revealed in the correspon-
dence between Buderus and the elector.

“Young Rothschild,” he wrote from Hanau to his
master on April 7, 1811,°8 “is actually on his way to Lon-

don to fetch the certificates of title regarding your in-

vestment of capital. He can take the packet of letters
with him. His father will gladly make an effort to get
the things away from Gottorp . . . and is already making
inquiries on this matter. On my advice Crown Agent

Rothschild has called in the capital payment due at Co-
' penhagen, and has received 159,600 gulden. Will your

Electoral Highness graciously permit me to convey to

Crown Agent Rothschild your Highness’s satisfaction

regarding his manifold activities on your behalf? I am

informed by Crown Agent Rothschild that the Prague
_ police have discovered the secret drawers in his carriage.
I have therefore thought it advisable not to send my ac-
count for last month with the other documents, on this
occasion, as it cannot be concealed under the clothes as
letters can.”

The elector rewarded such news with expressions of
genuine satisfaction, and agreed that Rothschild should
be acquainted with his satisfaction with him. He was,
however, still concerned about the money which he had
invested in English stock, in respect to which he had not
yet received any document of title. “I feel a real long-


94 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ing, which I think is justified,” he replied to Buderus,*°
“to see the documents regarding the investments. . . - I
had not been informed that the police here had discov-
ered the secret hiding-place in the carriage. In any case
there is no reason to expect anything untoward from that
quarter.”

Buderus was unceasing in his efforts to exalt the Roths-
child family in the opinion of the elector, and to repre-
sent all other business houses as unreliable or less accom-
modating. This was shown in the case of a transaction
of earlier origin. The elector had transferred to Meyer
Amschel Rothschild and two other Jewish bankers from
Cassel an amount of a million Dutch gulden due to him
in Holland. In accomplishing this various technical
difficulties arose which delayed the payment of the sum
in Holland, while the transferees of the debt had already
paid out the greater part of the sum involved. Before
making further payments, they naturally asked the elec-
tor for a guarantee.

In righteous indignation Buderus reported this to his
master: °° “The worst of this business is that it was not
entrusted to one single business firm. . . . The agents
Stuben Hesse Goldschmidt and the heirs of Michel Simon
are most ill-disposed toward your Electoral Highness.
Levy, Simon’s son-in-law, who manages the business, has
gone to such extremes that, as I know for certain, he
caused the recent arrest of myself and Rothschild, and
furnished the police commissary with the questions on
which we were cross-examined with extreme severity.”

Buderus now proposed that the Cassel Jews should be
made to retire from the business, and that the matter
should be entrusted to Meyer Amschel Rothschild alone.
The elector concurred in this proposal, and replied as
follows: *

“T have read with great interest the reports regarding
the Dutch loan of a million gulden. . . . You are quite
right in holding that it is essential to keep the Cassel


a


The Napoleonic Era 95


Jews out of this business (although I have always re-
garded Goldschmidt as an honorable man)... . I fear
that these Jews will not trust the Frankfort agent (Roths-
child) and will imagine that there are heavy profits at
issue, and demand high compensation for retiring.”

In the end the elector left the whole matter to Buderus,
and he accordingly put it all in Rothschild’s hands.

In general, however, the elector was again in an ex-
ceedingly bad mood, first, because Rothschild had still
not succeeded in bringing his property from Holstein
to Prague, and secondly, because he had received a re-
port from Buderus regarding an electoral loan which
had been made to a family called Plettenberg through
the intermediary of Prince Wittgenstein, the recovery
of which seemed highly doubtful. He was also annoyed
by a suggestion made by Buderus that he should again
take part in Frankfort loans, of which he had had such
an unfortunate experience. It was in a highly nervous
condition that he awaited the documents regarding his
investment in English stocks, which had not yet come
to hand. This mood found expression in an exceedingly
angry letter, in which the elector notified the cessation
of payments to Rothschild in respect to the English
stocks, thereby causing a positive panic in the Rothschild-
_ Buderus firm.

In the course of this letter he said: * “After all, my
trunks and chests in Holstein contain something more
than clothes; there are Hessian debentures, and accounts
of various kinds, and a chest containing silver. I will
arrange to have them brought to me here direct, for I
am weary of giving instructions in this matter to the
House of Rothschild year after year.

“T shall dispatch the draft letter to Prince von Wittgen-
Stein, regarding the Plettenberg loan affair, but do not
expect that it will have much result. The whole busi-
s is a network of intrigue, and I am absolutely deter-
ed to sacrifice everything rather than involve myself


96 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


further with that prince. He has behaved in a shock-
ingly irresponsible way toward me.

“T am not inclined to take part in the Frankfort sub-
scription loan. I am sick of all loans, and I really prefer
to have my money lying idle.”

Nothing had yet arrived from London, a fact which
particularly exasperated the elector. “I am exceedingly
worried about this matter,” he wrote, “and am most
eagerly waiting to hear what you have to say. In the
meantime you are to cease making any further payments
with respect to these stocks, neither are you to invest in
them any further English interest payments. I am still
waiting in vain for the documents regarding the capital
which I have invested; and in spite of all the confidence
which I have in Rothschild, I cannot tolerate this delay
any longer. Neither has the registration of the older
stocks been effected yet. Lorentz is constantly and em-
phatically reminding you of this matter. You must
see that he is kept fully informed of all my financial af-
fairs in England, and especially of the investments ef-
fected through Rothschild, in order that he may keep
an eye on them as it is his duty to do, as my chargé d’af-
faires. You are to see to this without delay.”

The elector’s fears had been increased by letters from
Lorentz, his plenipotentiary in London, who was of-
fended because he had not been taken into the confidence
of Buderus and Rothschild in the business which they
were transacting for the elector in England. He had
suggested to his master that England might conclude an
unfavorable peace, which would cause a heavy fall in
British stocks, and therefore advised the sale of the se-
curities which had only just been purchased. |

Buderus replied to his master in a very injured tone,**
stating that in accordance with instructions he had
stopped payments to Rothschild with respect to the new
purchases of stock, He enclosed Rothschild’s explana-
tion, which set out the enormous difficulties in the way


The Napoleonic Era 97


of undertaking journeys to and from England and safely
conveying documents and letters in a time of war and
blockade.

Buderus strongly indorsed the remarks of his Frank-
fort partner.* “In my opinion,” he wrote, “his judg-
ment is sound and his request is justified. . . . I have not
yet informed War Councilor Lorentz of the investments
made by Crown Agent Rothschild. It is not desirable
that such information should be too widely known.” He
added that if the elector’s instructions in this matter were
not countermanded he would forthwith carry them
out... . “The bank of Riippell and Harnier,” he con-
tinued, “‘is, not to put too fine a point upon it, filled with
absolute rage against your Electoral Highness. Although
they owe their fortune entirely to your Highness, they
behave like madmen, instead of keeping quiet as they
ought, and doing their duty by their customers, whom
they serve for profit.”

In a second letter Buderus wrote: “Rothschild is un-
justly accused of having, from motives of secret advan-
tage, delayed the Dutch business, which is probably to
the great detriment of your Highness’s interest; for it
is Rothschild alone who has collected such sums as have
reached your Electoral Highness, while the other bank-
ers have made no effort whatever in the matter.” *
Meanwhile one of the younger Rothschild brothers
_ (probably Carl) arrived at Prague with a detailed re-
_ port from Buderus, in which that official strongly urged
his master not to jeopardize the business of the English
investments, which was proceeding so well. Young
Rothschild employed all his powers of eloquence to per-
_ suade the elector to revoke his veto regarding further
payments. He thought that he had gained his object,
and wrote to Buderus from Prague, stating that the elec-
tor had graciously agreed to continue to invest in British
stocks the interest received in England. Buderus there-
upon immediately resumed his payments to Rothschild


98 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


on the elector’s account, until he received an instruction
from his master, dated December 9, 1811, which did not
confirm Rothschild’s premature conclusion. Thereupon
Buderus made a further effort to impress upon his master
that it was in his highest interest finally to cancel the
veto on further payments, since otherwise the Rothschild
banking firm would be faced with a severe crisis.

“Tt ig my duty,” he wrote,** “to bear witness to the
fact that the Rothschild bankers have not failed to make
every possible effort to obtain the certificates of the in-
vestments, and your Electoral Highness can have no con-
ception how difficult it 1s to send important documents
between here and London. If your Highness will con-
sider the dangers that would arise if such a document
were to fall into the wrong hands you will surely realize
that all precautions which human ingenuity can devise
must be taken in order to reduce to a minimum the
chances of such an occurrence.

“The withholding of further payments to the Roths-
child bankers has not increased their efforts to obtain the
documents, as these efforts could not be increased. Di-
rectly after his return from Prague, the young crown
agent Rothschild traveled to the seacoast in order to seek
an opportunity for bringing over these documents. He
did not feel secure in a Dutch village where he was stay-
ing, and went across to Dunkirk, where he has to
furnish daily to the police department a satisfactory rea-
son for his living there. According to his last letter, he
expects the documents to arrive at any moment and he
will then hasten here without any loss of time.

“The power of attorney sent to the bankers Van Not-
ten, under date October 28, 1810, authorizing the trans-
fer of the old stock (under another pseudonym) has been
recovered, After leaving Amsterdam, the ship was
driven back to the coast, and my letter was delivered in
a Dutch village, where a reliable acquaintance of the


The Napoleonc Era 99


banker Rothschild has kept it until now. The young
crown agent Rothschild has now taken advantage of a
favorable opportunity to forward it, and has received
an assurance that it has safely reached the other side of
the Channel.”
Finally, young Rothschild, who had traveled to Lon-
don, succeeded in smuggling over to the Continent a
certificate for £189,500 sterling, and this was immedi-
ately forwarded to the elector. William now again con-
sented to the interest on his capital being used for effect-
ing further investments, after noting with satisfaction
that the House of Rothschild, which had been highly
nervous about retaining this business, had reduced its
terms, and declared that it was now willing to deliver the
stock for 70 per cent commission. The elector expressed
his pleasure in conveying this information to Buderus,
and concluded his letter by saying: * “I do not fail to
realize the difficulties involved in communicating with
London, and am therefore exceedingly happy to be in
possession of the certificates for £189,500 sterling.”
_ The elector also expressed the wish that one of
| the brothers Rothschild should reside permanently at
- Prague, but this Buderus had to refuse. The operations
_ of the family were already so extensive that, with the
_ best will in the world, it was impossible to accede to this
request. Buderus wrote to his master:

“Flattering though the suggestion is that one of the
_ Rothschild sons should be allowed to reside permanently
in the neighborhood of your Electoral Highness, it is no
less impossible than flattering. Their father is old and
sick. His eldest son, Amschel Meyer, and his second
son, Solomon, who is also delicate, are indispensable to
him in his extensive operations. The third son, Carl, is
almost continually engaged in traveling in the service of
your Electoral Highness, while the fourth son, Nathan,
is very usefully established in London, and the youngest,


4


100 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


James, spends his time between London and Paris. They
have declared to me that they will spare no effort to carry
out your Highness’s commands.”

The continental blockade was naturally the chief
cause of the great difficulties in the way of communica-
tions with England. This question had indeed become
the crucial problem in general European politics. At
Erfurt the opinion had obtained for a time in 1808 that
Napoleon and Alexander of Russia would be able to
share the dominion of Europe between them. The Em-
peror of France had particularly in view that he might
finally be enabled to subdue England with the assistance
of Russia.

For this purpose it was essential that Russia should
unconditionally adopt the continental blockade; but the
tsar never contemplated sacrificing all his trade with
England for the sake of Napoleon. On the contrary, he
facilitated the import of goods by sea, and goods of Eng-
lish origin could now easily find their way to other con-
tinental states via Russia. Thus the effectiveness of Na-
poleon’s measures was endangered, and as early as the
summer of 1811 it was obvious to the whole of Europe
that a complete breach between the two most powerful
continental states was inevitable, and that war was now
only a question of time.

The Napoleonic police consequently applied a much
more rigid censorship to all correspondence and secret
agreements in territories subject to French rule. Any-
thing addressed to the ruling family of Hesse was sub-
jected to a particularly close scrutiny. A letter dated
Frankfort, November 1, 1811,°* which carelessly men-
tioned Meyer Amschel’s name in two places, and was ad-
dressed to the elector’s brother, Landgrave Karl, fell into
the hands of the French. In one passage the unknown
writer acknowledged the receipt of a letter from the
landgrave, through the good offices of Meyer Amschel,
while another passage read as follows: °°


The Napoleonic Era IOI


“T deliberately read to Rothschild, in his sons’ pres-
ence, the passage in which your Highness speaks of them
so kindly and graciously. They were all delighted.”

It was clear from the context that the letter referred
to the Tugendbund of which the landgrave was a mem-
ber, and it was a question of payments which Rothschild
had to make on the landgrave’s behalf. This letter was
immediately forwarded from Hamburg, where it had
been intercepted, to General Savary, the commissioner
of police at Paris, who instructed Baron Bacher, the
French ambassador at Frankfort, to furnish any light he
could as to the implication of the letter and the parts
played by the persons mentioned in it.

Baron Bacher suggested *° that they should not proceed
against the family Rothschild by domiciliary search and
arrest as in 1809, but should act with greater cunning.
The House of Rothschild and the other agents of the
elector should be lulled into a complete sense of security;
their letters should be skilfully opened, copied, and then
forwarded. In this way Bacher hoped in a very short
time to familiarize himself with their network of intrigue
in all its complicated ramifications. ,

The chief commissioner of police also asked for a re-
port from his commissioner at Mainz, and the letter in-
formed him ™ that the House of Rothschild had formerly
been exceedingly active in the trade of colonial goods
and English manufactures. But since they had been sub-
jected to a domiciliary search and had had their English
goods sequestrated, they had occupied themselves princi-
pally with banking business, and commerce in goods con-
fined to the Continent. The Mainz commissioner added
that the head of the House was not friendly toward
France, although he pretended that he was sincerely
attached to that country.

-  Bacher’s advice was taken. The brothers Rothschild
_ were most carefully watched by agents of the French
_ Imperial State Police, both in Frankfort and in France,


102 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


where they were amongst those who carried on illicit
trade with England subject to departmental authoriza-
tions; at the same time they were on the best of terms
with Dalberg’s Frankfort police, although this force was
also subject to Napoleon. Dalberg’s police commis-
sioner, von Itzstein, who although a Jew, was director
of the police of the grand duchy, was a particular patron
of Meyer Amschel and of all the Frankfort Jews.

Meyer Amschel Rothschild had long cherished the
idea of exploiting Dalberg’s friendly feelings for the
Jews in the interests of the fellow members of his faith
who had formerly been so oppressed, and incidentally
of his own family. It is true that a new “Status” pro-
claimed by Dalberg had somewhat improved their con-
dition, but it involved no essential change. For exam-
ple, the number of Jewish families tolerated remained
at five hundred. “Five hundred, only five,” indignantly
wrote a certain Israel Jakobsohn. “Why not more, and
why not less?” *”

Dalberg, seeing that he could exploit this situation and
do a good business deal, allowed Meyer Amschel and his
partner Gumprecht to persuade him to commute the
annual amount of 22,000 gulden payable by the Jews,
into a lump sum, and to grant them the rights of citizen-
ship in Frankfort, thereby making them the political
equals of the Christians. At the same time, the Jews
were granted their own governing body, known as the
“Governing Body of the Israelite Religious Commu-
nity.” Police Director von Itzstein was nominated pres-
ident, while the other members of the committee were
chosen from amongst the most prominent Jews in the
town.

In the course of his efforts Meyer Amschel let Dalberg
infer that the Jews were prepared to make financial sac-
rifices, and in the end Dalberg demanded that they should
commute the annual payment of 22,000 gulden by a sin-
gle payment of twenty times that amount. This was a


———


The Napoleonic Era 103


substantial amount of money, but one that the Frankfort
Jews could produce, especially as Meyer Amschel alone
advanced 100,000 gulden, or almost a quarter of the
total sum. He also managed to arrange that only 150,000
of the 440,000 gulden should immediately be paid in
cash, and that for the balance twenty-four bearer deben-
tures would be accepted. Jewish circles awaited with
considerable suspense, the conclusion of these arrange-
ments, which were so important for their future. If the
_ proposal went through, Meyer Amschel wanted to be
the first to bring the good news to the fellow members
of his faith.
As he was constantly being begged for information
by members of the Jewish community, he requested a
recorder of the province, who was friendly to him, to let
him have the earliest possible information: “I should
be most pleased,” he wrote to him in his peculiar Ger-
man,** “if I could be the first messenger of the good news,
as soon as it has been signed by his Royal Highness, our
most excellent Lord and great Duke, in our favor and
_ that I can inform my nation of their great joy, will you
. graciously inform me of it through the post, I confess
- J abuse your goodness and grace, but I do not doubt that
_ your Highness and your honored family have to await
_ great heavenly rewards and will receive much happiness
_ and blessing . . . because in truth our whole Jewry, if
they have the happiness to obtain equal rights, will gladly
pay with great pleasure all dues that the citizens have
— to pay.” :
After some time the matter was put through, and
aroused as much enthusiasm amongst the Jews as indig-
nation in the senate and amongst the patrician families,
who were hostile to them. It was at once suggested
- everywhere that Dalberg had received money personally,
in addition to the sum publicly mentioned. In this con-
“nection pointed remarks were made about the fact that
-Meyer Amschel and his sons had been appointed official


104 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


bankers to the grand duchy and that Meyer Amschel
had been made a member of the Electoral College of
Frankfort. A member of the Austrian Secret Police
actually claimed that he knew the amount of the sum,
namely 33,000 karolins, which Dalberg had received for
his good offices.”

The Jewish community certainly had every reason to
be grateful to the aged and infirm Meyer Amschel, who
had never completely recovered since his operation, and
yet still had the energy to apply all his influence and
money to secure this improvement in their status. The
debentures, to the value of 290,000 gulden, were imme-
diately brought into circulation. One of them, of the
value of fifty thousand, was acquired by Dalberg’s fi-
nance minister, Count Christian von Benzel-Sternau;
eight debentures of ten thousand gulden each were taken
over by Herr von Bethmann, while the greater part of
the amount paid by the Jews in cash went direct to Paris
as a payment on account of the electoral domains in Fulda
and Hanau, which had been seized by the French, and
which Dalberg had repurchased on taking over these
two principalities.

The grand duke immediately sold the domains again
to private persons for earnest money of three and one-
half million francs, payable by instalments, a transaction
which, when concluded, would yield 190,000 francs more
than France had received for the domains.

When the bargain was concluded Dalberg declared,
with somewhat premature joy, “A transaction concluded
in so masterly a manner deserves a reward,” and re-
warded the ministers who had been principally employed
in the transaction, and their wives, with presents of 40,000
francs each. In the letter regarding this matter‘ he
stated:

“Since I am determined to gain nothing by this busi-
ness except the welfare of the state, there are still 70,000
francs available out of the 190,000 realized. Of this


The Napoleonic Era 105


amount I give 10,000 francs to Privy Councilor von Itz-

stein as a reward for services rendered in converting into

cash the debts of the Jews to the state. I give 10,000

francs to the House of Rothschild for their excellent

cooperation. I shall leave the remaining 50,000 francs
with the House of Rothschild, as a part payment of what

I owe them.” 7°

The senate of the city of Frankfort, and the exiles who
had formerly been in power, observed these events with
concern and ill-will, and were firmly determined, if mat-
ters should take a different turn, to do everything pos-
sible to undo what had been done. Meyer Amschel’s
conduct had made him by no means popular with the
former authorities of the city; but for the time being
they had to look on in impotence, and allow him and his
protector Dalberg to have their way.

It was with the greatest suspense that they watched
the course of general European politics. The points at
issue between Napoleon and Russia had already almost
resulted in war. Napoleon collected the Grande Armée,
the greatest host that Europe had ever seen, in order to

' subdue the last independent monarch on the Continent.
At Dresden he gathered his dependent princes about him
at a great court ceremony, and his imperial father-in-
law Francis of Austria was also present on that occasion.

The elector in Prague had again begged Francis to
avail himself of the favorable opportunity for pleading
his cause with the Emperor of France. Emperor Fran-
cis was used to such appeals, and paid no further atten-
tion to the letter. While the great drama of the Rus-
sian campaign was being enacted, the elector remained
at Prague, and awaited the outcome of events in a state
of extreme anxiety.

Napoleon’s army was advancing steadily toward the
heart of the Russian Empire, although it was certainly
suffering enormous losses. Out of an army of four hun-
dred thousand men, scarcely one hundred thousand en-


—— =~


106 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


tered Moscow. But all that Europe saw was the vic-
torious advance. Owing to the prevailing conditions it
was weeks, even months, before further news reached
Frankfort. The merchants of that time could not adjust
their affairs to events as speedily as scientific discoveries
have now enabled them to do.

Meyer Amschel Rothschild’s attitude was entirely de-
termined by his sense of the overwhelming power of the
Corsican, who was now at Moscow, when the reopening
of his old wound quite unexpectedly brought him back
to his sick-bed. He did not live to see Napoleon’s com-
plete failure in Russia, to be followed a year later by his
defeat in Germany, which was followed by the return to
his Hessian domains of Rothschild’s lord and master the
elector.

On September 16, 1812, a high Jewish Feast Day, the
so-called “long day” which is set apart for the pardon-
ing of the penitent sinner, Meyer Amschel had been fast-
ing, in accordance with his strict religious principles,
and spent many hours standing in the synagogue, sunk in
prayer. The same evening he felt severe pains in the re-
gion of his wound. He was immediately put to bed, but
his condition grew worse. He had violent attacks of
fever, and he felt that death was approaching. There-
upon he determined, while he still had the strength in
him, to order his affairs, and to make a new will adapted
to the most recent developments, to take the place of the
earlier will which he had made.

In doing so he was giving effect to an agreement which
he had made with all his children, and in accordance
with which he sold to his five sons all his shares in the
business, his securities and other possessions, as well as
his large stocks of wine, for the sum of 190,000 gulden,
which of course was far below their real value, His
sons were henceforth to be the exclusive owners of the
business, and it was clear, although not definitely stated,


The Napoleonic Era 107


that after their father’s death any inequality in their
shares ceased, and each of the five sons henceforth pos-
sessed ten-fiftieths, that is, a fifth share, in the business.

The will completely excluded the daughters and their
husbands and heirs from the business, and even from all
knowledge of it. Meyer Amschel applied the purchase
price of 190,000 gulden as follows: he granted his wife
Gutle a life interest in 70,000 gulden; the remainder he
divided amongst his five daughters. This arrangement
served a double object. First, it made it unnecessary on
his death to declare to the officials the enormous value,
for those times, of the business that was divided between
the five sons, and to put the capital bequeathed at the
modest figure of 190,000 gulden. Secondly, the business
was secured absolutely to the five sons, safe from the pos-
sibility of any interference from the sisters and their rela-
tions.

The will concluded by enjoining unity, love and
friendship upon the children, and any undutiful child
that showed an intention of rebelling was threatened with
the penalty of inheriting no more than the legal mini-

' mum, which was only to be reckoned on the basis of the
190,000 gulden, from which would have to be deducted
anything that the child in question had received during
his life.

When Meyer Amschel drew up his last will there can-
not have been more than two of his five sons, namely
Amschel and Carl, at Frankfort, for Solomon was living

_ in Paris, and James, who was maintaining communica-
_ tion between Solomon and Nathan in England, was liv-
_ ing at Gravelines on the Channel coast in the Depart-
_ ment Pas-de-Calais. These facts, proved as they are by
_ French police records, and the records of visés issued,
are fatal to the well-known legend, according to which
Meyer Amschel gathered his five sons about his deathbed

and divided Europe amongst them. Moreover, his ill-


108 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ness had come on quite suddenly and developed so rap-
idly that the idea of recalling the sons who were abroad
could never have been considered.

When Meyer Amschel had thus done everything that
lay in his power to secure the future prosperity of his
House—which, it is true, he considered in terms only
of financial gain—and by clear and simple provision to
maintain unity and peace amongst his numerous family,
he could look death calmly in the face. Two days after
he had completed his will, on the evening of September
19, 1812, his old complaint took a marked turn for the
worse. The alpha and omega of medical practice of the
time was to let blood, a procedure which simply served
to weaken old people who were very ill, instead of giv-
ing them relief. At a quarter past eight on the evening
of the same day, Meyer Amschel Rothschild, the tireless,
cunning, simple, and religious Jew, and founder of the
banking firm M. A. Rothschild and Sons, was no longer
to be counted amongst the living.

In his last hours he was fully aware that he was leav- —
ing a fine inheritance to his sons, but he certainly could
not have guessed that he had laid the foundation of a
world power which during the first half of the nine-
teenth century was to exercise an unparalleled influence
throughout Europe, and was to maintain this influence
almost unimpaired throughout the changing conditions
of the second half of the century.


CHAPTER III


The Great Napoleonic Crisis and Its Exploitation by
the House of Rothschild


INCE the French Revolution, the Continent of Eu-
rope had been continuously suffering from the tur-
moil of war, while large territories were subjected to the
horrors of the actual battles between the opposing armies.
On the other hand, sea-girt England, although she ex-
erted a powerful political influence upon the continental
groups, was able to devote her principal attention, prac-
tically undisturbed, to the development of her commerce
and the prosperity of her citizens.
Through his financial reforms which had assisted the
_ capitalistic development of the state, the younger Pitt
had brought order into Britain’s internal affairs and
. thereby made it possible for England, out of her growing
~ wealth, to advance very considerable sums of money to
‘ her allies, who were waging war on the Continent with
the wealth and the blood of their citizens. Towards the
close of the eighteenth century England was indisputa-
bly the most important commercial power in Europe,
and the House of Rothschild had made an exceedingly
clever move in arranging that one of its sons, and the
most talented one at that, should take up his residence
in that kingdom.

Nathan had first settled in Manchester, the center for
the manufacture of all kinds of cloth, as he had long had
business connections with that city. In view of the nu-
merous armies that had to be clothed, the cloth trade
offered opportunities of making exceptional profits. The
sum of money he brought with him—£20,000, which con-
109


110 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


stituted a very respectable capital sum in those days—
gave the stranger an assured position from the start, al-
though he could not speak a word of English. Nathan,
therefore, came to Manchester, not as a small tradesman,
but as a fairly important representative of an established
commercial firm on the Continent, with money at his
command.

He entered upon his commercial activities with all the
enthusiasm of youth, at the same time showing a busi-
ness acumen remarkable in one so young. He first care-
fully studied his environment, and his neighbor’s meth-
ods of making money, and ascertained that profits were
made on the purchase of the raw materials necessary for
the manufacture of cloth and on the issue. of these mate-
rials for dyeing purposes, as well as on the sale of the
finished article, each of these activities in England be-
ing the province of a separate merchant.

Nathan determined to secured for himself the profit at
each stage in the process. He bought the raw materials
on his own account, had them dyed, and then gave them
out to undergo the further processes of manufacture, and
finally himself handed them over to the trade. Nathan
did not confine himself exclusively to cloth. He bought
everywhere, and anything that he thought was good and
cheap. Thus he bought all kinds of fancy goods, as well
as colonial produce such as indigo, wine, sugar, and cof-
fee. He was not troubled about finding a market, as the
parent firm at home required all these things.

The capital which he brought with him was soon dou-
bled and trebled, while his father and brothers derived
the greatest benefit from Nathan’s presence in England.
He enjoyed the life in that country, which struck him
ag extraordinarily free and unfettered, compared with
the oppressive conditions in Frankfort.

As his business grew, Nathan naturally began to estab-


lish contact with the capital, which is the heart of Great —


Britain, and in which all the financial interests of an


PR aso


| The Great Napoleonic Crisis III


extensive empire are concentrated. Determined to settle
in England for good, he left Manchester in 1804 for
London, where he would be in closer touch with those
political developments which were producing such pro-
found effect upon commercial life. He realized at once
that the fact that he was a foreigner was a great handi-
cap in business, and therefore, as early as the summer
of the year 1806, he applied for naturalization as a Brit-
ish subject. His wish was readily granted, as the appli-
cant had resided for six years in the country, and even
if he had not yet attained a very prominent position in
the business world, he was already honored and respected.
Favored by the keen demand for goods on the Conti-
nent, Nathan carried on his business in London with
great success, until the year 1806. His intimate experi-
ence of English life and character, and his sympathy with
the spirit of resistance to Napoleon’s plans of world domi-
nation which inspired the whole country, soon caused
him to adhere completely to English modes of thought.
But he avoided publicly identifying himself with any
_ political cause which might have damaged his family
_, at Frankfort, and all his actions were guided first and
_- foremost by business considerations.
; Nathan was now twenty-nine years old, and was con-
templating marriage. He had made the acquaintance
of the daughter of a rich Jewish family. Her father,
who had emigrated from Amsterdam, had several small
business dealings with Nathan, but their relations had
not been sufficiently intimate to enable him to form an
accurate estimate regarding the suitor’s financial posi-
tion and general business qualities. The fact that Na-
than was living abroad made investigations of this nature
more difficult. Nathan, however, with skill and direct-
ness, managed to set his future father-in-law’s doubts at
rest, while the information which the latter obtained
from Frankfort confirmed the fact that the Rothschild
family were prosperous and respected. Nathan gained


112 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


his object, and through his marriage was enabled to in-
crease his own fortune by the amount of his wife’s sub-
stantial dowry; his position was also strengthened by
the influence of a father-in-law who was a wealthy and
respected merchant in the City of London.

Moreover, his wife’s sister Judith Cohen shortly after-
wards married the rich and well-known Moses Monte-
fiore, who was thus brought into close association with
Nathan, and whose energy, foresight, and sound busi-
ness sense in regard to all the vicissitudes of the conti-
nental wars, which so intimately affected financial opera-
tions, Nathan had constant occasion to admire.

Nathan had as yet nothing to do with the elector’s in-
vestments in England, although his father at Frankfort
was endeavoring to get him this business, and had. re-
peatedly urged him to cultivate relations with the elec-
tor’s plenipotentiary in London. The intimations of the
elector’s wishes, hitherto received by Count Lorentz, had
not been favorable to such an arrangement, but this in
no way discouraged Meyer Amschel at Frankfort, or
Nathan in London, from continuing their efforts. As
has already been stated, the elector soon changed his opin-
ion, and we are now entering upon the period of the in-
vestment of large sums in English stocks, as recommended
by Nathan. In view of his intimate relations with Meyer
Amschel, the elector could not continue to object to the
employment of his son Nathan in transacting the busi-
ness in London.

Another factor in Nathan’s favor was the difficulty
of getting possession of the documents certifying the pur-
chases of stock, this being not so difficult for Nathan to
arrange, in view of his numerous Jewish and non-Jew-
ish connections. Thus Nathan came to be interested in
the enormous financial operations of the elector, and as
considerable periods of time could be made to intervene
between the purchase and the payment of the securities,
he sometimes had temporary control of very substantial


PO te


| The Great Napoleonic Crisis 113


sums of money, which he could employ in safe, short-
term transactions, such as, for instance, the purchase of
bullion, which was constantly rising in value at that time.
It was not known in England how Nathan came to have
such sums of money temporarily at his disposal, for the
purchases of English stocks on the elector’s account were
officially made in the name of Rothschild, and apparently
for the benefit of that firm, as the elector’s funds in Eng-
land had already been sequestered once.

The credit of the House of Rothschild and of Nathan
certainly gained greatly from these enormous purchases,
and he came to be entrusted with transactions which, even
if he could not immediately meet his obligations in cash,
he did not like to lose, as they offered good prospects for
the future. Nathan was particularly skilful at exploit-
ing the abnormal conditions of the period, conditions
such as always give those with a gift for speculation an
opportunity of enriching themselves, while those who
stand by passively are reduced to poverty.

Through his continental blockade, Napoleon had rev-
olutionized the whole commercial outlook of England;
then, recognizing that his measures had a boomerang ef-
- fect, he modified them, and actually negotiated with the
smugglers, whom the English government encouraged
with prizes for breaking through the Napoleonic block-
ade. The decree of June 15, 1810, practically officially
regularized this illicit trade. Certain goods that were re-
quired in France, and then gold and silver, were allowed
to be brought to France in limited quantities, French
products being sent to England in exchange. In order to
prevent the smuggling of undesirable articles, there was a
special railed-off enclosure at Gravelines for the officially
_ recognized smuggling, the captains of smuggling vessels
being required to remain exclusively within this enclo-
sure, and to load and unload their goods under police
control.

Nathan took advantage of this officially sanctioned


114 The Rise of the House of Rothschild —


commerce between England and hostile France, to do
business on an extensive scale, both on his own account
and on account of the parent firm at Frankfort. But it
soon became apparent that it was essential to have an
absolutely reliable man at Paris too, to deal with this busi-
ness. Nathan had written to Frankfort to this effect, and
old Meyer Amschel had decided to profit by his good
relations with Dalberg’s French régime at Frankfort to
obtain a Paris passport visé from the French officials for
one of his sons, to whom alone he was prepared to entrust
so important a position, and also to obtain a letter of rec-
ommendation for him to one of the higher French Treas-
ury officials.

A particularly favorable opportunity for this occurred
when Dalberg set out for Paris in March, 1811, with the
money advanced by Rothschild. It is certainly no mere
coincidence that, according to the French police records,”
James, who was then nineteen years old, started to Paris
via Antwerp, and took up his residence in a private house
there. It is particularly worthy of note that Count
Mollien, Napoleon’s finance minister at the time, had
been informed of young Rothschild’s arrival, and knew
of his intention to receive and forward large sums of
ready money that were expected from England.

“A Frankforter,” the minister wrote to Napoleon on
March 26, 1811, “who is now staying in Paris with a
Frankfort passport, and goes by the name of Rothschild,
is principally occupied in bringing British ready money
from the English coast to Dunkirk, and has in this way
brought over 100,000 guineas in one month. He is in
touch with bankers of the highest standing at Paris, such
as the firms of Mallet, of Charles Davillier, and Hottin-
guer, who give him bills on London in exchange for the
cash. He states that he has just received letters from
London dated the 2oth of this month, according to which
the English intend, in order to check the export of gold
and silver coins, to raise the value of the crown from —


Se


The Great Napoleonic Crisis IIS


five to five and a half shillings, and the value of the
guinea from twenty-one to thirty shillings. . . . Such op-
erations would be on a par with the practices of the Aus-
trians or the Russians. I sincerely hope that the Frank-
forter Rothschild is well informed of these matters, and
that ministers in London will be sufficiently foolish to
act in this way.” *

This letter reveals much; it shows that while James
Rothschild may have been in Paris before the 24th of
March, 1811, without the permission of the police, as soon
as he officially arrived, that is, as soon as he reported to
the Paris police, he must have had an interview with the
minister or with one of the officials of the treasury, this
being no doubt due to Dalberg’s introduction. Although
in sending the guineas to Frankfort Nathan was generally
acting in accordance with quite definite plans that suited
the British government, James, in order to gain the sup-
port of the French departments for these operations, pre-
tended to the ministry at Paris that the English authori-
ties viewed the export of cash with extreme displeasure,


_and did everything possible to prevent it. He succeeded


only too well in hoodwinking Mollien, and through him,
Napoleon.

“The French government,” says Marion,* “viewed with
satisfaction the arrival of English guineas at the Channel
ports, because they regarded this both as a proof and as a
cause of the progressive decay of England.” It is true
that in his memoirs Mollien afterward tried to suggest
that he did not share this view, and that Napoleon de-
rived it from others, but the letter quoted above clearly
shows that the finance minister also believed Rothschild.

Nathan wanted just at this time to send exceptionally


4 66


_ large sums of ready money to France, having the secret


_ intention that these should ultimately be destined for


Wellington’s armies, who were fighting the French in


Spain. That general had suffered great financial embar-


_ fassment since the beginning of the English campaign in


116 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Portugal and Spain. It was not only that the blockade
made it difficult to transport large sums by sea, but the
devastating storms in the Bay of Biscay were a serious
menace to the cumbrous sailing ships of those times. Such
consignments were therefore liable to grave risks, and the
insurance charges were exceedingly heavy.

As early as 1809 Wellington had had occasion to write
to his government in the following terms: “We are ter-
ribly in need of funds. . . . The army pay is two months
in arrears. I feel that the Ministry in England is utterly
indifferent to our operations here.® ... It would be
much better for the Governments,” he added some time
later,® “entirely to give up our operations in Portugal
and Spain if the country cannot afford to continue them.” -

This state of affairs continued for two years, and Well-
ington had to have recourse to highly dubious bankers
and money-lenders in Malta, Sicily,and Spain, from whom
he had to borrow money at the most usurious rates, giving
them bills of exchange which had to be cashed by the
British Treasury at great loss. The measures taken by the
treasury for satisfying the requirements of Wellington’s
army were always quite inadequate; finally the British
commander wrote indignantly to London ‘ that if matters
continued thus, his army would have to leave the Penin-
sula, which would relieve France of important military
commitments on the Continent, and expose England to
the danger of having a hostile force landed on the island
itself. Then his exalted monarch and his subjects would
experience in their own country something of the horrors
of war, from which they had hitherto had the good for-
tune to be spared.

A year later things were not much better, and on being
reproached for having too casually drawn bills on the
English government, Wellington replied with some heat,
writing that he was sorry to have to state that sick and
wounded British officers at Salamanca had been forced to >
sell their clothes in order to keep body and soul together.®


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 117


Such were the conditions under which the British army
was fighting in Spain, when an energetic movement in
its support was started in London, which at first was
directed by Nathan Rothschild on his own account. He
had acquired very cheaply a large proportion of the bills
issued by Wellington, and proceeded to cash them at the
British Treasury. The cash which he thus received—
generally in the form of guineas—he sent across the
_Channel to France, where it was received by one of his
brothers, generally by James, but in 1$12 sometimes by
Carl or Solomon, and then paid in to various Paris bank-
ing firms. The brothers obtained from the Paris bankers
bills on Spanish, Sicilian, or Maltese bankers, and they
_ contrived, through their business connections, to get these
papers to Wellington, who duly received the cash from
the bankers. Thus the cash sent from London actually
only had to make the short journey from London to Paris,
and thence through the intricate network of business
firms, who were mostly Jewish, it finally reached the
English commander in Spain, through the heart of the
enemy's country.
| As time passed, however, the supply of cash and
precious metal began to be scarce, even in England.
Wathan, who had concentrated his attention principally
‘upon business in specie and bills of exchange since the
blockade had made ordinary commerce so difficult,
‘closely watched * for favorable opportunities of acquir-
img any consignments of specie that might be available.
When the East India Company once offered a consider-
able amount of bullion for sale, Nathan Rothschild was
e of the first customers in the field; and he was able,
arough having recently received large sums of money
or investment from the elector, and through mobilizing
his whole credit, which stood very high, to acquire the
whole of this stock of gold for himself.®
A that time, John Charles Herries was commissary-
chief, an office that had been created in order to supply


118 The Rise of the House of Rothschild © r


both the British army at home and the troops fighting on

the Continent with the necessary funds. He was notable —
alone to meet the demands made upon him. A sailing ©
ship carrying money had again been held up somewhere ©
for weeks, and another consignment which had arrived

safely at Lisbon encountered extraordinary difficulties in
its further transportation. The British government, and —
especially Herries, were in the greatest distress. |

They then heard of Nathan Rothschild’s purchase of —
gold from the East India Company, and the almost un- |
known man who had acquired it was sent for by the treas-
ury. Nathan sold the gold to the government ata heavy
profit, and, at the same time requested that he should be
commissioned to convey the money through France to
Wellington in Spain, as he had already been doing to 2
limited extent at his own expense, asking that he should
now do it on a large scale on account of the British gov-
ernment.

Very substantial sums of moncy indeed were involved,
which were sent across the Channel from England to
France, 2s is shown by a letter from James in Paris t0
Nathan in London, dated April 6, 1812, which was imter-
cepted by the Paris police. Nathan had at that time sent
27,300 English guineas and 2,002 Portuguese gold ounces
in six separate instalments through six different firms, to
James at Gravelines. James acknowledged the receipt
of these amounts, and of bills on the firms of Hottinguer,
Davillier, Morel and Faber, to the amount of £65,798.
He added that he was glad that it had been possible to
send him this money without affecting the rate of ex-
change, and urged his brother to let him have amy com-
mercial news at the earliest possible moment Both
brothers naturally watched the rate of exchange very
closely, ceased buying bills when it rose, and acc
them when it fell.** oe


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 119


Minister Mollien. He was flattering himself that Eng-
land was in great difficulties, that the rate of exchange
was against her, and was constantly getting worse through
the drainage of gold, while the Bank of France was con-
solidating its position, and France’s currency stood high-
est in the world. Meanwhile gold pieces were trickling
through in complete security, under the eyes and indeed
under the protection of the French government, across
France itself, into the pockets of France’s arch-enemy,

Wellington.

But though Mollien was deceived, the activities of the
Jewish emigrants from Frankfort were being watched
with great suspicion in other quarters. Letters from a
local merchant to one of the Rothschilds at Dunkirk,
which were intercepted by the French police, revealed
the nature of their activities. A police official sent a de-
tailed report on the matter ** to Marshal Davoust, who
was then military governor of Hamburg. After carefully

_ examining the letters he fully appreciated the nature of
the Rothschild transactions in France. As the marshal
_ considered the matter to be exceedingly grave, he decided
_ to report on it direct to Emperor Napoleon.

' He pointed out incidentally ** that “the arguments in
favor of withdrawing money from England, under which
the plotters concealed their maneuvers, lose their force
when one considers that the English do everything pos-
sible to facilitate its export.”

The emperor took note of the report, but did not pay
any further attention to it. He no doubt said to himself
that Davoust was a splendid soldier, but that this did not
imply an understanding of financial matters, in which
Mollien’s opinion must be more reliable. The chief com-
issioner of police, however, continued to concern him-
f with the Rothschild family, of whose relations with
flesse he had long known, and he determined to get to
he bottom of their activities (couler a fond). He for-
arded Davoust’s report to Police Prefect Desmarets,


120 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


instructing him to furnish accurate dates regarding the
family, and at the same time wrote in similar terms to
Gravelines.

This was in February, 1812, when Carl and James were
both in Paris. Desmarets had them watched, and asked
the French commissioner of police at Mainz to report
regarding the political sympathies of the House of Roths-
child, its commercial relations abroad, and its speculative
transactions, as well as the extent, if any, to which it was
involved in contraband trade.

The police commissioner at Mainz sent a detailed re-
port in reply, in which he emphasized the confidential
relations between the Rothschild House at Frankfort and
Dalberg, stating that these were so intimate that Dalberg
refused practically no favor that a Rothschild asked of
him. He added that Dalberg’s entourage had certainly
given the Rothschild family previous warning of the
domiciliary search which was conducted in 1809, and con-
cluded with the words: ** ‘As regards Rothschild’s po-
litical leanings, they are far from being all that they —
should be. He does not like us French at all, although
he pretends to be devoted to the French government.”

At the same time the report from Gravelines came in,
which confirmed the constant presence, amounting practi-
cally to the “établissement’” of a Rothschild at Dunkirk,
and referred to his brother and partner in London.** The
prefect of police, Count Réal, pointed out that the mere
fact that Rothschild was a foreigner was sufficient reason
for not allowing him to stay on the coast.

“FTow could this man be anything but suspect?” he con-
tinued indignantly. ‘What could have been in his Maj-
esty’s mind when he permitted the smugglers to trader
Surely it must have been with the intention that this trade
should benefit French industry, an object which will not
be achieved if London firms can maintain correspondents,
not to mention branch offices, in Paris. What are we to”


i


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 121


think of this Rothschild’s sojourn on our coast? A man
who has established his brother in London, with whom
he actually has common interests?” Réal therefore rec-
ommended that Rothschild should immediately be asked
to leave the coast.

The Paris prefect of police reported the result of all
these inquiries to the chief commissioner, and at the same
time proposed that the Rothschild who was living in Paris
should be arrested. But the protection of the French
finance minister prevented this. Indeed, how could the
government suddenly allow persons to be arrested whom
it needed for carrying out its own business opera-
tions, and from whom the French Treasury accepted re-
ports and advice, while it also entrusted them with com-
missions? The brothers Rothschild had cleverly made
their position absolutely secure before they ventured to
Paris into the lions’ den, and in spite of all the suspicions
of the military and the police, they remained entirely un-
molested.

Nevertheless, the position was certainly not without its
dangers. Sentiment in high quarters might suddenly
change, in which case a Napoleon would have made short
_ work of the brothers Rothschild. A further incident oc-

curred to alarm the French police, and it caused General

Savary to institute a further investigation.

A letter which was being forwarded to James Roths-
child by a business firm at a special charge independently

_ of the post-bag, which was controlled by the Boulogne
_ police, was intercepted in the course of its journey. The
_ inference was drawn that the brothers Rothschild fre-
quently attempted to evade the censorship, but the writer
of the letter, and the responsible police commissioner of
the department asserted that the letter had merely been
sent by special messenger after the regular post, as it
‘was urgent. The matter was not further pursued, but the
police commissioner for Pas-de-Calais was severely repri-


|


4


122 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


manded, his chief giving him to understand that the lux-
ury of his household and his general extravagance were
highly suspicious circumstances.

The business of the two brothers Rothschild 4 cheval
the warring powers of England and France was so im-
portant that it was absolutely essential for the brothers
to be continuously on the spot, and even after the death
of their father on September 19, 1812, only one of the
two brothers who were in France at the time, namely
Solomon, returned to Frankfort, whilst James remained
‘n France and was constantly oscillating between Paris
and the coast.

James had won the esteem of the Paris business world,
through the enormous transactions which he always car-
ried through punctually and accurately. It was at once
noted whether he was buying bills or not, and the ex-
change was immediately affected when there was a rumor
that he was going to buy. He set great store by his per-
sonal reputation; when a business man once slandered
him to one of Nathan’s employees, accusing him of an
action unworthy of a man of integrity, he never mentioned
the matter to the person concerned, since, as he wrote to
Nathan, he considered it far beneath his dignity to dis-
cuss such a matter.*®

Great events were now brewing on the Continent; Na-
poleon had not been able to keep up the myth for long
regarding his victorious march to Moscow. The historic
burning of that city robbed him of his only resources.
Winter was already approaching when Napoleon was
forced to decide upon retreat, which meant that the rem-
nants of his army would have to traverse hundreds of
miles through ice and snow, pursued by the enemy across
country most of which had been laid desolate.

The crossing of the Beresina completed the disintegra-
tion of the Grande Armée, and on December 3, two days —
before Napoleon left it in order to return as quickly as _


possible to Paris, the famous twenty-ninth bulletin was


:


j


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 123


issued, which, while generally admitting the destruction
of the army, laconically reported that the emperor’s
health had never been better. The whole world received
this news with great emotion, and new hopes sprang up
in the European states which were under French domin-
ion. But it was not possible to estimate what the future
consequences of the catastrophe would be.

The reports from Russia made a particularly profound
impression at Frankfort. The unexpected news was so
disconcerting that at first there was a tendency to regard
it all as highly exaggerated—the newspapers had been al-
lowed to report only what the French censorship passed.
But soon stray survivors arrived, who told of the incon-
ceivable hardships suffered by the army.

Frankfort was particularly interested in the complete
collapse of Napoleon’s schemes on the practical side. It
is true, contents of the secret report of the paymaster gen-
eral of the Grande Armée were still unknown. He had
set out for the campaign with fifty-five cartloads of cash,
drawn by four horses apiece, and seventy-eight clerks.
He had been able to rescue only one cartload, containing

'two millions in gold, which he hoped to get safely to

Konigsberg, but he was not even prepared to guarantee

that.

“My staff,” he reported,*® “no longer exists; they have
all perished from cold and hunger. Some of them whose
hands and feet have been frozen have been left at Vilna.

_ All the account books have been taken by the enemy. No-
j body thinks of anything except saving his own skin, and
_ it is quite impossible to stem the panic... .”

Amschel Rothschild, the eldest son, and now head of
the Frankfort firm, was just engaged in building a new
banking house in the Bornheimerstrasse at Frankfort. He
was enormously excited by the news of Napoleon’s col-
lapse; in view of the firm’s extensive operations, which,
ranging from Spain to Denmark and from Prague to
London, already embraced the half of Europe, such sud-


124. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


den changes affecting the distribution of power on the
Continent of Europe were bound to have most far-reach-
ing consequences. It is true that his firm had friends in
both camps, but it was important that, if either of the
political structures collapsed, or showed serious signs of
instability, the center of gravity of the firm’s business
should be rapidly shifted to the victorious side.

However, things had not yet reached this point.
Through his enormous energy, Napoleon succeeded in
rapidly improvising a new army, with which he meant
to turn the tide of events. Frankfort continued to be oc-
cupied by the French, and Rothschild had to go very
warily.

It is true that everywhere in Germany people smelled
freedom in the air. In the public streets of Hesse the
cry was heard, “Long live the elector, long live Russia!”
Napoleon’s so-called allies in the Russian campaign fell
away, one after the other. Prussia allied herself with
Russia and declared war on France, and Napoleon felt
exceedingly uncertain even about the attitude of Austria. -
In April Napoleon was again campaigning in Saxony,
and in the operations of the year 1813 he won one or two
brilliant victories, but could not drive his enemies com-
pletely out of the field.

The bond between these became closer as time went on.
England again offered Prussia and Russia her all-power-
ful financial support. In the Treaty of Reichenbach of
June 14, 1813, she offered Prussia £666,666 as a subsidy,
if that kingdom would put eighty thousand men in the
field. Russia received twice the amount for twice the
amount of men. On August 10, after Metternich’s world- —
famous interview with Napoleon, Austria’s attitude was
also decided. The minister, who had completely changed —
his policy, left the Emperor of France, whom he had once ©
made the son-in-law of his emperor, in the lurch, and —
Austria joined the coalition against Napoleon, |


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 125


The Elector of Hesse also watched the course of events
with satisfaction from his exile at Prague. He again re-
quested the Emperor of Austria to reinstate him as speed-
ily as possible in his dominions. He felt that the end of
his sufferings and persecutions was at hand.*7 He who
had so often begged the emperor and Marie Louise to
intercede with Napoleon on his behalf, now spoke of him-
self as the German prince who had remained true to the
cause, and as the protagonist of the German nation (Ver-
fechter des teutschen Reichs) ; he certainly did not forget
to remind the emperor of the undertaking that he was
to be “guaranteed against any loss.” He was, however,
glad to contribute temporarily to the common war-chest
and to send troops to reinforce the allies. Buderus was
instructed, in spite of the general shortage of money, to
obtain the sums necessary for this purpose. He applied
to the House of Rothschild, and received one hundred
thousand thalers, which enabled the elector to make sev-
eral payments to the allies.

The unity of front which had thus been established led
to some success in the further course of the campaign.
In spite of her constant financial embarrassments, Austria


~ played an important military part in the war. England


SS


also came to her assistance, and under the Treaty Alliance
of Teplitz of October 3, 1813, she contracted to pay after
October of that year, a million pounds in monthly instal-
ments, in return for which Austria undertook to place
150,000 men in the field.

The day of Leipzig, October 18, 1813, was the final
turning-point in Napoleon’s career. The great general
was forced to yield to the powerful coalition. At one
blow the whole of Germany was liberated up to the


Rhine, the Confederation of the Rhine fell to pieces, the


King of Westphalia fled, and Dalberg voluntarily re-


signed his grand ducal dignity at Frankfort. The exiled
_ princes now returned to their states, and on November 11,


126 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the Elector of Hesse also left Prague and reached Cassel
soon afterwards, where the populace received him with
acclamations.

These events were propitious to the business policy of
the House of Rothschild. The prince to whose riches
they owed their prosperity, and with whom they stood
on such a unique footing, thanks to the assistance of Bu-
derus, had now been reinstated. He immediately set
about making good his financial losses, and reestablish-
ing his position amongst the princes of Germany. This
naturally reacted favorably upon his court banker,

In other respects the position at Frankfort left much
to be desired; the fall of Dalberg did not mean merely
the loss of a personal patron; the Jews lost the man who
had sold them rights which had placed them on an equal-
ity with other citizens. The final payment was not yet
due, and there was the risk that the senate, which con-
sisted of members of the old patrician families, would
on getting into power again revoke all the concessions that
had been so dearly bought. The old municipal constitu-
tion was reestablished, but without regularizing the legal
position of the Jews; and it was a bad sign that the re-
demption of the debentures which were falling due under
the contract for the purchase of their freedom -was re-
fused.*®

There was only one way of dealing with the situation:
the House of Rothschild would have to prove itself so
useful through its financial services, to the most impor-
tant powers of the victorious coalition, that the victors
would call the citizens of Frankfort to order if they
should really proceed to act with hostility against the
Jews. |
While the first principle of the House of Rothschild —
was to amass wealth, the liberation of the race from op- |
pressive restrictions contributed indirectly to this end, |
since it would facilitate intercourse with the rest of the —
world, and thereby increase the possibility of financial


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 127


gain, which in turn would serve to increase its power.
At this critical time the most important services were
rendered to the Frankfort firm, not by its new chief,
but by his incomparably more talented brother Nathan,
in England, whose flair for finance amounted to positive
genius. He now enjoyed the elector’s full confidence.
When in 1812 the Prince Regent of England seemed to
be inclined to repay £100,000, Nathan was instructed to
receive this amount, and to invest it in consols. This
transaction brought him into immediate touch with the
private finances of the royal family.

As Great Britain was the financier of the powers which
were fighting on the Continent, and was also maintaining
armies of her own abroad, enormous demands were made
on the British Treasury in 1813. The officials were not
equal to the task of raising the money or of sending it
to the Continent. It had already been necessary for a nat-
uralized foreigner to demonstrate that there were other
ways of raising and sending money than for Englishmen
abroad to draw bills on England. That method had a
very bad effect on the English rate of exchange, which
at the end of 1813 had already fallen by one-third.

Herries, who was charged with the sole responsibility
for sending money to the Continent, again called in Na-
than Rothschild to his assistance. While his principal
problem was to supply the enormous sums that England
had to provide under the subsidy contracts that she had
just concluded, it was even more urgent and more impor-
tant for the final overthrow of Napoleon to afford every
possible support to Wellington, who was still pressing
for money, but who was now free to advance into French
_ territory, as Napoleon had transferred his best troops
and generals to Germany.

Herries invited Nathan, whose name was still almost
always wrongly spelled by the British Treasury, to a con-
_ ference regarding the measures to be taken. The English
Official was completely convinced by the clarity and logic


#


128 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


of the scheme for sending money which Nathan sub-
mitted, and requested him to draw up a memorandum for
the chancellor of the exchequer, explaining the methods
to be adopted for rendering prompt financial assistance
to the Duke of Wellington. The technical problem was
now somewhat different, since Wellington attached most
importance to being supplied with French currency.

In the interests of England, as well as of his own pocket,
Nathan had hitherto worked almost consistently against
Napoleon; but he had done it as inconspicuously as pos-
sible for fear of compromising his brothers on the Con-
tinent. Even now that Napoleon was retreating, and was
soon to be fighting within the former frontiers of France
itself, he still kept well in the background, although he
adopted the anti-Napoleonic cause with all the more en-
thusiasm, since the Russian disaster and the defeat at
Leipzig seemed to imply the end of Napoleon’s power.
Lord Liverpool, first lord of the treasury and prime min-
ister, and Vansittart, chancellor of the exchequer, ap-
proved the scheme submitted by Herries, and in a secret
letter entrusted its execution to Nathan’s experience and
discretion.

Nathan Rothschild thereupon proceeded personally to
Holland and collected, in close cooperation with his
brothers, the French metal currency with which the Con-
tinent was flooded, but which, owing to the blockade, was
naturally unobtainable in England.*® James also ac-
quired French cash on the spot in Paris, and managed
to smuggle it across to his brothers in Holland. The sums
thus collected were then shipped from the Dutch coast
to Wellington’s headquarters, this transaction becoming
easier as his troops advanced from the west coast of


France. In this way, a constant stream of gold and silver }


in current French coin flowed to the British army, which ~


was thus enabled to pay in French money, whilst the —
allies, advancing from the east, were deprived of any such —


cash resources.


) The Great Napoleonic Crisis 129


In the interests of the brothers Rothschild the secret
was exceedingly well kept; Herries had every reason to
be satisfied with his, and his country’s relations with the
foreign Jew, and did nat grudge him the enormous profits
which he was making. In later years Nathan himself
stated that this was the best business he had ever done.?°

Meanwhile the victorious allies had advanced beyond
Frankfort, and had established their general headquarters
in that city. The Emperor Alexander of Russia, the King
of Prussia, and the Emperor Francis met in the ancient
city where the Holy Roman Emperors were crowned.
Metternich came with them, rejoicing in the triumph of
his policy. The outward signs of the great change in the
political situation were therefore particularly apparent
at Frankfort, the home of the Rothschilds.

It is not surprising that the family regulated their fu-
ture conduct accordingly. As yet they had had no rela-
tions with Austrian statesmen, but the brothers Rothschild
now proceeded to sound members of the imperial entour-
age with a view to getting an opening. Accompanying
Metternich was a previous acquaintance of theirs, Bar-
bier, vice-president of the Austrian Treasury, who was
responsible for the financial arrangements of the Austrian
army. It was with him that the unsuccessful negotiations
regarding the electoral loan had been carried on. Am-
schel accordingly called on him, and attempted although
at first with little success to secure his interest and that
- of his powerful master Count von Metternich.

The name of Metternich was now on everybody’s lips.
_ The success of his policy had enormously strengthened
_ the minister’s position. It was a fair assumption that
_ in the future he would exercise a very decisive influence
in all matters affecting Austria, even in financial matters,
although they did not come strictly within his province.
In spite of his other outstanding qualities, Metternich
had not a sound economic sense, either in public matters
or in his private affairs. He spent money rather thought-


130 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


lessly and extravagantly on his private account, and his
natural inclination was to make finance secondary to for-
eign policy, rather than the reverse.”

The Emperor Francis had repeatedly come to the res-
cue of his minister with personal loans, and had waived
their repayment later.?*? Metternich had also frequently
had recourse to various bankers, including such Frank-
fort bankers as Bethmann and the brothers Miihlen. As
far as can be ascertained, he had had neither official nor
personal relations with the Rothschild family before the
year 1813.

Metternich was conscious of his own uncertainty in
financial matters, and therefore relied largely on the ad-
vice of his indispensable secretary and counselor, the
brilliant publicist Frederick von Gentz. This man had
got to know the count intimately during the years 1802-
1803, while he was still in the Prussian civil service and
Metternich, who recognized his distinguished literary
talent, was ambassador at Dresden; and it was Metternich
who induced him to transfer to the Austrian civil service.

Gentz was even worse than Metternich at managing
his private affairs, and unlike the count, was completely
unscrupulous in getting money from anybody he could,
from his own or from foreign states, from persons who
desired orders or titles, and wherever opportunity offered.
In spite of this, and of the fact that he often managed to
earn considerable sums of money with his pen, he was in
a constant state of financial embarrassment owing to his
extravagant manner of life, and was repeatedly on the
verge of complete ruin. This, however, did not prevent
him from being always on the most intimate terms with
all the great men of his day, with poets and statesmen,
with princes and the higher nobility, as well as with Jew-
ish bankers and merchants.

Humboldt knew him well, and Goethe was interested
in him too. Humboldt wrote to Goethe on one occa- —
sion: 22 “You have perhaps heard that a few weeks ago


f


4


The Great Napoleonic Crists 131


poor Gentz went completely bankrupt. It is weakness,
and not extravagance that has brought him to this pass.”
Later events were to give the lie to this statement of Hum-
boldt’s; it would scarcely have been possible for anyone to
dissipate money more thoughtlessly and extravagantly
than Gentz.

In spite of these personal characteristics, Gentz had a
bent for political economy, and had taken a very good
course in that subject in England, where he stayed for
some time. While studying in that country he had made
the personal acquaintance of Herries, who translated sev-
eral of his writings into English, and maintained a cor-
respondence with him. He also told him of the firm of
Rothschild. Gentz did not stay with Metternich at gen-
eral headquarters, but he corresponded with him con-
stantly on financial matters.

The Austrian state was again urgently in need of funds
for continuing hostilities, as it had been decided to carry
the war into the enemy’s country across the Rhine. The
immediate problem was to convert into cash the remain-
ing instalments of the subsidies from England. This had
been done hitherto by the four Viennese banking firms,
but the government was not very satisfied with their
services, and Gentz, for personal reasons apparently, was
not on good terms with them. He therefore wrote to
Metternich to say that as far as he was aware, the four
Viennese firms had no exclusive right to conduct the
financial affairs of the state, and recommended the Frank-

_ fort banker von Herz. But he too proved to be very dis-
_ appointing; he succeeded in making several hundred
_ thousand for himself, but got rid of the bills at absurdly
low rates, thereby also damaging English credit. The
problem as to who should carry through these transactions
still remained to be solved.

A letter from Count Ugarte to Metternich indicated
how much they were exercised as to the best means of

getting the English money over.** Ugarte observed that


132 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


in the past the English government had generally sent the
subsidies in cash, and in gold and silver bars, while only a
small portion of them had been realized through “mer-
cantile’ channels. Now, however, that the precious
metals were scarce in England too, this was difficult to
arrange.

“We have to reckon,” he wrote, “that on the average
at least a third of the subsidies will be lost on the rate of
exchange, and this is another reason for trying to get the
amount of the subsidies increased to as high a figure as
possible, since, if for example six millions are sent over,
we shall only be able to realize four millions at the out-
side.” This remark of one of the highest Austrian gov-
ernment officials clearly reveals how governments were
taken advantage of in such transactions, and what huge
profits were derived in the course of remitting these sums
from England to the Continent.

Now there were several cogent reasons for the employ-
ment of Frankfort firms. They naturally did what they
could to bring influence to bear in this direction, on Met-
ternich and his advisers, and Ambassador Baron von
Hiigel pleaded the cause of the Frankfort bankers. He
had already on a previous occasion written to Count
Stadion to say that of all the cities in Germany, Frank-
fort ought to be specially considered in connection with
the financial measures of the imperial court. He said
that there was no commercial center in Europe that would
collaborate as readily as Frankfort in efforts to improve
Austria’s credit.

To crown all, Metternich simultaneously received a
dispatch from the ambassador in London, Baron von
Wessenberg, stating that the four Vienna firms had hope-


lessly mismanaged the realization of the English bills of |


exchange.2®> They had made the mistake of instructing
no less than four firms on the same day and in the same
market, to obtain bills on Paris and Amsterdam, so that
their joint action naturally forced up the rate of exchange.


: The Great Napoleonic Crisis 133


The imperial treasury had thereby incurred a loss of

thousands of pounds, which would have been avoided if

the business had been carried through by a single firm
which would not have feared the competition of its rivals.

In accordance with a memorandum of Metternich’s,
the Emperor Francis issued a letter*® in which he
strongly enjoined the persons concerned to expedite the
realization of the English subsidies as far as this could be
done without incurring substantial loss. He also com-
manded that careful investigations were to be made as to
the most advantageous method of procedure, adding that
since he understood from a trustworthy source that the
four firms had not handled the matter in a practical way,
and the business could be carried through much more
profitably from Frankfort, no further contracts should be
made with those firms unless it could be shown that that
was the best and most certain method of achieving the
desired object.

Ugarte had requested the four banking firms to send in

a written reply to the statement contained in Wessenberg’s

report, since he himself was inclined to support them, as

' they charged a commission of only one-quarter per cent;

and he instructed Barbier at Frankfort to report as to

whether the bills could really have been cashed at a

much higher figure in that city. At this point Metter-

nich intervened, also urging that Frankfort should be con-

sidered. Thereupon Ugarte summoned a secret commis-

sion at Vienna, and this commission naturally pronounced
in favor of the four well-established local banking firms,
_ whose credit stood high and who could be controlled
_ more effectively, as they were on the spot.”?

Meanwhile imperial headquarters had been shifted to
Freiburg in Switzerland, where Gentz joined Metter-
nich. In view of the conflict of opinion the emperor
_ Francis dealt with the matter by instructing Ugarte to do

nothing for the present.** But as in the early months of
1814 the allied armies advanced into France from all


134 The ‘Rise of the House of Rothschild


directions and the statesmen of the allied powers were
busily engaged alternately in fighting and negotiating
with Napoleon, it was all that they could do to raise the
money necessary for the further conduct of the war.

The firm of Rothschild at Frankfort made every effort
to get into touch with the Austrian government which
was so sadly in need of funds, and they knew through
Nathan that it received large sums from England. Na-
than did all he could to achieve this object, and had al-
ready secured the support of Herries. At the beginning
of 1814 Amschel Rothschild at Frankfort succeeded in
obtaining the order to issue the pay of the imperial of-
ficers who were passing through or stationed in Frank-
fort, the accounts to be settled by the Austrian paymasters.
That was at any rate a start.

Meantime the shortage of money at army headquarters
in Freiburg had become acute. The army needed as
much as two million gulden a month, so that further Eng-
lish subsidies, which the English government had agreed
to under the Treaty of Chaumont, were exceedingly wel-
come. Austria was to receive £1,666,66673 or a monthly
payment of £138,888%5. In point of fact there was never
occasion to pay out this sum, for the allies soon gained a
decisive victory over Napoleon, and entered Paris on
March 31; whereupon, after Napoleon’s abdication, the
first Peace of Paris was signed.

The elector immediately sent his sincerest congratula-
tions to the emperor as the liberator of Europe, as usual
accompanying this expression of feeling with a request
that he should be compensated for his losses.” The
elector had been a profitable example to the Rothschild
family. He was always importuning the authorities to
protect his interests, but he did so in rather an aggressive
manner, whereas the Rothschild brothers, though no less
persevering, always contrived so to frame their requests
that they seemed to be concerned only for the interests of
the state or the person with whom the decision lay.


The Great Napoleonic Crists 135


Austria had already received the English payments due
to her for the first three months of the year. The instal-
ments for April and May were still due, as well as two
payments for the return of the army, a total of £555,-
55514, the remittance of which amount had to be ar-
ranged. The firm of Rothschild put in for this business,
and in order to support it, Herries had proposed to
Vienna that Austria should arrange for the money to be
sent through Frankfort. In agreement with Nathan
Rothschild, the Englishman, who regarded Frankfort as
the most important financial center in Germany, had ap-
pointed his own plenipotentiary in that city, a certain
Chevalier von Limburger, who was to conduct any nego-
tiations regarding subsidies. He was a German Jew, and
the proprietor of an important tobacco factory in Leip-
zig, but he enjoyed the confidence of the English com-
missary-general Herries.

Meanwhile the Rothschild brothers had been cease-
lessly urging Barbier, who was still staying at Frankfort,
to avail himself of the services of their firm for the finan-
cial affairs of the Austrian imperial government. ‘They


‘now decided, with the assistance of Herries and Lim-


burger, on launching a final attack. On July 28, 1814,
two of the Rothschilds called on Barbier on behalf of the
firm in general, and informed him that they had received
instructions from the Chevalier von Limburger, the
plenipotentiary of the English commissary-general, to
ask whether Herries’s proposals regarding the settle-
ment of the balance due to Austria of the English sub-
sidies for 1814 had been accepted at Vienna or not. At


* the same time the brothers Rothschild handed him a let-
- ter in which they offered their services in that connection.
The letter was: *4


Your ‘Excellency:

In accordance with the permission graciously
granted to us, we have the honor to offer your High-
ness our most obedient service and most humbly beg


136 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


your Excellency to honor us with your high con-
fidence, and to commission us to realize your claims
on London. As our brother is himself established
in London, we can easily make use of bills on that
city, and enjoy many advantages which enable us
always to obtain the best price. Your Excellency has
had occasion to observe that we have acquired large
sums from London and Vienna, with the intention of
ourselves profiting by such exceptional circum-
stances. If your Excellency will lend a favorable ear
to our petition we shall undertake most faithfully
to serve your interests and to prove the high value
that we attach to your Excellency’s gracious good-
will, and, in return for our efforts and our services
we shall be absolutely satisfied with the customary
trade commission. . . . Comforting ourselves that
you will favorably accede to our request, we beg to
remain with all due respect, "7
Your Excellency’s most obedient servants,
MEYER AMSCHEL ROTHSCHILD AND SONS.


Not long afterwards they wrote again, more succinctly:
“We beg most submissively to inform your Excellency
that today we are paying at the rate of 132 to the pound
(on July 28 it would only have been 127) and that we are
appropriating £200,000 for this purpose, and beg your
confirmation of our action.” **

Barbier forwarded the two communications to Ugarte
at Vienna, and felt it his duty to add that in his opinion
the offer should not be accepted, as Viennese firms and


Austrian subjects were entitled to be considered. Hesug- |


gested, however, that the proposals of Herries and Lim-


burger should be considered, even if the Rothschilds’ were »


not. Barbier did not know at the time that the motive
behind their proposals, although hitherto they had only
recommended Frankfort in general and had not specif-
ically mentioned the firm of Rothschild, was to secure


that the whole business should be taken over by the House ~


of Rothschild.


The. Great Napoleonic Crisis 137


He was soon to be enlightened on this point; Carl
Rothschild left him no peace. On August 5 he had an-
other interview with Barbier, and gave it as his opinion
that the English rate of exchange was then very favor-
able. He stated that he had received a communication
from Limburger on the previous day and, in accordance
therewith, he desired to make a definite and advantageous
offer in writing regarding the realization of the further
subsidies due to Austria.

Barbier reported this offer to Vienna, adding that he
had taken no steps to conclude the arrangement, and
ended by saying: ‘The House of Rothschild now does
more business in English paper than all other firms put
together, and this may be largely due to the fact that one
member of the firm is established in London and another
in Paris, and that the firm has to carry through several
substantial remittances of money on account of the Eng-
lish government itself.” **

The fundamental idea at the back of Herries’s mind, a
plan that Nathan had inspired, was that in view of the
English government’s unfortunate experience of the

-' methods of middlemen, it should itself control the reali-
_ zation of the subsidies, and thereby prevent the frustra-
tion of its efforts for improving the English rate of
exchange. Whilst Nathan supported Herries in these ef-
forts, he profited by the occasion to get his firm estab-
lished with the continental powers, and to induce Herries
_ to entrust him with the remittance of the English sub-
_ sidies to the three greatest powers, mindful that the con-
nections thereby resulting would enable the firm in the
course of time to secure other important business with
the financial administrations of those powers. In this
_ way he hoped gradually to secure for his firm a privi-
leged position as state bankers to the four principal
powers that were engaged in defeating Napoleon.
A letter from the firm of Rothschild to Barbier, dated
Frankfort, August 8, 1814,°° while making constant ref-


138 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ences to Herries and Limburger, already entered into de-
tails concerning the remittance of the remaining £500,-
ooo, this serving as an introduction to the following pro-
posal, which concluded the letter: “Tf your Excellency
should be prepared to regard this unofficial proposal as ac-
ceptable, we would not fail to inform Herr von Lim-
burger of your views, after which we may be in a position
most dutifully to submit a formal offer.”

Whereas Barbier and the treasury official Schwinner,
who was on his staff, had hitherto dealt only with such
firms as Bethmann, Metzler, Wertheimber, etc., the firm
of Rothschild had now entered the field with the deter-
mination to drive all rivals out of it. The offer was duly
sent in and forwarded to Vienna by Barbier. At the same
time he observed to Rothschild that it was too vague to
be accepted, and that this was not an ordinary banking
transaction subject to the usual business risks, but was
based on the proposal of the English commissary-gen-
eral, and was therefore of an official nature.

Rothschild replied that Limburger was shortly coming
to Paris, and that he had therefore not been able to frame
his proposals more definitely. The Austrian Treasury
would not have to pay any commission in respect to such
transactions, although in all similar business which his
firm had had to carry through for the English govern-
ment, it had received a commission of two per cent. All
he wanted was an opportunity to demonstrate his zeal on
behalf of the imperial court.

Rothschild proceeded to enter into details as to the
method by which he proposed to carry through the trans-
action, as he was hereby able incidentally to relate that
the firm of Rothschild had already carried through simi-
lar business on an enormous scale for Russia and Prussia.
At that time England had to pay ten million thalers to
Russia and five million to Prussia. She agreed that this
payment should not be immediately effected by bills of


The Great Napoleonic Crists 139


exchange, but should be made in monthly instalments of
a million thalers.

It was further indicated that if the two states required
the money at an earlier date, bankers could temporarily
advance the amount. Knowing of this term in the con-
tract, Nathan had told his brothers at Frankfort imme-
diately to advance money to Prussia and Russia. These
advances were actually made, so that at his interview with
Barbier, Rothschild was able proudly to inform him that
his firm had advanced to the Russian court four million
gulden in cash and that his elder brother Solomon had
gone to Berlin to carry through this important business.

A few days later Rothschild further informed Bar-
bier,** with the object of impressing him, that his firm
had received payments of the value of 750,000 francs in
English crowns, and that this amount could also be ap-
plied to a settlement of the subsidies.

In the meantime, Count Ugarte’s reply to Barbier’s
communications of July 28 and August 1, in which Bar-
bier had first informed him of Rothschild’s offers, was re-
ceived. “As your Excellency ... quite rightly ob-
serves,’ wrote the count, “it will be more profitable and
safe for Austria in realizing the English subsidies to use
native firms that enjoy the protection of her government,
than to have recourse to foreign firms, over which her
government has no control, and in which one cannot have
the confidence . . . necessary for such extensive opera-
tions, as one would have no control over their activities,
and they would not be able to offer security for the very
considerable sums entrusted to them.” Ugarte also ex-
pressed the view that in any case it would appear more
advantageous to discount the English bills at Vienna, as
the pound in that city was dealt in at nine gulden, three
_kreutzers, whereas, according to the latest report, it was
only orth nine gulden at Frankfort. ‘There can there-

_ fore be no question,” he continued, “of accepting the firm


140 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


of Rothschild’s offer to take over twenty thousand pounds
sterling at the price they have suggested, of 8.48
gulden.” *”

The Rothschild proposal was therefore declined for the
time being. Ugarte had failed to be convinced, and even
Barbier had not been won over by the Brothers Roths-
child. However, they did not lie down under this re-
fusal. As they knew that the English government was
working through Commissary-General Herries, on
whom Nathan was bringing all his influence to bear, to
get these financial transactions entrusted to them, they
never thought of relaxing their efforts in that direction.

Limburger had just arrived at Frankfort with new in-
structions from England, and Amschel thereupon wrote
personally to Barbier:


Most honored sir, gracious vice-president!

We have the honor most dutifully to inform your
Excellency, in accordance with instructions, that the
Chevalier von Limburg has arrived here with the
purpose of negotiating with the three ministers or
comishairs (sic) of the high powers, regarding the
outstanding subsidy, we repeat our request for your
high commands, and are with great respect and de-
votion

Your Excellency’s most obedient servants
MEYER AMSCHEL ROTHSCHILD & SONS.
Frankfort, August 22, 1814.°°


The uneducated style of this letter, written by a mem-
ber of the second generation of the family, since it had
risen into prominence, contrasted strongly with other
communications from the firm, which were only signed
by one of the chiefs. Such communications indeed, in
contrast with the practice of most bankers of that time,
were always models of style and calligraphy, and there-


fore very easily read and understood—a fact which made —


a good impression on the government departments, who


y
y


.


ow


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 141


appreciated them as being above the usual standard.
When, however, a Rothschild unexpectedly took the pen
into his own hands, his style and spelling immediately
revealed the low standard of education obtaining in their
father’s house. This did not, however, prove to be the
slightest obstacle to the development of their commercial
gifts. It merely provoked understanding smiles from the


diplomats and highly placed persons with whom they had


to deal. ;

As Austria was not inclined to accept the Rothschild
offers, greater pressure had to be brought to bear by
England, and it was decided accordingly to send Lim-
burger to Vienna.*® The statement that Carl Rothschild
had made to Barbier, regarding his firm’s financial deal-
ings with Prussia and Russia, was in accordance with the
facts. Herries had gone to Paris to carry through the
subsidy negotiations with the representatives of the
powers personally, and to convert them to Nathan’s sys-
tem under which the subsidy payments would not be ef-
fected by drawing bills on London at considerable loss
to both parties, but through payments quietly carried


through by the brothers Rothschild on the Continent.


In Paris, James Rothschild, who was most familiar in
that city, had placed himself at the disposal of the com-
missary-general, and he was in turn introduced by Her-
ries to the representatives of the victorious powers who
were staying there. As a negotiator was required for the
discussions at Berlin, Solomon was instructed to travel
from Frankfort to the Prussian capital, and carry on the
detailed negotiations there. In this way the five brothers
played cleverly into each other’s hands, and just as their
father had contemplated, gave one another complement-
ary support in all undertakings.

France had undertaken, under a convention dated May


28, 1814, to pay the allied powers twenty-five million


_ francs as a lump sum, representing contributions that had
_ not been levied and stores that had been left behind. Aus-


s


142 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


tria’s share of this money was eight and two-thirds million
francs. France deposited as securities for this amount,
papers known as bons royaux, and the firm of Rothschild
immediately applied for the business of cashing these in
Paris at a commission of one-half per cent.

Rothschild again called on Barbier, and attempted to
secure this business for his firm, as far as Austria was
concerned, too. He was careful to mention that he had
already been entrusted with a similar transaction by Rus-
sia, and that 250,000 new Dutch Rand ducats which were
destined for Russia had already been deposited with his
firm.

He brought a written application in support of his sug-
gestion, and submitted to Barbier letters from the most.
important business firms in Paris,*? from which it ap-
peared that monetary conditions were so easy that the
bonds could be negotiated at a very desirable rate at that
time.

“Tf you should be graciously pleased,” the letter ran,
“to take advantage of these favorable circumstances, and
to entrust us with the discounting of the bons royaux
belonging to the royal and imperial government, you
shall have no cause to complain of the industry and care
with which our brother who is living in Paris will carry
through this business. We would always duly pay over
to your Excellency exactly what we received for the se-
curities, subject to the customary commission of one-half
per cent, with which we should be fully satisfied.”

Without replying to the brothers Rothschild, Barbier
submitted this letter, with some relevant observations of -
his own, to Ugarte, adding that certain other firms, in-
cluding Bethmann, had also applied for the business.**

The Rothschilds were endeavoring at the same time to
secure a third piece of business which was just then of-
fered. An agreement had been arrived at between the
Prussian finance minister and the Austrian Governor-
General of Belgium, under which a sum of 9,500,000_


The Great Napoleonic Crists 143


francs was to be paid by the Belgian Treasury to the three
eastern powers in equal proportions, on account of the
expenses of occupation. Knowing of this arrangement,
one of the brothers dropped the remark casually, in the
presence of Barbier, that the firm of Rothschild had re-
cently sent eighty thousand gold napoleons to Brussels,
and would shortly have to transmit to that city further
large sums of money on England’s account.*”

Barbier recollected the fact that Austria was to receive
this payment in Belgium, and in view of what he had
just heard, he thought it would be well for the firm of
Rothschild to deal with this matter and asked whether
they would undertake the business. Rothschild imme-
diately pledged himself to pay out any amount which he
received in Brussels in francs, in thalers or good bills of
exchange at Frankfort, after deducting one-half per cent
commission.

Barbier was entirely dependent on Vienna in such mat-
ters; he had first to report to Count Ugarte, and wait for
his decision. At that time, quite an interval had to elapse
before a reply could be received to a letter, and govern-
ment departments were also exceedingly slow in dealing
with correspondence. The brothers Rothschild sub-
mitted a detailed plan to Barbier, regarding the remit-
tance of the money from Brussels on July 29, concluding
with the words: ** “We shall request your Excellency
one-half per cent commission for our expenses and
trouble, beyond which you will not have to bear any fur-
_ ther expense whatever. If, on the arrival of the money
here, we can secure more favorable terms for your Ex-
_ cellency, we shall certainly not fail to furnish you with
_ such proofs of our disinterestedness.”’

_ The use of the word “disinterested” is not entirely to be
_ sneered at. Often, especially when as in this instance they
desired to gain a new customer, the firm of Rothschild
_ was wont to emphasize that it was particularly concerned
with the interests of the other party to the transaction,


144 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


and business was often undertaken at a quite modest
profit, sometimes even at a loss, with a view to securing
much more important business at a future date, whereby
any such loss would be made good. It was exactly the
same principle that old Rothschild had applied in his
dealings with the Elector of Hesse, when at the beginning
of their connection he sold him coins and antiques far
under their real value. This principle had paid, for by
1814 the Rothschilds were doing business that ran into
millions.

Barbier faithfully transmitted to Vienna all the offers
that were made to him, and received Ugarte’s reply a
month later.“ This was not favorable to the foreign
Jews, and showed a preference for relying on native
bankers. He could not, however, entirely ignore Bar-
bier’s suggestion regarding the transfer of the money
from Brussels. He therefore wrote to say that he con-
sidered Rothschild’s offer to be generally acceptable, but
limited the amount which they were to handle to about
one-half of the total; and in order to avoid all risk he
instructed Barbier to arrange with the firm of Rothschild
that the receipt for payment at the treasury in Brussels
should not be handed to them until the sum had been paid
in cash or in good Augsburg bills, or appropriate secur-
ity had been furnished.

Barbier hastened to arrange an interview with the firm
of Rothschild, and with the firm of Gontard, who were
collaborating with them, but he could not persuade them
to agree to carry through the business on such terms. In
spite of their desire to enter into relations with Austria,
they wanted at least to have the advantage of being able


to dispose of such a large sum for a short space of time, —


during which they could have employed it very profitably |
within the scope of their numerous activities. They were .


also somewhat offended at such a demonstration of lack of
faith.


4
L
{


“The heads of these firms observed to me on this point,” —


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 145


wrote Barbier to Ugarte, “that these conditions were not
at all customary in such transactions, and might indeed
be prejudicial to their credit; that certainly no other
firm would accept such conditions, and that in a business
in which they were charging only an exceedingly modest
commission, they could not make advances in cash...
especially at a time when they had so many other oppor-
tunities of employing their funds much more profitably.
Rothschild further remarked that much greater sums
were entrusted to him by the English government, and
that other governments also did not fail to accord him
similar confidence, while several millions of gulden that
belonged to the Elector of Hesse-Cassel and were invested
in government loans in London, Vienna, etc. were simply
inscribed in his name.”

Barbier admitted the general justice of the Rothschilds’
contention, but said he could not take bills that had not
been accepted or indorsed by a substantial firm as in
that case he would have no security except the property
of the drawer, “although,” as he wrote, “the firm of
Rothschild, as well as that of Gontard, are known to have

_very solid resources, and, together with several other firms
in the ‘second class’ as regards their resources . . . enjoy
a very good reputation and a no less extensive credit.”

Bethmann, with whom Barbier next negotiated, stated
that he would be doing the business at a loss, and that he
must ask for a higher commission. On Barbier pointing
out that Rothschild had only asked for one-half per cent,
and that Bethmann must therefore realize that it would
be difficult to get a higher commission approved, Beth-
mann replied that Rothschild could carry through the

__ business much more easily than he could, because he had
_ to make considerable payments to the English troops in
_ the Netherlands, on account of the English government.

_ Limburger also, to whom Barbier applied, refused to
‘handle the business, since his authority extended only to
‘the payment to the three allied courts of the English sub-


146 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


sidy still outstanding. At the same time he remarked
that in accordance with the instructions which he had re-
ceived, he was leaving the subsidy business to the direc-
tion and personal supervision of the firm of Rothschild,
since these transactions required the cooperation of an
active banker with very good connections; and that that
firm had actually to make considerable payments for the
English troops and would therefore be able more easily
than any other to deal with the remittances in question.

In spite of this new offensive in favor of the House of
Rothschild, the business was entrusted to Bethmann, on
the ground that the property of that house was “well
known to be so great as to require no other security than
a duly binding contract or a debenture.” ‘Phis was a
triumph of Bethmann over Rothschild, and it was due
to the fact that the importance and financial greatness
of the firm of Rothschild, which at that time was still of
very recent date, was not appreciated at Vienna, and even
Barbier had more faith in the old Christian firm of Beth-
mann than in the upstart Jewish firm,

Nathan was annoyed at this failure, but was all the
more obstinately determined to gain his object. How-
ever, before this could happen, Ugarte would have to
make way for a new man at Vienna, Count Stadion, and
Barbier would have to be won over, which was not ac-
complished until 1815, in Paris. For the moment, the
assiduous attempts of the firm of Rothschild to obtain
big business with Austria had failed, and it had to con- ~
tent itself with the modest duties of handling the Austrian —
war-commissariat account at Frankfort, which indeed
served to maintain its connection with the financial de-
partments of the Austrian government.

From the foregoing description of the nature of the :
business transactions of the Rothschild family, it is evi- —
dent that they were mainly concerned with overcoming
the tremendous difficulties to which international mone-
tary dealings were subject, owing to the political condi-


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 147


tions of those days and the backward state of communica-
tions.

Baron von Hiigel’s elaborate report ** as to the way in
which a sum of 8,353 gulden and 74 kreutzers could most
safely and cheaply be sent from Frankfort to Vienna,
makes strange reading today. At first he wanted to en-
trust the amount to a non-commissioned officer who was
leaving for the imperial city with a consignment of of-
ficial documents; but on reflection he thought it was too
dangerous to entrust such a large sum to a soldier, as one
could never tell what chance accidents might befall him
on the way, and endanger the property confided to him.

After such pondering Higel finally had recourse to the
Rothschilds, and asked them whether they could not issue
a bill on Vienna for the amount. The firm replied that
they were prepared to issue such a document, and to make
it a bill payable at sight, but that they would have to
charge a commission of one per cent, a sum of 83.30
guiden, which sum was certainly less than the cost of
sending the remittance by post-chaise. Such special cir-
cumstances yielded opportunities of profit which the
Rothschild family most skilfully exploited by establish-


ing a kind of clearing-house between the three brothers


in London, Paris, and Frankfort; and this system was
soon extended to Vienna.

Nathan was the father of this idea. Although the third
son, he was more and more tending to become the direct-
ing brain of the firm. His association with Herries, who


relied upon him to an increasing extent, although con-


cealed from the public became increasingly intimate and
more profitable both politically and financially. The
services rendered by Nathan, not only covered an ex-


_tensive field, but were also most varied in their nature.
After the fall of Napoleon, to which Nathan’s financial
_ measures in support of the Allies and of Wellington had


7


contributed not a little, his business expanded in a quite


— manner. ‘Thereupon he immediately


148 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


availed himself of every opportunity of rendering services
to the Bourbons, who had returned to France with the
support of the Allies, thus smoothing the path for his
brother James in Paris.

The exiled Bourbon heir, who was later King Louis
XVIII, had been living at Hartwell in Buckinghamshire
since 1807, When the Allies invaded France in 1814,
he appealed to his divine right to the throne, and decided
to go to Paris immediately after the fall of Napoleon.
However, he lacked the money necessary to undertake
the journey and make his appearance in France with the
magnificence proper to a king. The king applied to the
English Treasury, requesting it to advance the neces-
sary capital. As French currency and bills on Paris were
required, the application was sent to Herries to deal with,
and he called in Nathan.

Nathan was delighted to have such an early oppor-
tunity of proving himself useful to Louis XVIII, and
with the assistance of his brother James in Paris he ac-
quired bills payable in that city, to the value of 200,000
English pounds.*® He placed them speedily at the dis-
posal of the new king, and thus made it possible for him
to land at Calais on April 26, 1814, and to enter Paris
on May 3.

Although to Herries’s considerable satisfaction, Na-
than carefully preserved the close veil of secrecy covering
his activities, and let Herries get most of the credit, whilst
he contented himself with the commercial profit and the
fact that the transactions served to introduce him to other
governments, on this occasion Nathan was careful to see
that the newly established monarch learned of his share
in the transaction. For this seemed to him to be of great
importance for the future position of the firm of Roths-
child in France.

The development of this branch business was to be en-
trusted to James, who had already made himself at home
in Paris, and who was widely traveled, although he was

.


a


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 149


only twenty-two years old at the time. His appearance,
it is true, was not exactly prepossessing. He looked very
Jewish; he had red hair and deep-set eyes, and a good
complexion, but he had a wide mouth, a prominent
hooked nose, and pursed-up lips. During his earlier
years in Paris, he showed an almost servile politeness to
everyone. He had obviously acquired the habit at Frank-
fort, where the status of the Jews was very low, but as he
grew more successful and his position improved he grad-
ually lost it. Moreover, James was an exceedingly acute,
honorable, and clever banker, whose talents can be rated
only a little below those of his brother Nathan. Above
all, he had a fair share of the other’s abundant energy.

In the life of feverish activity which developed in Paris
after the conquest of that city, when officers, diplomats,
bankers, and business men flocked to it from all sides,
James was absolutely in his element. He was seen every-
where, in government offices as well as on the Bourse
and in diplomatic circles,*7 and made great efforts to
establish himself in society. He actively supported Her-
ries and his brother Nathan in their efforts to cash the
‘English subsidies without depressing the rate of exchange,
and Nathan was able to show in a report to the English
Treasury that hundreds of thousands were saved by the
new method.**

Under the Paris Treaty of May 10, 1814, the French
government had undertaken to meet certain obligations
‘incurred by responsible officials, either in France itself
or in the conquered territories. ‘To collect these amounts
‘the creditors found it necessary to employ middlemen.
James was appointed as the agent of numerous banks and
organizations that had claims of this nature, and he was
also engaged i in the interests of the Elector of Hesse and
other minor German princes.

- His personal mode of life was exceedingly modest. He
lived above a small courtyard, although his business deal-
ngs had not only won him the respect of commercial


150 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


circles but had also brought him substantial profit. He
had already decided ultimately to settle in Paris, just as
Nathan had taken up permanent residence in England.
He was, however, not in such a hurry as his brother to get
naturalized, partly because he wanted to watch the course
of developments in France after the stormy time of the
revolution and the Napoleonic period; and since France
could not at that time place any obstacles in the way of a
subject of the victorious powers, he wanted to register his
own firm in Paris. If occasion should arise the powers
were always ready to exert diplomatic pressure in favor
of their subjects. James did in fact register his business
without getting naturalized, his name appearing in the
Paris trade almanac for 1814 as resident in the rue de
Pelletier:

Whilst the House of Rothschild was getting well estab-
lished in Western Europe through the activities of the
two brothers, in its native town it had to fight for recogni-
tion, owing to the aversion of the citizens to the Jews.
The growing wealth of the Rothschild family at the ex-
pense of Christian firms was viewed with displeasure
at Frankfort. Buderus had completely succeeded in
eliminating their rivals. The firm of Van Notten at Am-
sterdam had put up a fight longest, but that firm, also,
failed to survive Buderus’s systematic propaganda with
the elector.

In a letter dated May 13, 1814, Buderus had written
to the electoral plenipotentiary Lorentz, at London, ex-
pressing his dislike of that firm in the following words: *°
“The worthy bankers Van Notten must be small-minded
people. On one occasion, when I was very hard-pressed
because I was waiting for assistance from England, I
drew £35,000 on them. They showed the most extraor-
dinary anxiety about the repayment of this sum. I hope
they are now easy in their minds. The Rothschild
bankers at Frankfort, on the other hand, have advanced


over half a million, and have rendered services of ia


The Great Napoleonic Crisis ISI


kind in a cheerful spirit.” Buderus did not fail to ex-
press similar views to the elector, so that the rivals of the
brothers Rothschild had the ground completely cut from
under their feet as far as the Hessian prince was con-
cerned.

The Frankfort Jews had nothing to fear from Austria
and Prussia. When Grand Duke Dalberg left Frank-
fort, the firm of Rothschild was a creditor of his for con-
siderable sums, including the following items: 22,900
gulden for supplying flour to France; 71,181 gulden ad-
vanced in connection with the transactions affecting the
Fulda property; and 50,000 gulden advanced to Dalberg
on account of the Jewish tax commutation payment,
which was not yet due.*® Baron von Hiigel, who after
the occupation of Frankfort took part in its civil admin-
istration, charged all these claims to the city budget, on
Amschel’s application, to the great indignation of the
senate. The city finances were in a state of confusion, but
the claims of the House of Rothschild seem to have been
satisfied.

The inhabitants of Frankfort particularly grudged the
Jews the equal political rights, which they had obtained,
‘it was held, by methods of indirect bribery. The threat-
ened attitude of their native town caused the brothers
Rothschild to be seriously concerned about the future of
the parent company on which their power was founded.

They decided to make every effort to prevent the Jews of
Frankfort from losing any of those rights which they had
bought during Dalberg’s régime.

_ The new constitution of Frankfort, and therefore the
‘decision regarding the future status of the Jews, was one
‘of the questions to be settled by the Vienna Congress,
‘which was to meet on October 1, 1814. The choice of
Vienna was not very acceptable to the Rothschilds, for
Austria was the state which had hitherto so obstinately
refused to enter into close business relations with them,
and her statesmen, such as Ugarte, still did not really trust


i.


152 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the upstart Jewish firm at Frankfort. Moreover, the
Rothschilds well knew the strict police control to which
foreign Jews were subjected at Vienna, and how greatly
all Jews were restricted in their freedom to do business
in Austria. As they were determined, however, to secure
the desired business connections with the Austrian state,
they were not tempted to make the realization of their
plan more difficult through possible conflicts with the
police authorities at Vienna.

Such considerations caused the House of Rothschild
to refrain from sending a member of the family there.
The Frankfort Israelites sent old Bornes, Jacob Baruch,
and J. J. Gumprecht, as their representatives. They were
closely watched by the Viennese police; indeed their ex-
pulsion was ordered and sanctioned by the emperor him-
self; but Metternich intervened, and prevented this from
being carried out. Metternich’s intervention was prob-
ably due to the fact that he had known Baruch when he
was ambassador at Frankfort. There is no proof that
Rothschild had any particular influence with the minis-
ter at that time.

The Jewish representatives at Vienna adopted the
method of giving presents; thus they offered Humboldt
three magnificent emerald rings, or four thousand ducats
—presents which he refused, whereas Gentz gladly al-
lowed himself to be bribed. The brothers Rothschild
had of course contributed to these funds; but they still
kept quite in the background.

The general discussions of the proud assemblage of
princes and diplomats at Vienna took their course, and
sometimes went through critical phases. At one time,
indeed, it seemed as though two main groups of powers
would form, the differences between which threatened
war. This seemed to Napoleon, who was fully informed
at Elba of all developments, to be a suitable moment for
putting into execution his plans of returning and regain-
ing the throne.


The Great Napoleonic Crists 153


On March 1, he landed on French soil with a handful
of faithful adherents. Three weeks later the magic of his
name had reinstated him in the palace of the Tuileries
in Paris. Louis XVIII and his court had fled from the
capital. Napoleon hoped, not only that the Congress of
Vienna would collapse, but that some of the powers rep-
resented there would adopt his cause. Actually nothing
of the kind occurred. While negotiations at Vienna had
hitherto hung fire, it was now clear to everybody that
delay was dangerous and that quick action was essential.
The powers unanimously turned against the disturber of
the peace, and determined on concerted action.

The other matters were settled hastily; and half-meas-
ures were sanctioned, such as the constitution of the Ger-
man Confederation. This formed thirty-nine communities
into a confederation of states, each one of which was
to remain independent, while having a common govern-
ing body, with Austria presiding over the Federal Diet,
whose seat was to be Frankfort-on-the-Main. It was in
Metternich’s interest to keep Germany disunited. Con-
troversial matters such as the Jewish problem were to be

/discussed later by the Federal Diet, while in the mean-

time existing arrangements were to remain unaltered in
the individual states.

Metternich informed the plenipotentiaries of the Is-
raelite communities in Germany of this decision,’ assur-
ing them that the Federal Diet would respect the welfare
of the Israelites and that he himself would urge that full
rights of citizenship be conferred on the Jews. This was
good news, and the.delegates hastened to send a copy of
Metternich’s statement to the House of Rothschild,
anxiously waiting tidings at Frankfort.

_ However, the time had not yet come to raise this ques-
tion. It was far more important to overthrow N apoleon,
who was again collecting his military resources in

France. On March 25, 1815, the four principal powers

had renewed their alliance. Each of them undertook to


fi


154 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


provide one hundred and fifty thousand men, except Eng-
land, which undertook to send subsidies instead of the full
amount of troops.

Napoleon was to be finally destroyed by a joint effort.
It was therefore again necessary to arrange to transfer
the subsidy payments from England to the various con-
tinental powers, and substantial sums would have to be
paid to Prussia and Austria. Prussia particularly was
again in great financial embarrassment, and unless this
were immediately relieved, her future military action
would suffer. Herries and Nathan now redoubled their
feverish activities. "Toward the end of April, Nathan
sent in one instalment the sum of £200,000 to the Prussian
government. It was conveyed by Solomon, who traveled
to Berlin for this purpose. When this amount proved
inadequate, Solomon without previously consulting Na-
than, granted a further advance of £150,000 on the secur-
ity of the English subsidy, at a rate which was certainly
very profitable to himself.

Herries retrospectively sanctioned this operation. Not
only did he make no objection, but he also allowed Eng-
land to assume the considerable loss on exchange which
Solomon’s high rate of profit had meant for the Prussian
government.”? His profit was not Solomon’s only gain
on this transaction; in return for his ready willingness
to advance such a heavy sum on his own responsibility,
the Prussian government conferred on him the title of
commercial adviser, a distinction that raised him above
the majority of his rivals.

Meanwhile in Austria a change had taken place in the
direction of the government’s finances. Count Ugarte
had retired, his place being taken by Count Stadion, the
gifted and eminent statesman who was such a bitter op-
ponent of Napoleon. Having hitherto been engaged ex-
clusively in diplomatic matters, he had not as yet made
himself familiar with finance. He therefore entered
upon his new office with some misgivings. Grillparzer,


‘
a


The Great Napoleonic Crisis Has


who thought so highly of Stadion that he described him

as having more character ** than any other person he had

ever met, noted in his diary ** that Stadion had himself ad-
mitted to possessing very little knowledge of finance.*®
In spite of his greatness in other directions, a finance

minister such as this would naturally seem an easy mark
for clever bankers and financiers who were out to get

business. In view of the change of atmosphere at Vienna
and the added prospect of new English subsidies, the

brothers Rothschild immediately made themselves felt
again, both indirectly through Herries and Limburger,

and by direct applications to the Austrian government.

However, Stadion as yet knew little about them, and

as Nathan’s heavy transactions were still purposely kept

in the background, he had no information about these

either, so that his whole knowledge regarding the origin

and business of the House of Rothschild was exceedingly

vague. He suddenly noticed that Meyer Amschel and

Sons described themselves as “I. and R. Crown Agents”

‘in a letter, and signed themselves as such. Stadion in-
quired at the Foreign Office about this from Metternich
—who had been advanced to the rank of prince after the
battle of Leipzig—stating that he could not understand

their signing in this way, since the treasury had no knowl-

edge as to when and in what connection the Rothschilds

had acquired this title from the Austrian court. In view
of the inferences that might be drawn from its use, he felt
it his duty to ask Metternich for further information on

the matter.”®

_ The following reply to this note was received: “With
reference to your inquiry . . . regarding the title of im-
perial-royal crown agents assumed by the Frankfort busi-
ness firm of Rothschild, the secretary of state has the
honor to inform you that there is no record in his depart-
ment of that title having been granted to the said firm,
ind that he has no information whatever on the matter.” °*
The fact was that the Rothschilds had not signed as


156 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


imperial-royal, as Stadion thought, but as imperial crown
agents, as they were entitled to do in accordance with
the decree of January 29, 1800, issued by Emperor Fran-
cis in his then capacity of Roman-German Emperor.*®
In any case the incident showed the extent to which the
Rothschild family were distrusted in Austria.

In Frankfort, also, they met with every kind of oppo-
sition. In order to hinder them in the development of
their constantly increasing business, an attempt was made
to force the two brothers who were living at Frankfort
into the army, in view of the special efforts being made
to raise men to resist the return of Napoleon. They
turned anxiously to Nathan for help, and he determined
to use this opportunity of intervention for addressing a
homily to Austria, as he realized that very definite pres-—
sure would have to be brought to bear from England, if
Austria were at last to be roped in as a customer. The
House of Rothschild had already established a virtual
monopoly in carrying out the subsidy arrangements of
the Island Kingdom. :

Nathan went to Herries and acquainted him with the
situation; and Herries induced the Foreign Office to
make representations to Herr von Neumann, Austrian
counselor of embassy in London, in accordance with
which Neumann commended the House of Rothschild
to Baron von Hiigel, the Austrian plenipotentiary at
Frankfort. His letter ran as follows: °° |


Sir:

The English Government has requested me most
particularly to commend to your Excellency’s con-
sideration the House of Rothschild at Frankfort, —
which carries out the transfer of our subsidies. This
firm is represented by several brothers, one of whom
is established here, and is employed by the British
government in connection with all their principal
financial operations on the Continent. By reason of
the confidence which he enioys, and the extensive


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 157


nature of his operations, both he and his brothers
have incurred the envy of the Frankfort bankers to
such an extent that an attempt has been made to
torment [ftourmenter| them by forcing them to do
military service. As the English government ap-
pears to be most anxious that this firm should not be
annoyed in any way, and as this appears to be a
matter that directly concerns our service, I felt that
I ought not to fail to transmit this request. I there-
fore ask your Excellency to grant that firm every
help and protection that lies in your power.


Baron von Hiigel immediately forwarded this letter to
Vienna, where it was submitted to Metternich and Sta-
dion, and it did not fail of its effect. No further opposi-
tion was offered to the Rothschild brothers’ undertaking
the transfer of the subsidies; and in general the interstate
financial transactions were all carried through more eas-
ily, since Stadion allowed his officials abroad much
greater scope than had Ugarte. The new finance minis-
ter was inclined to leave more to their personal initiative
and judgment, as he realized that they being on the spot
_ were in a better position to know what conditions were,

and as the cumbrous methods of communication made it

impracticable to correspond on matters requiring an im-

mediate decision.

At this time Herries himself visited Frankfort, where

his commissioner, Limburger, was negotiating with the

treasury commissioner Schwinner in regard to the

amounts to be paid to Austria, which Stadion would have

_ liked to receive in coin or bullion. Herries emphatically

_ demanded that in this matter the House of Rothschild
should be granted as free a hand as possible.

_ Napoleon’s return had suddenly upset their plans and

made new measures necessary, and the commissary-

general and Nathan were kept exceedingly busy. In the

campaign against the bold adventurer the most impor-

tant thing was to raise cash and especially French cur-


158 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


rency. As they could not obtain French coins anywhere,
Herries on Nathan’s advice had gold louis minted, in
order to supply the armies.

In the middle of June, Napoleon resumed the cam-
paign. France was supporting him only half-heartedly,
for after all these wars everyone was longing for peace,
and was willing even to put up with foreign invasion.
Now, however, the French were faced again with a de-
mand for new sacrifices and blood and treasure, and with
a struggle against superior forces. For a short time the
fortune of war seemed again to smile upon Napoleon,
but as early as June 18, 1815, the Emperor of France met
his fate at Waterloo. He was completely and decisively
beaten—abdication, captivity, and banishment to St.
Helena were the result.

On the resumption of hostilities in France, Herries and
Nathan had returned to London, and were anxiously
awaiting news of the result of the conflict. Nathan and
his brothers had always made a particular point of let-
ting one another have news as speedily as possible, either
directly or through their business friends, of any impor-
tant event that might influence their business, or be a
determining factor in new undertakings. Nathan had
promised prizes for the most speedy supply of news to
boats sailing between England and the Continent. He
also instructed his agents throughout the world to give
him the earliest possible report regarding the outcome
of the expected conflict. Such measures were of partic-
ular importance at that time, because none of the modern
methods of conveying news had been invented—the stage
post, that is a series of messengers, being the usual way
of obtaining it quickly.

Nathan’s arrangements worked perfectly for the battle
of Waterloo. One of his agents, whose name was Roth-
worth, waited at Ostend for news of the result. He suc-
ceeded in obtaining the first newspaper account of the
successful issue of the battle, and with a copy of the


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 159


Dutch Gazette fresh from the printers, he caught a boat
just sailing for London. He entered the British capital
very early in the morning of June 20, and immediately
reported to Nathan, who conveyed the news of victory to
Herries, and through him to the British government.

The government were at first skeptical, as they had not
received any direct information, and Wellington’s en-
voy Major Henry Percy did not arrive with the field-
-marshal’s report until the 21st of June.®° The members
of the British government were tremendously impressed
by Nathan’s advance knowledge of such an important
event; and when this became generally known, the pub-
lic, who were just beginning to learn of the extent to
which Nathan was employed by the English Treasury,
began to invent all manner of legends regarding the
method by which Nathan had acquired this knowledge
and the manner in which he had exploited it.

Some said that he had a private service of carrier-
pigeons; others that he had been personally present at the
battle of Waterloo and had ridden to the coast at top

_ speed. In order to make the story more romantic, he was
said to have found heavy storms raging when he reached
the Channel and to have crossed at the risk of his life.
Nathan was also alleged to have exploited the news on
the stock exchange, thus at one stroke creating the enor-
_ mous fortunes of the Rothschilds.
_ Nathan naturally applied the early information that
_he had obtained to his own profit in his business deal-
_ ings; but the substantial part of the fortune of the Roths-
childs had been amassed through the profits realized in
the financial transactions which have already been de-
scribed; the successful issue of the battle of Waterloo
merely served to increase it, and to open up wider fields
for profitable business in the future. This was all the
more so as England had been victorious and Nathan had
ansferred the center of gravity of the Rothschild busi-
ess to her side.


160 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


In spite of the fortunate issue of the campaign, which
had lasted barely six days, England continued to pay the
subsidies to the continental powers. ‘The House of
Rothschild was, for instance, instructed by the English
Treasury—that is, by Herries and Nathan—to pay
Austria £277,777 on demand, for the months of August
and September, this amount not to be subject to any dis-
count, so that Austria should receive it in fully The
commission due to the brothers Rothschild was paid by
England herself. The payments were continued up to
and including December.

Stadion had expressed the wish that as much cozn as pos-
sible be sent. This made the transfer more difficult and
produced a fall in the exchange; it was due to the con-
tinuing distrust, which even Schwinner, Austria’s repre-
sentative at Frankfort, was not able to dissipate. The
English alone emphatically countered this attitude, and
the resulting correspondence clearly shows how highly
the wealth and position of the young firm of Rothschild


were already rated in England, or at any rate in the au- ©


thoritative circles of Commissary-General Herries, as
compared to their standing in Austria.

“The ... exchange value [of the pound],”’ wrote
Schwinner to the Austrian embassy in London in Novem-
ber, 1815, “was constantly rising during the early part
of November; after the'gth it weakened because Roths-


child, having reason to believe that Austria would insist —
on receiving her considerable payments in cash, refrained |


from purchasing bills offered by foreigners. This cir-
cumstance would appear to justify the view of the Eng-


lish commissioner Baron von Limburger, in which Com- ~


missary-General Herr von Herries, who was here a


few months ago, concurred, that the more the House —


of Rothschild were granted a free hand. . . the more


certainly would the exchange value of English bills be


maintained.


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 161


“Tn this connection the firm of Rothschild have offered
bills with respect to the November and December instal-
ments ... similar to those that have already been ac-
cepted and fully cashed in previous payments to the
extent of several millions. Nevertheless, in spite of the
fact that the generally recognized standing of the firm
of Rothschild should be sufficient guarantee for these in-
struments, I felt that I must adhere to those rules which
must always be strictly observed, lest unexpected difficul-

ties should be met in cashing bills of exchange. I con-
sidered that this condition was met when Baron von
Limburger gave a written undertaking on behalf of the
English government that that government would in any
case indemnify the imperial and royal treasury if any loss
whatever were suffered in realizing the bills accepted by
Rothschild.” °°

Schwinner had on a previous occasion expressed his
misgivings to Limburger regarding his responsibility for
any loss “resulting from the lack of solidity of the firm

_of Rothschild.” Limburger had on that occasion replied
to him in the following terms:

“T have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
valued communication of even date. I cannot possibly

_ give the slightest credence to the rumors which you have
communicated to me, and which I regard as malicious
slanders deserving of severe punishment. In order, how-
ever, completely to set your mind at rest I have to repeat
to you on behalf of my government the verbal statement

made to you by the commissary-in-chief, Mr. Herries,
that even if the accepted bills are not met, the Imperial
and Royal Austrian government shall in no wise suffer
loss, but that they will be indemnified if there should
unexpectedly be any loss in cashing the said bills. I have
to point out first that in the case of the considerable
amounts which you have already received in such bills, no
such occasion has occurred and secondly, that the House


~ ad


162 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


of Rothschild is itself too rich and too powerful not im-
mediately to make good any such loss without requiring
the intervention of my government.” °°

Schwinner transmitted the whole of this correspon-
dence to Vienna, where it was brought to the attention
of Metternich and Stadion. As they were both hearing
such completely satisfactory accounts of the firm of Roths-
child from all quarters, and more particularly were
learning of the enormous credit which that firm enjoyed,
confidence was completely established at Vienna. From
now onwards the firm of Rothschild was most extensively
employed by Austria, even in business which had noth-
ing whatever to do with the English subsidy.

Thus Nathan had succeeded, while remaining behind
the scenes himself, in establishing his brothers on the
Continent in the confidence of the Austrian Treasury.
This was to be the starting-point of an even more inti-
mate association with governing circles in the imperial
state, which was to develop within the next few years.

While the position of the Rothschild family abroad
became more and more important and their wealth at-
tained prodigious dimensions by reason of the great in-
terstate financial transactions which were entrusted to
them, they had to fight in their native town of Frankfort
to secure the equal political rights of the Jews which had
been granted during the period of French dominion. In
spite of the decisions of the Congress of Vienna and in
spite of Metternich and Hardenberg, this equality was
threatened by a hostile senate. Now, however, embold-
ened by the position which they had won with the great


powers, the brothers Rothschild felt in a position to make ~


more definite efforts on behalf of their fellows.


The newly created Federal Diet which met at Frank- :
fort had an important voice in this matter, and the Roths- —


childs determined to gain the responsible representatives
of the powers for their cause. From the first, they had


a true friend in the representative of the Elector of


tJ


i
5
q


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 163


Hesse, who had already reestablished everything in his
own territory, including the soldiers’ pigtails, just as it
was before, and who was again at loggerheads with his
estates regarding financial matters and the question of
the separation of the state treasury from the prince’s privy
purse.

On October 17, 1816, he had nominated, as his envoy
to the German Federal Diet, the administrator of his
financial affairs, the old supporter of the Rothschild fam-
ily, Buderus von Carlshausen—who in the meantime had
advanced to the dignity of privy councilor and president
of the Chamber. Von Carlshausen had recently been in
Paris, on business in connection with his master’s claims
for compensation, and had specially commended the elec-
tor’s interests to James. He was now to serve as a kind
of liaison officer between the elector and the House of
Rothschild, as indeed he had always been. Only posi-
tions were now somewhat changed; hitherto it had been
the Rothschilds who had asked favors; now it was the
elector and Buderus who tried to maintain a close con-
nection. The brothers Rothschild certainly did not for-

_get what they owed them, and endeavored as far as pos-
sible to meet all their wishes. But the elector’s business
had fallen very much into the background since the fam-
ily had got accustomed to transacting business running
into millions with the states of Europe.

In any case, the first important relationship of the
Rothschild family had worked out to the benefit of all
concerned. ‘The elector had had his scattered resources

_ most ably shepherded during the confusions of the Na-

_ poleonic war; Buderus had been made an exceedingly

wealthy man; and the extensive operations of the Roths-
childs themselves had been made possible through the
moneys originally entrusted to them by the elector. They
naturally urged Carlshausen to make strong representa-
-tions in favor of Jewish interests at the Federal Diet.
Solomon and Carl Rothschild next turned to the Prus-


re. s


164 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


sian chancellor Prince Hardenberg and transmitted to
him a copy of the letter that Metternich had sent to the
Jewish representatives at the Vienna Congress, adding
the following covering letter: *


In humble confidence we beg to submit to your
Highness the enclosed document which is of such
fateful import for the destinies of the Israelite com-
munity.

After all that your Highness has done for our
community in recent years we cannot but hope that
your Highness will not withdraw your powerful
support at this decisive moment. That, and that
alone, can secure a tolerable existence to the Frank-
fort Jews. Everything depends upon the Commis-
sion nominated by the Federal Diet proceeding ac-
cording to just and reasonable principles in dealing
with this matter; and any influence exerted by your
Highness in that direction cannot but have the most
satisfactory result. _We therefore beg to submit our
most humble and relevent request that you will most
graciously convey to the royal Prussian Ambassador
at Frankfort, as speedily as possible, those general
instructions which are indicated in the enclosed
letter. This is the only means of salvation left to us.


This letter was necessary because there were definite
signs that the senate was not likely to pay much atten-
tion to the decisions of the Congress of Vienna. This
fact had financial consequences; for some of the deben-
tures issued by the Jewish community in connection with
their liberation had not yet been met. The Jews did
not wish to pay the money until it was certain that the
rights which they were thus purchasing would’be secured
to them. The firm Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons
wrote in similar terms to Hardenberg and Metternich,
saying that they had been informed that all the duly ac- —
quired rights of each class of the inhabitants at Frank-


a |


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 165


fort would be maintained, and that there was therefore
no further obstacle to the debentures being redeemed.

“As none of the principal magistrates at Frankfort,”
the letter continued, “have as yet taken any action in this
matter, and the holders of these debentures are pressing
more and more for their payment, we humbly request you
to take the necessary steps, so that these obligations may
be paid without further delay.

“We venture to hope that our most humble request
will be graciously granted, since the necessary money has
long been available, and it will be paid as soon as the
necessary action in this matter has been taken.” ©

Before this money was paid, the Rothschilds wanted to
receive an assurance from the city of Frankfort that it
would not attempt to dispute the agreement with Dal-
berg of December 28, 1811, regarding the equal rights
of the Jews. Both the persons appealed to agreed; and
Hardenberg wrote to Metternich that he considered the
request to be right and just, that the city of Frankfort
could not legally raise any objection, and that it would

_ be advisable for the two courts jointly and emphatically:
to enjoin Frankfort to recognize the agreement as bind-
- ing and to fulfil it.°°
Count Buol-Schauenstein, Austria’s plenipotentiary,/
and therefore president of the Federal Diet, was, in con-
trast to his superior Metternich, no friend of the Jews,
and had reported his views to Metternich at Vienna. He
_ held that Grand Duke Dalberg had sold the rights of
citizenship to a crowd of Jewish families for a song.
_ “Yrade,” wrote the ambassador from Frankfort, “is
still the only means of livelihood which the Jews adopt.
This nation, which never amalgamates with any other,
_ but always hangs together to pursue its own ends, will
soon overshadow Christian firms; and with their terribly
rapid increase of population they will soon spread over
the whole city, so that a Jewish trading city will gradu-
ally arise beside our venerable cathedral.”


_—


166 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Buol’s attitude was bound eventually to result in a con~
flict of opinion with Metternich, but for the time being
no decision was made in the Jewish question, and the
question of the status at Frankfort remained in the
balance.

Paris offered opportunities of important new business,
and all the members of the Rothschild family were kept
fully occupied exploiting them as far as possible.

The victorious powers inflicted a heavy war indem-
nity on France, appointing four commissioners of the
principal powers to settle the precise terms and receive
the money. They met at Paris under the presidency of
the Austrian, Baron von Barbier. The amount of the
indemnity was fixed at seven hundred million francs, to
be paid within five years in fifteen instalments of 46,660,-
666 francs, commencing on December 1, 1815.

At once the difficulty arose of arranging for these pay-
ments to be transmitted to the powers. James, perceiving
the great possibilities of profit that the situation offered,
advised his brothers and urged them to do everything pos-
sible to get the order for remitting this French tribute.

The brothers had to meet heavy competition. Austria
still employed her four banking firms, which were repre-
sented in Paris; while Baring and other big firms in
England endeavored, in connection with the Paris bank-
ing firm of Ouvrard, to get the business. All the firms
were eager to exploit the opportunity to the utmost, and
all the financial and banking world was considering the
methods by which the great indemnity could be settled.

Barbier received a proposal from the Baring-Ouvrard
Company which was unacceptable because, as Barbier re- —
ported,®* “the bankers insist on enormous advantages be- —
ing assured to them, without guaranteeing our principal ;
objects, namely, complete security and advances before in-
stalments fall due.” Austria intended, among other
things, to divert large sums to Colmar for various pur-_
poses, mainly of a military nature. The four Viennese


ee ee a


ee


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 167


firms had very poor connections in Germany, and it was
not practicable to make use of them.

The question therefore was whether the Messageries
—the overland postal services—could be entrusted with
this task, or whether recourse should be had to bankers
as an intermediary. Barbier felt anxious about the first
method, the roads being exceedingly unsafe so soon after
the confusion of the war. This was indicated by the fact
that the postal company refused to accept liability for
“Tes vols a4 main armée,” after a mail-bag had been rifled
on another journey.

Barbier reported as follows to Stadion: * “I am in-
formed that the Frankfort bankers Rothschild and Gon-
tard have undertaken entirely at their own risk to trans-
fer certain sums of money required for the Wurttemberg
regiments that are remaining in France, and that they
have been granted a commission of one and a half per cent
for their services. This amounts to exactly double the
transport costs demanded by the Messageries. I have
also heard that they have demanded one and a quarter
per cent for sending money to the Russian regiments. I
suggested to them that they should remit our money at
their own risk for a commission of one per cent, to cover
all expenses; but they definitely stated that the expense
and the danger were too great for this commission to
cover them. I had therefore no alternative, after lengthy
negotiations with them, except either to grant the com-
mission they asked or to adopt the cheaper but somewhat
_ unsafe method of sending the money by the Messageries.”
_ The Messageries were certainly cheaper, but an acci-

dent to a single remittance might make this manner of

transport exceedingly expensive. Barbier therefore
_ closed with the firms of Rothschild and Gontard, and on
_ January 6, 1816, they dispatched the final letter regard-
ing the transfer of the first amount of 2,200,000 francs
“to Colmar.
“Allow us,” they wrote,” “to add the assurance that


168 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


we shall apply our united efforts to carrying out this to
your complete satisfaction. .. . We could not offer a
lower commission because we cannot yet accurately esti-
mate the expenses involved. We shall, however, make
it our duty to reduce this commission in the case of future
remittances if circumstances permit. We venture to trust
that your Excellency will be disposed to let us know
when future payments have to be made, in order that we
may be able to quote you the cheapest terms.”

Accepting responsibility for all risks of carriage, the
two firms undertook the transfer of these moneys from
Paris to Colmar for a commission of one and a quarter
per cent on the payments made. This was not so serious
for them as it might appear, since they did not really
transfer any money at all, but through their extensive
connections acquired the equivalent sum at the place of
payment itself. Thus without incurring any risk, they
were able to book the high commission as pure profit.

After this system had been in force for some time, the
general commanding at Colmar, Baron Frimont, who re-
garded the commission as excessive, intervened, and at-
tempted to get the money over by military couriers. How-
ever, after trying to do this for two months, he admitted
himself beaten, and himself requested ™* that-these remit-
tances and the issue of officers’ pay should again be car-
ried out by the firms of Rothschild and Gontard, “as has
already been found to be the most reliable method in con-
nection with military payments at Frankfort.”

They did not confine themselves to this business. Soon
payments running into millions” were carried through
by Rothschild and Gontard on account of the French in-


demnity to Vienna, the most important part of which was —


entrusted to Eskeles and Geymiiller. Nevertheless, the
Austrian government continued to give considerable or-
ders to the four Austrian firms; and in their competition
with them, Rothschild and Gontard had to make excep-


tional efforts to be allotted even a small proportion of the -


;


— Tee. )~hUrhL


Pee, a


a a


The Great Napoleonic Crists 169


French indemnity to Hamburg. Competition was ex-
ceedingly keen.
At last the brothers Rothschild succeeded in winning
- over Barbier, Austria’s financial representative in Paris,
whose attitude toward them had hitherto been neutral.
As time went on he became an ardent supporter of the
Rothschild family and of the Frankfort bankers who were
working in conjunction with them. This is revealed by
the correspondence which passed between him and Count
Stadion, who dealt with the matter in a thoroughly busi-
nesslike and impartial manner.

Stadion recognized the conscientious services rendered
by the Rothschilds in remitting the subsidies; and Na-
than saw that the minister was fully informed from Eng-
land of the part which they had played. With Napoleon
a captive at St. Helena, the period of subsidy payments
was completely at an end, so it was no longer necessary
to keep this business a strict secret. Nor did Nathan
consider it desirable to do so, since their credit and repu-
tation would gain if it were widely known that those
enormous sums had been handled by the House of Roths-
child.

We must bear in mind that during the period between
October, 1811, and October, 1816, no less than £42,500,-
ooo ** had passed through Herries’s hands. Almost half
of this had been forwarded to the various continental
recipients through the intermediary of Nathan and his
brothers. In Herries’s memoirs, published by his son,
are extracts from a memorandum “™ prepared for compe-
tent authorities, which speaks of Rothschild in the high-
est terms. Of course in praising Rothschild, Herries was
indirectly taking credit for himself, since he after all
_ was responsible, and would have had to bear the blame
_ for any mistakes.

Herries wrote that it was possibly solely due to the
banking firm of Mr. Rothschild and his brothers that he
had been enabled to carry through the exchange opera-


-


if
‘


170 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


tions so successfully. He said that the greatest grati-
tude was owing to these gentlemen, who had devoted
themselves entirely to the public service, and that the re-
ward which they would receive would have been fairly
and honorably won.

Herries certainly emphasized ™ the fact that he had al-
ways kept Nathan strictly under his control, had never
allowed him to take any steps without his express con-
sent, and had had him almost constantly with him in his
room; but he also stated in a private letter to the chancel-
lor of the exchequer that he owed it to Mr. Rothschild
not to miss this opportunity of bearing witness to the skill
and energy with which he had carried out this service,
quite unobtrusively and in such a manner that the rate
of exchange had not been unfavorably affected. Even
if we regard Herries’s testimony as biased, there can be
no doubt that Nathan rendered magnificent financial
services, from which, it is true, he personally reaped sub-
stantial profits. .

The Austrian finance minister Count Stadion was just
about to undertake the task of putting his country’s
finances thoroughly in order, reducing the amount of
paper money in circulation, and as far as possible reduc-
ing Austria’s public debt. He required a large amount
of ready money for these purposes. This he had the pros-
pect of obtaining through the Austrian share of the
French indemnity, but as the payments were distributed
in instalments over a period of years, and as he required
money urgently, he decided that he would try to obtain an
advance on the amount due.

He therefore wrote from Milan ** to Barbier in Paris:
“If your Excellency should receive any offers of an ad-
vance on the security of the contributions due in the next
few years, I am of opinion that they should be considered,
for they would assure us the advantage of obtaining a.
certain sum for the treasury at an early date.”

Barbier replied to his minister as follows:


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 171


As such an offer could be expected to be made
only by a very substantial banking company, I con-
trived to introduce the subject in the course of conver-
sation with the firm of Rothschild. But it awakened
no response. Yet a short time ago young Roths-
child stated to me that it might now perhaps be pos-
sible to arrange the settlement of the Austrian share
of the indemnity for the four last years at one stroke,
saying that if I had the necessary authority to under-
take such an operation it might be possible to enter
into negotiations. I asked him to put his suggestion
in writing; but he replied that he was unable to do
so until a commissioner had been definitely in-
structed by Austria to enter into such negotiations.

This is as far as matters have gone at present; and
I am led to infer that the proposal is at present
merely a tentative suggestion on the part of Roths-
child, who would try to find partners for the scheme
if our court would express an opinion in favor of it.
. . . Rothschild spoke of the enormous discount of
forty per cent.


Barbier emphasized the fact that the entrepreneurs
were speculating on an enormous profit and that Roths-
child was paving the way thereto by mentioning this
heavy discount. Barbier estimated the loss involved
through such advance payments at “only” about twenty
percent. He stated that it would require special con-
siderations to make it desirable to incur a loss exceeding
twenty percent.

It is true that the demands put forward by the Roths-
childs were extremely high, and the benefit to be derived
from such a transaction was positively enormous. But
the very offer, implying as it did that the brothers Roths-
child and their business friends were in a position imme-
diately to supply cash to the tune of countless millions of

_ francs, shows how strong the financial position of the
_ Rothschilds had now become. There was nobody else in
. the field in financial transactions on this scale, and the


172 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Rothschilds meant to turn their privileged position to
account.

Austria’s urgent need of money, and the hope of getting
better terms for the advances from the brothers Roths-
child inspired Stadion to a clever move. He would put
the family, who, handicapped by their origin, were mak-
ing every effort to improve their social position, under a
special obligation. After the conclusion of the subsidy
transactions, the Rothschilds had repeatedly appealed to
Baron von Handel and to Schwinner at Frankfort to rec-
ommend to the emperor recognition of their services;
and Schwinner had forwarded this request to Count
Stadion, the minister of finance. Stadion gladly availed
himself of the opportunity thus offered.

Of the subsidies amounting to approximately £1,800,000
(15,000,000 gulden) *” which were made available in the
year 1815, the four Viennese discount houses first dis-
counted an amount of about 2,750,000 gulden, for which
the Austrian government paid a commission of one per-
cent. The money, however, was not forthcoming as
speedily as had been hoped, and the Austrian government
was compelled to ask the four banking firms for advances
on the payments. On these they had to pay interest at the
rate of six percent. ‘They were therefore exceedingly
pleased when the English government consented to make
the moneys payable in large amounts and even to pay sev-
eral months’ instalments in advance through the firm of
Rothschild. ‘Thus Austria no longer had to pay any
commission, and thereby saved one percent in that re-
spect, as well as saving six percent on any advances.

In the finance minister’s report to Emperor Francis
the following passage occurred: *°


Count Stadion flatters himself that his Majesty
will approve of the manner in which this business
was carried through. In this connection he feels it
to be his duty to recommend that the services of the
Frankfort banking firm Meyer Amschel Rothschild


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 173


and Sons should be recognized, since the efforts of
that firm contributed in a special degree to securing
the prompt payment of the English subsidy moneys,
and in the present circumstances it may be necessary
to have further recourse to the good offices of that
firm. . . . The firm has very large resources and en-
joys an even larger credit. It can carry through
transactions that appear vast to a private person on
the Continent, because the British government em-
ploys it in the most extensive operations and there-
fore supports it with the necessary funds.

An examination of the subsidy transactions reveals
the fact that the House of Rothschild alone paid out
12,203,822.43 florins with respect to £1,442,000. The
report of the former high commissioner, who was in
charge of the subsidy payments at Frankfort at the
time, shows that Rothschild always paid most punc-
tually, and that on various occasions, such as in
changing foreign coin and bills, he showed the
greatest desire to help without taking any undue
advantage.

After the subsidy transactions had been carried
through, the head of the firm expressed a wish that
the services which he rendered might be publicly
recognized by your Majesty. High Commissioner
Schwinner was asked for his opinion as to the form
which such recognition should take. He discussed
the matter with the director of the Gratz police,
Gohausen, who was then at Frankfort. . . . Gdhau-
sen suggested that the head of the house should be
granted the honorary title of imperial and royal
councilor, a like title having been granted for sim-
ilar reasons to the brothers Kaula, in Hanau and
Stuttgart, and to other Israelites. The grant of a
title of nobility, on the other hand, would excite the
envy of Christian banking firms and would create a
particular sensation at the present time, as the rights
of citizenship of the Jewish community at Frankfort
: are the subject of negotiations,

High Commissioner Schwinner does not recom-
q


174 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


mend that the title of I. and R. councilor be granted,
as it is customary to confer this distinction upon emi-
nent public servants. He favors the granting of an
imperial title of nobility, believing the apprehen-
sions of the director of police to be unfounded.
Since then Rothschild has repeatedly asked for some
recognition as an encouragement both to himself and
to others.

Count Stadion begs to state by way of recapitula-
tion: The services rendered by Rothschild are not of
a kind that may be suitably rewarded by conferring
an order; but the civilian medal would hardly come
up to his expectations. In view of his own wealth, a
reward in money or money’s worth would be even
less appropriate. And such in any case would have
to bear some relation to the high dignity of the donor
and would therefore have to be very considerable.
In the opinion of Count Stadion orders are more suit-
able as a reward for officials, but as Rothschild has
already many officials under his direction, an order
is not likely to impress him. Count Stadion there-
fore requests that as a public mark of your Majesty’s
satisfaction with the services rendered by the Frank-
fort firm Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons, your
Majesty will graciously confer on the two brothers
of this firm resident here, the German hereditary
title of nobility, free of all dues, and will authorize
him, Count Stadion, to convey to the firm in a special
letter your Majesty’s satisfaction.


This report was sent to Privy Councilor Barton von
Lederer. He was the right-hand man of Count Zichy,
the secretary of state and lord of the privy seal, and had
accompanied the emperor when he fled from Napoleon in
1809. On that occasion he had won his confidence and
affection. When the reorganization of Austria was un-
dertaken after the Congress of Vienna, Count Zichy was
placed at the head of the central office for dealing with


all matters affecting the reorganization; and it became |


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 175


his duty to consider the suggestions that were made from
various quarters and to express his opinion upon them.

Although Stadion was so enthusiastic about the serv-
ices rendered by the Rothschilds, Lederer remained com-
paratively unmoved. He regarded them simply as a cal-
culating family of money-makers who were only con-
cerned with their own interests, and he accordingly sent
in a detailed report in which he argued against granting
them a title of nobility. At the beginning of his state-
ment Lederer gave a short synopsis ‘* of the movements of
the pound sterling before and after the battle of Water-
loo, based upon the payments actually made by the Roths-
childs.


In the year 1814, it was as follows: the

pound sterling was worth on the aver-

I oF coed bcos acer» ‘nh oj heat onsinsa i 8 fli% x
In 1815, before the battle of Waterloo. .7 ” 4234
In 1815 after the battle of Waterloo...8 ” 5034
amine the whole year 1815.2... 6.8. Sp 22s oue
Taking the two years 1814 and 1815....8 ” 2134 ”


Lederer’s memorandum continues:


I now pass to the question of rewarding the two
brothers Rothschild, raised by the minister of finance
in his report. In this connection two questions have
to be considered: 1. In this business, have they con-
ferred a benefit on the Austrian Treasury, and
wherein does this benefit lie? 2. How can this ben-
efit be suitably recognized?

As to the first, it was not until June, 1815, that the
firm of Rothschild was employed as the business
agent of the English government, in connection with
the realization of the subsidies. It looked after the
payments for that government, for which service it
no doubt received a liberal commission, its duty
being to maintain the rate of exchange between Eng-
land and the Continent in favor of England and to


ae eee
— -


176 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


improve it. The firm of Rothschild never had any
right to ask Austria for a commission on the pay-
ments which it was effecting on behalf of the English
government. In acting wisely in this matter, it de-
served the compliments of the English government,
whose intentions it was carrying out. The rate of
exchange at which funds were transmitted before
and after the battle of Waterloo indicates how far its
success was due to fortunate circumstances and how
far to its efforts. In effecting the payments accu-
rately and punctually, the firm of Rothschild was but
doing its duty. Even the fact brought forward by
Schwinner, that they made the payments to the gov-
ernor-general at Frankfort and to his military de-
partments—payments for which the Austrian Treas-
ury was responsible—out of the subsidy moneys,
without charging any special commission for these
transactions, cannot in my opinion be counted very
much to its credit. It was paid a commission on the
whole amount by England, and it cannot have been
any more trouble to the firm to divide the payments
among the various departments than to pay the whole
amount into the central treasury at Frankfort. In
any case I cannot conceive of a business firm doing
business except in its own interest. The business man
undertakes transactions in order to make a profit,
and he should not pretend to having conferred an
obligation where he has not done so.

Count Stadion thinks it desirable to secure the
good-will of a firm of such extensive credit with a
view to the future. I must confess that I cannot see
how this is to be obtained by conferring any distinc-
tion whatever on the House of Rothschild. They
will carry through transactions for the Austrian
financial administration again in the future. If they
see the chance of making a profit, they will ask us
for business; but if they do not, they will decline
to do business for us, even if the chiefs of the firm
have been honored by your Majesty.

The balance-sheet is the first and most powerful


:
-


;


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 177


factor in determining the business man’s attitude.
However, since the firm of Rothschild has carried
through such considerable financial transactions for
the Austrian Treasury, whereby the payment of com-
mission was saved, I consider that it would be proper
and consonant with your Majesty’s dignity to give
both brothers Rothschild a proof of your favor.

In this connection J cannot agree with the sug-
gestion that a hereditary title should be conferred.
Such titles should be the reward of service only.
In this case there is the special consideration that the
brothers Rothschild are Israelites. It is true that
there have been cases in which your Majesty has
decided to raise Israelites to the ranks of Austrian
nobility, e.g. Baron Arnsteiner and Ritter von
Eskeles.

On the other hand the claims of the Frankfort
Jews to full rights of citizenship are now the subject
of discussion, and although I would not venture to
express an opinion as to whether honors should be
conferred upon Jewish business men when the result
of the negotiations in the diet is pending, I suggest
that if your Majesty is inclined to act upon Count
Stadion’s proposal, the views of the minister for
foreign affairs should first be ascertained. Person-
ally I consider that the most suitable thing would be
that your Majesty should make a gift to each of the
two brothers Rothschild of a gold snuff-box bear-
ing your Majesty’s monogram in diamonds. Count
Stadion might be consulted as to the monetary value
of such a gift.


Count Zichy, to whom this memorandum was sub-
mitted for his observations, sent it on to the emperor with
the comment that he considered Baron von Lederer’s ar-
gument to be sound but that he could not immediately
agree that the proposal should be rejected. He suggested
that since Prince Metternich was best informed as to the


_ conditions of the Israelites in Frankfort, and in view of


178 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the fact that the firm of Rothschild had really rendered
services to the imperial treasury, Prince Metternich
should be asked to express an opinion.*

Emperor Francis accordingly officially requested Met-
ternich to express his opinion regarding Stadion’s pro-
posal, asking whether the existing circumstances of the
Jews at Frankfort did not make it politically undesirable
to distinguish a Jewish business firm in that way.**

The matter was therefore to be decided by Metternich,
the man who, as has been stated, was well-disposed to
the Frankfort Jews, and who had concurred in Stadion’s
making the proposal. Metternich reported verbally to
Emperor Francis in favor of ennobling the Rothschild
family.

Mindful of the important financial and political con-
siderations on which Stadion’s proposal was based, and
which were further emphasized by Metternich, the em-
peror agreed, although he felt that the minor nobility
would view the ennoblement of foreign Jews with very
mixed feelings. The patent conferring the title of no-
bility on Amschel and Solomon, in recognition of their
services in realizing the English subsidies, was issued
from Schonbrunn on September 25, 1816.°°

Meanwhile, it had been pointed out to Stadion that the
two other brothers, Carl and James, whose services were
also required for the operations that were being planned,
might feel slighted, and a few days later Stadion recom-
mended that these two brothers should also be ennobled.
Emperor Francis issued an order in council to this ef-
fect, dated October 21, 1816.*

No sooner had the document been signed than Ugarte
had the fact recorded in the official Vienna papers.
Stadion expressly thanked the chancellor for doing so,
a fact indicating the importance which he attached to the
whole matter. At the same time he informed Ugarte that
he had asked both the brothers Rothschild to submit a de-


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 179


sign for a coat-of-arms, and to state whether they wished
to adopt a prefix of nobility.**

Stadion had informed Ugarte of the reasons for con-
ferring a title of nobility, as set out in his report to the
emperor, and added: “I do not consider, however, that
the patent should enter into any details as to the services
rendered, but that there should be merely a general state-
ment to the effect that since the two brothers Meyer Am-
schel [szc] Rothschild and Solomon Meyer Rothschild
have carried through a loan most meticulously and punc-
tually—the English subsidy transactions during the year
1815—and have also shown an exceptional readiness to
render services outside their actual duties, his Majesty
has been most graciously moved, etc., etc.”

In accordance with Stadion’s request, the brothers
Rothschild submitted a design for a coat-of-arms. This
was enclosed with a letter written by Solomon Roths-
child’s own hand,** explaining the design, and reading as
follows: “First quarter, or, an eagle sable surcharged in
dexter by a field gules (having reference to the Imperial
and Royal Austrian Coat-of-Arms); second quarter,

gules, a leopard passant proper (a reference to the Eng-
lish Royal Coat-of-Arms) ; third quarter, a lion rampant
(with reference to the Hessian Electoral Coat) ; fourth
quarter, azure, an arm bearing five arrows (a symbol of
the unity of the five brothers).

“Tn the center of the coat a shield gules. Right-hand
supporter, a greyhound, a symbol of loyalty; left sup-
porter, a stork, a symbol of piety and content. The crest
is a coronet surmounted by the Lion of Hesse.”

In submitting the design the Rothschilds asked that a
separate patent of nobility should be prepared for each
of the four brothers, as they lived in different countries.
The design was duly sent to the Heralds’ College (there

__ was such an institution in Austria at the time) with a re-
- quest for their observations. The college replied that


180 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


they saw no objections to preparing four patents, but
that it was “necessary to proceed with the greatest cau-
tion, particularly in the case of members of the Jewish
nation for various reasons, and more especially because
they are not familiar with the prerogatives of nobility.”
They added that although the usual fees were being re-
mitted, they considered that the Rothschilds should pay
150 gulden for the special grant and that they could
hardly resent this charge in view of the great distinction
that was being conferred upon them.

“As for the coat-of-arms,” the report continued,*® “they
ask for a coronet, a center shield, supporters, the Leopard
of England, and the Lion of Hesse. According to the
rales of heraldry, the gentry are entitled only to a hel-
met; their suggestion is entirely inadmissible since other-
wise there would be nothing to distinguish the higher
ranks, as coronets, supporters and center shields are
proper only to the nobility. Moreover, no government
will grant the emblems of other governments, as nobility
is conferred for services to one’s prince and one’s coun-
try, but not for services to other countries. The lion is a
symbol of courage only, which does not apply to the peti-
tioners.”

A design such as the Heralds’ College considered suit-
able was attached to the report. The seven-pointed coro-
net, to which the petitioners were not entitled, and which
was no doubt intended to express their wish for the title
of Baron, had disappeared, together with the heraldic
animals supporting the shield, and the lions of Hesse
and England. Only the half-eagle and the arm with the
arrows remained; but the hand was grasping, not five but
four arrows, this being in accordance with the curious
fact that Nathan, the brother who behind the scenes had
had most to do with the English subsidies, was not yet
recognized in any way.

The recommendations of the Heralds’ College were
accepted in every detail, and the design submitted by


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 181


them duly became for some years the coat-of-arms of the
Rothschild family, as laid down in the patent dated
March 25, 1817. Although the ennoblement only car-
ried a modest ‘“‘von,” the new rank was of-no little im-
portance. We must remember that at that period the
higher nobility were dominant in almost all the states
of Europe. They occupied all the highest positions in
the state and were in a most favored position financially
as compared with other citizens. For a Jewish family
who had to fight hard for their position in their native
city, the Rothschilds’ imperial patent was a particularly
rare distinction, and involved an important step forward
in their fight for social recognition. As soon as the no-
bility had recovered somewhat from their annoyance, it
became much easier for the brothers Rothschild to make
their way socially.

The event was naturally very helpful to the relations
of the House of Rothschild with Austrian statesmen.
They did not take over the business of paying the whole
of the huge French indemnity in advance instalments,
but partial payments were made through them. They
also transferred the moneys to Colmar as well as larger
amounts sent to Mainz for the purpose of building fort-
resses.

Austria was owed three hundred thousand Dutch ducats
by Russia for advances made to Russian troops during
the Napoleonic wars and accordingly drew bills on the
Frankfort firm of Rothschild, which were due in De-
cember, 1817, and January, 1818. In reply to Barbier’s
inquiry, James Rothschild wrote a considerate letter *”
saying that he could not accept the bills because the or-
der from the Russian finance minister had not yet been
received.

“Tf, however,” he wrote, “it is your Excellency’s wish
that these bills be accepted by me . . . I am gladly pre-
pared to do so if your Excellency will be so kind as to
give me an assurance that the bills in question are in or-


182 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


der and that I will receive the report of the Imperial
Russian Ministry of Finance.”

The brothers Rothschild further offered,** in conjunc-
tion with Gontard, to provide three hundred thousand
ducats, at five percent interest and one percent commis-
sion, a few months before the due date. “We flatter our-
selves,” they stated, “that your Excellency will appreciate
the reasonableness of our proposals, and we venture to as-
sure your Excellency that our principal desire has been
to give further proof to the I. and R. Court of our con-
stant zeal in their interests. Moreover, we are prepared
to modify our proposals if an alteration in the rate of
exchange in your favor should make this possible at the
time when your Excellency has occasion to accept them.”

Barbier supported the Rothschild proposal, attacking
the four Vienna firms and observing that in his opinion
the Rothschilds worked better and more cheaply.*® But
plans had now been changed at Vienna, where the bills
were wanted to be paid only when they fell due, and
inquiries had been made of the four Vienna firms as well
as of Rothschild and Gontard regarding the simple trans- °
mission of the ducats to Vienna.*°

The brothers Rothschild named their conditions and
went on to say: *' “If the treasury should later desire to
receive in advance the above-mentioned amount of three
hundred thousand ducats, we shall always be ready . . .
to provide it. If, however, we should make such an ad-—
vance your Excellency will find it not unreasonable to”
grant us a commission of one percent in addition to the
interest rate of five percent per annum. We flatter our-
selves that your Excellency will regard our various pro-
posals as just, and venture to believe that we have made
every possible effort in our power to furnish further
proofs of how greatly we desire to continue to be hon-
ored with the treasury’s confidence.” {

The letters show how cleverly the Rothschilds con-


f)


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 183


trived to clothe their proposals in polite phrases and
how they were always concerned to present their case as
if their one desire was to make themselves useful, while
the other party would derive all the profit and advan-
tage.

While endeavoring to secure the custom of Austria,
the brothers did not neglect the other states. Similar
advances on account of the French contribution appear
to have been suggested to Prussia and Russia, and in
February, 1817, a loan of several millions was made to
Prussia in the name of Rothschild. The Elector of
Hesse, it is true, had a large share in this.°* The brothers
Rothschild still carried out really big transactions in
conjunction with their patron or with other firms, but the
time was soon to come when the five brothers would act
alone, and one great firm after another would fall before
them.

They were now again concerned to secure their posi-
tion in Frankfort. The Jewish community had sent a
request for assistance to Baron von Humboldt, the Prus-
sian minister who was at that time acting on the diet;
and Rothschild had appealed to the young German legal
duminary and statesman Sylvester Jordan to use his in-
fluence with Count Buol at Frankfort, who had known
Jordan since his earliest youth.

“The banker Rothschild,” °* Jordan accordingly wrote
to Buol, “one of the richest bankers in Europe, who has
‘nothing to worry about except that he is a Jew, has most
‘emphatically implored me to commend to your Excel-
lency the interests of the Jews in general and of his House
in particular. Hardenberg has already sent instructions
in this matter to Humboldt. The senate of Frankfort is
determined to confine them to the Jewish quarter, which
‘is naturally distasteful to a banker who is worth millions.”
In the middle of December, 1816, a printed memoran-
dum with no less than thirteen enclosures, regarding the


184 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Jewish rights of citizenship, was sent to the diet, amongst
the signatories being Amschel and Jonas Rothschild, as
well as Jacob Baruch and old Bernes.

Meanwhile the brothers Rothschild were working as-
siduously abroad to extend their influence within the
countries where they were living. In Austria their per-
sistence had met with the greatest measure of success,
and accordingly they redoubled their efforts in that coun-
try to secure new honors and titles. It did not take them
long to realize that friendly social relations were of the
greatest use to them in their business in each country;
but it was just in this matter that they often met with
great difficulties in London and Paris.

It was exceedingly hard for poorly educated German
emigrant Jews to get into the higher social circles, even
though they were rich. James had so far been most suc-
cessful; at the excellent dinners which he gave he was
already entertaining diplomats such as the Austrian am-
bassador Baron Vincent, and once even a prince of the
blood royal, Paul von. Wurttemberg. But he also met
with numerous rebuffs.

Nathan and James hit upon the idea of asking Austria
to grant them the dignity and office of honorary consul.
On receiving such a nomination they would more or less
belong to the diplomatic corps, whereupon many doors
hitherto closed must necessarily be open to them as per-
sons of official standing. Moreover, the title of consul
of a great European power such as Austria was at that
time, would be bound to raise their prestige and their
credit in the business world. They wrote to Amschel at
Frankfort asking him to obtain the title for them in
Vienna; and he immediately wrote to Metternich: **


Most EXcELLENT PRINCE, MosT GRACIOUS PRINCE
AND Lorp! :
We have had the good fortune on various occa-

sions to experience the proofs of your Highness’s


The Great Napoleonic Crisis 185


most gracious good-will, and we are therefore em-
boldened most respectfully to make the following
proposal. Our brothers, the chiefs of the branches
in Paris and London respectively, Jacob M. von
Rothschild and Nathan M. Rothschild, honored
through the distinction recently received by our
family and their gracious elevation into the ranks of
the nobility, are inspired by the most zealous desire
to be able to devote their energies to the service of
the I. and R. Austrian Government. They would
feel they had found a means of satisfying these nat-
ural desires if one of them were nominated J. and R.
Austrian Consul, a position which is at present va-
cant both in Paris and in London.

This position depends upon the nomination of
your Princely Highness, and we therefore most sub-
missively venture to request that your Highness may
be pleased to accede to our humble wish. The I.
and R. Government can find no more loyal, zealous,
and indefatigable servants than our brothers; and we
flatter ourselves that the connections which we have
established with the governments of France and Eng-
land would make it easy for us, both in a general
way and in individual cases, to be useful to the I. and
R. trade with those countries. We should be happy
to be placed in a position to do so in this honorable
manner, and to receive this further distinction.


‘Amschel wrote to Stadion at the same time ** stating
that it was not the desire for further honors that caused
him to ask that his brothers should be nominated as con-
suls, but his sincere desire to prove himself of ever-in-
creasing usefulness to the I. and R. Austrian Government.
He was certain that the relations which both brothers
had established with the governments of the countries
where they were living would aid them in being of use to


the I. and R. Austrian subjects, especially in commercial


‘matters, and that the granting of their submissive request


a


would enable his whole House to apply all their energies


186 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


in the most varied ways to the service of Austria’s com- —
merce.

Carl Rothschild also appealed to Count Zichy,®* whom
he knew through business dealings, informing him that
the Austrian ambassador in London, Prince Esterhazy,
had written to Metternich in support of Nathan’s nomi-
nation and requested the same favor of him. Zichy for-
warded Rothschild’s letter to Metternich, with the re-
mark * that although the matter did not come within his
province he ventured to observe that this firm already ap-
peared to have rendered important services to the Aus-
trian treasury, and would through its riches and influence,
especially in England, be able also in the future to give
pecuniary aid to Austria. '

It was to be a long time before these requests were
granted. The Austrian state machine worked slowly, and
several objections and difficulties cropped up, which
could be overcome only by years of work. It was only
through their close association with Metternich and
Gentz, whom the brothers Rothschild cultivated in the ©
ensuing period of congresses, that they were enabled to
smooth the way, so that three years later there was no
further obstacle to the desired nomination. Before they
could achieve their object, however, they had a long row
to hoe.

But the brothers Rothschild worked assiduously toward
any goal which they had set themselves to achieve, not-
withstanding all the difficulties that arose and the years
during which their patience was tried. In the end they
got what they wanted. Their unremitting efforts and
their persistence in urging their cause, undismayed by
any rebuffs, secured for them the unique career that had
been destined for their family.


CHAPTER IV


The Brothers Rothschild During the Period of Con-
gresses, ISIS-18§22


HE great fortune of the Rothschilds had been made;

it was now a question not only of preserving it but

of developing it and of employing it as remuneratively
as possible. The convulsions through which all the states
of Europe had passed, and the enormous military efforts
made during the preceding quarter of a century, had pro-
duced general confusion in their finances, which could
be straightened out only by hard work in peace conditions.
Every state had been spending money lavishly for a
long time, and the resulting shortage of money was very
acute. The poverty-struck states had to acquire the cash
necessary for their recovery from those who had suc-
‘ceeded in profiting by war conditions to accumulate riches


as contractors or through financial operations. Fore-


most among these was the House of Rothschild, and it
gladly lent money to princes and states, as the repayment
of such loans through their subjects was secured. Thus
it advanced moneys to numerous small princely families,
especially to those of the neighborhood, while its relations
with the Elector of Hesse remained outwardly unchanged.

Although he was the third son, Nathan incontestably
took the leadership among the five brothers. His long
and fortunate connection with the English government


_had taught him both the advantage of concentrating on


really big financial operations, and the comparative safety


_ of carrying through such operations with powerful states.


For the concern of these for their public credit and their


187


Bertie made them regard it as essential to carry out


i.


188 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


their obligations punctually. Nathan was not in the
least inclined to rest upon his laurels, or to limit him-
self to the preservation and enjoyment of the family’s
great fortune. His aim was to increase the power of his
House; and he held the view that in order to win a vic-
tory, ducats, like soldiers, had to be concentrated in mass
suddenly and unexpectedly upon a wisely selected point.’
This was the dominant note in the policy of his House
during the following period.

In order to apply this policy it was necessary, now that —
his firm enjoyed the high regard of the business com- —
munity, that he should secure his position in society as —
well. The Austrian patent of nobility had given him a
good start in this direction; but his native city and the ~
senate of Frankfort continued to adopt an unfriendly at-
titude toward the Jews, including the Rothschild family. —
Amschel at Frankfort, who had been placed in charge
of the campaign against the senate, used every opportu- —
nity for exerting external pressure upon the authorities —
of the city, especially through Prussia and Austria. At —
the beginning of the year 1818 a favorable opportunity ©
occurred for again enlisting the support of the Prussian ~
Chancellor Prince Hardenberg, who was well disposed —
toward the Jews.

The state finances of Prussia were, like those of Austria, —
in great confusion. The deficit was large, and it seemed
not improbable that the pay of civil servants and of the
army would have to be suspended. The treasury lived
from hand to mouth, and the king himself was being
dunned by small tradesmen. In these circumstances,
Barandon, the London representative of the Prussian
Mercantile Marine, had recommended that a loan should
be raised in England, and that for this purpose recourse
should be had to Nathan Rothschild. Hardenberg
readily agreed, and asked Amschel at Frankfort, whom
he knew personally, to use his influence in favor of secur-
ing this loan. Amschel consented, and used this oppor-


a a a


The Period of Congresses 189


tunity of again appealing to the chancellor on behalf of
the members of his faith at Frankfort.

“At the present time,” he wrote,” “when his Excellency
the Minister and Envoy to the Diet, Count von Buol, is
with your Excellency, I beg to renew my most humble
representations regarding the fate of the members of my
faith here, who are awaiting in great suspense the deci-
sion of the diet. We place our greatest hopes in the hon-
ored Prussian government, and cherish the most sincere
wish that the principles recognized by it will be applied,
convinced that your Highness knows too well how to ap-
preciate the cultural progress made by our community
during the last forty years to allow the way to their fur-
ther development and improvement to be barred, or them
to be limited in this respect.”

Hardenberg was quite willing to accede to this re-
quest, since in doing so he would be acting in accordance
with his own personal convictions. He had, however,
a difficult task with his king, who was not well disposed to
the Jews. The monarch told him the measures he could
apply if action were taken by the magistracy of Frank-
fort, but at the same time expressed the desire that the
wishes of the magistracy should be met as far as pos-
sible. “In any case,” the resolution concluded, “I do not
wish Prussia to support the Jews in the diet.” *

On this Hardenberg angrily commented: “First ad
acta. We have at any rate the decisions of the Congress
of Vienna to go upon.” *

However, the king came off his high horse, for Harden-
berg had made him realize that the Prussian state would
need the brothers Rothschild for a loan, and that it would
not be good policy for Prussia to alienate them by an at-
_titude unfriendly to the Jews in the Diet of Frankfort.

The majority of the diet were in any case in sympathy
_ with the desires of the senate at Frankfort, and the rights
which the Jews had acquired in 1811 seemed therefore

to be in peril. Only the powerful influence of Metter-


190 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


nich and Hardenberg had so far restrained it from taking
a definite decision hostile to the Jews.

Amschel regarded the head of the House of Bethmann,
which was being more and more overshadowed by the
Rothschilds, as a natural enemy of the Jews; but Beth-
mann refused to admit that this wasso. “If Herr James,”
he wrote at the time to David Parish, “will but visit me
at Frankfort, he will soon realize that I am not influenced
by any nonsense about Christians and that I have no
prejudice against a reputable Jew. I have often at-
tempted in vain to disabuse Amschel of the stupid illusion
that I am opposed to the demands of the Jewish commu-
nity at Frankfort in so far as they are reasonable. The
fact that I am suspected by my fellow Christians of tak-
ing the Jewish side should convince him, if nothing else
will, that he has no ground for his attitude.” ®

Amschel Meyer certainly was greatly interested in
keeping on good terms with Prussia and Austria. Prussia’s
acute financial distress seemed to provide a further ex-
cellent opportunity of earning a large amount of money,
and he did all he could, in close collaboration with his
brother Nathan in London, to induce Prussia to come to
the Rothschilds for refuge.

That kingdom had very good reason to look around for
money, for in 1817 the state was carrying a burden of
twenty millions of floating debt, interest being charged
on part of this amount at the extravagant rate of twenty
percent per annum, the payments being met by further


borrowings each year. Apart from this, the annual —
budget showed a deficit of several million thalers. ©


Prince Hardenberg, by the king’s command, accordingly


instructed the Director of the Prussian Treasury to nego- —
tiate a loan. The director, Christian von Rother, was a_
highly competent official and Hardenberg’s right-hand —


man in financial matters, and he had come into special


prominence in raising money during the wars of libera-


tion.


The Period of Congresses IQI


“Tt is essential,” wrote the prince to Rother,” “that
_we should obtain money for various purposes. The main-
tenance of the state urgently calls for it. J am eagerly
waiting to hear from you. Act with decision and
courage.”

Rother first tried Berlin firms, but they attempted to
exploit the difficulties of the situation, and, as he re-
ported to the king, the conditions which they proposed
were “exorbitant and humiliating.” In Holland he had
no success either; but he fared better at Frankfort. As
Prussian commissioner of finance he had already come
into contact with the House of Rothschild in Paris, and
he now succeeded in getting on exceedingly good terms
with Amschel Meyer.

Amschel referred him to his brother Nathan in Lon-
don, as the most likely person to make the loan a success.
Hitherto, Barandon had conducted the negotiations in
England, but he was not liked by the House of Roths-
child. Rother, on the other hand, the brothers had known
in Paris, and they regarded him as a more pleas-
ant person to deal with. Indeed they preferred him in
every way, and were exceedingly gratified when he came
to London and Barandon was left out in the cold.

They were now dealing only with two friends of their
House, Rother and the Prussian ambassador in London,
William von Humboldt, the brother of the great explorer
Alexander. He himself was not only a diplomat, but
also a distinguished scholar and philosopher. Humboldt
understood little of money matters, and he left his pri-
vate estate to be managed by Rothschild, whereas Rother
was regarded as a financial genius in his own country.
Humboldt was certainly a complete believer in Nathan

_Rothschild’s indisputably superior talent for finance. He
reported in this sense to Berlin, using words which are
especially remarkable coming from such a man.

_. “Tf the loan is to succeed here,” his report ran, “this
can be managed in my opinion only through Rothschild.


192 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


. . . Rothschild is now easily the most enterprising busi-
ness man in this country. ... He is a man upon whom


one can rely, and with whom the government here does


considerable business. He is also, as far as I know, just,
exceedingly honest, and intelligent. But I must add that
if business is given to him to carry out, it will be neces-
sary to fall in with his ideas. For he has acquired the
independent habit of mind developed by riches and a
fairly long sojourn in this country, and he is now en-
gaged in such a constant number of financial transactions
that it will not greatly affect him if one of them fails to
come his way. He wants to take over the whole loan
himself; on this point he is likely to be exceedingly firm,
and he has asked in advance that the Prussian consul
here, against whom he is prejudiced, shall not be allowed
to interfere in the matter in any way.” ®

Humboldt’s report is all the more valuable as an ex-
pression of opinion, since he proved his independence in
concluding it by advising against the acceptance of the
loan, this being of course quite contrary to Nathan’s
wishes. Rother, on the other hand, speedily came to


terms with Nathan regarding a loan of five million


pounds. ‘This he considered advantageous for Prussia,


as other important states were able to obtain money by ~


loan only in small amounts.® In spite of the ups and


downs of the negotiations, exceedingly cordial relations —
seem to have been maintained throughout between ~


Rother and Rothschild. At any rate this is indicated
by their correspondence at this time. Rother wrote to


Solomon Rothschild,’® who was also in London at the —
time, that he had been glad to make the closer acquain- —
tance of his brother Nathan, whose character and intelli- ©


gence he felt compelled the greatest admiration.
Solomon’s reply was full of friendliness and candor.

His letter was, he indicated, an expression of his sincer-

est feelings, and Nathan and Solomon assured Rother,


when he left, that he could travel with a light heart.


The Period of Congresses 193


He had achieved “‘a splendid piece of business, and they
were his devoted, loyal, and eternal friends.” 7°

This way of getting into the good graces of the Prus-
sian negotiator did not fail of its effect. Rother was
delighted that he had carried the business through and
that on the day on which the agreement was concluded
Nathan sent a ship to Hamburg with a million thalers
as a payment on account.

Rother had, if possible, been even more strongly im-
pressed than William von Humboldt by Nathan’s influ-
ence. “The Rothschild in this country,” he reported to
Berlin,’® “is a most estimable person and has an incredible
influence upon all financial affairs here in London. It
is widely stated, and is indeed almost a fact that he en-
tirely regulates the rate of exchange in the city. His
power as a banker is enormous.”

The loan, which was issued at an average price of 72
per cent, turned out to be ‘“‘a splendid piece of business”
for Rothschild, as it never fell below the price of issue,
and in 1824 actually reached par. The House of Roths-


child therefore had every occasion to be pleased with
this, the first big state loan which they handled, and they


were encouraged to develop this line of business on a
large scale. ‘This loan was the first of several.

The brothers had formed valuable friendships through
these negotiations, and William von Humboldt intro-
duced them to his famous brother Alexander. It was
not long before he was seen dining at Rothschild’s house
in London. Nathan was more frequently the guest of
William von Humboldt, whose wide education and ex-
tensive knowledge certainly provided a contrast to the
Frankforter who had risen so rapidly. Humboldt ex-
pressed himself candidly about him in a letter to his wife.

“Yesterday,” the letter runs, “Rothschild dined with


-me. He is quite crude and uneducated, but he has a


great deal of intelligence and a positive genius for money.
He scored off Major Martins beautifully once or twice.


194 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Martins was dining with me, too, and kept on praising —
everything French. He was being fatuously sentimental
about the horrors of the war and the large numbers who
had been killed. ‘Well,’ said Rothschild, ‘if they had not
all died, major, you would presumably still be a subal-—
tern.’ You ought to have seen Martins’s face.”

The Rothschilds were anxious to maintain their
friendly relations with the Humboldt brothers. Solomon
also did his best to be agreeable to them whenever pos- |
sible. Meeting Caroline von Humboldt at Carlsbad on
one occasion, he overwhelmed her with attentions. She
wrote to her husband: “I have had several callers, and —
among others Herr von Rothschild, the brother of the
one who is looking after your affairs at Frankfort. He —
made some exceedingly comic remarks to me. He
thanked me, in the course of his conversation, for receiv- —
ing him, and said, ‘Your Excellency ought to come to
Frankfort again. We could do with a lady like you
there.’ It sounded extraordinarily funny. He also asked
me whether he could be of use to me in the matter of ©
money and said that his purse was at my disposal.” **

The Prussian loan, which the brothers Humboldt ar- —
ranged with the Rothschilds, furnished another excellent
illustration of the way in which the three brothers worked —
together. |

While Solomon and Nathan were dealing with that —
business in London, Amschel Meyer was meeting an awk- —
ward situation at Frankfort. In the case of propositions —
which the firm did not like, they could excuse them- ~
selves by pointing out the difficulty of obtaining the agree- —
ment of al/ the brothers—that is, of five persons who
usually were widely separated from one another—this ©
agreement being necessary for any substantial trans-
action. :

These tactics were adopted in a matter involving the
Crown Prince of Hesse, who was constantly at logger-
heads with his father. The elector was now seventy-five


The Period of Congresses 195


years old, and failing. In contrast to his parsimonious
father, the crown prince had made himself popular by
a manner of life from which many persons profited. This
involved very heavy expenditure, and the heir’s need of
money was all the greater since the appanage allotted to
him by his father was—according to his ideas at any rate
—ludicrously inadequate. The consequence was that the
prince found his way to the firm which owed its rise and
prosperity to his father. He applied to Rothschild for
a loan.

Naturally, this was done quite in secret, without the
knowledge or consent of the elector. At the beginning of
1818 the prince requested a loan of 200,000 reichsthalers,
which the House of Rothschild granted; but before six
months had expired he asked for a further advance of
300,000 reichsthalers. On this occasion he remarked that
the House of Rothschild had the fullest information re-
garding the elector’s affairs, and could therefore easily
provide for the subsequent repayment of the loan.

Carl Rothschild happened to be in Cassel at the time.
The prince immediately summoned him, and informed
‘him that he had again applied to his firm for money,
making the same remark to him as he had made to the
firm. Carl Rothschild left the audience chamber in re-
flective mood. He thought it exceedingly strange that
the prince should already have incurred further debts,
and he was somewhat annoyed at the remark which he
had made in asking for the loan. There was a risk that
the old elector might come to hear of his son’s borrow-
ings, and they would arouse his indignation not only with
his son but also with the firm of Rothschild. Carl Roths-
child met a chamberlain in the anteroom, and made

_ some remark which may have sounded ill-tempered about
the request for a further loan.

_ After returning to Frankfort ‘Carl took counsel with

‘Amschel, who was there alone; the result was embodied

_in the following letter: *


196 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Most EXCELLENT PRINCE!

We have the honor to acknowledge your High-
ness’s most gracious letter of 28th ultimo. We must
confess that having but recently handed to your
Highness the considerable loan of 200,000 reichs-
thalers, we did not expect to be asked for a still
greater amount. Your Highness will be graciously
aware that we can act only in agreement with
our absent brothers, and we shall therefore not
fail to communicate to them your Highness’s letter,
asking them for their views. In the meantime we
would most submissively beg for a gracious explana-
tion of the following passage in your Highness’s
letter, in which your Highness is pleased to state:
“You have the best possible knowledge of the elec-
tor’s business here, and it is therefore particularly
easy for you to reimburse yourselves through dis-
counting bills.”

Our knowledge of the elector’s affairs extends only
to such business as we are entrusted to carry out. It
is impossible for us to retain a single farthing and to
apply it in the interest of your Highness, for we fur-
nish the fullest accounts of the smallest transaction
and send them to Cassel.


This letter was to fulfil a double object: it would stave
off the prince for the time being, and it would also be a
protection against any reproaches from the elector if the
matter leaked out.

The letter displeased the prince exceedingly; he per-
ceived the rebuke and would have liked to reply indig-
nantly. But he restrained his feelings as he still hoped
to get money from the Rothschilds. However, he felt
that in these circumstances it was difficult for him to
carry on the negotiations personally. He accordingly
selected Buderus as a go-between, requesting him to keep
the matter strictly secret from the elector.

“Having learned of the chance arrival of Baron Carl
von Rothschild,” the prince wrote to Buderus,** antici-


ee


: The Period of Congresses 197


pating the future title of the family, “I felt that I should
inform him of the application I had made to his firm,
and did so most politely. He, however, replied in a most
unfriendly way, and permitted himself to make remarks
behind my back which are not consonant with my honor.”
The young prince stated that nevertheless he still had
confidence in the firm, and begged Buderus to use his in-
fluence to help him out of the awkward situation. He
suggested that the Rothschilds’ letter must be based upon
amisapprehension. “I for my part,” he continued, “could
of course never have thought of such a thing, my inten-
tion being to indicate to him that he would be fully se-
cured as he would have me more or less in his hands.”

Buderus hastened to-carry out the wishes of the heir
to the throne, his future master. He went to Frankfort
and remonstrated with Carl Rothschild for making the
remark to which the elector’s heir had taken exception.
Carl Rothschild protested that he had made no remark
regarding the further loan to anyone excepting Holz-
forster, the gentleman in waiting, who was kept fully
informed of the financial affairs of the heir. Buderus
reported to the young prince: ** “I have succeeded in per-
suading Finanzrat Carl, who was the only one of the
brothers at Frankfort, temporarily to advance a few thou-
sand friedrichdors. Finanzrat Solomon of London has
gone to a spa, and Finanzrat Amschel is also traveling.
It will require a month to obtain the replies of the ab-
sent brothers.”

However, the heir to the throne was persistent. He
immediately informed Buderus that he was not going to
be fobbed off with a few thousand friedrichdors, and
added a remark which savored strongly of a threat.

“T know,” *® he wrote, “that these gentlemen will be
entirely guided by what you say, and my gratitude in
future to Privy Councilor von Carlshausen will be com-
mensurate with his readiness to do me a service now.”

_ The letter went on to make proposals as to how the 300,000
é
-)


198 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


reichsthalers might in spite of everything be obtained |
from Rothschild.

The faithful Buderus felt very bitter about this un- —
gracious reply. He could not force the banking firm to
hand out money at the point of the bayonet. “I most
humbly assure your Highness,” ** he replied, “that the ~
will to carry out your desires is not lacking, and that I
would spare myself no labor or sacrifice to that end, for
I find my greatest satisfaction in the success of my en- |
deavors. Nevertheless, with the best will in the world I ©
am unable to dispose of another person’s property, or to
dictate to him how he should deal with it.”

Buderus reported that he had immediately sent a fur-
ther pressing request to the firm of Rothschild, and had
received the following communication from Carl: “I
am anxious to accede to his Highness’s request, and assure
you that if it depended on me alone there would be no
obstacle to its being immediately granted. However,
in the present instance consultation with all my brothers,
who are now away, is particularly necessary. Our funds
have been to an extent tied up in the recent negotiations
for considerable loans, and I am unable to my infinite re-
gret . . . immediately to come to a decision. Neverthe- ©
less, your Excellency may be assured that we shall make
every possible effort to satisfy his Highness’s require-
ments.” |

Meanwhile Solomon had returned to Frankfort, and it —
was decided ‘after all to advance the prince the money ~
he wanted on very special security. By a deed dated
October 15, 1818, he mortgaged not only “all his real and —
personal property to the exclusion of nothing whatso-
ever,” but also any property of which he might become —
possessed in the future in any way whatever.”

Three months had scarcely elapsed when the prince
was again in need of money. He himself felt that Carls-
hausen would think it strange that he should already —
want another 100,000 gulden; and he first tried to see


The Period of Congresses 199


whether he could ‘“‘acquire” the money from his father’s
friend, a lady whose politeness led him to expect that she
would not refuse his request.'** ‘The Countess von Hessen-
stein evaded the question of a loan in her reply.

The young prince would have gladly paid the firm of
Rothschild ten percent interest if only he could have
got the money. Von Carlshausen was instructed by the
Rothschilds to inform him that the firm never accepted
interest at ten percent as this would be a usurious rate.
Thereupon the prince wrote as follows to his father’s
loyal servant:

“T am well aware that the House of Rothschild can
loan no capital sums in cash at five percent without loss,
and at the same time that the prestige of the firm is too
great to allow them to take a higher rate of interest—
a fact which is entirely to their credit, although in these
times no objection could be made to the higher rate. 1
am therefore confident that your Excellency will, with
your usual kindness, use your good offices with the House
of Rothschild to persuade them to grant me a further
loan of four hundred thousand thalers,” *°

This request moved the firm of Rothschild to indigna-
tion. “Your letter,” they wrote to Carlshausen, “arrived
at the same time with the letter embodying the resolve
of our brother at Berlin, in accordance with which it is
plainly impossible for us to provide a sum exceeding the
five hundred thousand reichsthalers in cash already ad-
vanced, especially in view of the fact that we have had
to make the most exhaustive efforts to provide that
sum.” 7°

The use of the word “resolve” in this letter calls for
special comment, this word usually being reserved for
the decisions of sovereign rulers; also, it was apparently
not so “plainly” impossible to advance the money, for
~on April 1, 1819, this third loan was also granted and the
_ prince received the money he wanted.

Scarcely two years later the elector died; his son suc-


200 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ceeded to the government and to his father’s great pos-
sessions, and the Rothschilds had their money repaid in ©
full with all interest due.

A far-reaching political development now diverted
the firm’s attention from such minor loan transactions,
concentrating it exclusively upon the higher politics of
Europe. The victorious powers had decided to meet in
a congress at Aix-la-Chapelle, there to establish new rela-
tions with the France of the Restoration, as well as to dis-
cuss the question whether the armies of occupation should
be withdrawn, and alleviation granted for the indemni-
ties to be paid. England and the eastern powers were still
suspicious of France; and the interest aroused by this
congress was so great that the monarchs of the Holy Alli-
ance attended it in person, while England was repre-
sented by the two foremost men of the day, Lord Castle-
reagh and Wellington.

Metternich meant to use this opportunity to secure the —
support of the tsar and the King of Prussia for his
schemes by playing on their fears of revolution and gen- —
eral upheaval. Besides the numerous statesmen, the most —
prominent bankers and merchants of Europe flocked to »
Aix-la-Chapelle, scenting prey. Most of them traveled —
through Frankfort and availed themselves of the oppor-
tunity of getting into touch with the financial wire-pullers
in the commercial center of Germany. Metternich too
had come to Frankfort on September 3, 1818, accom-
panied by Gentz.

Gentz was his secretary and adviser in money matters;
but he was interested not only in his country’s but also in —
his own personal advantage. With rare candor he notes
in his diary that in 1815 he received a purse with three
hundred ducats and one with eight hundred ducats
from Russia, and that Prussia had given him—an
Austrian civil servant—eight hundred ducats and two
hundred gold napoleons as a gratuity.2* He was also
quite open about the fact that the Jewish banker Lamel


ilies


The Period of Congresses 201


had given him money and that Parish had given him a
share of the Austrian loan of May, 1818. Gentz called
such transactions “‘pleasant financial dealings.” *? His
way of referring to them is so candid that one gets the
impression that the circumstances of those times pre-
vented his being in the least conscious of anything im-
proper in such gifts.

Prince Metternich came into contact with all the local
magnates at Frankfort, including Bethmann. He seems
not yet to have met Rothschild personally at this time,
but this defect was more than made good by his right-
hand man Frederick von Gentz. The brothers Roths-
child were well aware of the great influence that Gentz
exerted upon Metternich in matters concerning the state
finances, and through him upon the minister of finance,
Count Stadion. They knew also that Gentz was bribable,
whereas they naturally did not venture to approach Met-
ternich in such a way.

Amschel Meyer and Carl Rothschild therefore culled
on Gentz immediately after his arrival. This visit re-
sulted in verbal agreements of a financial nature; and


they also requested him to use his influence with the


prince toward securing his support in the question of the
Frankfort Jews; for at that time the senate ** was attempt-
ing to dispute the competence of the diet to deal with the
Jewish problem, arguing that it was a purely local matter.
The pressure brought to bear by the Rothschilds upon
Gentz, and through him upon Metternich, resulted in the
senate’s objection being disallowed, and a commission of
the diet being appointed to mediate between the two
parties.

This decision, taken on September 10, 1818, moved the
brothers to call on Gentz again on September 12, and
to “engage his interest” by a further detailed exposition
of the whole matter. Gentz suggested that Hardenberg


should have his attention called to the subject again as he


would meet Metternich at Aix-la-Chapelle and would be


202 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


able to discuss it with him. ‘The brothers needed no.


pressing to do this, and wrote to Hardenberg in the fol-
lowing terms:

“Your Highness’s gracious sentiments toward us, as
well as your well-known tolerance in matters of religious
opinion, gives us reason to hope that you will graciously
grant this letter your favorable consideration. The ques-
tion at issue is the final decision in the matter of our posi-
tion as citizens. This is a most important question for us
now, since the welfare of those who confess our faith de-
pends upon it, and is constantly occupying our thoughts.
We are exceedingly anxious not to let pass the oppor-
tunity of the meeting between your Highness and his
Highness the Prince von Metternich to ask that he should
come to a final favorable decision regarding our destiny,
and we await his decision in confidence. In venturing to
appeal as strongly as possible to your Highness we hope
that it may be vouchsafed to us to look with confidence
to the future.” **


During the sixteen days which Gentz spent at Frank- —


fort the brothers Rothschild very frequently came to see
him; he was invited to dine with the Rothschilds at five
o’clock on September 22, Frau Herz and General Vol-
zoven being among those present at the dinner. Amschel
made no slight effort to have distinguished people at his
table; but, as Johann Smidt, Mayor of Bremen, stated,”
it was not in accordance with contemporary customs and
manners to admit a Jew to so-called good society. No
Christian banker or merchant of Frankfort had yet in-
vited a Jew, not even one of the Rothschild brothers, to
dine, and the delegates to the diet did not do so either.
However, several people were beginning to depart from
this tradition, and accepted invitations from the Roths-


childs, either from an absence of prejudice, or from mo-


tives of personal interest.


Gentz arrived at Aix-la-Chapelle September 25, a few


days after Metternich. A brilliant society had met in that


The Period of Congresses 203


city for the congress. Besides monarchs and statesmen,
it included financial magnates such as Baring and Hope,
who were negotiating the French loans in connection with
the payment of the war indemnity. The firm of Roths-
child had sent two brothers to Aix-la-Chapelle, Solomon
and Carl. The latter was accompanied by his bride, the
beautiful and intelligent Adelheid Herz, whom he had
married on September 16, so that his business journey to
the congress coincided with his honeymoon. In the case
of the House of Rothschild even the most important per-
sonal considerations had to yield to important business,
and to such a unique opportunity for forming extensive
new connections,

Through Gentz, Metternich was brought into actual
touch with the two brothers at Aix-la-Chapelle. Gentz
fell completely under their influence, and his diary con-
stantly records their visits. On October 27 Solomon
handed him eight hundred ducats, which he stated he
had won by speculating for him in British funds.?®

On November 2, Gentz again records ** “pleasant finan-
cial dealings” with Solomon, and on November 12 the
brothers, together with Gentz and Parish, lunched with
Metternich. In spite of his heavy work in keeping the
minutes of the congress, Gentz spent the whole of the next
day working on a memorandum stating the case for the ©
Jews of Frankfort, no doubt in return for financial con-
siderations. He called upon Carl’s young wife, who was
highly flattered to be waited upon by the secretary and
confidant of the man who was playing the leading réle in
the illustrious assembly. At the Rothschilds’ request,
Gentz supported Dr. Buchholz, whom the Jews had sent
to Aix-la-Chapelle to secure a favorable decision. Even
if this proved fruitless, the European Areopagus was at
any tate led to view the question in dispute from a

friendly angle.
_ The congress broke up on November 14, 1818. Its


conclusion brought profit to the House of Rothschild,


ca


Be:


204. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


although the principal parts among the bankers had been
played, not by them, but by Baring and Hope. The
Rothschilds, however, took over bills from that firm.
They had successfully put forward the demands of small
princes and above all through Gentz they had obtained a
profound insight into the activities of the men who were
the determining factors in European politics. Moreover,
they had formed invaluable connections for the future of
their House; and more especially they had made the
closer acquaintance of Metternich, the most powerful
man in Europe at the time. The brothers therefore left
Aix-la-Chapelle in a state of high satisfaction. _

Gentz was no less satisfied. He had been widely com-
plimented for his work during the congress and had col-
lected two orders, as well as six thousand ducats. He
also attached great value to having “taken part in the most
instructive conversation with the most powerful men in
the commercial world, while the intimate secrets of the
greatest financial dealings that have ever been transacted
between men were negotiated in his little room.” 78

It is true that Gentz liked to see himself in a romantic
light, and was wont to exaggerate anything with which
he had to do; but the negotiations at Aix-la-Chapelle as
to the manner in which France should pay the 270 mil-
lion francs of war indemnity still outstanding did in fact
constitute a formidable financial transaction. Metternich |
returned home with his sovereign, but Gentz returned at_
the end of November via Frankfort, where he spent about
a week.

His diary shows that the first week in December, 1818,
was spent in almost daily visits to or from the Rothschilds,
and in long conversations and discussions with the mem-
bers of the banking family. Hour after hour Gentz
worked in favor of the Jews of Frankfort. To this period
must be attributed the conclusion of the agreement that
was so profitable to both, providing the Rothschilds wit
an important source of political information and a con-


The Period of Congresses 205


nection with Metternich, while enabling Gentz to carry
on his extravagant manner of life, and to indulge in his
expensive middle-aged amour with Fanny Elssler. The
relationship continued until his death.

From Frankfort Gentz proceeded home via Munich,
where he received a letter from his friend Adam Miiller.

The public had learned something of the part played
by the brothers Rothschild during the past critical years,
and Gentz had told Miller more. Miiller, as a result,
suggested that his friend describe in a short sketch the
rise of the House of Rothschild.*®

Gentz replied as follows: “I was delighted with your
idea of a monograph on the Rothschilds. It is one of the
brightest and most happy notions that I have heard for
some time. The word is all the more appropriate since
the Rothschilds really do constitute a special species plan-
tarum with its own characteristics. ‘They are vulgar,
ignorant Jews, outwardly presentable. In their craft they
act entirely in accordance with the principles of natu-
ralism, having no suspicion of a higher order of things;
but they are gifted with a remarkable instinct which
causes them always to choose the right, and of two rights,
the better. ‘Their enormous wealth (they are the richest
people in Europe) is entirely the result of this instinct
which the public are wont to call luck.

“Now that I have seen everything at close quarters,
Baring’s most profound reasoning inspires me with less
confidence than the sound judgment of one of the more
intelligent Rothschilds—for among the five brothers there
is one whose intelligence is wanting and another whose
intelligence is weak. If Baring and Hope ever fail, I can
state with confidence that it will be because they have
thought themselves cleverer than Rothschild and have
not followed his advice. JI am writing to you con amore
about these people and their business, because they were
my recreation at Aix-la-Chapelle and at the same time I
aa a great deal from them.”


ie
u ‘


206 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


These remarks of Gentz’s are valuable because they
occur in a confidential private letter to a friend. We
shall see later how differently Gentz was to speak about
the same Rothschilds in a work destined for publication
for which he received a princely fee from the family.

While the International Congress temporarily brought
the three brothers, Amschel, Solomon, and Carl into the
foreground, James in Paris and Nathan in London had
not been inactive. Nathan in particular had succeeded in
carrying on his activities in dealing with large loans, and
had issued twelve million pounds of English State Loan.
This business does not itself appear to have brought much
profit to the firm of Rothschild, but it secured its prestige
in the eyes of the British Treasury, and demonstrated to
the whole world that in the face of native competition it
had maintained its position as the banker of England—
a nation which now, after Napoleon’s overthrow, was re-
joicing in its undisputed political power and wealth.

James in Paris was in constant close association with
Barbier, the chairman of the Austrian Liquidation Com-
mittee in that city. He-continued his efforts in rivalry
with other firms, to secure the handling of the war in-
demnity, and so extended his business.

While the House was thus prospering throughout the
world, its existence was suddenly most seriously threat-
ened in the home town of Frankfort. The family had
just lost one of its best friends there—the man to whom
must properly be ascribed the important part of having
first held the ladder on which the House of Rothschild
had climbed to such heights. On August 3, 1819, while
sitting at his desk in Hanau, Buderus had a stroke.

A short glance at the papers which he left shows that he
had spent his whole life in meticulous devotion to the
exacting work of accountancy. The son of a poor school-
master, he had risen to the rank of privy councilor and
head of the treasury. He had acquired a fine estate and
was possessed of about one and a half million gulden.*°


The Period of Congresses 207


All this was, however, a trifling reward, when one con-
siders the services he rendered to the elector during the
Napoleonic period, and the enormous portions of the
elector’s possessions he rescued.

His devotion to duty had not made him popular, for
he was reproached with having acted with too great
harshness in the elector’s interests. Von Carlshausen
seems to have realized this at the end of his days, and
there is a suggestion of self-justification in the concluding
sentence of his will, which reads as follows:

“T have done what was in my power to provide for my
dear children. I have considered no sacrifice and no
effort to be too great where the furtherance of their hap-
piness has been concerned, and my whole life has been a
consistent endeavor to place their welfare on a firm foun-
dation. God has blessed my efforts ... and you, my
dear children, hearken to and follow a father’s last coun-
sel: guard carefully the property which I, with God’s
help, have industriously acquired. It is burdened neither
by the tears of the oppressed nor by the curses of the de-
frauded. Endeavor to increase and secure it through
economy, order, industry, wisdom, clemency, and piety.
Shun greed and usurious avarice that blights all virtue.
Have naught to do with unjust acquisitions. Always re-
member that contentment is the crown of riches.” **

The House of Rothschild owed an infinite debt of grati-
tude to the dead man. It is true that under the contract
he had had his share in the business, and to this fact in-
deed he owed the greater part of his wealth. But this was
of small account in comparison with the services which
he had rendered in excluding all rival firms from the rich
elector’s business, and with the possibilities which he
had created of applying the elector’s money to consoli-
date the credit of the banking firm and to secure its great
business.

_ It was in its native town that the rise of the House had
aroused the greatest envy and hatred. A Frankfort police


208 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


report of that time gives a fairly good picture of popular
feeling in the old imperial city:

“The occasion of a day of penitence,” ** the report runs,
“being held to commemorate a big fire that occurred at
Frankfort a hundred years ago, through which four hun-
dred houses were destroyed, clearly brings out the feel-
ings of the Christian inhabitants against the Jews. Ac-
cording to the story, much property is supposed to have
been stolen by them. In general, any opportunity for
showing envy and ill-will is welcomed, all sense of jus-
tice being forgotten, although many rich Jews are a source
of substantial income to Christians. Any right-thinking
person will condemn the fact, for instance, that a carica-
ture ridiculing his ennoblement ** was recently pinned
to the door of the Jewish banker Rothschild at Frankfort.

“Rothschild, although he indulges somewhat in dis-
play, provides many people with an opportunity of earn-
ing money thereby, and is exceedingly benevolent to the
poor whether they be Christians or Jews. ‘The capacity
of this Jewish commercial and banking firm is shown by
the fact that it has taken over a loan for England, of
which we have just been informed. It is noteworthy that
the firm of Rothschild secured the business in competition
against others. A few days ago the firm on receiving a
special message from Vienna bought fifteen thousand
Métalliques; the price of Austrian securities immediately
rose, and the stockbrokers got extraordinarily busy.”

The revelation of the firm’s power had the most exag-
gerated results. In such a highly emotional period as
Germany was passing through, a rapid development of
this kind was bound to have a particularly exasperating
effect upon contemporaries and rivals. All thinking
people in Germany were greatly stirred by the desire for
freedom and national unity. On March 23, 1819, a fan-
atic’s dagger cost Kotzebue his life because of his attacks
on the national party. The emotion, artificially held in


») 32


The Period of Congresses 209


check by Metternich, everywhere vented itself upon the
Jews.

A farce called “Unser Verkehr” (“Our Neighbors”)
was played throughout Germany, which, to the uproari-
ous applause of the spectators, ridiculed the manners and
customs of the Jews.** The author was unknown, and
everybody said that the House of Rothschild had offered
a reward for his discovery.

In August, 1819, the Conferences of Ministers, over
which Metternich presided, met at Carlsbad to decide
upon the notorious measures against any movement of
liberation; the resulting excitement found an outlet in a
violent outbreak of popular passion against the Jews.
Wiirzburg was the first town in which acts of violence
were perpetrated. The populace gathered together in
groups which marched past the Jews’ houses, smashing
windows and breaking down doors. They began to loot.
“Hepp! Hepp! Down with the Jews!” *® resounded
through the streets. Similar scenes occurred in Bamberg
and other towns.

The Jews of Frankfort were all the more dismayed by
these occurrences, as there had been menacing signs of a
similar movement developing in that city. Amschel
Meyer Rothschild and his two brothers, who on account
of their wealth were likely to be the principal object of
any attack, began to feel that their lives were seriously
threatened, and to consider the question of flight.

One of the brothers seems to have spoken of their in-
tentions to an Austrian official, for, writing on August 6, a °
secretary of legation at Frankfort reports as follows: *°
“T have the honor tentatively to inform you that I have
learned from a reliable source that the Jewish banking
firm of Rothschild here intends to leave Frankfort for
good; they are going to apply, through the imperial min-
ister of finance Count von Stadion for permission to settle
in Vienna. Their intention is still a close secret here.


210 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


When they give effect to it, it will cause an enormous sen-
sation both among the municipal authorities and in the
whole business community, and the splendor of Frank-
fort will be considerably dimmed. It will probably serve
to heighten the bitter feeling against the Jews, and the
departure of the Rothschilds will be a fatal blow to
them.”

Frankfort soon caught the contagion of the anti-Jewish
disturbances in the other cities of Germany. They were
all the more likely to culminate in deeds of violence in
that city since the populace knew that in its hatred of the
Jews it enjoyed the sympathy of the highest authorities in
the town. The occasion for the outbreak was a trifling
one. On the evening of August 10, 1819, some youths
walked through the Jewish quarter provocatively shout-
ing “Hepp, Hepp!” Several Jews who happened to be
standing at their doors joined to drive the youths out of
their street, and beat one of the brawlers who had fallen
into their hands. Thereupon the rumor spread through
Frankfort like lightning that a Christian had been killed
by the Jews.

Crowds collected instantaneously and moved shouting
through the Jewish quarter, breaking up windows and
shops with stones. The house of the Rothschilds was also
attacked, and all their window-panes lay scattered about
the streets. The family had had to take refuge in the back
room, where they listened trembling to the threatening
shouts of the mob.

On the morning of the 11th, the words “Hepp, hepp,”
the slogan for driving out the loathed Jew, were inscribed
in large letters at all the street corners. ‘Thereupon sev-
eral wealthy Israelites left the inhospitable town of
Frankfort, and the brothers Rothschild nearly followed
their example. As the disturbances increased the senate
began to be alarmed that the Jew-baiting might develop
into a general rising. The available troops were called
up to hold the excited populace in check. Moreover, the


The Period of Congresses 211


delegates to the diet, feeling particularly concerned about
the attacks on the House of Rothschild, which had impor-
tant financial connections with most of the governments
represented at the diet, demanded that counter-measures
should be taken. A general resolution of the diet was
proposed, requiring the senate to take strong measures
to protect the security and property of the Jews.

Count Buol would certainly have been acting in ac-
cordance with the wishes of Prince Metternich in press-
ing energetically, at any rate on behalf of Austria, for
such measures to be taken by the senate. Buol, however,
who was hostile to the Jews, hesitated and waited for in-
structions. Not so the Prussian representative, Coun-
selor of Embassy Himly. On the very morning of August
11 he gave a “most worshipful council of the free city of
Frankfort to understand ** that he had the fullest con-
fidence that the council would take the most appropriate
measures for punishing the attack made upon the house
of the royal Prussian commercial advisers, Meyer
Amschel von Rothschild and Sons, and would assure
their persons and property adequate protection against
similar risks in the future.” Himly added, “The under-
signed ‘kindly requests the earliest possible information
regarding the measures which an honorable council have
taken in this matter.”

The mayors Metzler and von Usemer replied that the
disturbances in the Jewish quarter had immediately sub-
sided, and that the senate had taken the strongest meas-
ures to prevent their recurrence. The senate added to
this statement that the protection of the laws extended
to all the inhabitants, and therefore also to the merchants
Rothschild, and that the events of the previous night
would be reviewed most strictly, and the ringleaders pun-
ished.** ‘This read well, but bore little relation to reality,
for although actual attacks upon the houses of the Jews
ceased, the hatred of their inhabitants had come into the
open, and this kept the Jews in a state of anxiety.


212 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


James in Paris had heard with great alarm of what
had occurred at Frankfort, and had urged his brother to
leave his home. ‘You will have read in the public press,”
he wrote to David Parish at Carlsbad, “how on the night
of the roth of this month mobs collected in the streets of
Frankfort and poured forth threats and imprecations
upon the Jewish community. Prompt measures on the
part of a praiseworthy senate have scattered the ring-
leaders and, according to the last reports I have received,
have restored order.

‘You can readily imagine that such occurrences are as
unpleasant as they are unexpected nowadays. What can
be the result of such disturbances? Surely they can have
the effect only of causing all the rich people of our nation
to leave Germany and transfer their property to France
and England. I myself have advised my brother at
Frankfort to shut down his house and to come here, If
we make a start I am convinced that all well-to-do people
will follow our example, and I question whether the
sovereigns of Germany will be pleased with a develop-
ment that will make it necessary for them to apply to
France or England when they are in need of funds.

“Who buys state bonds in Germany, and who has en-
deavored to raise the rate of exchange if it be not our
nation? Has not our example engendered a certain con-
fidence in state loans, so that Christian firms have also
taken heart and invested part of their money in all kinds
of securities? The Jewish community in Germany is not
allowed to learn the various crafts, so that there is nothing
left for them to do but to become dealers in money and
stocks.

“A man generally has the greatest confidence in the
securities of the country in which he lives; if the peace of
the rich in Germany be disturbed, they will find them-
selves forced to emigrate for their safety; and they will
certainly not take any interest in the funds of a country
where their life has been obviously endangered. The


The Period of Congresses 213


object of the agitators at Frankfort seems to have been
provisionally to collect all the Israelites into a single
street; if they had succeeded in doing this, might it not
have led to a general massacre? In that case would
the public have had any scruples about plundering their
houses?

“T need not point out to you how undesirable such an

occurrence would be, especially at a time when our house
_ might be holding large sums for the account of the Aus-
trian or Prussian court. It seems to me to be really neces-
sary that Austria or Prussia should devise measures to be
applied by the senate at Frankfort for energetically deal-
ing with occurrences such as those of the roth of this
month, and thus making each man secure in his posses-
sions.
- “JT am sure you will be so good as to speak to his High-
ness Prince Metternich about this matter, and your
friendship for me makes me feel confident that you will
appeal to him strongly on behalf of our nation. I am
informed that Herr von Bethmann was particularly con-
spicuous among those who endeavored to restore
order.) °?

The advice which James gave from abroad did not
take into account the important interests that would have
to be sacrificed if the firm that was so deeply rooted in
its native city, where it was the center of an intricate net-
work of business connections, were to change its head-
quarters. The brothers who were resident at Frankfort
did certainly consider the question of leaving the town,
but when order had been restored they gave up the idea
for the time. Amschel Meyer, as head of the firm, was _
tied to Frankfort. But in Solomon and Carl, who were
freer to move about, the events at Frankfort had pro-
duced a certain uneasiness, which made them inclined
to welcome any future opportunity for settling elsewhere.

Baron von Handel attentively noted the results of the
Jewish disturbances. Some rich Jewish firms such as


214 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Ellissen and Speyer did actually transfer their headquar-
ters to the Hessian town of Offenbach close by; and a per-
sistent rumor was maintained that the Rothschilds would
follow them.

“The great and rich House of Rothschild,” Handel
reported to Metternich, “is supposed to be not entirely
averse to the idea of leaving here; and if they should
do so, they would probably take up permanent residence
in Paris or London, where they already have branches.
The question suggests itself whether it would not be in
our interests to offer them the prospect of a good recep-
tion in the I. and R. states, and to induce the House to
emigrate to Vienna.” *°

This report was communicated to the committee of the
treasury dealing with commercial affairs at Vienna.**
The next day another letter from Handel arrived, stating
that the inclination of the Rothschild banking firm to
leave Frankfort was becoming more and more marked.
The treasury committee for commercial affairs trans-
mitted these to the ministry of finance and the interior
for their information and observation, adding* that
Amschel von Rothschild spent a hundred and fifty thou-
sand gulden on his household alone and that he gave
twenty thousand gulden a year to the poor. The com-
mittee were of opinion that the firm of Rothschild was
at liberty to apply to be received in the I. and R. states.
Count Stadion thereupon wrote the following to the min-
ister of the interior, Count Saurau:

“The president of the treasury committee has informed
me in the enclosed letter of his intention to invite the
Frankfort firm of Rothschild to settle in Vienna, and also
of the means whereby, subject to my agreement, he pro-
poses to prepare the way to this end. The settlement of
the House of Rothschild within the Austrian dominions
would without doubt be of great advantage, and the pro-
posal is therefore deserving of every support, although
Hofrat von Handel’s letter does not suggest that the


wk” ui


The Period of Congresses 215


House have expressed any desire to emigrate to the Aus-
trian dominions. It merely raises the question whether
an effort should be made to induce them to do so.” *

As the reception of the Jewish families was a matter
that concerned the minister of the interior, Stadion re-
ferred the suggestion to him, with the request that he ap-
prove it. Count Saurau sent his reply direct to the presi-
dent of the treasury committee, conveying his decision to
Stadion in the form of a copy of that letter, which read
as follows: **


I venture first to call your Excellency’s attention
to the fact... that it is still quite uncertain
whether the firm of Rothschild intends to leave
Frankfort. Still less may we infer (from the re-
ports) any clearly expressed preference for settling
in Vienna. It would seem indeed exceedingly doubt-
ful whether the House of Rothschild would choose
for permanent residence a place where its principal
would, in view of his religious persuasion, be sub-
ject to more restrictions than in any other state.
Your Excellency must be aware that foreign Israel-
ites may reside here only on obtaining the special
“toleration” permit, which cannot be issued until
they have duly received the provisional authoriZa-
tion for wholesale trading.

The department is not competent to make an ex-
ception to the I. and R. regulations regarding this
matter, and its action would be limited . . . to ap-
proving the request of the House of Rothschild for
permission to reside, if submitted. In view of the
complicated conditions, which are not likely to at-
tract the House of Rothschild, it would seem espe-
cially desirable to avoid any step that suggested an
invitation, and to leave it to them to apply, since
special exceptions can be made only with the per-
sonal approval of the emperor. Meanwhile your

Excellency may rest assured that we are far too well
aware of the advantages that would in many re-
spects accrue to the imperial state of Austria through


216 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the settlement of such an eminent firm within its
borders, not to advise his Majesty most emphatically
to give his consent as soon as a formal or definite
application in this matter is received.


Handel was accordingly instructed that if the House
of Rothschild made inquiries at the legation he was to
indicate that they should submit an application. In any
case, the report of the department revealed that it desired
the House of Rothschild to emigrate to Vienna.

This was all the more remarkable as the position of the
Jews in Austria was far from being an enviable one.
They had not the right of owning land in any part of the
imperial dominions; law and custom excluded them from
administration and the courts, from the practice of the
law and from the teaching profession, from all higher
posts in the army, and from any political functions and
offices. They were restricted in the matter of marriages;
they had to pay poll tax and report themselves to the
Jewish office, and foreign Jews were allowed to remain
in the country only for a short period.

Such were the circumstances in which the highest of-
ficials in the state of Austria were trying to induce a for-
eign Jewish family to settle in the country. But that
family was enormously rich; its financial influence was
immense; and money overcame all other considerations.
Soon a Rothschild House was to be established in Vienna
too.

Frankfort was becoming exceedingly uncomfortable
for the Rothschild family. The brothers were constantly
receiving anonymous threats. One letter ** informed
them of the day on which Amschel was to be murdered
by a secret society formed for the purpose of driving the
Jews out of Frankfort. In spite of all this the firm con-
tinued to carry on its business undisturbed, the Austrian
side of it particularly developing with the help of Met-
ternich and Stadion.


The Period of Congresses 217


Austrian affairs were chiefly left to Solomon. In mid-
July of that year the firm of Rothschild had undertaken
jointly with Gontard to arrange for the transfer from
Naples of large sums of money which that kingdom had
owed Austria since the intervention of 1815. Also sums
to the value of about three million francs, payable in sat-
isfaction of Austria’s claims upon France, were trans-
mitted to Vienna, the firm of Rothschild receiving one
percent of the payments effected.*® Finally, the brothers
had heard from a confidential source in Milan that there
Was an amount of money in the state treasury there **
which the government wished to transfer to Vienna. They
immediately offered to carry this out.

It involved a transmission of two million lira in gold
coins, and Solomon, who was again staying at Vienna,
quickly got into personal touch with the treasury in order
to discuss the best means of sending this sum from Milan
to Vienna through exchange operations. ‘The firm of
Rothschild stated that they would undertake the transfer
of any sum whatever at the cheapest rate possible, and
that they could arrange the business to the greatest advan-
tage of the imperial interests.** For this service they and
the firm of Gontard received one-half percent commis-
sion and one-eighth percent brokerage, so that for the
simple transmission of the money from Milan to Vienna
they received 12,933 lira in gold.

Their extensive transactions necessitated a voluminous
correspondence, the rapid transmission of which was a
difficult problem under the primitive conditions of those
times. It was not only that posts were slow and far be-
tween; there were special dangers attached to the postal
service because the contents of correspondence was not
treated as inviolable. A large part of Germany was still
served by the Thurn and Taxis post bureaus which were
divided into lodges and non-lodges,*® according as their
officials were or were not the confidential agents of the
Viennese Cipher Service.


218 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


If a letter came to a lodge office, it was carefully opened
before being sent on, read through, and any important
passages were copied. As these “intercepts,” as they were
called, were always laid before the authorities, such
action, often abused, was greatly feared. Even Count
Stadion did not hesitate °° personally to invent “inter-
cepts” in order to ruin persons who were a nuisance to
him. Sometimes the couriers themselves intercepted
letters in transit.

“Such inspection,” Bethmann wrote on the occasion
of a visit to Vienna,** “is inevitable, and Rothschild and
Parish are as little able to avoid it as Herr von Gey-
miiller, although the latter enjoys the full confidence of
Prince Metternich. Solomon Rothschild yesterday told
me that his brother had recently again received three let-
ters from him in one day.”

The brothers Rothschild naturally thoroughly under-
stood the position. As they had a great deal to say to one
another that they did not wish anyone else to hear and
also attached great importance to the speedy receipt of
news in advance of normal methods, they decided to have
their own system of couriers. They would be reimbursed
for the heavy expense of this arrangement at one stroke
if their firm thereby received early news of any political
event that might affect the exchange.

An example of this occurred when the Duke of Berry
was murdered. The duke was the nephew of the King
of France, and as Louis XVIII had no children, the
hopes of the Bourbons were centered upon him. As he
was leaving the opera on February 13, 1820, he was assas-
sinated by a political fanatic who thought to save France
by exterminating the Bourbons. According to Handel’s
statement 2 the Rothschilds heard of this long before
anyone else; they made appropriate arrangements for
themselves, and then made the event known. This re-
sulted in an immediate fall in all state securities, and pro-
duced “general consternation.”


Se


The Period of Congresses 219


The courier system was at first inaugurated between
the three brothers in London, Frankfort, and Paris.
When the business with Austria accumulated, and
Solomon’s visits there grew more and more lengthy, the
couriers extended their route to include Vienna.

The Austrian representatives in London, Frankfort,
and Paris, being in constant communication with the
House of Rothschild, soon realized that reports could be
_ more speedily sent in this manner and, as remarks on
numerous documents showed, frequently entrusted the
Rothschild couriers with the most important and secret
letters, without considering whether the Rothschilds
might turn the tables and themselves “intercept” the state
communications. This certainly cannot be proved, but it
is highly probable, for on one occasion, when the brothers
entrusted a letter to an ambassador, the letter was imme-
diately “perused.” Proof of this is furnished by the fol-
lowing two letters: on November 28, 1819,°* Handel re-
ported as follows to Metternich: ‘““The banker Carl von
Rothschild, who left for Vienna today, asked us to put
several letters to various German ministers meeting at
Vienna, which he had been asked to take with him, in a
packet and sea! it with the embassy seal, so that he could
bring them over the frontier without risk. I made no
difficulty about acceding to the request of Herr von
Rothschild—who like other Jews is exceedingly timid but
is a person of sound character—because this favor made
it possible to see the contents of the letters. Rothschild
duly sent them to me and although I had not time to
peruse them all, I was able to scan the more important.”

The other letter was from ** Le Monnier, the secretary
of legation at Frankfort, to the director of the secret serv-
ice department at Vienna. - It ran as follows: “Herr
Rothschild [no doubt Amschel Meyer], whom I often
meet at Count Buol’s as well as at Baron von Handel’s,
has asked me to allow him to send his letters to his brother
in my bag. I did not raise any objection as I did not


220 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


think it advisable to refuse; but I venture to suggest that
you should inform the secret service department of this
fact so that they may look out for these letters and inter-
cept all those under my address.”

It is not at all unlikely that the brothers Rothschild,
who must be credited with a reasonable amount of intel-
ligence, sometimes deliberately had letters sent through
the embassies in order to put them in possession of facts
which had been invented or adapted for definite purposes.

The financial position of all the states which had been
engaged in prolonged military operations much needed
to be set in order, now that peace and tranquillity had re-
turned. In Austria, Stadion was dealing with this prob-
lem in collaboration with Metternich. Metternich was
personally concerned to see that Stadion was profitably
occupied in the financial matters, to which he had been
sidetracked when the chancellor succeeded to the Foreign
Office. His rival would then feel that he had plenty to
do, and the financial strengthening of the monarchy
would assist the policy of the chancellor. There were
thus two men controlling the destinies of Austria who
were well disposed to the Jews in general and to the
House of Rothschild in particular.

In 1816, in addition to the interest-bearing state debt,
there was an almost equal amount of paper money in
circulation which was worth a quarter less than its face
value. Stadion’s efforts were directed toward preventing
any further fall in value, through the issue of loans and
other measures such as the founding of a national bank.
The Métalliques loan, so called because the interest on
the bonds was payable in precious metal, constituted a be-
ginning. Stadion was in agreement with Metternich that
the House of Rothschild should always be treated with
consideration politically, with a view to inducing it also
to participate in a loan. Since these were Metternich’s
plans, it is not strange that he should have been much


:


The Period of Congresses 221


irritated by the anti-Jewish attitude of the city of Frank-
fort.

Frankfort was described as a center of unrest *° in the
reports from the delegates at this period. This was quite
enough reason for Metternich, who scented revolution
and upheaval everywhere, to feel displeased with that
city. He accordingly intervened to prevent the diet from
leaving the settlement of the Jewish problem to the muni-
cipal departments. Metternich and Stadion also decided
to accede to the request made a year and a day previously
that Nathan should be appointed consul in London. On
March 3, 1820, the emperor gave his formal sanction in
this matter.°°

The ambassador in London, Prince von Esterhazy,
was instructed °* to inform Nathan of his new sphere of
activity, and to encourage him “through friendly advice
and any other suitable means to carry out his duties in
the manner which the state expected.” Official instruc-
tions were simultaneously sent to Nathan in London °*®
informing him not merely that he should duly carry out
the duties imposed upon him by the I. and R. embassy,
but that he should, without waiting to be asked, regularly
convey to them any information he received regarding
events that might directly or indirectly affect the govern-
ment’s policy.

On Metternich’s instructions Handel, the minister at
Frankfort, had in November, 1819,°° entered into nego-
tiations with Rothschild for the big loan that Austria
wanted to place with the firm.

Since that time the distinctions and favors already de-
scribed had with deliberate intent been accorded to the
House of Rothschild. Nathan now had a position in the
consular corps of the British capital, a fact which was
exceedingly valuable to him both socially and in busi-
ness. He was able to give Amschel powerful support in
his struggle for the rights of the Frankfort Jews.


222 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


The ground had thus been well prepared for a favor-
able reception of the Austrian loan. The national bank
required about 55,000,000 gulden in order to withdraw
the paper money from circulation. On April 4 the em-
peror had authorized the minister of finance to issue the
loan, which in accordance with Stadion’s suggestion was
to be done in two parts. On April 7 the first 20,000,000
gulden were, in accordance with Solomon’s suggestion,
issued to the firms of Rothschild and Parish in the form
of a lottery loan, a method which was still unusual at
that time, and which never failed of its effect upon the
general public.

Nothing was said at the time of the negotiations that
were already in progress for the issue of a further 35,000-
gulden loan; and everyone subscribed to this loan in the
confident belief that it would be the only lottery loan for
the time being. The conditions were very oppressive to
the Austrian state, although the redemption of the loan
extended over quite a long period; under the agreement,
the state had to repay in all 38,000,000 in return for the
20,000,000 then advanced. This naturally produced an
adverse opinion in the general public, which was ignorant
as to the general financial position and Stadion’s inten-
tions, and had only these figures to go upon.

A contemporary police report states°® that the an-
nouncement of the Rothschild lottery loan had had a very
bad effect upon public sentiment. The government’s
credit when it‘ had scarcely begun to recover was appre-
ciably lowered.

“Ags far as the Rothschild loan is concerned,” the re-
port continued, “I feel a genuine difficulty in deciding
where to commence with my description of the exceed-
ingly unfavorable impression . . . made by this financial
operation, not only upon the Viennese public, but also
upon the inhabitants of all the provinces. It would not
be in accordance with the modesty due from one in my
position to record the harsh expressions used by the op-


The Period of Congresses 223


ponents of this measure in describing it as a monument
of frivolity, caprice, and self-interest—indeed as being
an immoral transaction. There have probably not been
such numerous critics and opponents of any previous
financial operation.

“T heard a guest at an At Home exclaim, ‘This loan is
one of the most wicked things that have been done at the
expense of our pockets for twenty years, and that is say-
ing a great deal!’ One thing generally felt about this loan
is that the manner in which it was made public inevitably
made it unpopular from the start. To notify the inhabi-
tants of a state that 20,000,000 were being borrowed from
a foreign Jew, for which 38,000,000o—very nearly double
the amount—would have to be repaid, is regarded as
treating one’s subjects as beneath contempt. . . . It is felt
that the announcement of the loan in the Wiener Zeitung
amounted to the finance minister’s saying: ‘IJ am well
aware that your expenditure being greater than your in-
come you have not enough money to pay your taxes.
Now in order that in future you may be still less able to
pay them I shall still further limit the amount of money
in circulation and therefore your income. In return for
this benefit you will have to pay 38 millions to the Jew
Rothschild.’ ”

The writer of this report emphasized the fact that there
appeared to be no conceivable excuse for excluding the
public from participating directly in such an advanta-
geous financial speculation as the lottery loan, and for put-
ting it in the hands of a foreign Jew. Citizens were being
compelled to purchase the lottery bonds from foreign
Jews at a premium of from 10%! to 18%.

“YT am assured by bankers here,” the report continued,
“that the profit which the contractors have made out of
this loan is enormous. To the four millions granted them
by way of commission must be added what they will
realize through the sale of the bonds, which they do not
issue at under 100 gulden. The Rothschild who is living


224. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


here himself admits that this profit will increase from
year to year, and that he hopes the bonds will rise to 200
by the second drawing, and to 400 by the tenth drawing!
And this is not at all unlikely, since Rothschild is holding
back the sale of the bonds, thereby increasing his chances
of a tremendous gain.

“The whole transaction is felt to be a shameful Jewish
swindle arranged between the Rothschilds and the crown
agent Joel. The latter is supposed to have persuaded the
minister of finance, or rather his department, to agree to it,
and in return Joel or Joelson is alleged to have received
1,000 bonds, Count Stadion 2,000, and Burgermeister, the
secretary of the treasury, 500. I personally regard all
these statements as slanders without any foundation. The
feeling about the loan was so bitter at first that a pro-
posal was made among all ranks of society to form
leagues, the members of which should pledge themselves
not to take bonds exceeding the value of 100 gulden from
the Rothschilds.”

There were other critics who did not deny that Sta-
dion’s intentions were honest, but gave him to understand
that they believed the minister of finance had been hope-
lessly done.

The figures contained in this police report somewhat
exaggerated the facts, but expressed the feeling of the
public that enormous profits had been made out of this
business. In spite of the declared boycott there was an
extraordinarily brisk demand for the Rothschild lottery
bonds. The offices were literally besieged with appli-
cants, and the bonds soon rose to 110, 120, 150, and even
higher.

The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung had published
articles by Gentz and other agents of the Rothschilds,
which under the title “Financial Letters” recommended
the “exceptionally favorable lottery.” Enticed by these
developments, Stadion decided in accordance with the
authorization which he had received, to issue the further


—_ee


_—_


The Period of Congresses 225


35,000,000 gulden four months after the first loan. Roths-
child and Parish paid out 35,000,000 gulden of conven-
tion currency in cash in twelve monthly instalments, in
return for acknowledgments of indebtedness. The terms
were such that the state would have to repay 76,821,515
gulden as capital and interest in return for the 35,000,000
gulden which it had received. In addition the state paid
a commission of 4%, amounting to 1,400,000 gulden.

These conditions which were approved by Emperor
Francis made the loan one of the most lucrative transac-
tions of the time. For the firm not merely exploited the
public’s gambling instincts to sell the bonds at a good
price, it also influenced the rate of exchange through its
connections with the principal bourses. It was obvious
that the Rothschilds would have to reckon with the fall
in the price of the twenty-million issue as soon as it be-
came known that a further loan of thirty-five millions
was to be made so soon afterwards. But before this was
made public they had placed the original issue at a price
well above par, so that when the second loan was issued
the earlier bonds were almost all in other people’s hands.

There was naturally at once a storm of indignation
against the enterprising bankers; but the first issue soon
recovered, and the bonds of both issues were eagerly
sought. The public indignation subsided; the Austrian
State had its millions in cash; and the Rothschilds re-
mained in undisturbed possession of their profits.

The negotiations necessitated by these important and
extensive transactions had made essential the continuous
presence in Vienna of a member of the Rothschild House.
The discussions were carried on almost exclusively by
Solomon Rothschild, although he was acting in concert
with his brothers. This enormous business, however, re-
quired constant personal attention in its further stages
also; and it was therefore necessary for Solomon to try
to obtain some permanent pied a terre at Vienna. The
laws of the country did not allow a foreign Jew to buy a,


226 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


house of his own, and perhaps such was not his original
intention. The firm did not yet contemplate establishing
a branch similar to those in London and Paris, although
this was done eventually as the result of its intimate asso-
ciation with the finance and policy of Austria.

Solomon Rothschild had taken up his quarters in one
of the leading hostelries of Vienna, known as the Hotel
of the Roman Emperor, No. 1 Renngasse. It had some
of the most distinguished visitors at that time, including
the King of Wurttemberg in the year 1820. This was the
only hotel with a large concert room,” and its acoustic
properties were excellent. Beethoven often gave recitals
there, and occasionally he stayed, it is supposed, at the
Roman Emperor.

Solomon lived at the hotel until he was given the free-
dom of the city of Vienna. Eventually, it is true, he was
the only guest in the hotel, for he occupied all the rooms.
In the end he bought the building, as well as the house
next it, No. 3 Renngasse. This is still in the possession
of the family, while an insurance company acquired what
was once the Roman Emperor Hotel.

Meanwhile Metternich’s confidence in the firm of
Rothschild had increased. The family perceived this,
and when they saw any signs of big business they would
let him know through Gentz that they would like to carry
it out. James had learned in Paris that the allies had de-
cided in 181s to put aside twenty million francs of the
Paris war indemnity for the erection of a fourth con-
federate fortress on the Rhine.*

James in Paris and Solomon in Vienna immediately
offered to send this money to Frankfort so that the diet
might have it available in current coin at their headquar-
ters. Metternich was unduly attracted by the firm’s offer
to transmit the funds without charging commission or
anything for expenses, and overlooked the profit to be de-
rived on the rate of exchange. He therefore decided


The Period of Congresses 227


jointly with the Prussian secretary of state that this busi-
ness should be carried through by the firm of Rothschild.

The two brothers, by a concerted arrangement, each
made an offer that, if the money were left in their hands,
the one in Paris would pay 3!14%' and the one in Vienna
would pay 3% until the building work on the fortress
actually commenced. That might be a long time yet,
as indeed events proved. Barbier observed in this con-
nection (in a letter to Buol) ®* that in carrying out Met-
ternich’s instructions he had arranged that the diet should
retain the right to demand security for the twenty mil-
lions from the House of Rothschild if this sum were de-
posited with them.

“The House of Rothschild,” he wrote, “is undoubtedly
one of the richest and best-established firms in Europe,
but we thought it wiser to take this precaution as over
twenty million francs are involved, which may be on
deposit with them for quite a long period if the con-
struction of the new fortress should be still further de-
layed.”

Thus while the government itself paid 5% for ready
money it left this large sum on deposit with the firm of
Rothschild at 314% interest for an indefinite time. The
banking firm got the advantage of this unexpectedly
cheap money just when important political events in the
South of Europe threatened to disturb the peaceful at-
mosphere that had been prevailing since the Congress of
Vienna.

The Liberals in Spain had forced the promise of a con-
stitution from King Ferdinand VII, who had been rfe-
instated there. Civil war continued in that country, while
the victory which the Liberals had won infected the ex-
citable population in other lands similarly oppressed.

Revolution broke out in the kingdom of Naples, where
_ the nationalistic aims of the secret league of the Car-
bonari had affected wide circles of the population. On


228 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


his restoration by the Austrians in 1815 King Ferdinand
I, an upholder of the principle of absolute autocracy,
gladly accepted Metternich’s condition that he should
make no concessions to the Liberals, and should govern
in accordance with the Metternich system. Now, how-
ever, that he was threatened by popular rising, he yielded
all along the line and made the ringleader, General Pepe,
commander-in-chief, and pledged himself to a constitu-
tion on the Spanish model.

A similar movement was making progress in the island
of Sicily, where the king’s ministers had to make way for
new men who were popular with the Carbonari. One of
these ministers was the brilliant Luigi Cavaliere de Med-
ici, who managed to maintain order in the finances in
spite of the extravagances of the ruling family, and the
privileges of the nobility and priesthood.

Metternich, who was watching over Europe like a
guardian angel, resented any signs of resistance to his
“principle of legitimacy.” He had been deeply disturbed
by the news from Italy, which was within Austria’s sphere
of interest. If the revolutionary spirit should spread
from Naples to the North and infect the territories that
were under Austrian dominion, there was no saying what
the results might be. He saw that his political system,
his influence, which already extended through the whole
of Europe, and the very existence of all the old legitimist
monarchies were endangered. He felt that every effort
must be made to meet this peril, and summoned another
conference of monarchs to consider the point. The con-
ference met at Troppau in October, 1820, to discuss the
principles to be applied if revolutionaries tried to impose
changes in the form of government anywhere in Europe.

The congress was moved to Laibach, and Metternich
arranged that the King of Naples should be asked to
attend. Scarcely had the king crossed the frontiers of his
revolutionary country before he forgot all the concessions
he had granted to the people, and assured the envoy of


The Period of Congresses 229


the eastern powers that they had been wrung from him by
force, and that he loathed constitution and Carbonarism.
The congress decided in January, 1821, in spite of the
objections made by England and France, to restore order
in Ferdinand’s kingdom by occupying Naples. Metter-
nich had succeeded in a masterly manner in gaining over
the tsar to his point of view.

“Tt is a matter of indifference,” he stated to that mon-
arch,** “whether the word be Bonaparte or the sover-
eignty of the people; they are equally dangerous and must
therefore both be resisted. The Neapolitan revolt, and
everything connected with it, must be completely stamped
out, or else the powers themselves will be destroyed.”

Metternich concentrated absolutely on his one great
political object, the overthrow of revolution. The troops
and money necessary for this purpose had to be forth-
coming, and it was up to generals and financiers to see
to the ways and means.

The news of Metternich’s plans, involving as they did
heavy additional expenditure, came as a severe shock to
Stadion, who had done so much to put Austria’s finances
on a sound basis. He saw the edifice which he had spent
years to erect shaken to its foundations. The revolutions
had also affected the bourses, and state securities were
falling in price. Metternich, however, succeeded in be-
ing so convincing through his influence with the press,
and the passionate communications sent by him from
Laibach, that even those who had reason to be alarmed
about their property became adherents of Metternich’s
plans of armed intervention in Naples. The chancellor
had inquired of Stadion as to how the money could be
found, and whether Naples would subscribe to a loan.
Stadion sent the following confidential letter in reply: ®

“Even our financiers, led by Rothschild and Parish,
are anxious to see our troops across the Po at the earliest
possible moment, and marching on Naples. I have writ-
ten to Count von Mercy regarding the Neapolitan loan.


230 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


I suppose you have spoken only to Rothschild about it?
I have never mentioned it to Parish, because I do not
know how far Rothschild wants him to come into such a
business (parceque je ne sais en combien Rothschild
voudrais de lui dans une pareille affaire). In any case
it is essential to lay our plans carefully so that the money
does not merely come in at one door to go out of the
other.”

As Stadion considered the matter more closely, he be-
gan to feel distinctly uneasy. In normal circumstances
the deficit for the year 1821 would have amounted to eight
million gulden; but very heavy additional sums of money
were now required for the expeditionary force to Italy,
and the greater part of this cash would have to be found
immediately. As Stadion came to consider the heavy
demands made upon the treasury by Metternich’s policy,
he felt a growing sense of bitterness. Metternich, the
chancellor whose financial ideas did not extend much be-
yond a general realization that a state no less than a pri-
vate individual must have money, carried out his policy
without any consideration of the cost. Stadion was ex-
pected to produce the necessary funds as if by magic, and
he really was at a loss how to do it.

The chancellor advised Stadion to see the Rothschilds,
and urged him to discuss with the brothers the means for
raising the amount necessary for the campaign. ‘The
emigrant Jews from Frankfort had suddenly become the
sheet-anchor for Austria’s two leading statesmen, one of
whom exercised an influence upon the destinies of Europe
extending far beyond the boundaries of the imperial
dominions.

While at Laibach, Metternich had asked Count Nes-
selrode, the Russian minister for foreign affairs, who was
just about to leave for Vienna, to urge Stadion to ask
Solomon Rothschild to come himself to Laibach and ex-
press his personal opinion there regarding the issue of
loans to Russia and Austria. The chancellor also wrote


The Period of Congresses 231


a letter to Solomon Rothschild on January 29, 1821,
making this suggestion, but Solomon was not prepared to
leave Vienna at a time when the political situation was
such that prices on the bourse were fluctuating violently
from day today. He therefore wrote the following letter
to Count Nesselrode: °°


YouR EXCELLENCY:

With reference to the business matter under con-
sideration, I venture most respectfully to observe that
a discussion on this matter at Laibach, and my pres-
ence there, might give rise to numerous and probably
highly inaccurate newspaper reports. Persons with
base motives would unearth the fact that a loan to
the most gracious of monarchs was being discussed ;
rumor would be piled upon rumor, and this would
not be at all agreeable in the highest quarters. For
this reason I submissively venture to suggest to your
Excellency—and Finance Minister Count von Sta-
dion agrees with my proposal—that the business be
negotiated here with our finance minister. My con-
tinued presence here would dissipate all rumors,
while everything would be carried on under the
strictest seal of secrecy, and the business could be
transacted in peace and quietness.


Solomon Rothschild sent a similar communication to
Count Stadion at the same time, and the count immedi-
ately wrote ** to Metternich to say that in his opinion Solo-
mon’s contention that neither he nor any other banker
should go to the congress at Laibach was absolutely sound.

“In addition to the arguments which he has brought
forward,” he wrote, “I submit that the following points
have to be taken into consideration. The loan in ques-
tion (which ought to cover the costs of the expedition),
can be only a Neapolitan loan, guaranteed for the greater
security of the powers. It can be prepared under these
conditions, but its formal conclusion must take place in
Naples, after our troops have entered the city and occu-


232 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


pied it... . Until that moment the public must know
nothing whatever about it; for the loan would go very
badly if we were only like the person in the fable offering
the bear’s skin, and it could be issued only on very un-
favorable terms. It would immediately suggest that we
were in lack of money, which fortunately is not yet the
case; but the mere belief that we were would seriously
damage not only our credit but our political position
generally.

“Rothschild is here abie to control his business and his
correspondence from the center, and day by day, in col-
laboration with our finance department and his business
friends, to decide upon the steps or transactions that seem
to him appropriate to prevailing conditions. He cannot
carry on his work effectively anywhere but here, while
it is only here that we can examine the means that he
adopts to carry out the wishes and intentions of the gov-
ernments. These means must be brought into harmony
with our general system of credit, since the loan is des-
tined ultimately to find its way into the Austrian Treas-
Lit yeebeis 5: .

“T feel myself compelled to observe that whatever view
one takes of the situation Austria alone will have to bear
the burdens of the military operations until Naples is oc-
cupied. When we get there it appears to me that the
three following matters will have to be dealt with: first,
our troops will have to be entirely maintained by that
country; secondly, we shall have to obtain compensation
for the costs otherwise incurred through their stay in the
kingdom of Naples; and thirdly, we shall have to obtain
an indemnity that will partially make good our advances.

“Rothschild believes that if the sum exceeds—the loan
ought not to be too heavy—one million pounds, or about
twenty-four million francs, cela se pourrait faire pour
ainsi dire une bonne fortune a Londres. I have not yet
gone far enough into the matter to be able to judge how
far his hopes are well founded.”


The Period of Congresses 233


At the same time Solomon wrote the following letter to
Metternich:


Your Highness was graciously pleased to send me
your command of the 29th ultimo. Although it gives
me great pleasure to show my zeal in fulfilling your
Highness’s wishes at all times, and happy though I
always am to wait upon you, I feel it my duty to
avoid doing anything which would attract attention.
. . . A journey to Laibach at this time would arouse
such attention, and would give rise to all kinds of


Peniccuires. . .°.
Ever devoted to your Highness’s commands I beg


to remain in deepest respect
Your Highness’s Most Obedient Servant,
S. M. VON ROTHSCHILD.


Stadion’s letter had revealed the whole plan that was
to be carried out: Naples was to pay everything, and
Rothschild was to arrange loans at the expense of that
country, the proceeds of which were to be applied for pay-
ing for Austria’s unwanted intervention.

Meanwhile things had begun to move. The Austrian,
General Frimont, crossed the Po on February 5, 1821,
with 43,000 men, and began to march on Naples. Solo-
mon Rothschild perceived with satisfaction that Austria’s
statesmen were dependent on him for finance, and saw
the prospect of realizing substantial profits. He accord-
ingly hastened to place sums at their disposal, with a view
to securing the possible business at Naples entirely for
himself.

Stadion wrote to Metternich: * “Rothschild and Par-
ish”—who had apparently, against Rothschild’s wishes,
been informed of this affair by Gentz—‘“are provisionally
offering to make me advances and to transfer sums direct
to Naples apart from the loan. Rothschild is already
concluding agreements in Paris and London for this pur-
pose, or at any rate he says he is,”


234 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


A week later Stadion wrote saying: “For some days
Rothschild has been effecting transfers of money to one
or several banking firms (in Naples), and by the time we
get there about three million francs will be available.
These can be immediately placed at the disposal of our
government. I only wish that I could always be informed
of the requirements in good time so that I could make the
necessary arrangements. Until the day before yesterday
nobody asked for a single gulden of cash for the whole
march of our troops from the Po to the Neapolitan
frontier; and then a courier arrived demanding an ur-
gent credit of 250,000 gulden at Florence. It seems to
me that this should have been foreseen and provided for a
long time ago. Fortunately, Rothschild has money and
credit everywhere, and he was therefore able immediately
to provide me with the advance I wanted, as well as an
additional advance of 100,000 gulden. .. .”

Stadion was already relying largely upon the House of
Rothschild, which rendered that statesman the most wel-
come services in his embarrassment, although certainly
not without cherishing the hope that they would be duly
rewarded. The finance minister had sent Metternich a
detailed scheme regarding the contemplated Neapolitan
loan.

“T am awaiting,’ he wrote to the chancellor, “your
reply to my last memorandum regarding the Neapolitan
loan, so that I may carry the matter further with my
friend Solomon Rothschild. It is absolutely impossible
for him to travel to Naples, and he is asking one of his
brothers to come over from Frankfort and go on to
Naples. This brother is expected by the end of the
month. He has also written to Paris to say that a con-
fidential servant of his firm—by name Salicey—who is
thoroughly familiar with Naples, should proceed there
without delay.” ™

Finally Stadion complained that he no less than the


The Period of Congresses 238


public had been kept completely in the dark for ten days
regarding the progress of events and the present position
of the troops.

Solomon had realized that it was absolutely essential
that a member of his firm should go to Naples. It was
not exactly pleasant to go there as there was a revolution
in progress, and the Austrian troops would have some
hard fighting; nevertheless Solomon summoned Carl, the
only one of the five brothers who so far had no independ-
ent sphere of his own.

Carl had, since his youngest days, been accustomed to
making long journeys on his father’s business. Now at
the age of thirty-three a promising field for his activi-
ties was offered him, although it was in a country that
he had only once casually visited, and the language of
which he did not know. This, however, did not affect
the matter, for it seemed to be a merely provisional
arrangement, and Carl little guessed that Naples would
come to be his permanent place of abode. On March 1,
Carl Rothschild arrived at Vienna from Frankfort and
immediately called on Stadion.

“Un petit frére Rothschild,” Stadion reported to Met-
ternich, * “has just arrived here on his way to Naples.
I am engaged in working out with the two brothers the
most important conditions regarding the loan which they
will issue. I hope to send young Rothschild to Laibach
next Wednesday, or at the latest next Thursday. You
will there be able, my dear prince, to inform him whither
he should then proceed. I hope that it will be to Naples,
and that you will have occasion to send him as speedily as
possible.”

On March 6, Carl did in fact go to Laibach. Stadion
was hoping that in the course of its advance the army
would acquire a few millions for the Austrian Treasury,
which was sadly in need of them. “I have to point out,”
he wrote, “that the declaration of war by Naples without


236 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


a shot having been fired is sufficient ground for us to
declare our right to indemnity from the date when our
troops crossed the Po.” ”

Meanwhile the Austrian army was approaching the
Abruzzi, which was the easiest territory between Austria
and Naples for the enemy to defend. Its march was
somewhat delayed through the insufficiency of provisions
and of money. Count Ficquelmont, who was accompany-
ing the army on his way to take up his duties as ambas-
sador at Naples, wrote: ‘We are all suffering acutely
from the disastrous shortage of money.” Application was
made at Rome to Torlonia and other banking firms, but
in vain. A stirring appeal was made by Metternich with
a view to remedying these evils. On receiving a report
from Vienna, Metternich had published a statement
regarding the whole expedition, in order to pacify the
Viennese public, who did not understand what business
Austria had in Naples. Count Sedlnitzky welcomed this
step, wishing the chancellor luck in carrying on his policy
on the grand scale, and reported: ™

“Through an arrangement made in the nick of time
by the thoroughly worthy House of Rothschild and other
firms, regarding Wertheimer’s failure, the market here
has been saved from being flooded with Meétalliques
bonds, and a gradual rise in their value as well as in that
of other state securities has been effected. This has had
an excellent effect upon public opinion in the middle
classes and in the business world.”

The minister of police considered the critics and mal-
contents to be especially numerous among so-called men
of learning, and even in several higher circles and in the
army. ‘Nevertheless,’ he wrote, “we may count our-
selves fortunate, if we compare public sentiment here
with that:in other countries.”

Stadion, however, who was constantly receiving appli-
cations for money, was not equally satisfied. He viewed
the future with dismay, and was utterly at a loss to see


Lhe Period of Congresses 237


how he could provide the money for everything that was
being done. He suddenly heard that a general had stated
during the court ball that the emperor had recently com-
manded the pay of the Neapolitan Expeditionary Force
to be increased, and a new recruiting law to be carried
into effect which would add almost 100,000 men to the
strength of the army.

“T was absolutely overwhelmed with surprise,” he
wrote in alarm to Metternich, “ “by this news, and by
the manner in which I learned it. If this is true, it will
involve a permanent additional expenditure on our armies
of more than ten millions. I have not got this money
and I see no prospect of getting it. Things cannot go
on like this. I feel that I have already reached the utmost
limit of what is possible... .

“Tt is very easy to send out handbills, but in order to
translate them into reality the emperor must find a man
who can feed fifteen thousand men with five loaves. I
cannot refrain from protesting against the way things are
being done. His Majesty does not allow himself to spend
even two hundred florins on his gardens; he does not
sanction a pension to save a poor family from hunger
without sometimes consulting me several times in the
matter. And now we are to have an additional expendi-
ture of ten million which it is difficult to justify. ...
So far from consulting me in fixing this sum, which is
far beyond anything we can possibly raise, it was not
even thought worth while to inform me of the decision.

“Tn such circumstances my position, which I have
always regarded as the great misfortune of my life, has
become quite impossible. For years I have been refused
the means . . . of putting things straight, but at the same
time I am regarded as an inexhaustible source of money.
I am required to fill the glass at any moment it is put
before me. Such a method of proceeding certainly puts —
an end to my responsibility in the matter. Even if, after
all the other sacrifices I have made, I cast aside the last


238 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


shreds of any respect that I may enjoy in the world, this
will not bring additional revenue to the monarchy or save
it from financial disaster.

“T write to you today, my dear prince, in the bitterness
of my heart. It is difficult to remain calm under such
conditions. Besides, I feel it to be my duty to state the
unvarnished truth, when, as in the present instance, the
truth is of such importance. Farewell, my dear prince,
make such use of this letter as you think fit.”

In some such mood as this, Stadion wrote two memo-
randa regarding the general financial position of the
country, and sent them to Metternich. “The problem is,”
he submitted, *° “how to save at least some part of our
existence. I cannot possibly conceal from you any longer
that I am weighed down and oppressed by a load of mis-
fortune. I have reached the point when I fear that any
day I may find that I am quite impotent and helpless to
do any more work. I will carry on with the strength
that remains to me, until I drop. But do not expect any
great services from a man.who is weakened as I am.”

The finance minister’s panic left Metternich unmoved.
Clear before him lay the path that he had recognized as
the right one, and had ruthlessly followed. He was
determined not to deviate from it until he reached his
goal.

“We have embarked upon a great undertaking, one
that contains the possibilities of greater results than any
of our times,’”” he wrote to General Count von Bubna. ”
“Tt is great, for upon its success or failure the whole
future depends; not merely the future of the Austrian
monarchy but that of the whole of Europe. .. . It was
impossible for us to take any other action, for it is a matter
OPiite oMdeethy* 74.2)

“Everything now depends upon success. I hope that
one or two hard blows will decide the issue. If not, the
result will be the same as if we had ventured nothing; the
revolution will engulf, first Italy, and then the world.


The Period of Congresses 239


I will spare no effort until I am killed myself. ...
Meanwhile, farewell. I shall not see you this year, but
I shall certainly see you next year unless the world has
been destroyed.” .

While Metternich was using proud words such as
these, he was being besieged with the most urgent requests
from the army to furnish money for its innumerable
needs.

In the meantime Carl Rothschild had arrived at Lai-
bach and had called on Gentz, who immediately in-
formed his princely master of young Rothschild’s arrival.
Metternich asked Carl, through Gentz, whether he would
be prepared to travel in his service, and whether he was
able, without any loss of time, to make payments to the
army. The chancellor also desired to know how moneys
could be speedily and safely conveyed to Rome.

Carl replied as follows: “I have the honor to reply to
your Princely Highness’s gracious inquiry of today that
I am prepared to undertake the journey at once to any
place where your Princely Highness may bid me go, and
to do everything in my power to see that the payments
which you have graciously commissioned me to make to
the army are carried out with the greatest possible speed
and precision. If your Princely Highness will most gra-
ciously inform me what sums, and at whose disposition
you wish them placed in Rome, I will then ... send a
special messenger to instruct Signor B. Paccard, a mem-
ber of a firm who is in Milan, to transfer any sums re-
quired to Rome without delay, and if necessary to travel
there himself. . . . I have only to add, with all humble
respect, that we will, on this occasion as always, use our
endeavors to satisfy the wishes of his Majesty, which
indeed is always our sole aim.” 78

Carl Meyer von Rothschild, who thus came into prom-
inence, was personally the least gifted of the five brothers.
He had little talent for adapting himself to his environ-
ment, had an awkward manner, and was over-strict in


240 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


his observance of the religious practices of an orthodox
Jew. His principal asset was a pretty and intelligent
wife, who won everybody’s affection and thereby made
people forget many of her husband’s errors. In spite of
the distance which separated them, Carl remained, at
any rate in really important transactions, under the con-
trol of his brothers James and Solomon.

Meanwhile the Austrian army had advanced almost
without a battle. The encounter at Rieti was just a small
skirmish and was described by Ambassador Count Fic-
quelmont as the most ridiculous thing he had ever seen.
“Our advance is uninspiring,” he reported,” “as we are
completely unopposed, but our political Mig is all the
greater?”

Everything therefore seemed to be proceed satis-
factorily, when a very bad piece of news was received.
After his return King Victor Emmanuel had inaugurated
a severely reactionary régime in Piedmont. For example
he made the possession of a certain amount of property
a necessary qualification for being allowed to learn to
read and write; he had the botanical gardens at Turin
destroyed, and wanted to destroy the marvelous bridge
over the Po, simply because they were the works of
Napoleon. He naturally opposed all nationalistic move-
ments among young people. The risings in Spain and
Naples were accordingly joyfully welcomed in Pied-
mont.

When the Austrian troops started for the South, a ris-
ing broke out in Alessandria too, the object of which
was to secure a constitution, and the abdication of the
autocratic king. The news of these events caused dismay
at Laibach. The assembled diplomats were like a swarm
of bees that has been disturbed. Gentz reported: ®° “This
unexpected news is a very hard blow to me and to all
of us. I remained with the prince until half-past four
in a kind of stupor, and then I tried to eat something.


The Period of Congresses 241


Rothschild came to me in a state of great emotion; I had
enough sang-froid to be able to calm him.”

Carl Rothschild was just about to start for Italy in
accordance with Metternich’s wishes, and these events
caused him the most serious alarm. The impression made
at Vienna was no less profound. Stadion completely lost
his nerve. ‘The situation is terrifying,’ he wrote to
Metternich.** “Never, not even in the darkest hours of
the revolutionary wars, has an event produced such an
effect on the Vienna bourse as the latest news from Italy.
. . . If the enemy were at the gates there could not be
more unreasoning panic. The whole of the population
of Vienna is rushing to the bourse to get rid of our public
securities. .. . Our credit (which has only just been
established) is on the eve of vanishing completely. I
shall be forced to suspend the conversion of paper money
into cash or banknotes on demand. To do so would be
exceedingly painful to me, for it would mean destroying
in one day the labors of the five preceding years... .

“This is the first step to our destruction. It is impos-
sible that a loan should be considered either at home or
abroad at a time when our securities are becoming worth-
less... . Judging from the way things are going we
shall have to give up all hope of getting any financial
assistance from Naples. .. . There is so much popular
unrest of a very marked character that each day may
bring a fresh catastrophe and make further desperate
measures necessary.”

During this period Stadion repeatedly called in Solo-
mon to examine the situation with him and ask his ad-
vice. If, however, he hoped for comfort from him, he
was doomed to some disappointment. Solomon too had
suffered from the sudden fall in the value of securities,
and could not himself help being somewhat affected by
the general panic. It was not until he received reassur-
ing news from his three brothers in the West of Europe,


242 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


that he was able to take a less gloomy view of the situa-
tion,

The panic reached its height on March 22. On that
day Stadion wrote again to Metternich, describing the
complications in Naples and Piedmont as amounting to
the destruction of Austria.2? He wrote: “If all the
misfortunes that appear imminent today come upon us
at once, I must confess I see no hope of salvation. Never-
theless we must try to put an end to the Naples adventure
as speedily as possible, and thus at least save the army’s
honor. All troops should be withdrawn to within our
frontiers and kept in readiness to meet attacks from
abroad and from the revolutionary spirit at home.”

Metternich said nothing, but proceeded to set troops
in motion for quelling the revolt. It was Stadion’s busi-
ness and not his to raise the necessary money. The for-
mer had already spent money which was earmarked for
the year 1822, and his pronounced sense of responsibility
caused him to take a darker view of recent events than
was strictly justified. Metternich, however, infected his
imperial master, who was staying with him at Laibach,
with his own spirit of resolute calm, and the emperor
wrote a reassuring letter to the King of Naples. The
king had just left Laibach, having borrowed the money
for the journey to Florence from the Emperor Francis,
as he had no funds himself. While assuring the king
that his interests were identical with his own, the emperor
did not forget about the repayment of the journey money,
and issued instructions that the cash should immediately
be provided out of the Rothschild loan which was being
planned in Naples. *

On March 24 the expeditionary force had entered
Naples without encountering serious resistance. The
news of this event put an end to the rising in Piedmont;
Lombardy remained quiet; and the general information
received at Laibach gave reason to hope that the whole
movement would die down. In a short time Metternich


The Period of Congresses 243


was able to feel that he had reestablished his system in
both countries. It was now possible completely to reas-
sure Carl, and to persuade him that the journey to Flor-
ence, where the King of Naples was still staying with his
retinue, was absolutely safe. Before he started on the
further journey to the capital at the foot of Vesuvius, the
Austrian troops there would have reestablished complete
order and security.

It was on March 23 that Gentz had made these reas-
- suring observations to Carl Rothschild, using the oppor-
tunity to ask for a small personal loan. Carl, who was
not so quick at appreciating Gentz’s influence as his
brothers had been, made difficulties, with the result that,
to use his own words, “‘an unpleasant discussion” ensued.

When he got back home Rothschild learned that Met-
ternich wished him to leave for Florence on the following
day. He felt some misgivings regarding the disobliging
attitude he had adopted toward the right-hand man of the
all-powerful chancellor; and he thought that his brother —
Solomon would be annoyed with him if he had parted
from Gentz in ill-will. He accordingly called on Gentz
late that evening in order, as the latter put it, “to make
good his error.”

Metternich had given Carl Rothschild a letter of intro-
duction to the Austrian general, Baron Vincent, who was
staying at Florence with the King of Naples. The gen-
eral had long known of the Austrian government’s finan-
cial intentions regarding a loan to be issued in Naples.
He knew that the Allies had agreed with the king at
Laibach that the costs of the expedition should be borne
by the kingdom of Naples from the moment when the
army crossed the Po, and that the cost of maintaining the
army in Naples should also be borne by that kingdom.
Metternich had sent Vincent the following instructions
on the matter as early as March 1, 1821:

“The point regarding the loan is of great importance
for our finances. We wish to facilitate the work of the


244. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Neapolitan government so that they will be able to pro-
vide for the first needs of our army and fulfil some of
their obligations to us. Count Stadion has already en-
tered into negotiations on this matter with the House of
Rothschild. . . . It is desirable in our financial interests
that this house should be given the preference, and the
king also is prepared to proceed on these lines. The firm
has the necessary means at its disposal, and I therefore
believe that it will be possible speedily to come to terms
with its. 2

“It would be redundant to point out to your Excel-
lency that the fact that Count Stadion was compelled to
make enormous advances to the Neapolitan Expedition-
ary Force has made him exceedingly anxious to insure
that these moneys shall be gradually repaid. He is the
more concerned about this since, if the monarchy were to
incur such a heavy loss, the resulting financial embarrass-
ment might produce results which nobody can foresee.” **

Shortly before Carl Rothschild’s departure Metternich
followed up these instructions with a letter *° stating that
Rothschild was coming only in order to negotiate for the
Neapolitan loan. Although this firm had not yet put for-
ward definite terms, Metternich wrote, it was desirable
that the Neapolitan government should hand over to the
House of Rothschild bonds coming within the scheme of
their general system of credit at a fixed price, and leave
it to the firm to reimburse itself by issuing these bonds
at its own risk at a price which would yield it a profit.

Should the House of Rothschild demand a guarantee
from Austria for the due carrying out of the obligations
of the Neapolitan government, Vincent was authorized
to accept such a condition if it was necessary. He was
urged, however, to ask Rothschild to put his proposals
into writing, and to press for a speedy conclusion of the
agreement. This was urgent in the interests of Austria’s
finances. In general he should show courtesy to Carl
Rothschild and introduce him to the Neapolitan minis-


The Period of Congresses 245


ter, Prince Ruffo, so that Rothschild could deal direct
with him. Metternich concluded by saying:

“We must naturally take no direct part in these busi-
ness negotiations, but we are very much interested in their
success. The loan is destined to cover a part of the costs
of the expedition, as well as to meet the expenses of main-
taining and paying our army. You are invited, therefore,
if Herr von Rothschild’s first proposals are accepted by
the Neapolitan minister, to facilitate the conclusion of
their business through your good offices.”

Carl Rothschild arrived in Florence on March 31.
On Vincent’s introduction he had a short interview with
Prince Ruffo, ** but he was coolly received and was not
given any explanation as to the minister’s intentions. He
had to wait for news from James, who had been requested
by Solomon to express his views regarding the Neapolitan
business. Vincent advised Rothschild to go to Naples
and inform himself as to the prospect on the spot, for
Ruffo had been absent so long that he was completely
uninformed as to the financial situation. The Ambassa-
dor took the opportunity of borrowing 1,000 ducats *” on
the government’s account, the advance for his official
expenses having long been exhausted. Rothschild gladly
lent the desired amount.

Although the agreements were kept secret, and nobody
knew that that firm had been granted absolute priority,
the news of a loan to be issued by Naples became known
in other banking circles. A Milanese, by name Barbaia,
approached Vincent, and in agreement with certain
French firms offered ** to advance thirty millions to the
Neapolitan government at an issue price of 60%. “My
one fear is,” Vincent replied, “that this may conflict with
our arrangements with the House of Rothschild and con-
fuse them.” Barbaia was not a negligible rival. He was


_ already known to the King of Naples, and was received


by him in Florence on this occasion too. Vincent as
speedily as possible gave Carl Rothschild precise infor-


246 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


mation regarding the offer. *° “You will,” he remarked,
“be in a better position than anyone else to say what value
should be attached to this offer.”

This problem itself naturally did not engage Carl’s
very close attention, but it was valuable to him to be
informed of his rivals’ plans as speedily and accurately
as possible, in order to be able to take appropriate coun-
ter-measures.

On April 6 he proceeded to Naples. Vincent gave him
a letter to Ambassador Count Ficquelmont, informing
the count of the offer being made by Barbaia, and of
Austria’s anxiety that the loan should be intrusted to the
firm of Rothschild. The king himself did not yet dare
to return to Naples. In accordance with Metternich’s
instructions the general commanding at Naples mean-
while restrained the newly installed government from
considering loans proposed by various Italian banking
firms before Rothschild should have arrived. When he
arrived on April 12, Count Ficquelmont immediately
introduced him to the government, who informed him
that they wished to take up a loan of twelve million
ducats—about twenty million gulden.

Under pressure from the Austrian general the govern:
ment had ignored Barbaia’s offers, although the Milanese
had brought a letter from the King of Naples recommend-
ing him. The king had instinctively felt that the House
of Rothschild would act in Austria’s interests rather than
his own; but he was king only by the grace of Austria,
and that country could call the tune.

The House of Rothschild stated that they were pre-
pared to grant a loan of ten million ducats. °° They added
that they would at first make only six millions available,
the balance to be paid when they had placed the six mil-
lion. The bonds were to be issued at 54; 3%! commission
was to be paid; and an undertaking was to be given that
during the continuance of the agreement no new loan
should be issued. Moreover, in any future loans the firm


The Period of Congresses 247


was to be given the preference before any other. For
sinking-fund purposes and for greater security they de-
manded that the state domains should be pledged.

These were hard conditions. Public securities then
stood at 60%’, so that the issue price was very low, and all
the more favorable to the Rothschilds, as they intended
to issue the state bonds (which had hitherto been dealt
with only on the Naples bourse) and, through their
London and Paris houses, to put them on the market in
those cities. The Neapolitan finance minister, Marchese
d’Andrea, considered the proposals to be far less advan-
tageous than those of certain Neapolitan firms, and there-
fore entirely unacceptable. The minister was of opinion
that instead of helping the state the conditions would be
a serious blow to its credit, since it was impossible to
place any confidence in a government that sold its securi-
ties at such a low rate. He held that there was no reason
for selling bonds at 54 when the ruling price was 60. The
government was not so pressed for money as those ap-
peared to believe who put such proposals forward. **
_ Meanwhile, news had been received that the revolution

at Naples had collapsed.

Ficquelmont summoned Carl Rothschild and told him
that Austria was desirous that the House of Rothschild
should handle the loan. The ambassador requested him
not to make it too difficult for Austria to bring the nec-
essary pressure to bear upon the Neapolitan government,
but to moderate his terms somewhat.

Rothschild replied that his first proposals were not his
last word in the matter; he had been asked to make an
offer, and he had done so by way of opening negotiations.
The good news received from Piedmont made it possible
for him now to offer better conditions. The ambassador
also asked Rothschild to avoid, if possible, saying any-
_ thing about a guarantee by the powers. Carl promised
to do what he could, and Ficquelmont assured him of
his full and very powerful support with the Neapolitan


248 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


government. That government owed its very existence
to the Austrians, and it was obvious that it would have
to conclude the agreement with those whom the Austrians
wished.

The ambassador at Naples had completely understood
what was in the minds of the leading men at Vienna.
“If the House of Rothschild carries through a loan of
any kind,” he wrote to Metternich, ** “that fact will pro-
vide us with the necessary security. As we have not yet
made any direct or positive demand for reimbursement
of our expenses, I did not feel that it was possible to
include in the terms of the loan any explicit condition
regarding direct payments to Austria [by the House of
Rothschild]. Herr Rothschild, who always keeps our
interests in view in the negotiations, has therefore in-
serted the words in his draft terms, ‘payable to those who
shall be authorized to receive the money.’ This condition
will become applicable when our direct negotiations have
settled the amount to be paid to us.”

The ambassador was anxious that the Neapolitan
finances should be spared as much as possible so that
there should not be any doubt as to Naples’ ability to
pay the expenses of Austria’s expeditionary force. “If
the current expenses for the maintenance of our army,”
Ficquelmont wrote to Metternich, “can be met out of the
ordinary revenue of the state, the whole amount of the
loan could be paid into our treasury, except perhaps the
first two or three instalments, which the government will
require . . . in order to put the taxing system in order.”

Shortly afterwards the loan was issued, 16,000,000
ducats being taken up at 60 ducats for the 100 ducat bond.
Rothschild allowed other Italian banking firms to take
some small part in it in order to keep active opposition
down. The government pledged itself not to issue any
further loan before 1824, and if it required to issue
further loans, to give the House of Rothschild the pref-
erence.


The Period of Congresses 249


Carl joyfully reported the conclusion of the business
to Metternich. °** He emphasized that in accordance with
Metternich’s wishes he had made no mention of a guar-
antee by the powers, writing: ‘Moreover, I hope that,
if peace only lasts for a little while, the loan will soon be
fully subscribed, and it will not be necessary to ask for
guarantees for the balance, as in that case all state securi-
ties will rise in value, and the Neapolitan securities will
follow suit...”

The plan had succeeded, and Austria had thereby put
the House of Rothschild in the saddle at Naples. This
was not done from motives of disinterested friendship,
and the brothers Rothschild paid for the privilege—
with Neapolitan money. Meanwhile the forces of reac-
tion were playing havoc at Naples. People were arrested
in thousands, the death penalty and long terms of impris-
onment were meted out to the Carbonari and the revolu-
tionary officers. <A strict censorship was also instituted.
These conditions continued after the return of the king,
and as all these things were being done under the protec-


_ tion of Austrian bayonets, the foreign troops did not gain


any sympathy in the country. All classes, excepting the
conservative upper class, regarded them as undesirable
guests; and resentment against the Austrians was height-
ened by the fact that they were using a clever foreigner
to force the country itself to pay for their occupation.
About this time death came to the man in whose service
the Rothschild family had grown great. On February
27, 1821, the Elector of Hesse had a heart attack. With
the words,* “I shall lose this battle,” he expired. His
death had nothing like the importance to the Rothschild
family that it would have had about ten years earlier,
when their transactions with the elector constituted
almost their only, and certainly their most important,


business.


ee


The new elector spent a great deal of money, but he
had not the commercial ability of his father, and the rela-


250 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


tionship with the Rothschilds was limited to casual trans-
actions of minor importance. Amschel at Frankfort
carried on the business of making loans on an extensive
scale to princes and other important personages whom he
desired to cultivate. James and Nathan put the Neapoli-
tan securities on the market in London and Paris, making
the interest due in London payable in British currency,
a fact which induced many people to invest their money
in these securities, carrying as they did a high rate of
interest. The result was that soon after their issue they
rose considerably in price.

Nathan was clever at securing people’s support, and at
getting publicity for himself. A young clerk from the
commercial department of the treasury at Vienna, by
name Anton Laurin, had been sent to study in England
for some months during the summer of 1820, and was
naturally referred to the Austrian consul in London,
Nathan Rothschild. Nathan showed a great deal of
kindness to Laurin, as he naturally assumed that he would
send a report home. He acted as his mentor, and invited
him frequently to dinner and supper.

He was so successful in securing the young man’s af-
fection that Laurin gave the most ecstatic not to say ex-
travagant and almost tedious accounts of him when he
returned home. He sent in such an enthusiastic report
to his chief that the latter decided to convey the essential
points in it to the emperor, with the request that Nathan
should be specially commended.

After recounting how Nathan had helped Laurin, the
president of the commercial department of the treasury
proceeded to state in his memorandum to the sovereign:
“Laurin at the same time reports as to the disinterested
work done by this consul, and as to his efforts to be of
effective assistance to Austria’s credit, industry, and com-
merce. He states that Rothschild waives all consular
fees, actively assists Austrian subjects . . . has secured
a quotation for Austrian state securities on the London


The Period of Congresses 25%


stock exchange, helps Austrian sailors generously ...
from his private resources. Nathan is prepared with his
own ships to establish a direct service between London »
and Trieste; he has sent a collection of seeds of rare for-
eign plants for your Majesty’s gardens, as well as several
articles of interest in industry and the arts for the Poly-
technic Institute without asking for any payment; he is
still collecting models and various objects of this kind
with a view to bequeathing them to that institute.

“Tt is not for me to express an opinion as to the value
of the services rendered to the credit of the Austrian state
by Consul Rothschild; in this connection I can but hum-
bly lay before your Majesty the London stock-exchange
report for the 6th ultimo, which he has sent me. In this
your Majesty may be graciously pleased to observe that
Austrian state debentures are specially mentioned, to-
gether with their price, under the designation Austrian
Loan. The other efforts referred to above by Consul
Rothschild for facilitating and extending Austrian trade,
the industrious and disinterested manner in which he car-
ries out the duties of the consulate, so graciously intrusted
to him by your Majesty, his generous help to unemployed
Austrian sailors, and his efforts to enrich your Majesty’s
gardens and the Polytechnic Institute deserve proper
recognition.

“Through establishing a direct monetary exchange on
London, Rothschild has indisputably greatly facilitated
commercial and financial transactions. If he succeeds,
as he undoubtedly will, in view of the disinterested patri-
otism of his aims and methods, in establishing direct com-
munication between London and Trieste, the beneficial
results to our commerce will be even more marked.
Through carrying out this one conception he will earn
the well-deserved gratitude of a considerable portion
of the Austrian trading community and consuming
public. ...

“T hope that your Majesty may graciously realize from


252 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


a perusal of these few lines what an important and bene-
ficial influence upon the trade and industry of the mon-
archy the nomination of this man as Austrian consul is
having. . . . Our former consuls in this country, which
is so uniquely adapted to trade and industry, did...
absolutely nothing for the monarchy, confining their
activities to collecting substantial fees from our subjects.
. The newly appointed consul, Rothschild, has in a
very short time done more than all his predecessors put
together. J therefore feel it to be my duty to bring his
meritorious activities to your Majesty’s knowledge, and
at the same time most dutifully to beg that your Majesty’s
satisfaction may accordingly be conveyed to him.” ®

In his memorandum to the emperor of March 6, 1821,°°
Count Stadion confirmed the statements of Ritter von
Stahl, adding that the Rothschilds also deserved praise
for the greater facility with which, under the existing
critical conditions, the financial requirements of the army
in Italy could be met.

These two documents were also sent to Count Zichy
for his observations, who passed them to Privy Councilor
Baron von Lederer, who gave his opinion in the same
skeptical vein he had used when the ennoblement of the
family was under consideration.

“The alleged special services of Nathan Meyer Roths-
child,” he wrote, *’ “are connected partly with his activi-
ties as Austrian consul in London, and partly with his
relation to the finance departments. If it is due to Roths-
child that Austrian government securities are quoted in
London stock-exchange reports, and if the transfer of
money to Italy has been facilitated through the good
offices of the House of Rothschild it must be remembered
that the interests of the brothers Rothschild are identical
with those of the finance departments.

“The brothers Rothschild are at the head of the busi-
ness which concluded the last two loans with the Austrian
financial administration, so that they are clearly interested


The Period of Congresses 253


in obtaining a market for Austrian securities abroad, and
particularly in London. When banking firms undertake
to remit money they are rewarded by a commission set
aside for the purpose, and are able to profit by differences
in the rate of exchange. I would therefore attach more
importance to Nathan Meyer Rothschild’s disinterested
manner of carrying out his duties as Austrian consul, and
would venture immediately to concur in the proposal that
he should be acquainted of his Majesty’s satisfaction, if
I did not feel that the occasion for doing so is somewhat
unsuitable.

“A clerk of the commercial department of the treasury,
by name Laurin, obtains leave to travel.to England. He
is given a letter of introduction to Nathan Meyer Roths-
child, who receives him in a friendly manner, and sup-
ports him in his endeavors to extend his knowledge in the
fields of industry and commerce. He returns full of
praise of the way he has been received, and takes the
opportunity of commenting in high terms on Nathan
Meyer Rothschild’s disinterested and zealous conduct as
consul,

“T am far from wishing to cast any doubt upon the facts
that he brings forward, but as he made the journey purely
as a private person, and not on any official mission, it was
not his business to put these facts forward through official
channels, and to take the responsibility for their accuracy.
In my humble opinion the statement he volunteered
should merely have led to an inquiry on the matter being
made through the Austrian Embassy; and it seems to me
that this omission can still be rectified.”

The emperor, who was not yet fully aware how deeply
leading statesmen had committed themselves to the House
of Rothschild, did indeed command that further infor-
mation should be asked for regarding Laurin’s statements
that Rothschild carried out his duties in such a disin-
terested manner. Ritter von Stahl, however, stuck to his
guns, and was particularly emphatic in pressing the in-


254 The Risé of the House of Rothschild


terests of the House of Rothschild. As he knew that
James in Paris desired the dignity of an Austrian consul-
general, for the same reasons as his brother in London,
he suggested, on March 30, that James should be ap-
pointed.

The highest quarters did not give any immediate de-
cision in this matter, but the Neapolitan revolution oc-
curred shortly afterwards, involving the close cooperation
between Metternich and the House of Rothschild. It
was no longer thought either desirable or possible to re-
fuse the brothers anything, as it depended upon their
attitude whether or not Austria should recover the money
spent on the expeditionary force. Solomon gave his
brother James at Paris to understand that he should renew
his application to be appointed consul-general, for now
was the critical moment, as the Austrian government was
more or less in a cleft stick. As it was under an obliga-
tion to the House and closely associated with it, it could
not turn the request down,

James asked Solomon, as he stood so well in Vienna,
to. put forward the request himself. Solomon drafted a
petition to the emperor, and handed it to Stadion, who,
in consideration of the indispensability of Solomon and
his family, conveyed it to the emperor with the following
memorandum: °°

“T venture to support this petition, which your Majesty
was previously not pleased to entertain, for the following
reasons, which relate particularly to present circum-
stances, and to conditions obtaining during the last few
years. Your Majesty is fully aware of the highly impor-
tant services which the House of Rothschild or, more
accurately, the various Rothschild firms established in the
principal capitals of Europe have rendered in the com-
plicated difficulties of the present time.

“To the energy and resources of the Rothschilds, to
their tireless efforts to apply large sums of money at
points where they were immediately required to stem the


The Period of Congresses 255


tide of events, I owe the fact that I have been able con-
tinuously, in all places, and at the right moment, to pro-
vide what was necessary for military operations, without
interfering with our internal services or the measures to
restore our credit. In the precarious state of Austria’s
finances resulting from recent events, it was only thus that
popular feeling and the government’s credit could be
maintained at the point where they now stand. Through
the Rothschilds’ clever management, the cost of the ex-
tensive monetary movements during the military opera-
tions was low compared with any other method of remit-
ting money.

“Through the great services which the Rothschild
firms have rendered to us during a most eventful period,
their existence has become most intimately bound up with
that of the Austrian monarchy. They have incurred the
envy and hatred, and to a certain extent the persecution
of the whole Liberal party in Europe; and although the
extent of their wealth, their firmly established reputation
throughout Europe, and their constant rectitude in busi-
ness matters have so far protected them from the conse-
quences of malicious intrigues, it is really essential that
their services should be recognized by our court and that
they should enjoy the explicit protection of your Majesty
in the principal markets of the world, in order that they
may have the necessary strength to resist all these machi-
nations and to continue as useful to the monarchy in the
future as they have been in the past.

“This is particularly the case in Paris as being the
headquarters of all Liberal activities in Europe, and the
city in whose bourse the loans of all states are handled,
with no inconsiderable effect upon their value.

“The president of the commercial department of the
treasury has laid before your Majesty proofs of what has
been done to promote our trade by the Rothschild who
has been appointed consul-general in London. Even
more successful have been his efforts to develop a market


256 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


for the sale of our securities in England and to establish
arrangements for directly discounting bills of exchange
between Great Britain and the Austrian markets.

“Paris is as indifferent as London to religious distinc-
tions, and the appointment of one of the brothers Roths-
child as Austrian consul-general in Paris should be of
real service to the commercial and financial interests of
the monarchy. Moreover, Rothschild waives the right
to any emoluments connected with such an appointment,
which he desires only for the distinction attaching to the
office as being likely to afford him some protection against
the hatred and persecution of the Liberal party in that
city.”

There was much truth in Stadion’s report. The Roths-
childs had in fact made themselves unpopular with the
more Liberal section of the public abroad, through the
contracts which they had made everywhere with the re-
established reactionary governments. Stadion was not
aware that in spite of their particularly conservative sen-
timent, especially in Austria, they cultivated relations
with the other parties as well, lent money here and there,
and thus secured themselves against a political reaction
such as was always possible.

The envy of other firms was increasing to a prodigious
extent as the power of their house grew. In Paris their
position was particularly delicate. For the Bourbon
kingdom, with the weak Louis XVIII and the Ultras,
who were all the more powerful, was far from popular,
and the strictly royalist minister, Villéle, who was at the
head of the government, was hated by a large part of the
population. ‘The brothers Rothschild, however, had
necessarily become intimately connected with the new
régime and, moreover, as the bankers of the Holy Alli-
ance, they were sending French gold abroad in large
amounts. ~~

James Rothschild was often the target of veiled attacks,
and once he felt actually constrained to call upon the pre-


The Period of Congresses 267


fect of police to lodge a complaint regarding the large
number of threatening anonymous letters which he was
receiving.*® Through being appointed consul-general he
hoped not merely to raise his social prestige, but also to
achieve greater security under international law. It is
true it was not realized at the court either of Paris or of
Vienna that James Rothschild was in close association
with the liberal-minded Duke Louis Philippe of Orléans
(afterwards King of France). James frequently advised
him in money matters, and was very often a guest in his
house.

Emperor Francis referred James Rothschild’s applica-
tion to be appointed consul-general to the commercial
department of the treasury, with the instruction that they
should let him have their observations upon it. Ritter
von Stahl did not need to be asked twice to do this. He
immediately transmitted the application to Stadion with
the following observations: *”

“England and France are by far the most cultivated
states in Europe; in them agriculture, industry, and com-
merce flourish in the greatest harmony, and it is there-
fore most important for us to have in their capitals com-
mercial agents who are experienced men, and enjoy an
extensive credit.... As far as commercial and industrial
matters are concerned, I cannot suggest a more suitable
person for his Majesty than the head of the Paris House,
James von Rothschild.

“I made his personal acquaintance during his last stay
here; he is a young man of parts, who is intimately ac-
quainted with several members of the Polytechnical In-
stitute in Paris, and of the Conservatoire des Arts et
Métiers, as well as with many of the most cultured French
manufacturers and business men. Moreover, he ex-
pressed to me his readiness, as his brother in London had
done, to cooperate in every possible way in promoting our
industry and commerce. For this purpose he immedi-
ately ordered some interesting machines, which he is giv-


~


258 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ing to our Polytechnic Institute, assuring me that he did
not wish in any way to lag behind his brother in London
in proof of his devotion to the House of Austria.

“Finally, the consideration that James Rothschild is a
Jew seems, in my humble opinion, to constitute no greater
difficulty than in the case of his brother in London. It is
true that in the decision regarding the appointment of the
London Rothschild as consul, which decision is attached
to the application, your Majesty expressly laid down that
it would have to continue to be the rule that no Israelite
should be appointed consul. Yet if the exception made
by your Majesty in favor of the London Rothschild has
proved in the highest degree beneficial, it is likely to be
no less so in the case of the Paris Rothschild.

“In Paris, too, the consuls . . . have no specially rep-
resentative character . . . and as, under the French con-
stitution, the Israelites enjoy the same rights of citizenship
as all other French subjects in France, I am of opinion
that your Majesty may graciously permit an exception to
the rule to be made in the case of James von Rothschild
such as you have graciously permitted to be made in re-
gard to the London Rothschild.

“While the commercial and industrial reasons for ac-
ceding to James von Rothschild’s request are weighty,
the financial considerations are still more important. This
point it is not necessary for me to labor; your Excellency
is fully aware that since the recent crucial events in Italy
the combined Rothschild houses have rendered far
greater services than they had rendered even at the time
when his Majesty, with your Excellency’s approval, was
graciously pleased to appoint the London Rothschild to
the office of consul. It is certainly a factor of no small
importance in the success of such vital operations to have
the support of all these wealthy firms.”

In conclusion, Ritter von Stahl strongly urged that
Metternich should be asked to express an opinion as to
whether there was any objection to the proposal from a


The Period of Congresses 259


political point of view, so that a further report to his
Majesty might be made as speedily as possible.

Metternich duly wrote to Herr von Stahl: 1*% “As all
considerations of a commercial, industrial, and financial
nature make it desirable to grant this application, I have
to add only that from a political point of view there is
no reason why Solomon von Rothschild’s wish should
not be granted.”

On August 11, 1821, James von Rothschild was duly
appointed consul-general in Paris. Thus another of the
five brothers had climbed a rung in the ladder of social
position.

Immediate payment for his Majesty’s favor was re-
quired. Since the Austrian army had entered Naples, the
Neapolitan government had met all its expenses, includ-
ing pay; but ten days after so whole-heartedly supporting
the petition, Metternich instructed Count Ficquelmont in
Naples to get from that government the money that had
been expended from the moment when the army crossed
the Po. The finance minister had already pressed im-
patiently to be indemnified for these expenses. ‘The
advances already made were estimated at 4,650,000
gulden, and the money was to be repaid in Vienna in six
monthly instalments, commencing on August 1, 1821.1
Metternich sent a private letter to the count, together with
these instructions.*°*

“The ministry of finance,” wrote the chancellor, “at-
taches very great importance to the punctual and reliable
repayment of the moneys which you are hereby instructed
to demand from the Neapolitan government, and it will
not tolerate any further excuses for delay. With this end
in view, it has concluded an agreement with the House of
Rothschild under which . .-. Herr Rothschild in Naples
has been authorized to make an arrangement with the
government in order to facilitate these payments. ... I
have the honor to request you to get into communication
with Herr Rothschild on this matter, and to support such


260 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


proposals as he may consider it desirable to submit to the
Neapolitan government. The object of these proposals
will be to make it easier for the government to effect a
payment that might cause it some embarrassment with-
out the assistance of this banking firm, and at the
same time to facilitate the punctual receipt of a consid-
erable sum of money by our treasury, in the payment of
which no further delay can be suffered, as it constitutes
a part of our annual budget.”

Although he did not succeed in arranging for the Nea-
politan government to repay the whole of this amount,
Count Ficquelmont managed to obtain compensation to
the extent of 4,000,000 gulden, 500,000 to be payable on
August 31, 700,000 in each of the following three months,
and 1,400,000 in January, 1822.'° ‘The first amount was
paid to Carl Rothschild and transmitted by him through
his brother Solomon to the Austrian government. It had
been possible to make this payment out of existing funds,
but further payments were to be met out of the loan of the
House of Rothschild.1°° ‘Thus part of the money sub-
scribed for the loan never reached the Neapolitan Treas-
ury at all, but was made over to Austria direct by the
House of Rothschild, although Naples bore the whole
burden of the loan.

The government of that kingdom at this time made the
request of Carl Rothschild that in consideration of certain
additional advantages he would, if possible, make his
loan payments to them earlier than was provided for
under the agreement. Rothschild agreed, on condition
that he was allowed to deduct the first two instalments of
700,000 gulden, and transmit them direct to Austria. Carl
reported the conclusion of this agreement to Count Fic-
quelmont, stating:

“T am accordingly glad to be in a position . . . to give
your Excellency the assurance that the first two payments
are secured, and that I shall be making payments to your
Excellency, instead of my brother making them in Vienna.


The Period of Congresses 261


Your Excellency will no doubt realize that this was the.
principal reason which led me to fall in with the sugges-
tion—at some sacrifice to myself. For I was thus able to
satisfy your Excellency’s wish that the payments in ques-
tion should be secured to the I. and R. Treasury, and at
the same time furnish further proof that | am always
prepared to make every effort in the interest of his Maj-
esty’s service. As for the balance of 1,400,000 gulden
(out of the total of 4,000,000 gulden) due in January, I
shall try to deal with this sum in a new loan which the
royal government of Naples intends to issue shortly. . . .”

Carl Rothschild had thus endeavored to meet the con-
venience of all parties. He made it easier for the Aus-
trians to recover their expenses, and he paid the instal-
ment on the loan to the Neapolitans before the agreed
dates. He himself did not do badly, for in June, 1821,
the bonds he had underwritten at 60, already stood at
7614! Thecourt of Naples had been in such urgent need
of the advance payments on account of the loan that when.
Carl agreed to make them, he received a special letter
from the finance minister.*”*

“His Majesty,” the letter ran, “has instructed me to
communicate to you in his royal name, his full and gra-
cious satisfaction with the consideration you have shown
in the matters affecting the treasury.”

The king’s debts to the emperor were also settled
through the House of Rothschild by making a deduction
from the loan. The balance, so far as it was not used in
the maintenance of the Austrian army, was not spent
either carefully or usefully. In spite of all the loans,
therefore, the country continued to be oppressed by finan-
cial stringency; and the Neapolitan ministers were con=
stantly complaining of the annual charges (amounting to
nine million ducats) for maintaining the Austrian army,
which made any reasoned finance impossible.

But Austria insisted upon its pound of flesh, and Sta-
dion’s attitude was positively petty when Carl Rothschild


262 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


transmitted the moneys to Austria in bills due in three
months. The finance minister demanded immediate pay-
ment in cash, as Naples was required to pay the money
free of all charges in Vienna. Carl took the stand that
without his intervention and willingness, the Neapolitan
government would have been absolutely unable to carry
out the obligation it had incurred to the Austrian court
to pay four million gulden, so that he had felt himself
justified in adopting this method of remitting the
money.’°? Henceforward, however, he paid in cash, and
simply debited the expense of remitting the money and
the loss on exchange to the Neapolitan treasury.

In such circumstances the first loan was naturally soon
exhausted, and the Neapolitan finance minister found it
necessary to apply to Carl Rothschild for a second loan.
After lengthy negotiations a loan of the nominal amount
of 16,800,000 ducats was arranged at the end of Novem-
ber, 1821, which in view of a wider market and the re-
sulting improvement in price was underwritten at 67.3
in spite of the fact that the state’s indebtedness had in-
creased.

When the amount of 1,400,000 gulden fell due on the
last day of January, 1822, the finance minister himself
asked Rothschild to make the payment out of the loan,’
as Naples was not able to find the money; for the support
of the Austrian troops was a constant heavy burden on
the treasury. Stadion’s financial program with regard to
Naples was carried through quite ruthlessly; and Metter-
nich was able to point out to the finance minister that
thanks to the Rothschild intervention, which he had ad-
vised, the undertaking that Stadion had so much dreaded
had been completely financed by Naples.

Metternich fully appreciated the services rendered by
the House of Rothschild, and was prepared at Solomon’s
urgent request to devote greater energy henceforward to
securing the emanicipation of the Jews. Slowly but
surely, the rich Jewish bankers, who had been brought


”


:


’


The Period of Congresses 263


into touch by the Rothschilds with the delegates to the
diet at Frankfort, improved their social position. Se-
verely though they had been shunned before, the change
became apparent during the first months of 1820. The
Rothschilds and other representatives of the commercial
world gave big dinners, and the bearers of the most noble
names, as well as persons in every kind of high office, were
seen at their tables. In this way they often acquired items
of news that they could turn to account in business.

“Since arriving here,” the Bremen burgomaster Smidt
wrote from Frankfort,’ “I have found to my great aston-
ishment that people like the Bethmanns, Gontards, Bren-
tanos eat and drink with prominent Jews, invite them to
their houses and are invited back. When I expressed my
surprise I was told that no financial transaction of any
importance could be carried through without the cooper-
ation of these people, they had to be treated as friends
and it was not desirable to fall out with them. Having
regard to these facts the Rothschilds have been invited
by some of the ambassadors.”

During this period Amschel Meyer Rothschild’s wife
was invited to a ball at the Prussian Legation in Frank-
fort. Smidt specifically recorded his opinion regarding
the Rothschild family in a report of a conversation with
the delegate to the diet, Count Buol.*™

“This house,” he observed, “has through its enormous
financial transactions and its banking and credit connec-
tions, actually achieved the position of a real power. It
has to such an extent acquired control of the general
money-market that it is in a position either to hinder or to
promote, as it feels inclined, the movements and opera-
tions of potentates, and even of the greatest European
powers. Austria needs the Rothschilds’ help for her
present demonstration against Naples; and Prussia would
long ago have had to discard her constitution if the House


~ of Rothschild had not made it possible for her to put off


the evil day. Several medium and small states have also


264 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


had recourse to its financial power in their difficulties.
This puts it in a strong position to ask for favors, espe-
cially for a favor of such an apparently trivial nature as
the protection of a few dozen Jews in a small state.”

At the end of May, 1820, Metternich sent a dispatch to
the reluctant Buol instructing him to support most of the
Jews’ wishes in the diet. Buol, however, was inclined to
follow out his own predilections, so that there was no
immediate change in the situation; indeed the senate
showed a tendency to revert to increased harshness in
dealing with the Jews. Thereupon Metternich firmly
admonished Buol to put an end to this state of affairs, with
the result that the diet sent a kind of ultimatum to the
senate.

The chancellor went even further; he traveled to
Frankfort himself, and decided publicly to honor the
Rothschilds there by accepting an invitation to dine with
them. He had let Amschel Meyer know this through
Solomon at Vienna, who had just come into prominence
again through an action which had won sympathetic rec-
ognition in high quarters. The I. and R. Court Theatre
at the Karntner Tor was again without a lessee, and the
only applicant, Dominik Barbaia, was unable to find the
deposit of fifty thousand gulden in cash required under
the terms of the lease. The House of Rothschild stated
that they were prepared to guarantee and pay this amount
to the I. and R. Treasury, whereby, as the document of
guarantee stated, “the further continuance of an enter-
tainment worthy of the dignity of the imperial court and
the capital city” was assured until the year 1824.11?

On his arrival at Frankfort, Metternich received the
following letter from Amschel Meyer Rothschild: 1


Most EXCELLENT PRINCE! Most Gracious PRINCE
AND Lorp!
I hope your Highness will not regard it ungra-
ciously or consider it as a presumption if I make so


f


;


7


The Period of Congresses 265


bold as to ask your Highness to do me the gracious
favor of taking soup with me this noon.

Such a favor would mark an epoch in my life; but
I would not have ventured this bold request if my
brother in Vienna had not assured me that your
Highness did not entirely refuse his entreaty to grant
me this gracious favor.

The Austrian gentlemen here have assured me
that they will also be present in such a case. If your
Highness wishes to come at another time, please com-
mand me, for any man feels himself happy to be in
your Highness’s company.


Metternich accepted the invitation and, accompanied
by his intimate friend Countess Lieven, came to lunch
with Amschel Meyer, an event which did not fail of its
effect upon the diet and upon society in Frankfort. The
two burgomasters of Frankfort, although invited, did not
come. The senate, however, was prepared to make all the
concessions asked for, except to agree to the designation,
“Tsraelite citizens.” Metternich had seriously to empha-
size his “definite wishes” to the obstinate Buol, instructing
him to act “in strict accordance with them.” But the
senate remained obdurate, Buol practiced passive resis-
tance, and the Jewish problem remained unresolved.

While making these social and diplomatic efforts on
behalf of the Jews in general and of the Rothschilds in
particular, Metternich instructed Gentz to see that the
House of Rothschild did not suffer in the press. Because
of the close association of that House with Austria, which
was ruthlessly repressing all liberal movements in Ger-
many, the more radical sections of the German public,
and their papers, were venturing to pass some rather hos-
tile judgments upon the House of Rothschild, in spite of
the prevailing censorship. Gentz had repeatedly to listen
to Metternich’s reproach that he had not got the news-
papers sufficiently in hand. For whenever an article un-
favorable to the Rothschilds appeared in a German paper,


266 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Solomon pressed Metternich to use his influence to pre-
vent such occurrences in the future. Even the Frankfort
letters to the Allgemeine Zeitung, published by the firm
of Cotta, contained such attacks. Gentz felt that it was
his duty to intervene.

“Sir,” he wrote on October 18, 1821, to Cotta, “you
will have heard from other sources that there is again
grave dissatisfaction here regarding the manner in which
the Allgemeine Zeitung is edited. . . . It seems to me all
the more necessary that if you are really anxious that the
A.Z. should continue to circulate in the Austrian states
without restriction, you should at least mitigate such of-
fending passages as convey the impression of hostility to
PAUSE Bos, ove

“I refer to such articles as those of Frankfort origin,
which have been appearing with some frequency lately,
and which comment upon the financial operations here
and the rate of exchange in a manner unfavorable to Aus-
tria and her credit. It is true that the general sense of
these articles reveals the fact that they are directed, not
against our state securities, but against the House of
Rothschild. Under prevailing conditions, however, it is
obvious that the moves attributed to the House of Roths-
child always react upon our state credit, and are gener-
ally more damaging to it than to the Rothschilds, who in
such cases are well able to help themselves.”

On December 4, 1821, Gentz wrote again, saying, “The
constant attacks upon the House of Rothschild invariably,
and sometimes in the most outrageous manner, reflect
upon the Austrian government by necessary implication,
since everybody knows they are transacting important
financial matters with that House, which is not only un-
impeachable, but honorable and thoroughly respectable.
The persistent rumors regarding new loans are invented
simply and.solely in order to undermine the confidence
which our public securities have won and which they
mae yen as


The Period of Congresses 267


The Allgemeine Zeitung was thereafter banned
throughout the whole dominions of the Austrian mon-
archy. Cotta, who although no friend of the Jews was a
sound business man, was exceedingly displeased at this
and requested Stegemann, the editor-in-chief, to be more
careful, as Gentz—and they both knew well that meant
Metternich—had complained bitterly about the paper.

Stegemann replied:*** “In view of the letter from
Herr von Gentz which you have been kind enough to
communicate to me, I gladly give my formal promise not
to accept . . . anything in future relating to the value of
Austrian public securities, or anything whatever relating
to the House of Rothschild (at least as affecting its rela-
tions with Austria). This means of course that I shall
have to adopt a new, very cautious, and colorless attitude
to affairs. . . . In point of fact, I know nothing of any
attacks against the House of Rothschild, unless the re-
mark that Madame Rothschild has received her first in-
vitation from the Prussian minister constitutes an attack.”

In a word, Cotta and Stegemann submitted, and for
the time being the brothers Rothschild did not have to
bother much about the very widely read Allgemeine Zei-
tung. The zeal Gentz had shown in this matter was not
attributable entirely to Metternich’s instructions. Since
his return from Laibach to Vienna he had grown more
and more intimate with Solomon Rothschild. He often
had occasion to confer with him on behalf of his chief
regarding the Neapolitan loan, and on one occasion Met-
ternich made a very friendly remark to Gentz, regarding
the attitude of the House of Rothschild in this matter.**®

It happened that on the following day Gentz met
Rothschild at a dinner given by the banker Eskeles at
Hietzing; and he hastened to inform him of the ‘“‘remark-
ably flattering remarks made by the prince.” ‘This pro-
duced, as Geniz himself records in his diary, results most


~ favorable to himself.


“This morning,” he notes,'*” on June 24, 1821, “Roths-


268 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


child paid me a very long visit; he told me the same re-
markable story about his money and family affairs as I
had recently heard from the prince. At the same time he
gave me the account of my share in certain recent finan-
cial operations, from which it appeared that, entirely con-
trary to my expectations, nearly five thousand gulden
were due to me.”

Gentz’s diary for the next few months is full of notes of
meetings with Rothschild, and constantly mentions his
“very agreeable communications,” *'* and “important
financial arrangements.” *1®

At the end of the year Rothschild specially demon-
strated his gratitude for all the information he had re-
ceived, and for the influence that had been brought to
bear upon Prince Metternich and the press. ‘Rothschild
breakfasted with me,” Gentz notes in his diary on Decem-
ber 22, 1821, “and gave me a proof of real friendship for
which I cannot feel too grateful to this excellent man at a
time when all my income from the principalities has come
to an end,’*° and nothing is done by those in authority to
compensate me somewhat for this loss.” *** Finally, Gentz
played his part in bleeding the Neapolitan treasury, and
Rothschild assisted him in this matter too.

On New Year’s Day Rothschild waited at Gentz’s
house until he came back from Metternich in order to
tell him that a courier was leaving for Naples next day,
and that Gentz might send an urgent reminder regarding
the gratuity promised him by the court of Naples. He,
Solomon, would see that the matter was put through by
his brother Carl and General Koller, the intendant gen-
eral of the Austrian troops. Gentz and Rothschild had
become positively inseparable; the friendship certainly
cost Solomon a great deal of money, but the cost was
negligible in view of the advantages which it brought
him.

The restoration of the Neapolitan kingdom by the Aus-
trians placed heavy burdens upon the people. Count


The Period of Congresses 269


Ficquelmont estimated that Naples had to pay 23 to 24
million gulden, or 12 to 13 million ducats, for the annual
upkeep of the Austrian army; *** he himself was terrified
at the magnitude of the amount. “If the burdens that we
impose,” he reported to Vienna, “‘are so oppressive that
they are more than the country can stand, all parties will
unite in desiring our departure. Instead of being a pro-
tecting power we shall become oppressors. The end of it
will be that we shall not be able to remain as long as our
interests and those of the kingdom of Naples require.”

The ambassador also stated emphatically, as he had
often done before, that the finance minister was entirely
incapable, and that there was only one man who could
restore order, namely, Luigi de’Medici, the former
finance minister, who had been overthrown by the revo-
lution. All the other foreign representatives were also
of this opinion, but the king feared Medici as a man
whose intellectual gifts would not accord well with his
own autocratic temper. Ficquelmont discussed this mat-
ter with Carl Rothschild, and Rothschild also thought
that it was only by appointing this descendant of the emi- —
nent Tuscan noble family—a man of outstanding honor,
energy, and administrative talent—that the material re-
covery of the country could be assured.

Although Medici had enemies among the royal family,
such as the Duke of Calabria—to whom he had refused
to give money for the duke to squander in an irresponsible
manner—successful pressure was brought to bear by the
Austrian government with the result that he was reap-
pointed finance minister at Naples in the spring of 1822.
The new minister did succeed with great difficulty in get-
ting the country out of its serious embarrassments.

It is true that not even he was able to deal with the
demands of Austria, but he proved himself a pertinacious
accountant, and managed to knock down considerably the
maintenance expenses of the Austrian army, the returns
for which had always been scaled up very generously.


270 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


He contrived to make the second Rothschild loan last
longer than his incompetent predecessors had done in the
case of the first loan, but in December, 1822, he was com-
pelled to have recourse to a third loan, the extent of which
was 22 million ducats nominal. Later on he raised a
fourth loan of 2% million pounds sterling at the rate of
89%, in order to acquire the necessary funds for paying
the Austrian army for a further period, and for covering
the deficit in the budget.

Through arranging for the loan to be issued in sterling
instead of in ducats Nathan expected especially to interest
English investors,*** and in this he was successful. By
February 26, 1824, the loan was already quoted at 96.75.
The public debt of Naples, which before the revolution
had stood at 28 million ducats, had risen by the year 1824
to no less than 104 million ducats nominal, yet the bonds
appreciated so considerably in value that some Neapoli-
tan public securities stood at 108 in April, 1824. It might
have been expected that as the amount of the debt in-
creased these quotations would fall, since, the income
having remained comparatively stationary, the security
for repayment of the debt diminished as the debt in-
creased in amount.

The ambassador Ficquelmont fully appreciated the po-
sition when he wrote: “It was therefore another’s credit
and not that of Naples that caused the prices to rise,
namely, the credit of the House of Rothschild. The
value of its public securities is therefore not a reliable
basis on which alone to found an estimate regarding a
state’s welfare. By so doing one might be gravely misled.

‘Securities at Naples have risen in value because a
wider market for them has been found. London and
Paris have become the principal centers through which
they are sold. It has not been possible for Naples to con-
tribute in any way to the result, since Naples merely
punctually paid the interest on its debt. . . . A small por-
tion of the funds has found its way to Austria, the bal-


The Period of Congresses ars


ance, . . . which was not placed in Naples, has been
gradually absorbed by powerful banking firms in London
and Paris, which derive their profit from fluctuations in
value, and have thus recouped themselves (and a great
deal more) for the capital sums which they have ad-
vanced,” **4

Thus, briefly stated, the financial policy of the Roths-
childs in Naples was summed up. Carl Rothschild had
_ originally gone to Naples with the intention of remaining
there only for a short time, as its occupation by Austrian
troops was intended to be a temporary measure; but local
conditions made it necessary that these troops should re-
main in the country for a much longer period, unless by
withdrawing them Metternich was prepared to risk hav-
ing the king and his reactionary supporters driven out
of Naples.

While the Austrians remained, the presence of Carl
was an urgent necessity; and his wife, who had embarked
on the journey to Naples as a pleasure trip, made ar-
rangements for a prolonged stay. Carl extended his busi-
ness, and finally contrived to make himself indispensable
' to the Neapolitan court in financial matters. He struck
roots in that beautiful city of southern Italy, and what had
at first seemed likely to be a brief business sojourn was
destined to develop into permanent residence. And the
House of Rothschild acquired a new center of operations
in the world.

In spite of Stadion’s efforts through Rothschild and
military pressure to get in the money expended in Naples,
the Austrian budget had got into a state of sad confusion.
The rising in Piedmont had cost a great deal of money,
and the military expenses had attained colossal figures.
In despair Stadion reported to the emperor and Metter-
nich ** that the excess of expenditure over revenue was
_ such that there was a permanent annual deficit of at least
20 million gulden, or more than one-sixth of the total
budget. He urged the necessity for putting an end to this


272 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


disastrous state of affairs. If it were to continue for a
longer period of years, it would involve the downfall of
the monarchy.

Stadion stated that another loan to cover this deficit
was urgently required, and suggested recourse again to
the House of Rothschild, whose wealth had increased
prodigiously of recent years. Moritz von Bethmann,
who was staying in Vienna in February, 1822, expressed
the following opinion regarding the House of Roths-
child :,i7°

“I can understand that the Rothschilds prove exceed-
ingly useful instruments to governments, and am far from
wishing to cast aspersions on them or from envying them
their good fortune. Solomon especially is a man of the
most estimable character, and I am exceedingly fond. of
him. I have heard from a reliable source that Solomon
Rothschild has stated that the annual balance sheet of the
five brothers showed a net profit of six million gulden in
20-florin measure. This is certainly a case where the
English proverb applies: ‘Money makes money.’

“Observing their industry and judgment, we may ex-
pect their business to continue to flourish; indeed one
hopes so, since the overthrow of this Colossus would be
terrible. The harmony between the brothers contributes
largely to their success. None of them ever thinks of
finding fault with another. None of them adversely crit-
icizes any of the others’ business dealings, even when the
results do not come up to expectations. Solomon has won
people’s affections here, partly through his general mod-
esty and partly through his readiness to be obliging. No-
body leaves him without feeling comforted.” ;

Stadion’s gloomy report regarding the condition of the
public finances induced the emperor to give his agree-
ment to a loan being obtained from the House of Roths-
child. Rothschild was approached in March, 1822, an
amount of 28 to 30 million gulden being mentioned. The
treasury official, Baron von Pillersdorff, wrote a consid-


The Period of Congresses 29.84


ered report on the offer sent in by the firm.’** Rothschild
proposed that 30 million gulden should be issued at 70%’,
so that the loan certificates to be issued would represent a
nominal capital sum of 42,957,000 gulden. As interest
was allowed to be deducted, even before the money was
paid, a capital amount of 42,875,000 florins would have
to be issued in respect of cash received, amounting to
28,785,717 florins.

“Tf we compare the real underwriting figure (allowing
for the deduction of interest) of 67%,” Pillersdorff’s re-
port continued, “with the ruling price which averages
75%, we find there is a difference of eight points, or
1074% in favor of the underwriters, which would mean
a profit to them of 3,428,000 gulden. It further appears
from the above statement of the case, that the interest pay-
able on the suggested loan would amount to 714% per
annum,

“The view to be taken of these conditions,” the report
concluded, “follows naturally from a consideration of the
figures detailed above. In my opinion they are exceed-
ingly onerous and less favorable than any previous pro-
posals, having regard to the fact that the first loan, con-
cluded when Austrian credit was in its infancy, was a
daring experiment. They are unacceptable in view of all
the reactions that would result... .

“Taking all these considerations into account, the pro-
posals put forward do not seem to me such as should be
accepted, even as a basis for further negotiation. It
would certainly be a severe blow to the country’s credit
if it became known that, in the circumstances indicated
above, a loan had been concluded at the price of 67,%,
especially when one bears in mind that the treasury would
have to meet the reproach of having confined itself to a
single offer.”

The House of Rothschild was accordingly informed
that the treasury was prepared to carry through a finan-
cing operation with them and Parish, if this could be ar-


274. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ranged on favorable terms, but that the proposals made
could not be regarded as such. Moreover, the treasury
wished to take up only a small amount. The Rothschilds,
who wanted to get the business at all costs, replied in the
following terms: °°

“We hasten hereby to inform your Excellency that we
have just heard from our houses in London and Paris,
that several firms in those cities have informed them of
their desire to invest capital in Austrian funds, and
thereby to participate in a loan arranged for his Majesty’s
service. In view of our friendly relations with those
firms, we should be exceedingly glad to meet their wishes
as far as we can. So we venture to inform your Excel-
lency, in connection with the offer (we have now made)
for underwriting twelve million gulden of five per cent
loan, that we are prepared in any event to offer one and a
half per cent more for the amount decided upon than is
offered by any other firm.”

The Rothschilds sent in a second letter on the same
day, in which, together with Parish, they endeavored to
get the large loan. They tried again to induce the finance
minister immediately to issue the loan on a larger scale,
as they stated,’*® “principally in order that the credulous
and uninstructed public should have no occasion to be-
lieve that a similar operation would be repeated at an
early date.” The letter concluded: “In the full convic-
tion, that none, not even the smallest circumstance of any
significance escapes the profound insight and business
acumen of your Excellency, we are confining ourselves
briefly to indicating the above consideration and are con-
tent to leave the appreciation of it entirely to your Ex-
cellency’s wisdom and judgment.”

When the Austrian Treasury did not accept this offer,
Solomon Rothschild felt personally aggrieved. He took
his troubles to Gentz, who had just received a gratuity of
three thousand ducats from the court of Naples, through
Carl Rothschild’s interventions. Gentz reports **° how


The Pertod of Congresses 275


Solomon described, with many tears, how inconsiderately
he had been treated in more than one quarter, in connec-
tion with his new loan proposals.

This failure was soon compensated for by other im-
portant transactions. Nathan had just concluded a loan
of three and one-half million pounds with Prussia, and the
repercussions of this transaction were felt as far as Frank-
fort and Vienna. Concurrently there were a large num-
ber of small loans arranged in Germany and Austria, with
the higher nobility, who were short of money in both
countries.

The loan, amounting to nine hundred thousand gulden,
which Prince Metternich himself obtained from the
House of Rothschild on September 23, is of particular
interest. It was a perfectly straightforward business; the
loan bore five per cent interest, and was to be repaid by
1834; in fact the prince repaid it in full in 1827. There
was nothing in the least suggestive of bribery about the
transaction—Metternich was no Gentz—but it was bound
to make the chancellor, who thus became Solomon’s
debtor, feel not entirely free in his dealings with him. At
all events it had the result that Metternich was more in-
clined to be sympathetic to the personal wishes and re-
quests of Solomon Rothschild and his brother.

The chancellor had known for some time that the
brothers Rothschild were not content with the simple
“von” that they had acquired in the year 1817, and that
they had their eye on the title of baron. Upon Gentz one
day sounding Metternich as to whether a request in that
direction was likely to meet with success, the chancellor
gave him to understand that he would raise no objection.
The brothers accordingly put forward this request, men-
tioning their services to Austria. And it was granted;
by an imperial decree, dated September 29, 1822, all the


_ brothers and their legitimate descendants of either sex


were raised to the rank of baron.
Thus most of the objections raised by the College of


276 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Heralds, the court officials, and Baron von Lederer, were
automatically discounted. The Rothschilds obtained the
seven-pointed coronet which, as a rather broad hint, they
had drawn on the coat-of-arms submitted in 1817. The
lion on the coat was also granted, and instead of the four
arrows which the hand had grasped since they had been
admitted into the ranks of the minor nobility, there were
now five, symbolizing the five brothers. They were also
granted supporters, a lion and a unicorn, and three splen-
did helmets adorned the coronet. The motto, “Concor-
dia, integritas, industria,” was intended to express the
harmony between the brothers, as well as their honesty
and tireless industry.

In view of the enormous value attaching tc to any title of
nobility in those times, the promotion to the rank of baron
signified for the Jewish House, which only twenty years
ago had been almost entirely unknown outside its native
town, an almost immeasurable increase of prestige. The
private life of the brothers also changed from this time.
They occupied luxurious dwellings in Frankfort, Paris,
and London. Only the aged Gudula stuck faithfully to
the family house in the Jewish quarter until her death in
1849 at the age of ninety-six.

Their efforts firmly to establish their social position
also met with success, especially as the stories of the
family’s wealth had invested its members with a kind of
legendary halo. They consciously encouraged this be-
lief in their wealth and their power, for they fully
realized that it increased the credit of their House.
Astonishing though the achievements of the five brothers
had been since their father’s death, they showed no sign
yet of flagging in their efforts. They were driven by the
constant urge to accumulate ever-growing riches, and to
increase their power and prestige.


CHAPTER V
The Rothschild Business Throughout the World


HROUGH his vigorous intervention, Metternich

had restored peace after his fashion in the Apennine
Peninsula. The chancellor, however, was constantly ap-
prehensive for the future of his system and the principle
of legitimacy, and dreaded the spread of liberal and
democratic ideas. When the fires had been quenched at
one spot they burst out at another on the broad continent
of Europe. Attention was now directed to the Greek
rising, and to the civil war in Spain, which had been
continuing since 1820.

In this country, which had wrung a constitution from
the king, the opposing forces of the Right and Left were
| still in conflict. During the summer of 1820 the radical
members of the Cortes treated the king practically as a
prisoner, and on June 22 of that year Ferdinand VII
wrote to the King of France requesting him to send forces
to his assistance, and also endeavored to induce the other
great powers to assist him against his own subjects.

The idea of intervention did not appeal particularly
either to the King of France or to his chief minister Count
de Villéle, although one party, that to which Chateaubri-
and belonged, was very much in favor of it. The matter
had come to be one that concerned the whole of Europe,
and Metternich had grown accustomed to intervene deci-
sively in any important European crisis. He had found
_ that the most effective way of doing so was through the
- congresses of sovereigns, such as had repeatedly been held »
of recent years. These congresses gave him the oppor-
tunity of using his persuasive powers to the full,

277


278 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


On October 20, 1822, another such congress met, this
time at Verona. Metternich and Gentz accompanied the
emperor to Verona as they had to Laibach, and profiting
by their previous experience they took Solomon Roths-
child with them. For it was obvious that if it were
decided at Verona to apply measures of compulsion to
Spain, the resources for this would have to be forth-
coming immediately. As the House of Rothschild had
proved so useful in the case of Naples, it was desired
to make use of it if necessary on this occasion too. In
the case of the congress at Laibach, Solomon had felt
misgivings about leaving Vienna; but he made no diffi-
culties now.

When Solomon arrived at Verona he learned from
several representatives of the powers there of a rumor
abroad that the House of Rothschild had offered a loan
to the government which had come into power through
the revolution, and which was threatening its own king,
or that the Rothschilds had at any rate entered into nego-
tiations with this government. Such conferences may
actually have taken place; but it was of the utmost
importance to the Rothschilds that Metternich should
be reassured. He must not be left in any doubt as to the
fact that their House was lending its support only to the
legitimists and the conservative régime. Solomon there-
fore two days after his arrival at Verona hastened to
write a letter to the chancellor refuting these rumors:

“Most gracious Chancellor,” the letter ran. “On my
arrival at Verona I was amazed to learn that men of
standing here believe that our House has contracted or
intends to contract a loan with the Spanish government.
Your Highness is far too familiar with the sentiments of
myself and my brothers to give such a baseless rumor more
than a moment’s consideration. It is so wholly inconsis-
tent with our general reputation that I do not think it
necessary for me to go into explanations regarding the
matter. I will confine myself to stating that your High-


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 279


ness may rest assured that we have never concluded any
loan with the Spanish government, that we shall not
conclude any such loan, and that we have refused such
offers as have been made to us in this matter as decisively
as we have, in your Highness’s knowledge, refused simi-
lar offers in the past.”

Solomon had spoken the truth. He had had nothing
whatever to do with any arrangements with Spain; his
brothers certainly, especially Nathan who lived in lib-
eral England, often did things which they did not imme-
diately communicate to the other brothers, and which
these learned of only after the fait accompli, but on this
occasion there had actually been no agreement concluded
with Spain. After handing his letter to Metternich, Sol-
omon called on Gentz. Alexander von Humboldt had
just left him. Humboldt was attached to the King of
Prussia’s suite, and he had been discussing problems of
high philosophy with the “Pen of Europe.” In order to
assure himself of Gentz’s support during the congress,
Rothschild held out to him the prospect of further profit-
able transactions, and Gentz noted with satisfaction in his
diary that Rothschild had discussed with him “matters
which although not so high were far more pleasant.” ?

During the whole period of the congress Solomon and
Gentz had been inseparable, and both had derived the
greatest advantage from their association. Gentz intro-
duced Solomon to the representatives of Russia, and the
delegates of the tsar’s dominions soon concluded a loan
of £6,000,000. Apart from the business profit realized
on this transaction, Solomon contrived to increase his per-
sonal prestige.

“Rothschild and his Paris brother had the Order of
Vladimir conferred on them yesterday,’ Gentz wrote *
to Pilat, the editor of the Oesterreichischer Beobachter,
which was the most widely read Viennese newspaper at
that time. He would be very much pleased if this fact
could be mentioned in the papers in an appropriate man-


280 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ner in the near future. “TI do not feel that this can con- |
veniently be done in the Beobachter; its proper place
would be in an article on Verona, and as you have not
published such an article yet, there would be something
comic in this being the first item of news from here.

“We must, however, do everything possible to satisfy
such a good and loyal person as Rothschild. You might
give this matter your thought. In any case please see that
it is mentioned as soon as possible in the Allgemeine
Zeitung. Have the following statement printed in that
paper: ‘In recognition of the distinguished services ren-
dered to the Russian Empire by the House of Rothschild
in various important financial and credit operations the
emperor has conferred the Order of Vladimir upon the
barons Solomon and James von Rothschild.’ Do not say
St. Vladimir and do not refer to the class, which neither
I nor the Rothschilds know.”

Sometime later Gentz had occasion to send a reminder
to his friend and wrote: “You have not replied to me
regarding the Order of Vladimir conferred upon the
Rothschilds. The baron is asking me every day whether
you have forgotten about it. He is particularly anxious
that the news should be featured in the Beobachter, and
I do not see why this should not be done. At all events
the news should be mentioned by you in the Allgemeine
Zeitung before somebody else prints it in a misleading
and possibly a malicious manner.”

In the end the distinction was duly announced in both
Papers, and the news that the mighty empire of the tsars
was also having financial dealings with the House of
Rothschild appreciably assisted in raising its credit with
the general public.

Meanwhile Solomon had inaugurated a private service
of couriers between Verona and Paris and Vienna, and
the Rothschilds proceeded to exploit the news about the
congress, which they thus received in those capitals before
anyone else.


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 281


At first it was not by any means certain whether armed
intervention in Spain would be decided upon. Even Met-
ternich was not entirely in favor of it, and as war with
Spain was therefore not expected* French securities kept
rising in value. Suddenly, on the arrival of a courier from
Verona, James Rothschild sold French bonds to the nom-
inal value of five million francs. The following day it
became known that the banker Ouvrard, who was also
staying at Verona, had concluded a loan with the Regency
Government, which had been set up by the supporters of
absolute monarchy in Spain for the duration of Ferdi-
nand’s captivity.

It was certainly natural to draw the inference that the
congress was taking the side of the king, and a sharp fall
in French bonds resulted. The capital of France re-
echoed with reproaches against ministers who had con-
stantly averred that they were determined to avoid war
with Spain. The slump became more and more acute,
until, a few days later, the British ambassador got news
from Vienna. It then became generally known that no
decision had yet been taken, and Wellington was con-
tinuing, on behalf of England, to oppose the proposal
for intervention. The securities now began to go up, and
the good news was confirmed by Rothschild.

On November 18, Villéle wrote to his representative at
Verona to say: ‘The Rothschilds’ courier is causing our
securities to rise again. He is spreading the news that
there will be no intervention. I do not believe in these
deceptive booms, which entail fresh variations in the rate
of exchange and heavy losses to many persons,” especially
when there may be a risk of war later.”

The House of Rothschild was thus using the general
political situation for the purpose of doing profitable
business because it was able to get news early. James had
been alarmed by the contradictory reports that had fol-
lowed so rapidly upon one another. Solomon had confi-
dentially informed him that important decisions were


282 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


obviously pending at Verona, and that the French govern-
ment would play the leading part in them. Solomon
suggested that it would be exceedingly useful if James
would come to Verona personally,

James quickly decided to make the journey, and on
November 22 Solomon introduced his brother James
to Gentz at Verona. On the following day the two
brothers dined with Prince Metternich. A few days
later, on November 26, Solomon planned to take advan-
tage of his brother James’s presence in Verona, and go
himself to Vienna. Gentz had just given him a secret re-
port on the congress, and several letters which he wanted
taken to Vienna. But a post from Rome informed him
that their brother Carl was shortly to arrive from Naples.
Solomon postponed his journey for two days. The three
Rothschilds had thus an opportunity thoroughly to dis-
cuss Neapolitan and Spanish affairs, and the probable
result of the congress. After this Solomon and James
returned home.

At the beginning of the congress, Solomon had been
sending so much news from Verona to Vienna that the
bulky Rothschild postal-packets attracted the notice of
the postmaster at Scharding. He felt called upon to draw
the authorities’ attention to this exceptionally voluminous
correspondence. This naturally did not particularly
excite them, since numerous communications were en-
trusted to the Rothschild couriers by Metternich and
Gentz themselves.

The decisions of the congress did finally lead to armed
intervention by France in Spain. The congress passed off
with great brilliance and duly impressed the world at
large. The ancient arena at Verona was the scene of a
magnificent banquet, which was attended by all the
members.

Rossini, who was then at the height of his creative
powers, charmed the members of the congress with melo-
dies from his operas. Solomon, who had known Rossini


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 283


in Vienna, introduced him to James at Verona, and this
proved to be the starting-point of a friendship which was
to develop into intimacy in Paris, especially during the
last ten years of their lives.

Solomon dealt with Prince Metternich’s personal ex-
penditures at Verona—amounting to 16,370 lira—as in-
deed the House of Rothschild had furnished® all the cash
spent in Verona, drawing it partly from France and
partly from the various money-markets of the Lombard-
Venetian kingdom.

The relations between Austria and that House were
constantly growing closer, and her leading statesmen were
scarcely able to refuse any request put forward by one
of its members.

On September 30 the commercial department of the
treasury received an application from Nathan, asking
to be appointed Austrian consul-general in London. He
pointed out not only that he had punctiliously performed
the duties enumerated in his official instructions,
especially in the matter of rendering assistance to Aus-
trian seamen—doing so without asking for any compen-
sation—but that he was the sole consular representative
of a foreign power in London who had not the rank of
consul-general.? He promised not to relax his watch on
Austrian commercial interests in the future, and also
most conscientiously to carry out any instructions which
he should receive. The commercial department of the
treasury strongly supported this application, and Metter-
nich sent it forward to the emperor with the following
memorandum:

“The said Rothschild has for a considerable period
occupied the office of Austrian consul in London, to the
general satisfaction of his chiefs, and in a disinterested
spirit has carried out his duties often involving personal
sacrifices, from which he never shrank where the prestige
and the interests of your Majesty’s service were involved.
Your Majesty is moreover graciously acquainted with the


284 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


services rendered by his House to the imperial state. The
incongruity of his present rank in relation to the commer-
cial agents of other foreign powers in London, who gen-
erally are styled consul-general, cannot fail to injure his
official prestige.”

Metternich also pointed out that James in Paris already
had the title of consul-general, and Emperor Francis ac-
cordingly granted the application. So Nathan now held
the same position in London as his brother in Paris, That
city was the center now of Rothschild enterprise. ‘The
question of intervention in Spain was still the dominating
issue, and as in this matter England was sharply opposed
to the conservative groups in Russia, Austria, and France,
it was inevitable that there should be a corresponding
conflict of opinion within the House of Rothschild.

Metternich, with his legitimist policy, had Solomon
completely in tow; Amschel was not so prominent, but
owing to the Jewish problem at Frankfort, he had to
follow the direction indicated by his protector Metter-
nich, while James in Paris was so closely bound up with
the leader of the ministry, Count de Villéle, and antici-
pated such advantages from this connection that he too
was compelled to fall in with the conservative group, who
were all-powerful on the Continent. Carl at Naples was
also a dependent upon Austria, so that Nathan in liberal
England was in an awkward position with regard to his
four brothers on the Continent.

As a naturalized Englishman, and as banker of the
richest state in the world, he personally would have
wished to fall in with its political opinions as completely
as possible. Indeed, it was necessary that he should do sO,
as otherwise he would speedily have lost his connection
with the British government, and any possibility of doing
big business in the future.

After the conclusion of the indemnity transactions in
Paris, James had succeeded in getting on good terms with
the Bourbon court, and especially with the leading min-


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 285


ister Count de Villele. He had often been able to oblige
influential persons in matters of finance, a fact which
assisted him in his efforts to consolidate his position. Soon
after his appointment as consul-general James had taken
the magnificent Palais Fouché formerly occupied by
Napoleon’s commissioner of police, and the magnificent
style in which he lived served to enhance his prestige. He
was still a bachelor, a fact that somewhat limited his
social activities, but also made it easier for him to make
his way into exclusive circles, some of which still showed
great reluctance to admit the Jewish parvenu, and only
did so when personal interests made it appear desirable.
Conditions, however, gradually improved in this respect
as his wealth increased. James also benefited by the fact
that the great Paris bankers of that period such as Laffitte
and Casimir Périer were either liberal, or indeed almost
revolutionary, in their views, while others such as Del-
essert, Mallet, and Hottinguer were too nervous to
undertake risky ventures on a large scale.

In 1823 James offered to place funds at the disposal
of Villéle, and informed him that he was prepared to


_ come to his assistance in alleviating the financial embar-


rassments of the treasury. James’s first important trans-
action with the French Treasury consisted in undertaking
the sale of 6% Royal Bonds. When at the end of Janu-
ary, 1823, the campaign against Spain was decided upon,
James gave Villéle to understand that he was prepared to
deal with the big loan to which the chamber had agreed.
Villéle bethought himself of the precedent of Austria
and Naples, and suggested that Rothschild should in a
similar way raise the money necessary for intervention in
Spain through negotiating a Spanish loan payable to
France.

Fundamentally, however, James was as reluctant as


_ Villéle to embark on hostilities against Spain, for these


might seriously interfere with his financial scheme. His


attitude is revealed in some intercepted correspondence


286 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


between him and a Spanish banker called Bertran de Lis,
who was endeavoring in association with the Liberals to
secure the fall of the Spanish Ministry, in order if possi-
dle to prevent the French from intervening. San Miguel’s
Spanish ministry had, in view of the French menace,
obtained authority from the Cortes to change the seat of
government and the royal residence. The king would
gladly have dismissed the government, but the menaces of
an excited populace caused him to refrain from doing so.
If the fall of the ministry could be brought about in some
other way, France might perhaps be induced to regard
this as indicating an improvement in the position and
abstain from taking action.

Such was the state of affairs when a letter arrived from
Rothschild’s confidential correspondent at Madrid. “We
are at this moment,” wrote Bertran de Lis to the House
of Rothschild in Paris,® “struggling to overthrow the
ministry and to replace it with persons better qualified
to guide the ship of state. I am convinced that we shall
succeed in our endeavor, and I am therefore anxious that
you should bring these facts to the attention of your gov-
ernment, so that they may cease taking any hostile action.
I am asking you to do this in the confident expectation
that a solution may be found consistent with the honor
of both nations, which will assist in maintaining peace
throughout Europe. I hope that you will support me in
this endeavor as much as possible; but if you see that
nothing can be done, and that a breach is imminent, I
hope that you will send me a special messenger at my
expense, so that I may regulate my actions accordingly
in settling my financial affairs.”

The same correspondent subsequently attempted in va-
rious ways to communicate items of important political
and business news to James; but these appear to have been
intercepted as they never reached their destination. The
first letter to get through seems to have been one dated
March 29, 1823, in which Bertran de Lis wrote:°


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 287


“Tt is our desire to avoid war, and in order to carry
through the business that we have in hand, I feel I should
let you know the line of action which in my view your
government should adopt to this end. For one thing I
feel they should cease any hostile operations until new
ministers have been appointed. . . . In this way we might
perhaps reach an agreement satisfactory to both nations,
and one that might also bring us advantages of a general
nature, and also such as we may turn to account in our
business.”

The writer of this letter proceeded to deal with the
current situation in Spain in some detail, and concluded
with the warning: “It is important also to use every pre-
caution in carrying on this correspondence; for it would
be exceedingly painful to me to be compromised in this
matter in which I am convinced that the public interest
is identical with my personal interest.”

In spite of the precautions that were presumably taken,
the correspondence fell into the hands of royalists, and was
duly brought to the attention of Metternich at Vienna.
He was highly indignant that one of the Rothschilds, who
always pretended to be so conservative, and denied that
they had anything to do with Liberals, should suddenly be
discovered in dealings of this character. Gentz was in-
structed to speak to Solomon about it. Solomon was at
great pains to invent an explanation, and Gentz noted
in his diary:

“T have just had a little discussion with Rothschild
about the incredible story of his brother in Paris, who is
suddenly appearing in the rodle of intermediary between
the French ministers and a revolutionary banker at
Madrid.” %

Meanwhile the French had seriously embarked upon
intervention in Spain. On April 7, 1823, the Duke of
Angouléme, nephew of the king, crossed the Spanish
frontier. He encountered no opposition, and pressed on
far into the country toward the capital Madrid. It was


288 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Villéle’s task to provide the moneys required by the
French army, and now that the die had been cast James
Rothschild hastened to offer his services to the minister.
His first action was to hand the minister a letter of credit
in favor of the Duke of Angouléme addressed to a bank in
Madrid that was closely connected with the firm of
Rothschild.

Villéle forwarded this document to the duke. “This
is,’ he wrote in a covering letter,’ “in the nature of a
courtesy, but I was afraid of offending Rothschild, who
has been and still is exceedingly useful to us in our
financial difficulties, if I did not accept it. As soon as
the army has entered Madrid Rothschild will send an
official of the firm, or perhaps one of his brothers, to
that city. I would request your Royal Highness to grant
this banking firm your very special protection, as its
intervention may be exceedingly useful to us in the future,
both in the matter of rendering financial assistance to the
army, and also in the matter of the Spanish loan, if such a
loan can be usefully launched.”

Angouléme did not share Villéle’s view that the letter
of credit was to be regarded as a mere courtesy. “I
consider,” he replied, “that it would be exceedingly useful
to avail ourselves of the facilities that Rothschild enjoys
for providing ready money at Madrid.” He held that
this was a speedier and more economic method than
sending money from France. He fully agreed that
Rothschild should be treated with consideration, as rec-
ommended by Villéle, who it was clear had learned much
from the Austrians in Naples.

James was thus placed firmly in the saddle, and was
enabled to carry out his measures under the protection of
the two most powerful men in France at that time. It
is true that Villéle revealed a certain attitude of suspicion
toward bankers in general, regarding them as voracious
beasts of prey out for money.

On May 23 the duke entered Madrid without opposi-


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 289


tion, and set up a regency, which was to rule with modi-
fied absolutism until the king should have been liberated
from the Cortes. This government, however, in spite of
its dependence on French troops, soon threw all counsels
of wisdom and moderation to the wind. In order to fill
its empty treasury it attempted to arrange a loan with
Ouvrard and an agent of the House of Rothschild, who
had come to Madrid with the French army.

Villéle warned Angouléme not to allow the regency to
have a free hand in this matter. “For,” he wrote,'* “where
the body is, there will the vultures be gathered together
to devour it.” He referred to the bankers, not excluding
Rothschild, who would undoubtedly have offered the re-
gency oppressive loans.

Meanwhile the Cortes had carried the Spanish king off
to Cadiz, and Angouléme proceeded to invest that city
and to liberate the king. “Cadiz is the key to the whole
problem,” Villéle wrote to the duke. “By force and
negotiation the king must be got out of the hands of the
rebels. Your Highness knows that his Majesty has given
you carte blanche to enable you to succeed in this venture,
and that we have plenty of money in reserve which is
available for any of your requirements. Moreover, with
the letter of credit which I have sent to you, your High-
ness can draw bills up to any amount on the House of
Rothschild in London for making payments to those who
may deliver up the king.”

In order to meet all this heavy expenditure Villéle had
been negotiating for some time for the flotation of a con-
siderable French loan. The minister still found his de-
pendence upon the House of Rothschild irksome, and
gave vent to his feelings in a letter to the duke: **

“Although I have nothing but praise for the manner
in which Herr Rothschild has served us while I was in
difficulties, I should like to float a loan which would make
me independent of these people.”

The cold facts were destined to turn out rather differ-


290 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ently, and through this loan of 23 million francs, which
was offered for public tender, Villéle was to be bound
more closely than ever to the House of Rothschild. In
open competition with three other banking firms, James
Rothschild, encouraged by his brother Nathan, offered
89.55%, the next highest price offered being 87.75%.
The importance attached by the House of Rothschild to
the conclusion of this agreement is most clearly evidenced
by the fact that Nathan from London, Solomon from
Vienna, and Amschel from Frankfort had all hurried
to Paris for the negotiations. |

Both parties were delighted with the arrangement.
Villéle was pleased since he had scarcely hoped that such
conditions were possible for France, engaged in a venture
like the Spanish intervention, especially in view of the
fact that the country was already burdened with a foreign
debt of 400 million francs.®> He reported enthusiastically
to the duke on July 11 '* that the bonds on that date al-
ready stood at 91.25, and that the loan had therefore
appreciated 2 1/3%.

The four brothers did everything possible to extend the
European market for this French loan. Villéle congratu-
lated himself on having got the loan underwritten at such
a high figure, and explained his success as follows: “Mon-
sieur Rothschild, whom the King of Portugal asked for a
loan of 25 million francs, had the courtesy to ask King
Louis XVIII for his permission before consenting. This
is an example of the efforts which the financial powers
were making to intervene in politics. Moreover, Roths-
child of London, Rothschild of Frankfort, and Rothschild
of Paris are all here, a fact which contributed not a little
in giving me the confidence necessary to fix the minimum
price at 89.5%.”

Villéle thought that he had carried through quite a
clever deal, but this loan, which constantly rose in value,
and reached par as early as February 12, 1824, proved to
be a new and abundant source of profit to the issuing firm.


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 291


Villéle now reverted to his scheme that the duke should
present a skilful ultimatum demanding the liberation of
the King of Spain and his family. Villéle advised that
he should bring money plentifully to bear in this matter,”
and should have an unlimited supply of credit at his dis-
posal through Monsieur Belin, the Madrid agent of the
House of Rothschild, so that he could draw bills up to
any amount on the House of Rothschild in London. James
agreed that he might accompany the duke if he left
Madrid. Belin’s signature was sufficient to release
amounts which it might otherwise be exceedingly diffi-
cult to procure. Without his assistance it would be im-
possible to use bribery for the liberation of the king.

“This man,” Villéle wrote to the duke, “is personally
known to the majority of those whose support we need,
and it will be much more attractive to them to receive
the price of their infamy secretly in London than to be
paid in gold which they would have to withdraw at their
own risk from a city invested on all sides.”

Villéle had entirely forgotten his former feelings about
the Rothschilds, and he had extensive recourse to the
_ convenient services rendered by the firm at home and
in Spain.

“Your Highness,” he wrote to the duke,’* ‘“‘can use the
House of Rothschild’s money for all your financial re-
quirements, whether necessitated by the service of the
army or by the negotiations. In connection with the latter
its agent’s banking relations with the principal banking
firms of Cadiz may be useful to you.” He suppressed any
misgivings at having brought Angouléme into such close
contact with Rothschild. ‘Finance and trade,” he wrote,
“are the friends of peace, but they always wish to secure
peace at the expense of honor; nevertheless, having the
safeguard of a man of your Highness’s temper and senti-
ment as a counterpart, we need not be anxious about allow-
ing these gentlemen to intervene.”

In Spain matters took the course that France had


292 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


desired. On June 23, 1823, the duke had reached Cadiz
and was prepared to launch his attack. The forts sur-
rounding the city were speedily captured. The necessity
actually to take the town by storm did not arise. In
accordance with Villéle’s advice the duke made free with
the Rothschilds’ money; bills were drawn on Nathan
Rothschild to the amount of nearly two million francs in
favor of various members of the courts, and of the per-
sons who held the king captive.

When the military position at Cadiz had become hope-
less, and those who had accepted bribes promoted mutinies
in the garrisons, the Cortes finally broke up, and released
the king. It is true that he was first forced to sign a
document containing all kinds of promises for a moderate
form of government, in accordance with the constitution ;
but everybody knew perfectly well that he would not
keep them. Thus the King of Spain was not in the end
required to feel under an obligation to the powerful sup-
port of the House of Rothschild for his release from his
own subjects of the liberal party. Neither was the duke
forced to feel that he owed it to the banking firm that,
after speedily overcoming all difficulties, he was enabled
to return to Paris as a conquering hero.

_ The services which the House had rendered to the
French government, however, enhanced its prestige at
court and with Villéle to an enormous degree. James
began to surround himself with luxury, and to patronize
science and the arts; he furnished his house at No. 40,
rue de Laffitte magnificently. He received the Cross
of the Legion of Honor.

After the intervention, the course of events in Spain
was, to Metternich’s delight, exactly similar to what had
occurred at Naples. An absolute monarchy was reintro-
duced, the liberals being savagely persecuted. The con-
stitution vanished. The Roman Inquisition functioned
again, and the government went far beyond what the


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 293


French government had wanted to achieve by inter-
vention.

Ferdinand’s new absolute government had money
troubles no less than its predecessor; and the king ap-
pealed to the monarch of France, pointing out that his
work was not yet completed, and that he lacked such
a financial foundation as would be provided by a loan.
Villéle applied to James Rothschild, who, in conjunction
with Nathan and the British bankers Baring and John
Irving, offered a loan of 120,000,000 piasters’® to be sub-
scribed for at 60%. ‘The bankers demanded, however,
that the whole of Spain’s Colonial revenue should be
mortgaged, this being the only revenue that had suffered
little through the civil war, and in addition they required
that France should give a formal guarantee.

An agreement was not concluded at the time, since Vil-
léle replied to the bankers”® that his first consideration
must be his duty toward France. He could not agree to
a guarantee by France without endangering its political
and financial interests. He would, however, gladly advise
the Spanish government to regularize its administration
and to apply moderation in its general policy, in order
to create the confidence necessary for such agreements.
These were fine words, but they offered no tangible secu-
rity for calculating business men, and accordingly the
bankers withdrew their offer.

Metternich and Gentz had attentively watched the
course of events. Rothschild’s relations with Gentz had
become, if possible, still more intimate, and the sincerity
of Gentz’s diary is attested by nothing more than by the
entries of the 6th and oth of January, 1823: “Rothschild
called on me in Vienna. Everything is going magnifi-
cently and money in profusion. ... January 9. I have
been informed by Rothschild that a remittance of a thou-
sand ducats is on its way from Russia.”

Rothschild was assiduous in impressing Gentz with


294 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


the riches and power of his family. On January 13, 1823,
he favored him with over an hour’s discourse on the
position of his firm and its enormous resources, showing
him some “eloquent and exceedingly interesting docu-
ments.”

The firm had in fact grown so powerful that it now
proceeded to conclude most important transactions, in
which it had formerly allowed other firms such as Gon-
tard and Parish to participate, entirely on its own. The
brothers may have learned that the Austrian finance min-
ister once more had occasion to think of them. England
had recently demanded the repayment of some old debts
owing by Vienna, and it appeared that Solomon’s and
Nathan’s services would be required again. Metternich
and Gentz were therefore anxious to be obliging at this
time, especially in matters that did not cost the state
anything. They did not have to rack their brains to
find an opportunity of showing their good-will, for to-
gether with Borne, Solomon had been “hammering at
[Gentz] about this wretched question of the Frankfort
Jews.” ** |

The growing power of the House of Rothschild, which
had originated in Frankfort and now had dealings with
most of the more important states, caused the Frankfort
Jews to stiffen in their attitude. They now demanded as
a right what they had formerly begged as a favor. While
Solomon and Gentz were pressing Metternich to help the
Jews of Frankfort, Solomon’s coreligionists there were
carrying on a constant campaign against Count Buol, dele-
gate and president of the diet who was so markedly hos-
tile to them. Their efforts finally resulted in Count Buol
being recalled, and this constituted an important victory
for the House of Rothschild.

Buol’s successor, Baron von Miinch-Bellinghausen, was
instructed to settle the Jewish problem as speedily as pos-
sible, since it was Austria’s intention to support such de-
mands of the Israelite community as were just. Amschel


j


:
.


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 295


Meyer Rothschild was quite unrestrained in his demon-
strations of joy. On the day when the new president of
the diet arrived, Rothschild gave a big dinner, to which
all the delegates were invited.

“T should have preferred,” Minch stated in his report
to Metternich,” “not to have made my first public appear-
ance in this manner, but as the affair had already been
arranged I thought that I ought not to be too nice; more-
over I made the acquaintance of all the delegates before
the session.”

Matters now began to move; Miinch-Bellinghausen
followed out Metternich’s ideas in quite a different way
from Buol, and in August, 1822, the question was settled
in a manner highly satisfactory to the Jews. It is true
that many restrictions were still maintained. ‘Thus only
fifteen Jewish marriages were allowed in each year;** no
Jew was allowed to possess more than one house, and Jew-
ish trade too was not free from all restrictions. The Jews,
however, were henceforth counted as “Israelite citizens” ;
the ghetto was done away with, and they had full liberty
of movement within the town.

They regarded these concessions as a victory, and
Rothschild gave a dinner to celebrate them September 3,
to which he invited both burgomasters, as well as the
delegates to the diet. The former, however, again stayed
away because, as Schwemer said, they did not feel in a
mood for celebrations.** ‘The debentures issued in 1811
under Dalberg’s agreement for the liberation of the Jews
were now fully redeemed. ‘This fact also indicated that
the Jews were satisfied. ‘Thus the matters in dispute
in the Jewish question, which had been pending for eight
years, were finally settled by the diet acting in a judicial
capacity. The principal credit for this was due to
‘Rothschild. Both the town and the Jews sent deputations
_ to thank Baron von Minch, who did not fail to report this
fact to Metternich, as he knew well the importance Met-
ternich attached to this question.


296 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


The reasons for supporting the Frankfort Jews were
well known in Austria. Count Stadion had been nego-
tiating with Rothschild and Parish, the underwriters of
the last Austrian loan, since the spring of 1822 for a loan
to cover the estimated deficit of 20 million gulden. They
had stated that they were willing to underwrite 20 mil-
lions at 67, and then at 68.5%, but Count Stadion, whose
recent experience in such matters had made him more
cautious and critical, thought that these terms were not
sufficiently favorable, or were, as he expressed it, “oppres-
sive.’ *> He therefore looked around for other offers,
and for the first time in the experience of the Austrian
government these were forthcoming.

Stadion wanted to borrow only 12,000,000 gulden at
first; he fixed the final date for submitting tenders at April
14, 1822. The Paris banker Fould, representing a group
of Paris firms at the head of which was Laffitte, offered to
underwrite the 12,000,000 at 69%. Parish and Rothschild
made a second offer to take over the loan at 69%, while
the Viennese banking firm of Geymiiller offered 7234. A
conference of ministers was summoned for April 13, to
consider the tenders.

Solomon Rothschild was particularly anxious to secure
the loan, if necessary without the cooperation of Parish—
with whom he had recently had several differences—as
this would provide him with a further opportunity for
exploiting the advantages enjoyed by his firm for the sale
of securities through their branches in the most important
markets in Europe. He learned through Gentz that other
firms were not merely in the field but had actually offered
better terms than his, and he therefore decided to write
to Stadion.

When the finance minister went to attend the conference
on April 13, he was handed a letter from the firm of
Rothschild just before entering the conference room.
This letter bore the signature of that firm alone. The firm
stated that they were prepared in any case to offer 12%


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 297


more than might be offered by anyone else for the loan
which was to be issued.

The conference first decided that 20 million gulden
should be issued at once instead of the smaller amount
that Stadion desired. It was then considered whether or
not any attention should be paid to Rothschild’s late offer.
The conference was agreed that Rothschild’s letter was
manifestly irregular. Applicants had been required to
submit tenders under seal by April 12. Rothschild had
done so jointly with Parish, but their offer had been less
favorable than that of Geymiiller. The second letter, al-
though dated April 12, had not been given to Stadion until
the following day. The minutes of the conference pointed
out that “the irregularity of this procedure consists in
having failed to observe the final date imposed upon all
applicants for submitting their tenders—a fact which
Rothschild is obviously trying to conceal by antedating
his offer—and also in the lack of precision in the offer
itself.”

Metternich and Count Zichy expressed the opinion that
Rothschild’s offer should not be accepted, but that it
- should not be rejected either, and proposed that the whole
matter should be negotiated afresh. With regard to the
French banker Laffitte, whom he suspected of liberal
sympathies, Prince Metternich stated that he feared the
banker might be actuated by other than purely business
motives. He added that he felt similar misgivings regard-
ing Geymiiller’s offer, since it was possible that he was
acting in concert with Laffitte.

While Metternich used his influence in favor of the
House of Rothschild, Stadion took the opposite line, ad-
hering to his view that Rothschild’s retrospective tender
should be ignored, and that the offer of the firm of Gey-
miiller should be accepted as the best offer sent in by the
_ time fixed,

Stadion was of the opinion that the financial interests
of the state required that competitive tenders having beep


298 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


asked for, it was essential that the conditions laid down
should be strictly observed, and that Rothschild’s retro-
spective offer should therefore not be considered. “This
is the first time,” he emphasized, “that the treasury has
had the gratifying experience of finding several competi-
tors tendering for a loan. They will come to us again,
and perhaps with even more favorable results in the future
if we prove to them that belated offers are not considered.
If in the present instance we act otherwise, it may be
assumed that henceforth we shall have no possibility of
securing genuine competition, and we may therefore pay
dearly in time to come, for any immediate advantage.”
Finally, with reference to the objection made to Laffitte
on personal grounds, Count Stadion observed that it
would be quite impossible in any case to prevent him
from being an unrevealed participator in a loan, and that
even if Rothschild’s offer were accepted this contingency
would still have to be reckoned with.

As there was no way of bridging these differences of
opinion the conference broke up without result. It was
therefore necessary for the emperor to give the final deci-
sion, with the result that Metternich’s views prevailed.
The emperor issued the following decisions in council :?¢

“On the question whether 12 or 20 millions should be
issued, the general political situation should be regarded
as the determining factor, and Metternich should accord-
ingly be consulted. A new date should be fixed for
submitting tenders indicating that belated offers will not
be considered.”

Another year was to pass before the new big Austrian
loan materialized. In April, 1823, the deficit up to the
end of the financial year 1824 was estimated at no less than
35,000,000 gulden. It was now decided to issue a loan of
30,000,000. Four firms, including the House of Roths-
child, jointly provided this sum in cash, receiving
36,000,000 five per cent debentures payable in coin, at 82
gulden per cent.?"


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 299


While Austria was suffering from these difficulties, her
aggressive foreign policy—especially the expedition to
Naples, which was viewed very critically in England—
had given rise to the belief that the finances of Austria
must be in a most flourishing condition if it had so much
money to spend on such objects. The Opposition in the
British Parliament had for some time been reproaching
the ministry for failing to demand payment of debts which
had been incurred by Austria even before the revolution-
ary war.

Before the system of the English subsidies had come
into effect, Austria had been granted two loans by Eng-
land, to the value of £6,220,000 for financing its cam-
paigns, and in the excitement of the Napoleonic wars,
this fact had fallen into the background. With the addi-
tion of compound interest the debt had, by the time of
the Congress of Verona in 1822, risen to an amount exceed-
ing £23,500,000. Austria had already been approached
at Aix-la-Chapelle regarding the repayment of the loan,
but Metternich had refused to pay, and all the negotia-
tions since had proved fruitless.?* For Stadion definitely
' stated that if England insisted upon its demands it would
mean the collapse of Austria’s finances, which had been so
laboriously resuscitated.”®

When Metternich adopted a policy at Verona which
was opposed to that of England, Wellington again re-
minded the chancellor that his government was pressing
for the payment of this debt. He was not asking for the
whole gigantic sum mentioned above, but was prepared to
waive all interest charges, compound and simple, and
would even be satisfied with a capital payment of £4,000,-
ooo. This amount, however, Austria must pay in any
event. Even this was a very considerable sum, represent-
ing about 40,000,000 gulden in convention coinage, and
it constituted another dreadful surprise for Stadion.

Metternich realized that it was his policy which had
induced this claim to be brought forward again, and he


300 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


endeavored to reach an agreement in personal conversa-
tion with the British commissioner Sir Robert Gordon,
who had been dispatched for this purpose. Various solu-
tions were considered and rejected.. Finally Metternich
offered a lump sum of 30,000,000 gulden five per cent de-
bentures at an issue price which involved the reduction
of the total claim to about two million pounds. He then
had recourse to Solomon Rothschild, asking him to try
to influence the British government through his brother
Nathan. Solomon immediately wrote a confidential letter
to Nathan on the matter.

“The British minister,” he wrote,*° “has as yet made no
reply to this proposal . . . It is probable that England
will not at once unconditionally accept the offer of the
Austrian government, but will attempt in one way or
another to obtain better terms. Whatever the reply may
be, however, I do not believe that the Austrian govern-
ment will vary their original offer . . . If it were to act
otherwise, and all at once to put in circulation new public
securities amounting to so many millions, the Austrian
government would be dealing a severe blow to its credit,
which is being raised by a businesslike and intelligent
administration to a point commensurate with the country’s
greatness,

“You are a business man yourself, and will therefore
be best able to appreciate these circumstances, so that it
would be redundant for me to explain myself further.
What I have written has been communicated to me in con-
fidence by his Excellency Prince von Metternich, and it
is merely intended to inform you of the general position.
In any case you may, although only confidentially (for you
have no official instructions) discuss the matter with the
chancellor of the exchequer, and endeavor to convince the
English of the fairness of the offer which is being made.
As I am aware of your devotion to the government here,
I feel confident that you will be grateful to me for giving
you an opportunity of proving yourself useful and well


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 301


disposed to them in such an important matter, and that
you will show all the wisdom and caution necessary to
assist it in attaining its ends. I hope that you will be
able to inform me of the success of your endeavors by the
nextpest ..°..”

Nathan thereupon got in touch with the bankers
Baring and Reid-Irving, and also with the British govern-
ment, and succeeded in persuading the government to
agree to a payment of £2,500,000, whereas the negotiators,
after at first asking for more, finally obtained from the
Austrian government 30,000,000 florin 5% cash debentures
at an issue price somewhat exceeding 82 2/3 %. Stadion
agreed to the offer made by the three firms mentioned
above,** and on October 31, 1823, Solomon was able to
send the following report to Metternich: *


Most GRAcious CHANCELLOR!

It is with particular pleasure that I take this oppor-
tunity of informing your Highness of the pleasant
news, that after considerable effort I have at last
succeeded, in collaboration with my colleagues in
London, in concluding the transaction with the Eng-
lish government on the basis of the amount of 30
million gulden 5% Métalliques Bonds. I have thus.
faithfully carried out the promise made to you on
my departure, and am most happy to have been able
to terminate a matter outstanding for so long, entirely
to the satisfaction of the wishes of the imperial
government.

I have been expressly requested by my colleague
to endeavor to secure that the government of his
Majesty the Emperor shall grant a commission of
2-3% to the underwriters in view of the fact that the
transaction is such an advantageous one to the treas-
ury. Mindful of the just and loyal principles of the
government here, I may feel justified in assuming
that if I submitted such a request it would not fail to
receive consideration. But the reflection that my
services and my zeal in this matter have resulted in


302 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


such definite advantage to the state, and effected such
large savings, is so exceedingly pleasant that I gladly
renounce the possibility of deriving any further
emoluments. J have made a similar statement re-
cently to his Excellency, Count von Stadion, and
therefore flatter myself that I have given occasion
for his Majesty to feel satisfied with me, and have
earned his gracious consideration.

Your Highness will no doubt deign to appreci-
ate with your customary gracious condescension the
efforts that I am making in the interests of the im-
perial state, and I confidently flatter myself that you
will graciously consider a request with which, lest I
should seem immodest, I do not venture to trouble ©
your Excellency yet. I am waiting to communicate
it to you verbally. I await with extreme impatience
the moment when I shall have the happiness of seeing
your Highness again and in the best of health, and
when I shall be able personally to renew the assur-
ances of my most profound regard... .


As a matter of hard fact the whole transaction consti-
tuted a bull speculation in Austrian public securities by
the three firms concerned. Their expectations were ful-
filled directly after the negotiations had been concluded,
for as early as January, 1824, the Métalliques showed a
marked appreciation in value,

When the conclusion of the whole affair was reported
to Emperor Francis, with a suggestion that the Austrian
mediator Kubeck should be commended, Count Zichy
wished to avail himself of the opportunity for obtaining
some imperial recognition for the House of Rothschild.
He minuted on the memorandum requesting the em-
peror’s confirmation that, although the firms carrying
through the settlement of this loan, which had so materi-
ally improved the credit of the Austrian state on the
London Stock Exchange, had indisputably had their own


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 303


interests in view, they, and especially the House of
Rothschild, nevertheless deserved recognition for the able
way in which they had handled the business. Such a
demand for Austrian securities had been produced that
the last loan was already quoted at a premium of over
57%, while by making their credit available the firms had
succeeded in the difficult matter of satisfying the English
government.** Zichy accordingly proposed for the em-
peror’s consideration that the following sentence should
be added: “And we take cognizance of the efforts made
by the London banking firms which have so materially
raised Austria’s public credit.”

Baron von Lederer, however, added that in his view
the services rendered in arranging the loan in England
consisted merely in an intelligent appreciation of the cir-
cumstances; and that on this service the banks had already
realized no inconsiderable profit as shown by the prices
of the securities published in the English papers.

Emperor Francis drew his pen heavily through Zichy’s
“frill,” and took “cognizance with satisfaction” of the
fact that the matter had been settled.** ‘The whole trans-
action proved to be one of the most profitable pieces of
business in which the House of Rothschild had ever
engaged. The bonds continually increased in value, their
average price in 1824 being 93, and in 1825, 94. It is
obvious that the brothers Rothschild succeeded in very
profitably realizing on the 30 million gulden debentures
which they had subscribed at 82 2/3. It is not possible
to estimate the actual profit, but according to the state-
ment of Neumann it already amounted to £1,824,600 at
the beginning of April.*® Solomon Rothschild’s “pleasant
feelings” and the magnanimous gesture with which he
refused a commission or “emoluments” are thus readily
intelligible.

It is not surprising that, since Vienna offered opportu-
nities of doing such excellent business, Solomon should


304. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


have grown more and more attached to that city. In spite
of the restrictions imposed upon foreign Jews, his rela-
tives also were attracted by the idea of settling there.
One of these was a cousin of Solomon Rothschild, called
Anton Schnapper, who was about to marry the daughter
of William von Wertheimstein, Rothschild’s Vienna man-
ager, a Jew who had received the imperial “toleration” as
a private wholesale merchant.

Through Solomon’s powerful influence Anton Schnap-
per contrived to obtain an audience from the emperor,
and to submit his request for toleration, and permission
to carry on business. Although the emperor gave his
consent, much time elapsed, as was the case with all
applications, before formal sanction could be given, and
the impatient young man decided again to make applica-
tion to the emperor, but in writing.

“Your Majesty,” the application ran,** “The under-
signed desires henceforward to be included among the
millions of fortunate subjects who enjoy the merciful and
just rule of your Majesty. I was born at Frankfort-on-
the-Main, and I am the son of honorable parents, my
mother’s name having been Rothschild. I have worked
for several years as an assistant in the business of this
well-known firm, and acquired such knowledge as goes
to make a competent and honest business man.

“T now desire to settle in this city as a wholesale mer-
chant, and to unite myself in the bonds of honorable mat-
rimony with the virtuous daughter of the licensed whole-
sale merchant of this city, William von Wertheimstein.
My request for ‘toleration’ and for authority to act as a
wholesale tradesman has already been considered by all
the departments concerned, found to be in order, and has
been submitted to your Majesty for approval. May your
Majesty be pleased most graciously to accede to this
humble request, and speedily to grant it, and thus estab-
lish a family which in return for this priceless favor will
never weary of beseeching the Almighty in their daily


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 305


prayers to grant prosperity to your Majesty and your
Majesty’s family.”>  _

Schnapper sent this in with the observation that his
first application was still lying in his Majesty’s office.
“You have on several occasions,” he wrote to Solomon,*”
“kindly promised me your support in this matter, and in
view of the bonds of blood and friendship that unite us,
I hope you will have the kindness to concern yourself
with it now.”

Solomon kept his word, and requested Metternich *°
very kindly to emphasize the importance of this petition
quite briefly to Martin, his Majesty’s principal private
secretary, as his Majesty’s signature was still required.

Metternich’s position was such that a word from him
put the matter through at once.

_ Stadion continued to employ the House of Rothschild
in important financial operations. In February, 1824, the
firm undertook to produce old 200 gulden bonds to the
value of ten millions for a commission of 244%, if he
were granted new 100 gulden 5% bonds in return for each
200 gulden bond. Solomon indeed wanted to increase
the sum to twenty million, subject to the condition that
during this period the old debt should not be reduced,
and that the strictest secrecy should be observed during
the whole scheme. The offer came to Hofrat von Lederer
for his opinion, and he at once minuted that he doubted
whether the House of Rothschild would find it so easy to
carry through the business to the tune of twenty millions.

He was to prove right; for in February, 1825, the
House of Rothschild asked to be allowed to reduce the
amount to seven (from ten) millions. In the meantime
the older bonds had increased considerably in value, and
the result was a loss to the firm. The House of Rothschild
naturally did not do all its business at a profit; but if
it ever failed to do so, or actually suffered a loss, the
brothers generally succeeded in their efforts to reduce it
to a minimum, and above all, to keep it secret. The firm’s


306 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


transactions, even outside Austria, were constantly in-
creasing in scope, and its undertakings were beginning
to extend beyond Europe to other continents.

Brazil had, in 1821, also imposed a Cortes constitution
upon its sovereign the King of Portugal, with the result
that separation from the mother-country was decreed and
the king’s son Don Pedro was proclaimed constitutional
emperor. This occurred with the support of England,
but against the will of the conservative eastern powers,
and especially of Metternich.

While the four brothers on the Continent were under
Metternich’s sway—James alone allowing himself occa-
sional secret ventures with the liberals in Spain—Nathan
had to do his best to follow the general political tenden-
cies of liberal England. When, therefore, in 1824 Brazil
was unable to fulfil its obligations to another London
firm, Nathan intervened to the great satisfaction of British
statesmen, taking over Brazil’s liabilities, and in 1829 he
concluded a loan of £800,000 with the new imperial state.
This enabled Brazil to put her finances in order, while
Nathan did not suffer financially.

However, such loans, being suggestive of liberal senti-
ments, would naturally arouse resentment amongst the
conservative powers, and they also gave rise to consider-
able difficulties amongst the five brothers. Fundamentally
the brothers were in complete agreement regarding their
aims, and they had no intention in any circumstances of
adopting any definite political line. Their adaptability
made it impossible to do anything of the kind. But those
Rothschilds who were living within the sphere of Met-
ternich’s power, and especially the Viennese Rothschild,
were forced at any rate to pretend that they stood exclu-
sively for the conservative tendencies represented by
Metternich’s system. It was often exceedingly difficult
for them to explain away or put a good complexion upon
Nathan’s actions, a fact which frequently led to embar-
rassing situations,


en


i


i]
}


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 307


At this time occurred an event of great importance to
the House of Rothschild. On May 13 Solomon Roths-
child came to see Gentz in a state of great excitement, and
told him he had just received news that Count Stadion
had suddenly had a stroke at his home. A man of the
most scrupulous personal honor, and the most indefat-
igable industry, he was profoundly ambitious, and so per-
meated with the spirit of devotion to duty and with a
sense of the importance of his work, that he took all the
vicissitudes of his difficult office deeply to heart; he there-
fore used up his reserves of energy more quickly than
other men. The excitement and the strain of the events
of the last few years had prematurely worn him out. He
died two days after the stroke, and was succeeded in office
by Count Nadasdy.

This was a serious loss to the Rothschilds, for they
owed it to Stadion more than to anyone else that they had
come to Vienna. It is true that during the last years of
his life he had grown much more skeptical and critical
in his attitude toward the brothers; but they were so in-
timately connected with Austrian finances that a new


_ minister, had he wished it, would have had the greatest


difficulty in eliminating them. Even Metternich, who
secretly cherished feelings of suspicion and aristocratic
pride toward the Jewish parvenus, never thought of such
a thing.

Moreover, Gentz and the Rothschilds themselves took
care that no serious misunderstanding should arise.
‘As Gentz reports, Rothschild not only repeatedly saw
Metternich at his office during this period, he also often
had meals with the prince; and Solomon’s big dinners
with thirty or more guests were attended by ministers
and ambassadors and many members of the aristocracy.


Through his numerous invitations, Solomon extended his


connection, and got ideas for his operations.
The center of gravity of the House of Rothschild’s


business was at that time in France. The former leader


308 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


of the royalists and head of the government in that coun-
try had not forgotten the financial assistance rendered
by the House of Rothschild at the time of the Spanish
expedition. As it was his ambition to set France on her
feet financially, it occurred to him that he might avail
himself of the assistance of the House of Rothschild in
this also. At that time France had to pay no less than
197 million francs interest on its public indebtedness.
Villéle meant to reduce this intolerable burden by con-
verting the 5% loan, which already stood at par on Feb-
ruary 17, 1824, to a loan at a lower rate of interest, namely
3%. In this way he anticipated saving about thirty-four
millions annually in interest. Villéle thought out his
scheme and then made a detailed proposal to James
Rothschild in Paris.*°

The minister showed that in spite of the expense of the
Spanish war, he could make his budget balance without
a further loan or additional taxation. “In these circum-
stances,” he wrote, “it appears to me to be possible to take
advantage of the conditions that have caused public
securities in England and throughout Europe to appre-
ciate in value, for the purpose of carrying through the
conversion of our 5% bonds into 4 or 3% bonds.”

Villéle asked James to cooperate in this plan, which
was not to affect French credit. He meant in this way
to convert no less than 150 million bearing 5% interest,
and to issue to the underwriters a corresponding amount
of 3% bonds at’75. The minister hoped that the 3% bonds
would also soon rise in value; and he offered to allow the
underwriters to keep the saving in interest during the first
year after the conversion of the bonds bearing 150 million
in annual interest had been effected.

James immediately informed his brother Nathan in ©
London of the French finance minister’s proposal for this
gigantic transaction. All the brothers, and especially
James, tacitly recognized Nathan as having the best finan- —


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 309


cial brain. His connection with the British government
also made him the most influential of all the brothers.
The finance minister not only had sent his proposal to
James in writing, but also had repeatedly discussed it
with him personally, and immediately after such discus-
sions, on the 2nd, 3rd and 4th of March, 1824, James sent
a private courier to his brother Nathan in London. On
March 6, Nathan, after consulting with the banker Bar-
ing, sent James the following reply: *4

“MY DEAR BROTHER: ... the brothers Baring, as well as
I myself, will be pleased to be of use to the French gov-
ernment in their plans for reducing the interest payments}
and as the scheme seems to have been well thought out,
there should not be much cause to fear for the result. At
the same time, it is absolutely essential that the finance
minister should be in complete agreement with us,
and that no difficulties should arise in carrying out his
intentions.

“Tt is quite clear that the present price of the bonds is
maintained by speculators who have been exceedingly
lucky for some time, and will no doubt continue to de-
velop their success by further speculating on arise. Such
persons, however, have not the power to assist the finance
minister in a scheme embracing such far-reaching possi-
bilities, unless it be supported by such eminent capitalists
as Messrs. Baring and Rothschild. I am sending you the
draft of a scheme which I should like to have submitted
to the minister, and the success of which would undoubt-
edly be of enormous importance to the country and to
the government.”

In this drafted scheme Nathan explained that the
finance minister would have first of all to secure the
chamber’s consent to the operation, the government being
allowed a completely free hand to carry through in the
_ most advantageous way possible, as was done in similar
cases by the British Parliament. In essentials, Nathan


310 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


followed Villéle’s proposal that he should jointly with
Baring underwrite 150 million 3% bonds. He asked only
that, in the event of the operation being less successful
than was anticipated, the minister should be authorized
by the chamber to issue treasury bills up to 100 million
francs, so that in such a case Baring and Rothschild would
be able to get money by cashing these bills, and would not
be forced to sell the bonds.

“Tf the results work out satisfactorily,” wrote Nathan,
“the firms of Baring and Rothschild, who will apply all
their energy and risk their property in carrying out the
French minister’s scheme, must expect to receive as their
reward the profit which this operation will yield during
the first years. The minister must persuade the bank to
discount at 3%, and also to lend money on the bonds.

“Fis Majesty will thus be in a position when the cham-
ber reassembles, to inform his subjects and the whole
world of the flourishing condition of French finances, and
that, too, directly after a war which has restored the
Spanish Bourbons to their throne and to the hearts of
therm, people jaws}.

If the whole operation. were to go through successfully,
and if 150 million of annual interest charges were really
to be cut down from 5% to 3%, the saving effected by the
French government would run into many millions, and
the House of Rothschild was to receive the benefit of the
first annual saving thus made.

Villéle and the two firms soon arrived at an agreement.
Nathan had applied his experience in British transactions
of a similar nature, and the whole matter had now to be
submitted to the public.

When the chamber reassembled, the King of France
referred to the contemplated operation for reducing the
rate of interest payable on the public debt. The proposal
came as a surprise to the public. The bonds were held
by many thousands of small people, and the news made a
great sensation because innumerable investors felt them-


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 311


selves hit, and most of the bondholders understood only
that they would in future receive three francs interest
instead of five.

Meanwhile the bonds had been driven up to a still
higher figure, reaching 104 and 106. Each man felt him-
self threatened in the possession of this valuable paper,
and a storm artificially raised by Villéle’s enemies broke
out. This was increased by making enormous play of the
government’s statement that the former émigrés should
be compensated out of these savings. Vincent, the Aus-
trian ambassador in Paris, reported that these operations
would furnish the banking powers with fresh fields of
gain, and that their avarice would lead them to suggest
similar plans to all other governments.

The scheme met with harsh criticism in all quarters,
the most devastating being contained in a report from
Paris to Metternich, which concluded with the words:
“The rentiers are wild with indignation, but Villéle will
attempt nevertheless to carry the thing through, for he is
a minister guand méme.” **

The king was so upset that he did not dare to show
himself in the streets of Paris, fearing demonstrations by
the small bondholders. Nevertheless, at the expense of
his popularity he consistently supported the plans and
intentions of his prime minister.

There were exceedingly severe critics of the role
which the House of Rothschild played on this occa-
sion. Ouvrard attacked them with special severity in his
memoirs.** As, however, he belonged to the party which
was hostile to the Rothschilds, his statements can be
accepted only with reservations. There was no immedi-
ate prospect of the House of Rothschild making either
profit or loss, for the proposals were carried in the lower
house by a very small majority, while the members of the
upper house, most of whom had strong personal interest
as bondholders, rejected the proposal on July 3, at the
instigation of Chateaubriand. Thus, the scheme failed.


312 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Gentz does not seem to have been speaking so well of
his friend Solomon at this time, or possibly he wanted to
impress Metternich with the fact that he could assert his
independence of the House of Rothschild. In any case
he wrote to the chancellor on June 11, 1824: “I am
secretly pleased that Villéle’s finance operation has not
gone through. It will do no harm if that gentleman’s
arrogance is somewhat reduced. Besides, the scheme
itself was exceedingly unjust and cruel; and France will
certainly be impressed by the fact that the hundred thou-
sand families who would have been hard hit by it owe
the fortunate event entirely to the aristocratic opposition.
Also there can be no harm in the coalition of big bankers
having suffered a rebuff which will somewhat damp their
ardor for getting new business. Everything must have
a limit, and the all-powerful firms were beginning to go
beyond theirs. They obviously had a fully prepared
scheme for carrying through similar reductions in interest
in all the principal states. It will now be as much as they
can do to get out of the French scheme with a whole
skin... and if I were Solomon Rothschild I would
retire with all my millions after losing such a battle.” **

If this remark was meant seriously, Gentz was to prove
very much mistaken. It was not the habit of the Roths-
childs to throw up the sponge at the first reverse. More-
over, one must be cautious in drawing conclusions from
a perusal of the letters that passed between the brothers
and Austrian politicians, as the letters suggest that they
were inspired by unqualified devotion to the state of Aus-
tria, which would not have been consistent with their
position with regard to other governments.

Carl Rothschild at Naples in particular soon realized
that it would not be at all advisable for him to be regarded
there merely as the agent of a foreign power. The occu-
pation by the Austrian troops could not last forever, and
it was all the more necessary for him to cultivate relations


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 313


with the local authorities since he was strongly inclined
to settle permanently in Naples, and to found a new
branch, the fifth, of his House there.

As the king and the members of the royal family at
Naples were always in need of money, Carl had several
opportunities of obliging them. His constant business
dealings with the finance minister, Medici, resulted in
their getting on very good terms in spite of the payments
to Austria. While on the one hand the Rothschilds
assured Austria of their anxiety to see the state paid by
Naples, Carl protested to Medici that he would do
everything he possibly could to lessen the burden that
Naples had to bear. The results soon became appar-
ent; Medici began to examine and criticize the accounts
sent in by Austria for the maintenance of the troops.
Ficquelmont now lamented *° the fact that the sums to
be paid by Naples had not been fixed once and for all,
and demanded in 1822. He suggested that in that case
Medici would not have had time to examine Austria’s
disbursements so closely.

“The real reason,” he stated in a report to Vienna, “that
he is induced to increase his demands, and to make diffi-
culties, lies in the fact that he obviously knows of the
savings that we are effecting; as Rothschild is transmit-
ting them to Vienna, we may practically assume that
Medici is bound to know of them, for Rothschild’s staff
is in too close touch with Medici’s for this to be avoided.

“It would have been better to leave this business to
the quartermaster’s department of the army, as was done
in the case of the first occupation of Naples; in that case
nobody would have known the amounts that we transmit
to Vienna, and we would also have saved the charges
which we pay to the House of Rothschild. Our depart-
ments send in exaggerated accounts, and J should not like


‘to have the task of defending them. It is exceedingly


annoying that the figures made up by the accounts de-


314 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


partment should be submitted to a foreign government
without revision. This is the most certain way of com-
promising us.”

It was a bold admission to state that the expedition-
ary force was being used to get more money out of
Naples than the expenses actually incurred; but Count
Ficquelmont must be given considerable credit for the
fact that he opposed these exaggerated demands, and
pointed out that the annual claim of 13 million ducats,
sent in by Quartermaster-General Koller, was gaining for
the Austrian the enmity of the whole country.‘

The king also was forced gradually to realize that he
would not much longer be able to dissociate himself from
the movement that pressed for the recall of the Austrian
troops, for Medici daily reminded him of what terrible
burdens the occupation imposed upon the kingdom, and
how his sovereignty was limited thereby. But the king
feared the outbreak of another revolution; and as he did
not trust his own soldiers, he attempted to recruit Swiss
regiments. ‘These negotiations came to nothing because
of the expense of raising the troops.

The king then proceeded to recruit in Ireland. The
brothers Rothschild had very skilfully introduced this
idea to him. Great disturbances had broken out in that
country as a result of the wretched conditions under which
the poor peasantry, oppressed by their landlords, were
living. Nathan had come into contact with an Irishman,
the Irish London banker Callaghan, who thought that the
British government would also be in favor of such recruit-
ing, as it would draw off dissatisfied and poverty-stricken
elements of the population. Nathan saw the opportunity
of killing three birds with one stone: he would be render-
ing a service to the English government by diverting a
troublesome element; to the King of Naples by provid-
ing the neutral troops that he so much wanted; and, in
addition, he would do good business for himself.

It was Nathan who, having prepared the ground in


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 215


England, advised his brother Carl to make a proposal on
these lines to the King of Naples.*7 He enclosed the
Irishman’s letter, which stated that the difficulties that
might previously have been put in the way of such a
scheme had disappeared, now a new government had
come into power. Callaghan stated emphatically that
the overpopulation of Ireland, where it was scarcely pos-
sible to keep body and soul together, was at the root of
all the trouble, and that it was positively desirable that
some of the population should emigrate.

Carl Rothschild handed the letter to the minister
Medici, telling him of Nathan’s proposal. Medici has-
tened to inform the king of both these facts, the king’s
one wish being to have at last some sense of security.

Shortly afterwards King Ferdinand fell ill, and died
on January 4, 1825. He was succeeded by Francis I,
who was personally no less frivolous and extravagant
than his predecessor, and was far from possessing a strong
character. Under his rule the state of the kingdom tended
to get worse rather than toimprove. He too had reason
to feel anxious about his personal safety, and in 1825 it |
was decided to recruit four Swiss regiments for Naples,
and the Irish project was discarded. The incident illus-
trates how the Rothschilds would apply their energies in
the most varied spheres, if there were any prospect of
rendering a service to those in power, and incidentally
filling their own pockets.

Meanwhile James was actively engaged in negotiations
in Paris for a new Spanish loan, which the Madrid gov-
ernment wanted to put through at any price. Busy though
he was, he contrived to steal time to make a journey to
Frankfort in early July, 1824, in order to marry his nine-
teen-year-old niece Betty, the daughter of Solomon. He
was acting in accordance with the wish of his dead father
—which had come to be regarded in the family as an
unwritten law—that. the sons should refrain as far as
possible from introducing other families into their circle


316 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


by marriage, and should in no circumstances marry a
Christian,

Even on this journey James took with him private let-
ters and dispatches reporting on the situation in France,
from the Austrian ambassador to Prince Metternich, who
was staying at his country place, Johannesberg. For-
going his honeymoon, immediately after the marriage,
James had to return to Paris as his brothers Carl and
Solomon were there, carrying on discussions with the
Spanish negotiators.

The three brothers decided that one of them should go
to Nathan in London with a Spanish plenipotentiary, and
ask him to try to persuade the House of Baring to par-
ticipate in the loan. The Rothschilds, however, de-
manded that the seventy-two millions which Spain owed
to France for her intervention should be included in the
loan; to this proposal the Spanish government raised ob-
jections. As the Rothschilds in any case had little confi-
dence in Spanish conditions, and tried in vain to secure
a guarantee from other powers, the negotiations on this
occasion also came to nothing.

On September 16, 1824, King Louis XVIII died. His
brother, the former leader of the conservatives, succeeded
to the throne as Charles X. He was already sixty-seven
years old, and firmly convinced of the necessity of still
more definite reactionary measures, as well as being full
of religious intolerance. Villéle remained in office for
the time being, so that as far as the Rothschilds were con-
cerned, there was no immediate change in the political
and financial situation in France.

During this period their business expanded in all direc-
tions; Nathan founded a big insurance company in Eng-
land, the Alliance Insurance Company; Amschel was
collaborating with Bethmann, Gontard, and Brentano in
a scheme for founding a bank at Frankfort, although
through the opposition of the senate it came to nothing.


j
!


‘


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 317


As the Rothschilds’ business expanded, their correspond-
ence naturally became more voluminous, and they found
it necessary strongly to reinforce the system of couriers
with which they had covered Europe. This circumstance
entailed a consideration of the question whether their
correspondence could be more closely watched.

In this connection the suggestion made by a Milan post-
master is illuminating. “JI have often noticed,” he re-
ported to Vienna,*® “that the Rothschild clerks who travel
as couriers from Naples to Paris about once or twice a
month take with them all the dispatches of the French,
English, and Spanish ministers, accredited in Naples,
Rome, and Florence. In addition to this not inconsider-
able correspondence, they also deal with the communi-
cations passing between the courts of Naples and Rome
and their legations at Turin, Paris, London, Madrid,
Lisbon, etc., as well as all private letters that are of any
importance,

“These couriers travel via Piacenza. As we have an
Austrian garrison there, under the command of the reli-
able Colonel Eberl, it might perhaps not be impossible
to induce one or another of these clerks to hand over their
dispatches for our perusal. Such an examination should
yield profitable results, especially if we wait for a favor-
able or important moment. A room at Piacenza under
the protection of Austrian soldiers would be all that we
should want in order to do everything necessary without
attracting attention.”

Since diplomatic correspondence was involved, this
proposal concerned the chancellor, and was duly brought
to Metternich’s notice. He felt that it would be awkward
to accept the suggestion. ‘The scheme could turn out to
be a double-edged weapon, as he himself often made use
of the Rothschild couriers, and matters of the greatest
secrecy might come to the knowledge of a subordinate
postal official. On the other hand, Metternich would


318 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


have been exceedingly glad to get hold of the private cor-
respondence between the brothers Rothschild and, as the
technical term went, to submit it to “manipulation.”

The result of these considerations was the issue of the
following order: “The couriers of the House of Roths-
child passing through Lombardy on their way from Paris
to Naples, or from Naples to Paris are, when carrying
dispatches bearing the seal of the I. and R. Consulates-
General in those cities, to be regarded and treated as offi-
cial couriers; if, however, they should be found carrying
any letters which have nothing to indicate that they are
of an official nature, such letters shall be subject to the
usual regulations in force.” 4°

Hormayr, the former director of the Vienna State
Archives, who had been banished because of his associa-
tion with the Archduke Johann in his venture for found-
ing the so-called “Alpine Kingdom,” was a bitter enemy
of Metternich and the emperor. He was thoroughly
familiar with the manner in which correspondence was
tampered with, and used this knowledge for making a
violent attack upon Metternich and Solomon Rothschild.
He even went so far as to state *® that Metternich had,
in agreement with Solomon, waited at Fischamend, two
stages from Vienna, for a post bearing important news
from Constantinople, and held it up for two days.

“This was done to gain time in order to have two or
three days to rig the market, and to make some hundreds
of thousands for the chancellor, Zichy, and the rest of
the pack of thieves, with the German fortress caretaker *°
Rothschild, the King of the Jews and the Jew of Kings,
at their head.”

As far as Metternich’s relations with Rothschild were
concerned, these exceedingly offensive allegations were
far from the facts; but it certainly was possible, through
holding back news received by courier, to gain time for
profitable deals on the exchange, and this was no doubt
done,


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 319


The firm of Rothschild, which had now literally at-
tained world-wide dimensions, was to enter upon a diffi-
cult period. The long years of peace which England was
enjoying led that country to seek profitable investment for
the enormously increased wealth which it had acquired
since the successful termination of the Napoleonic wars.
There was also an increasing tendency to unsound specu-
lation, and a flood of new flotations. As the Central and
South American republics freed themselves of Spanish
dominion, they seemed to offer desirable opportunities for
doing business in agricultural produce and mines.

At the end of 1824 there was feverish activity in the.
City. Companies sprang up like mushrooms, and mil-
lions of pounds in cash were subscribed. Almost all the
principal London firms took part in this movement; ** but
the Barings and Rothschild, who regarded it as unnatural
and artificial, held aloof. The year 1825 proved that
they were right. The South American mining ventures
collapsed, and numerous undertakings apparently on a
solid foundation experienced the same fate, in a crisis
that was becoming more and more general, and was
spreading from London to the whole of Europe. Consols
fell appreciably, and foreign public securities threatened
to follow their example.

In these difficult circumstances, Wellington remem-
bered the signal services Nathan had once rendered to
him under the much more dangerous conditions of war.
He consulted him as to how the crisis should be met, and
Lord Liverpool’s government followed Nathan’s advice.

Nathan had intended to go to Paris to meet Metternich,
who was staying there in 1825, but in view of the critical
economic situation, he could not think of leaving London,
and wrote the following letter to Metternich:

“Tt has been my daily endeavor to travel to Paris, in.
order to express to you the gratitude I owe for the gra-
cious and fatherly kindness which your Highness has
shown to the Rothschild family for so many years. The


320 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


date of my journey was actually fixed, but an entirely
unexpected event unfortunately frustrated my intentions.
The British funds, which had reached a very high level,
have fallen rapidly, because of incorrect inferences drawn
by the English from the meeting of sovereigns. I am
accordingly forced to remain here to prevent if possible
any further fall, the government being unwilling that I
should be absent at this time.

“I hope your Highness will not misinterpret my ab-
sence, and will appreciate the obvious urgency of the
matter which detains me . . . since, if a further fall in
the funds is not speedily checked, the movement will
spread abroad, and even affect the I. and R. Austrian
funds. Nevertheless I cherish the hope. that financial
circles here will soon regain their confidence, and am
looking forward to making the journey then, and waiting
personally upon your Highness. Meanwhile I beg that
your Highness will graciously accept my written expres-
sions of thanks in the spirit in which they are offered, as
proceeding direct from my heart, for I pray constantly
to the Almighty that our beloved sovereign emperor may
long be spared, and that your Highness may flourish.” *?

Thanks to Nathan’s skill, the developments in England
did not result in excessively serious losses to the House of
Rothschild, in spite of the crisis through which that coun-
try passed, but the firm was severely affected indirectly by
the commercial crisis in Paris. In spite of the change in
the general situation, the French minister Villéle had
adhered to his conversion scheme, and although the
Rothschilds were much less enthusiastic about it than they
had been a year ago, James was so closely bound up with
the French minister that when Villéle took the scheme
up again in May, 1825, he could not stand entirely aloof.

He certainly did not conceal his misgivings. While
Metternich was in Paris, James openly said to him that
it was wrong of Villéle to resume the operation at that
time.** James was more explicit in the following state-


a


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 321


ment to the Austrian ambassador, Baron von Vincent:
“There are times when such an operation may be oppor-
tune. Last year the finance minister was assured of the
success of his scheme; he was supported by powerful
firms, and a large volume of English money was available
for investment in France, but now it is flowing into other
channels. The return of the capital sums that find their
way to America is only partial, and much slower. Most
of the banking operations in Europe are not carried
through on a cash basis, but this is not the case in America.
The . .. operations of Mr. Huchinson in England are
moreover exactly contrary to those of M. de Villéle.
When one also considers the constant complaints in the
press which bring the measures proposed by the ministry
into bad odor, one cannot but fear that it will find itself
deprived of the necessary resources.” **

Villéle, however, was not to be restrained. He suc-
ceeded this time in carrying his proposals in the upper
chamber as well, and he proceeded to put his long-cher-
ished plans into operation. The Rothschilds could not
exclude themselves from the scheme, but they went into
it very cautiously. ‘The Paris market was reacting to
the fall in prices in England, and as success was largely
dependent upon a boom in French securities, the pros-
pects were far from propitious.

James remarked to Vincent on July 7, that it was a long
time since he had seen the Paris market so dull. He
shared the antagonism of a certain party toward M. de
Villéle, and he said it was certainly not his fault that
the House of Rothschild was regarded as seriously com-
promised in having supported the government.’ ‘This
was a dig at Nathan, because James was a little jealous
of Nathan’s outstanding reputation.

The difficulties of the whole undertaking were in-
creased through the public opposition of the authorities
at the Bank of France. This was shown in the fact that
they suddenly demanded the repayment of considerable


322 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


sums advanced by the bank to the treasury. James was,
however, not altogether confident that he was right in
taking up an attitude opposed to the operation. The
matter might succeed in the end, and in that case James
would have suffered a humiliating reverse. He accord-
ingly thought it advisable to say °* to Vincent as early
as June 8, that in spite of the bank’s hostility to Villéle
and to the House of Rothschild, matters could still be
arranged, and Villéle’s plan would yet succeed.

Somewhat later, after the chambers had accepted the
draft bills, James for a time saw everything in glowing
colors, and wrote a letter to Metternich expressing his
changed views:°” “You may now be assured that Villéle
has won his case. The bonds will be a great success, and
he will defeat all his opponents because he is right.”

On June 18, Solomon, who was also staying in Paris,
made the following statement: “I am now able to say
that notwithstanding all the vigorous attacks to which M.
de Villéle has been subjected hitherto, and is still being
subjected, in my view, his financial scheme will go
through; and the count, who enjoys his Majesty’s confi-
dence to an exceptional degree, will be strengthened in
his position; while the enemies of peace and of the minis-
try will be deprived for a long time yet of the pleasure of
secingvit fall.”.°*

Metternich condemned this remarkable change of
opinion with the remark: “In Paris Rothschild said to
me that Villéle was wrong. It is often so with the
world’s judgment.” *®

James’s first view had really been the right one. The
general financial situation throughout the world did not
in fact admit of such an operation’s being carried through
at that time. The government succeeded only in con-
verting 30 millions to 3% bonds, and these quickly fell
from 75 to 62 and 63.

Four of the Rothschild brothers—Nathan alone was
absent—were assembled in Paris in August to take coun-


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 323


sel regarding the steps to be taken to limit the loss result-
ing from the decline in the 3% bonds. They admitted *°
that they had not reckoned with the possibility of such an
unexpectedly sudden fall. The four brothers finally went
to consult the family oracle Nathan, in London, with a
view to taking energetic measures to save the situation.
Villéle’s conversion scheme, however, could not be im-
proved in any essential now. Even the 5% bonds were
quoted some points under par at the end of the year.
All they could hope to do was to limit their losses, and in
this they succeeded to a certain extent; but the whole
affair was an unfortunate piece of business,

In other, more distant fields also, the Rothschilds had
not been over-lucky in their investments during that
year. After several fruitless attempts at reconquering
Haiti, the second largest island of the Antilles, it had
to be surrendered by France, on the payment of an
indemnity of 150,000,000 francs by the new republican
government. This government borrowed the necessary
money, the loans being taken up by a French syndicate,
including Rothschild and Laffitte. The Republic of
Haiti was never able to meet its obligations; and even
though the French government eventually indemnified
the two firms for their losses, the transaction had to be
put down as unprofitable.

Whether the brothers Rothschild were fortunate or
unfortunate in their dealings, their names were on every-
body’s lips; legends gathered around their activities and
their wealth, and they were accredited with the most
fabulous schemes by the general public. Thus the story
gained currency in Austria that Rothschild had one day
demanded the immediate repayment in convention coin-
age, of no less than 40 million gulden which he had lent
the state. On being told that it was impossible to repay
this sum, Rothschild was alleged to have proposed that
he should either be handed over the whole customs rev-
enue throughout the imperial dominion for a certain


324 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


period, or be granted the monopoly of the purchase of
fleece in the Austrian dominions, whereby he would have
been able to dictate the price of textiles. Although these
rumors were obviously untrue, they indicated the estima-
tion of the power of the House held by the public,
whether it was well or ill disposed.

The Rothschilds were becoming the central figures in
the jokes and caricatures of comic papers. In 1825 a
caricature making fun of their versatility was circulated
in Frankfort and South Germany. The drawing showed
a Rothschild on horseback, with samples of all his busi-
nesses; wine-casks, seeds, buttons, etchings, state securi-
ties, umbrellas, pens, magic lanterns, etc., on his way from
the north to the south of Europe. The easily interpreted
legend ran: “Blueshield, commercial traveler, does
business in all branches of trade.” *

The brothers did in fact engage in every conceivable
kind of venture, and they were approached with all sorts
of schemes. Persons in high places especially had re-
course to them for loans. Among them was Marshal
de Marmont, Duke of Ragusa, formerly governor in
Illyria under Napoleon I. He had joined the Bourbons
after Napoleon’s fall, and got on good terms with Met-
ternich. As a reward for his change of allegiance and
various political services, he was granted an annuity of
fifty thousand francs by the Austrian government, in
alleged compensation for a donation allotted to him by
Napoleon I.,. The marshal had again got into serious
financial difficulties, and the French government, which
did not wish him to be publicly compromised, advised
him to mortgage his Austrian annuity to Rothschild if
the banker would put his affairs in order.

The duke did apply to Solomon Rothschild, but Sol-
omon wanted first to make sure that the Austrian govern-
ment would actually pay Marmont the annuity until he
died. He therefore wrote to Metternich: “I would not
have entered into any negotiations in this matter without


{
|


a


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 325


having previously asked your Highness’s consent, had I
not done so at the suggestion of Count de Villéle. ... I
am therefore venturing to ask your Highness in this
most humble private letter, whether the assumption of
these negotiations or their continuance is in accordance
with your Highness’s wishes. Will your Highness please
to be assured that on receipt of the slightest hint of the
contrary being the case, all negotiations will immediately
be broken off, and in such a way that neither Count de
Villéle nor the Duke of Ragusa will discover the true
reason of the change.” °

Marmont also wrote to Metternich in order to get his
support. ** The chancellor replied cautiously.** He
thought that the treasury would no doubt simply pay the
annuity to Rothschild; but the finance minister would
have to be asked for a special guarantee to that effect.
Everything would be simple, “as long as the respective
positions of the persons concerned remained the same.”

This was rather a dangerous reply, and Solomon
wanted to have various, and, as Marmont called them,
“ridiculous” guarantees. °’ Rothschild, however, firmly
adhered to the position that the Austrian government
must give her full expressed consent to the arrangement,
if he entered into it.

“T am fully aware,” Marmont wrote, “that this re-
quirement is not flattering to me, and that the only motive
for making it is to obtain guarantees against the possi-
bility of my mauvaise fot.’ But for fear of endanger-
ing the arrangement, he had to agree.

In November, 1825, the contract was submitted, con-
stituting a speculation on the part of Rothschild that the
marshal, who was fifty years old, would live a long time.
Metternich, however, would not agree that Emperor
Francis should give his express consent, as contemplated


under the contract, because it was impossible to know in


the case of a former marshal of Napoleon whether his
political opinions would not undergo changes such as


326 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


might cause Austria to cease her payments. If, however,
these payments were mortgaged to Rothschild for the full
term of the marshal’s life, it would not be possible to
discontinue them. The contract was therefore not con-
cluded, and in order not to rebuff Villéle, James lent
the marshal a small sum on the security of the next instal-
ment of his pension.

On April 30, 1827, Solomon wrote the following letter
to Metternich *: “Your Highness will perceive from
the enclosed statement that Marshal de Marmont’s affairs
are in a state of the greatest confusion, and he is hard
pressed by his creditors. He is bound to go bankrupt
sooner or later, and in such a case our Paris branch would
be a creditor to the extent of fifteen thousand francs, ad-
vanced to the marshal on the security of the personal
annuity payable to him by the imperial government.
There is only one way in which my firm can be secured
-against possible loss, and that is by impounding the two
next instalments of this annuity. I therefore venture
most humbly to request your Highness to issue the neces-
sary authorization for the I. and R. Treasury to instruct
the paymaster’s office to accept a veto from me, in the
usual form, upon the instalment of the pension now due
and upon that due next quarter in so far as this may be
necessary to cover our claim.”

It was asking a good deal to expect the powerful Aus-
trian chancellor to concern himself with securing a pay-
ment of 15,000 francs to the House of Rothschild. But
Solomon was in a position to take this liberty, since
Metternich himself was again negotiating a personal loan
with the firm; and in fact on June 1, 1827, the prince
received a loan of half a million gulden from the Roths-
childs.

The failure of the conversion operation necessarily
damped the Rothschilds’ ardor with regard to any other
ventures, the consequences of which could not be clearly
foreseen. The situation in Spain was exceedingly critical,


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 327


and the lack of money was being acutely felt. In igno-
rance of the way in which the conversion scheme was
working out, the Rothschild representative at Madrid
had been somewhat rash in making promises to the
Spaniards.

“The financial problem [in Spain],” Vincent reported
to Metternich, ® “is now in the hands of the House of
Rothschild, all of whose members are just now in London.
It seems to me that M. Renevier, the manager of the
Madrid branch, has gone rather too far in what he has
said to the Spanish government. The House of Roths-
child will not enter into business negotiations with Spain
without having made previous inquiries in England, and
assured themselves of the probable attitude of bankers
there with regard to assistance rendered to Spain, for
such a loan might damage the loans made to the South
American governments which are in rebellion against
that country.”

When James Rothschild returned from London in the
middle of September, 1825, after spending five weeks
there with his four brothers, he was assailed by questions
from all sides as to whether Spain had any prospect of
securing a loan of 25 millions. Nathan had advised
against it because for political reasons he did not wish
the reactionary Spanish government to be supported.
Metternich on the other hand would have been pleased
by the granting of a loan, and desired it to go through.

“So far as I have been able to ascertain,” Vincent re-
ported to the chancellor,** “the House of Rothschild
is not much inclined to have anything to do with a finan-
cial venture in Spain. They have little confidence in
the guarantees offered by the government, and they are
afraid of damaging themselves with English firms having
interests opposed to those of Spain. Although the House
‘of Rothschild may pretend that their sympathies are
purely monarchistic, the recognition of the engagements
entered into by the Cortes government, and the liberation


328 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


of the Spanish colonies, would provide a far wider field
for enterprise and political securities, the value of which
they do not fail to appreciate.”

The House of Rothschild could well be discriminating.
Offers of business from governing circles flowed in on
them from all quarters. Carl Rothschild had met Count
Louis Philippe de Bombelles in connection with some
payments which he was instructed by the Austrian gov-
ernment to make on the Neapolitan account for the pas-
sage of Austrian troops through Tuscany. Although
large sums were involved the matter was promptly
settled, and the Tuscan government gave him to under-
stand that it would take the opportunity of demonstrating
its satisfaction. ry

Grand Duke Leopold II, who had been ruler of
Tuscany since 1824, was at that time considering a scheme
of great benefit to his subjects, namely, to drain the
Maremme, an area of marsh land in Tuscany embracing
thousands of square miles. The grand duke proposed to
Carl Rothschild through Bombelles that he should
undertake a part of the drainage operation on his own
account, subject to a suitable arrangement with the state
of Tuscany. Such was the esteem in which the House
was then held for its versatility and financial resources.

Carl Rothschild did not feel that he could undertake
such a far-reaching scheme. ‘Would it not be better,”
he replied to Bombelles, ® “if the Tuscan government,
which has conceived such benevolent plans for their sub-
jects, would itself supervise the carrying out of the
scheme with the assistance of a loan to be taken up grad-
ually as the work progressed? Such a method of proce-
dure seems to me to be more advantageous than to entrust
the work to foreigners who do not know the country, and
who would be compelled at great expense first to find
and engage workmen.”

These discussions took place in August, 1825, a most
unfavorable time for persuading the Rothschilds, who


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 329


were uneasy at their losses, to agree to such a serious
undertaking. The scheme nevertheless was carried
through, and the firm took some part in financing it, al-
though it had nothing to do with the work itself. It
proved to be an inestimable boon to the country, although
the work took very many years to carry out, and cost
untold millions.

The relations of the House of Rothschild with Met-
ternich had remained untroubled throughout the year
1825; and the Rothschilds actually ventured to intercede
with the chancellor regarding the affairs of certain mem-
bers of Napoleon’s family. Toward these Metternich was
in general anything but well disposed, and was always
inclined to put the greatest difficulties in their way.
Napoleon’s mother, the aged Letitia, who was then sev-
enty-five years old, lived at Rome, and dearly wished to
see again her eldest son Joseph, the former King of Spain,
who was living in North America under the pseudonym
of Count de Survilliers. Mother and son had not seen
one another for ten years. Joseph had repeatedly at-
tempted to get a passport, but the Austrian and French


' governments would not permit him to return to Europe.


All entreaties had hitherto been in vain, and a friend
of the family, Count Villeneuve, approached Solomon
Rothschild, asking him to use his influence with Metter-
nich, because the old lady was ill, and Joseph promised
to return to America immediately after his visit. The
world had indeed passed through great changes during
the previous ten years when the son of a despised Frank-
fort tradesman was asked to intercede on behalf of the
man who was once deemed all-powerful.”

Metternich, however, remained obdurate. To yield
would not have been in accordance with the general prin-
ciples of his policy. The House of Bonaparte was fin-’
ished with, should remain finished with, and never be
allowed to become dangerous to Metternich’s system
again. For this reason even the smallest favor was re-


330 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


fused to the family; Rothschild was not listened to, and
had to realize the limits of his influence. Although
when interference with his policy was involved Metter-
nich might remain absolutely firm, he often gave the
House of Rothschild much too much rope in matters of
finance; and in such instances he relied upon the finance
minister and the treasury.

An accident has revealed the details of a transaction
which clearly shows that Metternich and his assistants
sometimes went too far in their reliance on the Roths-
childs; and an examination of this incident offers an
opportunity of noting the treasury’s own comments on
its mistakes and on the loss involved, which, it should be
pointed out, was incurred under Count Stadion’s suc-
cessor.

Since the first Austrian occupation of Naples in 1815,
the kingdom had had to pay a war indemnity. Since the
end of 1818, it had been the duty of the Austrian ambas-
sador at Naples, Prince Ludwig de Jablonovski, to
receive the instalments as they were paid in each month,
and, in connection with a banking syndicate controlled
by the Neapolitan firm Dollfuss, to arrange for their
transmission to Vienna. Everything went well at the
start, but the bill for the second instalment was protested
in Vienna, because the firm of Dollfuss was in difficulties.

Dollfuss reported this fact to Jablonovski in January,
1819, but the ambassador had already received the
orders on the Neapolitan Treasury for the following in-
stalments up to March and drawn these sums in advance.
Jablonovski was now in danger of losing this money, and
was forced to accept a very unfavorable settlement offered
by the firm of Dollfuss, under which they handed him
public securities, for the sum they held, at 87, the price at
which they had bought them, although these securities
had by then fallen to 78. Jablonovski hoped that they
would appreciate again, so that he would avoid any loss.

“The power,’ Jablonovski remarked later, “which


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 331


autocratically governs quotations throughout Europe, so
that the most careful calculations go astray, the auto-
cratic power of the House of Rothschild was a factor of
which I was not then aware.” ™

Jablonovski had miscalculated. ‘The bonds continued
to fall, and the prince was unable to make the payments
to Vienna on the due dates, because he felt he could not
sell the bonds at such a loss. He therefore mortgaged
them at 60% in order to be able to send at any rate part of
the money, and still hoped that they would appreciate.
Later on, however, the remittances to Vienna ceased alto-
gether. This greatly annoyed and worried Stadion, who
needed the money. As an imperial ambassador, who was
under Metternich’s orders, was affected, Stadion com-
plained to the chancellor, and Metternich had to try to
think of a way out. Again he had recourse to the brothers
Rothschild, a constant refuge in distress. It was in the
summer of 1819, and James and Carl had just come to
Vienna from Naples. They had informed themselves as
to conditions there, reported to Prince Metternich and
been commissioned by him ™ to undertake the transmis-
sion of Austria’s outstanding claims in Naples.

Rothschild stated that he would be delighted to carry
the matter through in collaboration with Gontard at the
“most favorable possible rates,” and asked for 14% com-
mission and 14% brokerage. ‘You may be assured,”
his offer concluded, ** “that we shall do everything in
our power to carry out your commands with all the dili-
gence and economy of which we are capable, so that we
shall continue to justify the confidence which you place
in us.” ‘The matter was accordingly entrusted to them.

Prince Jablonovski had not yet been told anything
about the negotiations with Rothschild, and he was ex-
ceedingly upset when he was suddenly instructed to hand
the business over. He expressed his astonishment,
especially in view of the fact that he had meanwhile
arranged a solution of the matter with the finance min-


/


g22 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ister Medici by direct shipments of gold to Trieste. ™
“But,” he wrote, “Herr James Rothschild was in Naples,
and presumably heard of my unfortunate dealings with
the firm of Dollfuss, and determined to turn them to his
own advantage. Nothing else can explain how the House
of Rothschild should have taken over such an unimport-
ant business in a center with which they are not familiar,
where the rate of exchange is constantly varying and
unfavorable, or how they could have persuaded the
I. and R. Treasury to renounce the advantages of trans-
porting gold, and to bear the considerable loss of
exchange.”

In any case the matter was taken out of Jablonovski’s
hands, and his suggestion that further payments should be
deferred until the Neapolitan bonds rose again was
ignored. In January, 1820, Jablonovski received instruc-
tions to hand over all documents regarding the matter to
a controller specially sent to Naples for this purpose. In
July, 1820, the revolution broke out, and in the spring of
1821 the Austrian troops entered Naples. The immediate
effect of these events upon the bonds was unfavorable, and
they fell continuously until May, 1821. The result was
that Stadion, who was always liable to sudden panics,
hastily gave instructions that the bonds which had been
mortgaged at 60% should be sold to Rothschild, and this
was done in May, 1821, at the lowest point which they
touched, namely 58%.

The following year saw an extraordinary rise in Nea-
politan securities, so that it may be readily imagined that
the House of Rothschild made an enormous profit out
of this purchase. This became particularly apparent when
in August, 1827, the new finance minister Count Nadasdy,
after going through these accounts, declared that Prince
Jablonovski was liable to make good an amount of 584,-
354.54 florins, and created a charge over his property at
Rogozno for this amount.

The prince protested strongly with the result that an


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 333


imperial commission was appointed to investigate the
matter. This investigation led to some lamentable reve-
lations as far as Austrian public finances were concerned.
The “most obedient loyal servant Count von Taaffe,”
president of the treasury, had some utterly devastating
statements to make in his most submissive report” re-
garding the treasury’s claims on the prince. He revealed
that the transaction had been most unprofitable in every
way, and declared that Prince Jablonovski’s statement that
it would have been better for him and for the treasury
to have burned the certificates of the mortgage bonds,
and rid himself of them completely, was correct, harsh
though it sounded. For as the bonds ** had been mort-
gaged for 60, and had later been transferred to Rothschild
at 5844, the Austrian state had not merely failed to re-
ceive anything further, but had actually had to make up
the difference. Jablonovski’s proposal to hold the bonds,
and wait until they improved in value before realizing
them, had been a sound business speculation. Instead of
this they had been handed over to the House of Roths-
child, together with the interest payments for the first
half of the year 1828.

On this memorandum an imperial instruction was
issued, ordering the finance minister to examine the ac-
counts again in collaboration with Prince Jablonovski,
and if the results showed that any added compensation
had to be paid, to take the necessary steps to collect the
amount as speedily as possible. ‘The fianance minister
carried out these instructions; and the report on the matter
concluded with the following words: “The assessor
appointed for the investigation is of the opinion that,
although there is in a general way . . . an obligation on
the prince to make good the amount, the claim could be
effectively resisted in the courts or otherwise. For we are
not at all likely to succeed in replying to an order to show
cause, such as will necessarily be granted if the charge
created [on the prince’s property ] is not canceled.”


334. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


The result of the further examination was that instead
of being held liable for the amount of more than half a
million florins, the prince was finally required to pay
only 10,694 florins 34 kronen, in order that the complete
failure of the treasury might be somewhat concealed
from the outside world.

The facts which had thus been brought to light also
gave the chancellor food for thought, and he afterwards
observed a certain amount of caution in his relations with
the House of Rothschild. They availed themselves of
every occasion to make the sovereign and the leading
statesmen forget such untoward occurrences, and endeav-
ored to obliterate the bad impression by giving proof of
their deepest devotion. This was especially the case
when Emperor Francis fell ill in the spring of 1826, re-
covering only after many weeks of sickness. The whole of
Europe had been in suspense, for the decease of the em-
peror would have involved profound political changes;
and the news of his recovery offered an opportunity for
the brothers Rothschild to send their congratulations to
Metternich. It is true that they little guessed how clev-
erly he had provided for the continuance of his control
of affairs, even in the event of Emperor Francis’s death.
It will suffice to quote the letter which Amschel wrote
from Frankfort:


I have by today’s post received the news of the
fortunate recovery of his Majesty our universally
beloved emperor. Having suffered the greatest anx-
iety since the emperor fell sick it was one of the most
joyful moments of my life when I heard the news.

Heaven has heard our prayers in preserving the
greatest and most virtuous of monarchs, and thus al-
lowing the world to continue to enjoy a good fortune,
the greatness of which I can but marvel at without
venturing to appraise. It is impossible to describe
the radiant joy that lights up all faces—only angels


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 335


could express in words our feelings of gratitude to
Providence!

I cannot refrain from expressing to your Highness
my congratulations on this blessed évent. I would
gladly make so bold as to lay my congratulations at
the feet of his Majesty himself, our most benevolent
emperor—so sincere and overwhelming are my feel-
ings. May God preserve in full health this best
father of mankind until the end of his days! And
may it ever be my fortune in deepest reverence to
call myself your Highness’s most humble and most
obedient servant,

AMSCHEL MEYER VON ROTHSCHILD. ™


Now that the emperor had recovered, the fear that
his death would deal a blow to Metternich’s régime, and
therefore also to the position which the brothers Roths-
child had established in the I. and R. chancellor’s office,
was again remote. Solomon, who through Metternich
and Gentz was constantly winning his way in Viennese
court circles, was frequently invited to the chancellor’s
and also often entertained him in his own house.

One after another, families of the high aristocracy, re-
quiring financial assistance, procured loans from the
Frankfort banker who had settled at Vienna. In this way
he placed many aristocrats under an obligation to himself,
and whether they liked it or not they had to admit Solo-
mon and his family to their exclusive salons. Thus both
socially and in business Solomon climbed to dizzy
heights at Vienna, and his commercial rivals began to
become painfully aware of this, especially during the
years of financial crisis of 1825 and 1826.

The firm Fries & Co., one of the four “monopolistic
state bankers” which had come into prominence during
the reign of Maria Theresa, had got into difficulties dur-
ing the crisis of 1825. David Parish, a son of the well-
known John Parish of Hamburg, and Rothschild’s


336 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


partner in numerous transactions, had entered the firm
some time previously, and was now involved in its fall.
Parish’s extravagance and reckless speculation had
caused him to be excluded from a partnership in his
father’s business, and he had set up on his own account.
Being unable to meet his liabilities he had no other
course open but to require his most powerful patrons
such as Metternich and Gentz, who were at the same
time his debtors, to repay their loans. He thus forfeited
their favor, though he could not save his firm from ruin.

When he saw that the crash was inevitable Parish put
an end to his life by jumping into the Danube; but before
doing so he wrote two bitter letters expressing his resent-
ment at the fact that the House of Rothschild had el-
bowed him out of many transactions. He blamed Metter-
nich for having sacrificed him to the cupidity of a family
who had succeeded better than he had in securing the
chancellor’s interest. He described the brothers Roths-
child in a letter to Metternich as “heartless persons, only
interested in their money-bags, who, standing under the
special protection of Metternich, have behaved in a most
ungrateful manner to him.” 7°

Just before his death, Parish also wrote to Solomon
Rothschild, reproaching him for having squeezed him
out, although he had in 1817 introduced him to the big
French and Austrian financial business. Now it has been
ascertained that the Rothschilds would have succeeded in
establishing this connection even without Parish, and that
he invited them to join in several transactions simply be-
cause he was not sufficiently rich and powerful to carry
through these great state financial operations alone.

On the other hand there is no doubt that the brothers
Rothschild were entirely ruthless in competing with the
firm of Fries and Parish, and that they succeeded as no
one else did in consolidating their position with the public
departments. In any case, Solomon neither desired nor
expected that the rivalry should have such a tragic end-


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 337


ing, and he was not a little shocked by it. He spent many
hours discussing the tragedy with Metternich and Gentz,
in its various aspects.

Two rivals had been disposed of, but life went on its
course, and it appeared desirable to wipe out their mem-
ory, and to anticipate evil tongues by cleverly giving pub-
licity to news regarding the fame, the business dealings,
and the prestige of the House of Rothschild. The broth-
ers had long recognized that good advertisement, which
owing to the limitations of the time had to be of a literary
nature, could be of the greatest value. Through their
influence with the authorities, who were able to use the
power of the censorship in order more or less to restrain
press activities in all countries, they had little to fear
from violent attacks in the press; and if any such oc-
curred, they were almost always able to take effective
countermeasures. Moreover, they had ample means at
their disposal for influencing cowardly papers, and
pressing the cleverest pens into their service.

First and foremost there was Gentz, the “Secretary of
Europe.” He had for a long time been writing propa-
ganda articles for the Rothschilds in various papers, and
exerting his influence—backed as it was by the powerful
figure of Metternich looming behind him—upon the con-
temporary press in their favor. Gentz’s growing inti-
macy with the House of Rothschild, which was marked
by constant invitations to dinners and theatres, as well as
by “highly welcome financial transactions with the excel-
lent Rothschild,” as faithfully recorded by Gentz,” gave
a chance for carrying out a master-stroke of publicity.

In 1826 the Brockhaus publishing firm was just about
to publish a new edition of its Conversational Encyclope-
dia, which had a very wide circulation at that time, and
was regarded as an absolute gospel. The Rothschilds had
not yet been featured in it, and it seemed to offer a con-
venient opportunity for describing the origin and prog-
ress of their House. .


338 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


There was nobody better qualified to execute this, as re-
garded both manner and matter, than Gentz. Solomon
Rothschild accordingly requested him in return for a
princely fee, to undertake the task, explaining to him the
points he wished to have emphasized. He was particu-
larly anxious that the relationship with the Elector of
Hesse should be described in such a way as to convey the
impression that the whole of his enormous fortune had
been entrusted to the management of the House of Roths-
child; and that they had succeeded in saving it by risking
all their possessions. Special emphasis was to be laid
upon their integrity and disinterestedness, and the firm
was to be described as more powerful than any contem-
porary firm, all the titles and dignities that the five broth-
ers had acquired in the course of time being enumerated.

During the first week of April, 1826, Gentz wrote an
essay entitled “Biographical Notes about the House of
Rothschild,” which was to serve as the basis of his article
in the encyclopedia. The following extracts will give an
idea of the way in which Gentz carried out his task. The
essay was accepted at its face value by very large numbers —
of people, and after appearing in the Brockhaus publica-
tion was incorporated into similar foreign works, as for
instance Encyclopédie des gens du monde. The article
ran:


The Rothschilds, at the present time the greatest
of all business firms, are among those who have
achieved greatness and prosperity simply through
intelligently taking advantage of opportunities
which were available for thousands of others,
through a spirit of enterprise seasoned by calm judg-
ment, and through their understanding of men and
affairs, and their capacity to adjust themselves to the
conditions of the time. Meyer Amschel Rothschild,
the father of the five brothers, who are now living,
was the founder of this firm. . . . In a short space of
time his knowledge, his tireless industry, and his


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 339


straight dealing won for him the confidence of highly
respected firms; he was given important orders, and
his credit as well as his wealth increased. The rela-
tionship which Rothschild established with the Land-
grave, afterwards Elector, of Hesse was a deci-
sive factor in the enormous subsequent development
of his business. The elector appointed him crown
agent in 1801, having come to realize that he was as
reliable as he was useful. When in 1806 the French
occupied the elector’s territories, and he himself was
compelled to flee, he left the rescue of his private
possessions to Rothschild, their value amounting to
many million gulden. It was only by sacrificing the
whole of his own property, and at considerable per-
sonal risk, that Rothschild contrived to save the prop-
erty that had been entrusted to him.

The well-known fact that all Rothschild’s posses-
sions had been confiscated by the French led the
exiled elector to believe that his own property had
been lost too. In fact he does not appear to have
thought it even worth while to make inquiries about
it. When matters had settled down again Rothschild
immediately proceeded to do business with the prop-
erty he had saved. ...

The brothers are most scrupulous in observing the
injunction that their father laid upon them when
he was dying, which was to collaborate in absolute
brotherly harmony in all business matters. Indeed
they treat the memory of their father with such piety
that they refer to him in all important business mat-
ters, and Nathan generally applies to doubtful cases
a rule his father recommended.

When the elector returned to his states in 1813,
the House of Rothschild not merely offered immedi-
ately to return to him the capital sums with which
it had been entrusted, it also undertook to pay
the customary rate of interest from the day when it
had received them. The elector, positively aston-
ished by such an example of honesty and fair dealing,
left the whole of his capital for several more years


340 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


with the firm, and refused any interest payments for
the earlier period, only accepting a small interest
from the time of his return. Through recommending
the House of Rothschild, especially at the Congress
of Vienna, the elector certainly assisted greatly in
extending their connections, until now as the result
of the political developments since 1813 the House
has, through an uninterrupted series of great trans-
actions, attained the position it at present holds in
the commercial and financial affairs of Europe,
which are partly directed by it... .

Students of economics and politics have no doubt
frequently wondered how the House of Rothschild
has been able to achieve so much in so short a time.
Leaving the effects of chance out of account, its suc-
cess is attributable principally to the strictest observ-
ance of certain fundamental maxims, together with
wise business management, and the exploitation of
favorable opportunities. The principal maxim is
harmonious collaboration in all business matters, to
which reference has already been made.

After their father’s death every offer, whatsoever
its origin might be, was made the subject of joint
discussion between the brothers; any transaction of
any importance at all was carried through according
to a concerted plan by their joint endeavors, and all
the brothers had an equal share in the result. They
continued to act in close agreement, in spite of the
fact that they gradually settled in places far removed
from one another. This circumstance, indeed, in-
stead of. interfering with their collaboration, has
proved an actual advantage; it has enabled them to
obtain the fullest information as to the state of affairs
in the principal markets, so that each of them can
from his own center the more effectively take the
preliminary steps in any business. ‘The firm as a
whole then takes it over and carries it through.

Another of the principles which the Rothschilds
have adopted is to keep moving, and not allow them-
selves to become enmeshed by circumstances... .


The Rothschild Business Throughout the World 341


Finally it should be noted that, apart from the reason-
ableness of their demands, the punctiliousness with
which they carry out their duties, the simplicity and
clarity of their schemes, and the intelligent way in
which they are put into operation, the personal moral
character of each of the five brothers has been a de-
termining factor in the success of their undertakings.

It is not difficult for those whose power enables
them to attach large numbers to their interests, to
secure the backing of a powerful party; but to unite
the support of all parties and, in the popular phrase,
to win the esteem of gentle and simple, implies the
possession not merely of material resources, but also
of spiritual qualities not always found in association
with wealth and power. Ever ready to lend a help-
ing hand, without distinction of person, to those who
have come to them for assistance, all of the five
brothers have achieved a real popularity. They have
rendered the most important services in such a man-
ner as to make them most acceptable, for they have
been actuated not by considerations of policy but by
natural benevolence and kindness. ®°


_ This eulogy of the Rothschilds was a masterpiece exe-
cuted by a clever stylist; it was bound to raise the prestige
of the House enormously, especially in the opinion of
those who did not know how it came to be written. Then
as now the great mass of the unthinking public accepted
anything in print at its face value, and as the article, while
containing statements that were untrue, did contain much
that was the result of accurate observation, and attributed
excellencies that were not fictitious, even the more critical
were inclined to give credence to the description.

It was not signed by Gentz, although it is true he ad-
mitted to being the author, at any rate in conversation
with his friends. Indeed he actually asked Adam Miller
to express his opinion on it. “I should be glad,” he
wrote, * “if you would read the article on Rothschild in
the supplement of the Conversational Encyclopedia. It


342 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


is my work, and I have endeavored to give briefly a simple
and I hope not infelicitous explanation of the greatness.
of that House. I shall greatly appreciate your opinion —
on this little article.”

Gentz was proud of his work, and as he has noted in
his diary, he read it to Rothschild’s manager Wertheim-
stein, who naturally listened to it with “undisguised admi-
ration.” *? Ten days later Gentz called on Rothschild
and received his “actual” cash reward. **

Apart from the great advantage which its publication
brought to the brothers Rothschild, his essay contained
some shrewd observations which are of general interest.
One passage in particular, although not included in the
Conversational Encyclopedia, may be worth quoting.
“There is a truth,’ Gentz remarks, “which, although not
quite new, is generally not properly understood. The
word /uck as commonly used in the history of famous in-
dividuals or eminent families is bereft of all meaning,
when we endeavor to dissociate it entirely from the
personal and individual factors in each case. There are.
circumstances and events in life in which good or ill luck
may be a determining although not an exclusive factor
in human destiny. Lasting success, however, and con-
stant failure are always, and to a much greater degree
than is generally supposed, attributable to the personal
deserts or the personal failings and shortcomings of those
who are blessed by the one or damned by the other.
Nevertheless the most outstanding personal qualities may
sometimes require exceptional circumstances and world-
shattering events to come to fruition. Thus have the
founders of dynasties established their thrones, and thus
has the House of Rothschild become great.” **

The circumstances could not have been more aptly
described, for the family Rothschild of that generation
did undoubtedly bring mental forces into play in a defi-
nite direction, the results which they achieved being
favored by the circumstances of the time.


CHAPTER VI
The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm


HE control of the business of the House of Roths-

child, established as it was in five different centers
in Europe, had become exceedingly difficult with the pas-
sage of time as a result of the enormous extension of its
operations and their intimate interactions with the events
of general European politics. It is true that Nathan |
quietly exerted an influence that tended to harmonize
the often conflicting aims of the various branches; but
on account of the primitive nature of the communication
at that time, and the inadequate postal arrangements, it
was impossible, in spite of all the efforts he made, for
him to supervise everything.

The result was that each brother had a fairly wide

scope within his own center, it being left entirely to his
own judgment within certain limits to do what he con-
sidered best in the interests of the firm as a whole. Be-
tween Vienna, Frankfort, Paris, and London, these places
being linked up on the main European routes, communi-
cation was easier. It was just the least gifted of the
brothers, Carl, who was practically isolated from the
others at Naples, and therefore often had to travel per-
sonally to Paris and London in order to get into touch
with his brothers.

A final solution of the problem of the Austrian troops
at Naples had become urgently necessary. Since the end
of the year 1822, Neapolitan statesmen had been con-
stantly protesting that the Austrian Army of Occupation
should be reduced, in view of the enormous expense of
maintaining it. Memorandum after memorandum, ex-

343


344. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


plaining the intolerable burden and the necessity of re-
lieving the situation, was sent in. The Congress of
Vienna had decided that the occupying forces should be
reduced to 35,000 men; but before this decision was put
into effect (August, 1824) the Austrian government had
already realized savings to the extent of about 6,500,000
florins out of the sums paid by Naples.? This fact natu-
rally soon leaked out and caused great dissatisfaction in
the kingdom,’ especially as a rumor was abroad that the
government would shortly reduce the pay of all those in
its service,

The greater part of Naples public securities was held
abroad. Of the annual interest, only about two million
ducats remained in the country itself, while the balance
constituted a tribute that Naples had to pay to foreign
capitalists. The budget suffered from the malady of a
constantly growing deficit, which rose to 3,800,000 ducats
in 1825. This meant that the interest on foreign debt
was only slightly less than the state’s annual deficit.

Count Apponyi, afterwards ambassador in Paris, had
been sent to Naples by Metternich to examine the situa-
tion on the spot. “Cavaliere de’ Medici,” he reported,*
“regards the presence of our troops as nothing but an
intolerable burden. As finance minister he trembles at
the idea that the foreign occupation may last until
after 1826, and by compelling him to take refuge in an-
other loan, still more increase the state’s terrifying deficit.
This caused him to say to Rothschild a few days ago: ‘If
the Austrian troops remain here after the limit of time
fixed by the convention, I am determined to hand in my
resignation.’ ”

Fundamentally Carl Rothschild was absolutely on the
side of the finance minister. It was not in accordance
with his wishes that the expenses of the occupation should
lead to the whole internal economy of the state being
thrown into confusion, so that the loans handled and


:


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 345


issued by the House of Rothschild would run the risk of
declining seriously in value. He began, therefore, no-
ticeably to adopt the Neapolitan point of view, and grad-
ually to forget to consider the interests of Austria,
although he owed his position in Naples to that country.

He too favored speedy evacuation, especially as the
new king, who had succeeded to the throne in January,
1825, and on whom he wanted to make a good impression,
cherished the same wish. At Vienna he was actually
suspected of supporting the Neapolitan finance minister
in his obstinate efforts to recover part of the moneys paid
out to the Austrian troops on the ground that they were
excessive. The Neapolitan government was claiming
the repayment of 1,013,398 ducats as excess payments
made only up to November, 1821, and proposed to re-
tain 100,000 ducats each month from the moneys payable
to the Austrian war account until the adjustment should
have been fully effected. Austria offered only 650,000
gulden in satisfaction, and was contemplating making
deductions even from this amount. However, she was
afraid of any public dispute in the matter. The quarter-
master-general himself admitted in a letter to Count
Nadasdy that the estimate of 650,000 florins was too low. |
He said that in his view it would be better to agree to the
amount demanded by the Neapolitan government as a
lump sum, rather than to allow the matter to be dis-
cussed in detail, as that would be too damaging to
Austria.®

Ficquelmont also expressed his fears® that innumer-
able claims might arise, the airing of which would be
unpleasant for Austria. He offered to arrange for the
settlement of the matter, “without publicity and without
compromising the dignity of our government,” asking
only that the repayments should not be made out of the
resources of the I. and R. war-chest at Naples, but
through the House of Rothschild. For direct repay-


i]


346 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


ments through the war-chest would furnish proof that
savings had been effected out of the lump sums paid by
Naples.

“Looking at the matter coldly and impartially,” he
added, ‘“‘we find that we are to refund only the portion of
the excess payments attributable to the period between
February 1 and November 30, 1821.”

But Vienna was not prepared to refund the money so
quickly, and hesitated about making it available. Medici
urgently needed the money, and would not wait any
longer. He therefore applied to Carl Rothschild, in-
forming him that the royal treasury required 1,500,000
ducats in excess of its normal revenue. He asked
Rothschild to advance this sum, offering as partial se-
curity the claim exceeding a million ducats which had
been recognized by Austria.7

Carl Rothschild immediately sent Medici’s letter to
Vienna in order to ascertain the imperial government’s
attitude in the matter. As, however, it was not yet in-
clined to give way, in spite of Ficquelmont’s representa-
tions, it simply put the letter by. Nevertheless, in re-
turn for special securities in the event of Austria failing
to pay, Carl Rothschild advanced 1,200,000 ducats, be-
cause he attached great value to being on good terms
with Medici and the new king.

This brought him into great favor in high quarters, a
fact which Carl exploited to create a position for himself
in‘society in Naples, as his brothers had done elsewhere.
During the winter of 1826 many distinguished foreigners
flocked .to the beautiful city of the south; amongst them
were Leopold of Saxe-Coburg—afterwards King Leo-
pold I of Belgium *—the Duke of Lucca, and other
princes, as well as several wealthy English families.
“This greatly enlivens our social gatherings,” Carl said in
a private letter. “Amateur companies perform French
plays; there are balls and soirées—in a word, in spite of
everything, life is very gay... .”


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 347


Meanwhile, as the result of representations made by
Solomon to Metternich,*® the House of Rothschild had
been informed that there was no objection to crediting to
the House of Rothschild the moneys which Austria would
finally refund to Naples. Their total, however, re-
mained undefined, and as it went very much against the
grain to pay these amounts at all, Metternich was some-
what annoyed that the House of Rothschild should in-
tervene in the matter.

At the end of December, 1826, Emperor Francis and
Metternich decided finally to evacuate the Two Sicilies,
although not without emphatically warning the king
never to think of changing the form of government. On
the occasion of the Austrians’ leaving, General Frimont,
the officer in command, had recommended various per-
sons for decorations, including the finance minister
Medici and Carl Rothschild. In view of the attitude
adopted by both of these in the matter of the rebates,
Vienna was not prepared to consider the suggestion.
Metternich minuted on the proposal that Medici ought
not to receive any distinction,** since he already possessed

_the Grand Cross of the Order of St. Stephen, and that
Baron Rothschild should not receive one “because he is
not qualified to receive the distinction suggested.” This
was, in effect, a reply to the new attitude which Carl
Rothschild had assumed. People in Vienna were almost
inclined to call him a traitor or a deserter.

The negotiations regarding the refund of the exces-
sive payments made for the support of the army con-
tinued for some time. Austria maintained her resistance
against paying in full the amount demanded, until the
King of Naples finally yielded, in order not to upset the
agreement arrived at. But he wished at least to re-
ceive the interest on the excess that had been paid.

A memorandum on the matter states: ** “The king does
not doubt that the difficult circumstances in which Naples
has been forced to accept her onerous obligation to the


348 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


House of Rothschild will so far influence the noble heart
of the emperor that he will without delay carry out at
least this wish of the Court of Naples.” The Austrian
government was to arrange the method of payment with
the House of Rothschild. This appeal, however, met
with little success; Austria finally paid only 338,564 gul-
den, which Rothschild took over on account of his claim
against Naples, and at the end of 1829 this settlement
was accepted for the sake of peace.

Although, as in Carl’s case, Metternich was some-
times not entirely in agreement with the attitude of the
brothers Rothschild, he always came back to them again,
in both public and personal matters. There was no other
financier who controlled such large sums of money and
such important international connections. Moreover,
it had been the chancellor’s experience that the strictest
secrecy was observed and maintained by the Rothschilds
in all transactions of a delicate nature. In that respect
they were in marked contrast to most other bankers; and
this was of special importance to a man in such a public
position as Metternich.

Transactions constantly arose in which the financial
interests of the imperial house, to which Metternich
naturally always wished to prove his devotion, had to be
made to harmonize with those of the state in such a way
as to avoid any public criticism. The Rothschilds were
particularly skilful in handling such cases, and they
thereby made themselves indispensable to Austria’s lead-
ing statesmen, in spite of any disagreements.

A striking example of this was furnished when Metter-
nich had recourse to the services of the Rothschilds in
connection with the financial affairs of Marie Louise,
wife of Napoleon I and daughter of Emperor Francis.
Although she was far superior to her husband in birth,
this lady was in general character and in intellectual
gifts no fit consort for the Corsican genius. She remained
with him as long as fortune favored him; but when his


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 349


collapse came she left him, with her son, and returned
to her father without shedding a tear for her husband.

Notwithstanding Napoleon’s entreaties, she never once
expressed the wish to visit him at Elba, to say nothing
of St. Helena, although it is true that if she had so
wished, her father and, still more, Metternich would
have opposed her. The chancellor wished Napoleon’s
memory to be completely obliterated, and he was par-
ticularly skilful in the case of Marie Louise in exploit-
ing her weaknesses to that end. She was callous and
pleasure-loving, and used to visit fashionable spas; she
lived only for her own amusement and did not even
trouble to answer Napoleon’s letters.

In 1814, while the ex-empress was staying at Aix-les-
Bains, Metternich allotted to her as courtier a man who
not only played the part of courtier, but also had an im-
portant political role in Metternich’s service. Adam
Albert, Count von Neipperg, was a handsome man of
thirty-nine; he had lost his eye through a sword-thrust
in the war and wore a black eye-patch. He was a smart
and elegant officer, and had the reputation of possess-
ing unusual courage and exceptional intellectual and
diplomatic gifts. It was his duty to obliterate all thoughts
of Napoleon and the empire in Marie Louise’s mind, and
to keep her from all contact with any member of Na-
poleon’s family or his supporters. He was to be only
too successful.

The Congress of Vienna had decided that the duke-
doms of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla should belong
to Marie Louise “en toute souveraineté et propriété.” As
long as she ruled in accordance with the principles of an
absolute monarchy, without constitution or representa-
tive bodies, she thereby acquired a kind of private prop-
erty in these territories, by the act of the congress, this
being quite in accordance with the contemporary atti-
tude of regarding a state as a patrimony. It had, how-
ever, been laid down by the Treaty of Paris of 1817 that


350 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


these possessions should not be hereditary, but should
pass to another prince on Marie Louise’s death. Yet no
provision had been made as to how the transfer should
be effected, nor as to how the duchess’s private property
should be determined.

Marie Louise had entered Parma in 1816, Count Neip-
perg sitting with her in her carriage. He had in the
meantime not merely obtained complete control over the
duchess’s actions, as Metternich had wanted—he had also
won her heart. The man in gold-braided uniform, sitting
next her in her carriage, as Marie Louise entered Parma,
was already her lover, and Napoleon, the great em-
peror and general, her husband and the father of her
child, had been completely forgotten.

The affair was no secret at Parma, and it proved use-
less to try to hush it up; it soon became publicly known
that on May 1, 1817, a daughter had been born to Marie
Louise and her courtier in the palace of the ruler of
Parma. This child received the name Albertine at her
christening. ‘Two years later on August 8, 1819,** Marie
Louise gave birth to a son, who received the names
William Albert, Count of Montenuovo—this being the
Italian equivalent to the name Neipperg (Neuberg).

Both children were therefore illegitimate, for Marie
Louise’s husband, from whom she never obtained a di-
vorce, did not die until May 5, 1821, in his distant island
prison at St. Helena, while the marriage between Neip-
perg and Marie Louise, who had been living constantly
together for some years, was celebrated in secret in Sep-
tember, 1821.

As the Duke of Reichstadt was still alive, Neipperg
feared that on the death of their parents, his children
might be left unprovided for. He therefore begged
Marie Louise, while there was still time, to extract from
her small dominions some money that could be declared
to be her private property so the children could be given
portions out of it. Marie Louise too realized that some-


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 351


thing must be done for their future, since on her death
her lands would pass to another prince. She knew that
there was an intention to construct a dukedom out of
some Bohemian estates for the son by her marriage with
Napoleon, but nobody at Vienna knew anything about
the Montenuovos.

Up to 1826 the annual income from the territories ruled
by Marie Louise had never been completely absorbed
in administration, and it had been possible to allot large
sums to the building of castles and bridges, and to im-
provements in the ducal gardens, etc. The Castle of
Piacenza had been built, and the palaces at Parma and
Colorno had been magnificently refurnished ; bridges had
been constructed over the Taro and the Trebbia; a thea-
ter had also been built; and a survey had been made of
the whole country. Neipperg argued that these out-
lays had been a drain on Marie Louise’s personal income,
since it could not be disputed that any balance left over
in administering the state belonged to the ruler.1* The
expenditure in question amounted to 10,435,000 francs,*®
and he said that she should ask that at any rate a part
of this sum should be refunded in cash and applied to
forming a private estate for the duchess.

Neipperg fully realized how far his understanding
with Metternich went, and that the chancellor would not
be able to refuse his request. The general decided with
Marie Louise that the matter should at first be dealt with
without mentioning the Montenuovo children, but only
the Duke of Reichstadt when necessary. The general
then wrote to Metternich to say ** that after all the sacri-
fices which Marie Louise had made for the peace and
welfare of Europe, and in view of the enormous benefits
which she had conferred on her subjects, the question of
her personal and private property ought to be cleared up.
It was obvious that the castles, etc., which had been built
out of savings were her own private property, and in
order to secure the furniture, pictures, library, horses,


352 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


and jewels, all of which she wished to leave to her son,
negotiations should be immediately entered into with her
successors, so that there should not be any dispute in the
event of her death.

Neipperg proposed that either all the powers should
conclude a supplementary convention, or a loan should ~
be issued whereby what was due to the duchess could be
made immediately available. Neipperg pointed out in ~
a memorandum ”" written in support of his contention that
“nobody can protest that, according to the law of the
land, the whole direct and indirect income of the state,
of whatever kind it may be, is absolutely at the sover-
eign’s disposal; and she may, after the expenses of the
administration in all its branches have been met out of
the annual budget, dispose of any sums saved or bal-
ances left over, entirely as she thinks fit.”

Metternich wanted to keep the other powers out of
the matter as far as possible, and advised as a “less com-
promising procedure” that a direct agreement should be
reached '8 with the Duke of Lucca, Marie Louise’s desig- ©
nated successor. He too-was in favor of “the applica-
tion of carefully designed measures in order to place
her Majesty’s property beyond the reach of foreign
claims and, in so far as it cannot actually be taken out
of the country, to secure its separation from the property
of the state.”

The issue of an “appropriate loan” seemed to him to
furnish an easier way out. “In considering a loan,” he
wrote, “we have, it is true, to keep in mind the fact that
her Majesty is herself the beneficiary of the dukedoms;
but this does not constitute a reason for denying her power
to contract loans on the country’s security by virtue of
her recognized sovereign rights.” ‘The justification for
such a loan was to be found in the fact that Marie Louise
“has made notable and extraordinary sacrifices in carry-
ing through important works for the benefit of her sub-
jects and the country; and in order to a certain extent


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 353


to indemnify herself for these sacrifices without imposing
new burdens upon her beloved subjects or exacting the
taxes due with excessive severity, she has decided to have
recourse to a loan.”

Metternich stated emphatically that the questions of
the Duke of Reichstadt’s inheritance, of a civil list for
Marie Louise, or of the distinction between private prop-
erty and the public treasury should not be brought before
the public. The only result of this would be to draw
undue attention to the matter and to compromise one-
self. Neither did he consider it necessary to go into any
question of accounts with the public, excepting such as
had reference to the amount and conditions of the loan.

After lengthy correspondence, Neipperg reported in a
personal discussion of the matter with Metternich at
Vienna that *® “her Majesty the archduchess has decided
to propose to her council that she shall apply one-sixth
of the state property [ patrimonium] which is valued at
thirty millions to the formation of an allodial property,
which would be hers to dispose of as she pleased, and
to make a gift to her subjects of the rest of the sum that
‘she had used in works for the benefit of the public weal,
the cost of which amounted to 10,439,000 francs. Marie
Louise wishes to leave it to the council to decide whether
the public debt of Parma shall be increased from its
present amount of four millions to nine millions, or
whether steps shall be taken to sell some of the state
lands.”

Metternich felt it difficult to come to a decision. The
problems involved were of a difficult and exceedingly
delicate nature, such as were hardly suitable for official
discussion. He therefore decided again to ask Solomon >
Rothschild for his advice. When the question became
acute Metternich was staying on his Johannisberg es-
tate on the Rhine. He first informed Marie Louise that
he would ask Solomon Rothschild’s advice on all these
matters, and that he was certain that Solomon would


354 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


have the most useful ideas as to the best way of carrying
out her wishes. He then wrote a long letter to Solo-
mon,”° carefully explaining to him that the archduchess
wished to have available a capital sum of from five to six
million francs, and to assure herself of the right to spend
the income derivable from it in such a manner as she
should deem fit. There were political objections to Neip-
perg’s proposal that state lands should be sold; while if
she increased the public debt, the archduchess was afraid
of losing popularity.

“In my humble opinion,” Metternich wrote, “the fol-
lowing scheme might be suitable. The archduchess
should state publicly to her council that she could just
as well have applied the state revenues—used of her own
free will in erecting buildings for public purposes, or
about to be so used—for acquiring a private property,
but that she does not intend to do this; that she is leaving -
for the benefit of the state what has already been spent,
as well as what will be spent, but wishes to secure a sum
of five to six million francs out of the whole amount for
her free disposal. .

“After making this declaration she should take up the
sum as stated and deposit it in the form of bonds in her
treasury. The transaction may be a fictitious one, for she
does not need ready money; she could leave the securi-
ties in her treasury, or issue them in whole or in part.
My idea is that only five per cent securities should be
Created:

Metternich wished to have Solomon’s views as to how
this scheme should be put into practice in detail; and on
receipt of the chancellor’s letter, Solomon hastened “to
submit his suggestions for his Highness’s wise considera-
tion.” 21

“In my humble opinion,” he replied, “the object which
you have in view could best and most effectively be real-
ized in the following way. The government of Parma
should create for the total capital sum involved a general


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 355


inscribed bond, made out in the name of our firm, which
bond should be deposited at the government’s option in
the I. and R. Austrian National Bank at Vienna, or in
the Bank of Milan. On the security of this general bond
we should issue bearer certificates of varying amounts
. . . the holders of which should be competent to change
them at any time . . . for inscribed bonds registered in
the Great Debt Book of the state.”

Solomon submitted a three per cent rentes certificate,
which the French government had privileged his House
to issue. A sinking fund would furnish the necessary se-
curity, and punctual interest payments should place the
business on a sound basis. Solomon certainly wished first
to obtain information regarding Parma’s outstanding
loans, but he did not recommend sending anybody there

et

“Perhaps,” he concluded, “your Highness could obtain
the documents relating to them direct from Parma. This
would not arouse attention as would be the case if I did
so. Finally, I assure your Highness that I shall most
zealously use all my endeavors to deserve the satisfac-
‘tion of her Majesty the Archduchess, as well as the
gracious commendation of his Majesty the Emperor in
this matter, since, as your Highness is aware, I always
deem myself richly rewarded when I have the good for-
tune to contribute to the fulfilment of the lofty aims of
the Imperial Court of Austria.”

This was Solomon’s official reply, for Metternich’s use
in dealing with Marie Louise. He sent also a covering
confidential letter, intended for the chancellor alone.”?

“T take the liberty, in accordance with your Highness’s
wish, of writing a few separate lines regarding the busi-
ness dealt with in the enclosed business letter.

“T am pleased to say that I am confident of arranging
this matter to the full satisfaction of her Majesty the
Archduchess, and of H. M. the Emperor and King, and
of achieving the desired results. As the financial con-


356 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


siderations touch political questions at many points I ven-
ture to give it as my opinion that it is quite important for —
the archduchess to secure the capital in such a way that
after her death the claims of her legal heirs cannot be
disputed. The preparation of bearer bonds issued by an
eminent banking firm, the holders of which will be con-
stantly changing, seems to me to meet any possible eventu-
ality. For if anyone attempted to seize such certificates
. . . such action would ruin the credit of Parma for all
time, consequently all governments who have an interest
in maintaining an inviolable credit system would use their
influence to prevent such a thing being done.

“In my opinion it would be better to fix the capital
sum, not at six, but at ten millions, for as your Highness
has yourself indicated, the state requires some millions
for public institutes and buildings. In this way the bad
impression which might, as the grand duchess fears, be
produced by the issue of the loan would be largely coun-
teracted by a consideration of the fact that the proceeds
were to be adapted to purposes beneficial to the com-
munity and to the country. ... If on my return to
Vienna your Highness should feel convinced that my per-
sonal presence in Parma would assist in promoting the
business, I should not hesitate for a moment to obey your
Highness’s wish—which for me is a command—and
should immediately proceed ‘thither.

“T shall count myself happy indeed, if my efforts are
crowned with the success we desire, and if I carry through
the business to your Highness’s satisfaction, which I value
above all else.”

Metternich acted in accordance with Solomon’s wishes,
and obtained documents regarding Parma’s former loans;
these he forwarded to Solomon. ‘They, however, did not
sufficiently enlighten Solomon. He wrote to Metternich
that he could not obtain a clear view of the situation from
them, such as was absolutely necessary to enable him to
draw a valid conclusion, applicable to such an important


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 357


transaction as was involved. “I therefore venture to sug-
gest that your Highness invite her Majesty the Arch-
duchess of Parma to send to me a confidential man of
business, furnished with the necessary powers, so that he
can let me have any information I require, and I can ne-
gotiate the matter with him under the direction of your
Highness. .. . It is with particular satisfaction that I
am able constantly to assure your Highness that I count
it the greatest honor to devote my best services to her Ma-
jesty the Archduchess of Parma, and to justify the confi-
dence which that gracious lady reposes in me.” **

Solomon’s wish was granted, and Colonel von Werk-
lein, who directly controlled the duchess’s public purse,
set off for Vienna, taking with him a letter from Marie
Louise to her father, the emperor.

“My one desire this year,” she wrote,** “is to have the
great happiness of seeing you again, and I cherish the firm
hope that this may be fulfilled. This letter will be
brought by Colonel Werklein, whom I am sending to
Prince Metternich in Vienna, in accordance with his
wishes, so that he may give Rothschild all the explana-
tions he needs in the financial matter which you know
about. The loan itself, however, which is to clarify my
claims on Parma, will be formally negotiated and con-
cluded here, with the assistance of the finance president,
and a plenipotentiary of Rothschild’s. I will then be
much more at ease regarding the future.”

The main lines of the proposal to be submitted to
Marie Louise were decided in long secret conferences
between Metternich, Werklein, and Solomon.

Solomon Rothschild had brought with him a detailed
memorandum *° in which he showed that the commercial
crisis had affected the credit-of all states, so that public
enthusiasm for investments of the kind in question had
been considerably damped. Moreover, Parma’s public
debt was too small to arouse interest in any of the prin-

cipal money-markets of Europe. These facts were men-


358 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


tioned in explanation of the rather unfavorable condi-
tions which he was offering. He made it a conditio sine
qua non that the consent of the Duke of Lucca, the pre-
sumptive successor, should be obtained. State lands of
the value of twenty-five million would realize only twelve
to fifteen millions at the outside, so that a loan was pref-
erable; but Parma would have to undertake not to incur
any further debt for a period of years.

“Finally,” Solomon’s memorandum concluded, “as his
Highness Prince von Metternich is well aware, local con-
ditions in Parma make it of the greatest importance that
the government should be told most emphatically to main-
tain the strictest secrecy regarding the proposed business
until the time comes for carrying it into effect. We must
also bear in mind that the new loan will almost double
the public debt of Parma, a fact which will have a far
from good effect upon the country’s securities, so that the
loan cannot be issued at a very high price.”

There was no fear that Metternich and Werklein
would attempt to modify these conditions. They were
far too well satisfied that the matter was being arranged
so easily, to attempt to obtain better conditions. They
therefore signed the draft agreement submitted by Roths-
child and Mirabaud, under which a loan of 6,000,000
livres, bearing interest at 5 per cent was to be issued at
75 per cent on the security of the three dukedoms.

Both bankers undertook the sale of the bonds, stating
explicitly in the contract ** that it had been arranged “at
the invitation of the government of Parma and under the
auspices of his Highness Prince Metternich.” The goy-
ernment of Parma also undertook for fifteen years not
to issue any other loans, without the consent of Roths-
child and Mirabaud, to reduce the present loan by 3
per cent per annum, and to obtain the requisite consent
of the Court of Lucca. Metternich and Werklein agreed
because they hoped easily to secure the other’s agreement.
“If he [the Duke of Lucca] should refuse,” Metternich


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 359


wrote,”" “we should simply carry on and ignore him; that
is, act against him.”

Metternich expressed his satisfaction in a letter to
Neipperg: “In settling the matter in this way every fac-
tor has been carefully considered. The best thing will be
for your Majesty to sell your property to the House of
Rothschild under a fictitious contract, and gradually

. invest the funds skilfully. You will thus find in
about twenty years that you have acquired the whole capi-
tal sum that you want without its having cost you a half-
penny, and you will also during the whole of the period
have received 9 per cent interest upon it... . Unless I
am very much mistaken you will then possess not merely
six millions in cash but seven or eight.”

The chancellor wrote a short letter to Marie Louise in
which he expressed his satisfaction at the conclusion of
such an excellent arrangement, which offered the pros-
pect “of achieving the desired results in the simplest
possible way. If on examining the contract,” he added,
“your Majesty shares my feelings, all my wishes will be
completely satisfied.” *°

Marie Louise, who understood nothing of financial
matters, but gathered that she would obtain the millions
she wanted, agreed to everything, signed the contract,
and rejoiced with Neipperg that the future of her chil-
dren by the second marriage was now assured. She wrote
to her father saying: *® “I have accepted and ratified the
fictitious loan of 300,000 francs annuities,*° which Prince
Metternich and Werklein have concluded at Vienna with
Rothschild and Mirabaud. I should be glad if, when
the Duke of Lucca is being asked to give his consent,
everything affecting my private property and furniture
could be cleared up at the same time, so that after my
decease my son and those persons whom I wish to benefit
will not become involved in actions and disputes with
his successor.”

Marie Louise, however, wished that Rothschild would


360 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


carry out the agreement, even if the duke’s consent were
not obtained. Metternich informed Solomon of this, as-
suring him that he would personally endeavor to secure
the duke’s consent. But Solomon was most unwilling to
proceed without this security.

“I must honestly confess to your Highness,” he re-
plied,** “that I can see no prospect of this matter being
satisfactorily settled in such a case. Her Majesty cannot
flatter herself that it will be easy to double the country’s
indebtedness and to find a market for such a large quan-
tity of bonds, without offering the public every kind of
security.” He therefore emphatically begged Metter-
nich to use all his influence to secure the duke’s consent.
The chancellor concurred all the more readily in Roths-
child’s appeal, as he himself wished to secure this consent
in view of possible further developments.**

Baron von Werklein accordingly went to see the Duke
of Lucca with a letter from Marie Louise and Metter-
nich. The duke unexpectedly made no difficulties. He
authorized Werklein to write to Marie Louise and Met-
ternich and say that it was a pleasure to him to be able
to meet the wishes of the archduchess.** He also per-
mitted Neipperg to have an inventory taken of Princess
Marie Louise’s personal effects. He stipulated only that
the duchess should not arrange any further loan, that she
should create a sinking fund and sell no property belong-
ing to the state.

In the end all parties were satisfied, including the Aus-
trian Treasury, which immediately recouped itself out
of the loan to the extent of 400,000 francs disbursed on
military expenditure and on the maintenance of Marie
Louise during the years 1814 to 1816.

Metternich wrote a self-congratulatory letter to Marie
Louise herself ** in which he said: “The matter has so
far worked out so entirely in accordance with my wishes
that I cannot refrain from congratulating myself for hav-
ing first conceived the idea of an arrangement that so


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 361


extensively harmonizes your Majesty’s interests with the
principles of justice.”

There were certain distinctions to be conferred in con-
nection with this business. Metternich wrote to Neip-
perg:*° “Werklein will have told you that Herr von
Rothschild wants a little St. George for his managing
clerk.*® This indicates a certain amount of vanity, the
Rothschilds, in spite of their millions and their generous
loyalty, having a craving *’ for honors and distinctions.
At the same time I feel that it is not in the best of taste to
ask that such an order should be conferred upon a clerk,
and I suggest that you reply to this request that the order
of Constantine is a knightly order. It constitutes a genu-
ine religious brotherhood, and is not simply a distinc-
tion, and as the (Jewish) religion forbids its adherents to
take the statutory oath of the order, the chancellor of the
order would not be able to confer the cross. ‘Temper
your refusal with appropriate expressions of your ex-
treme regret, and the matter will be disposed of. Write
to . . . Herr Solomon on these lines, but do not mention
me, as nobody can take offense at a statutory provision,
while a single personal remark can do untold mischief,
and I myself have committed the great offense of making
it impossible for all time ** for the Rothschild family to
obtain an Austrian decoration. If he thought I was im-
plicated he would regard me as a positive cannibal.”

Metternich certainly did leave Rothschild under the
impression that he was prepared to use his influence in
favor of securing a distinction for Leopold von Wert-
heimstein; but Solomon himself had been disingenuous
in the matter. In putting his secretary forward he had
himself in view, for if Wertheimstein were to be made
a Companion, he himself was bound to be made at least
a Commander. As he took Metternich’s pleasant words
at their face value, and had no suspicion of the corre-
spondence quoted above, he wrote the following letter
to Werklein at Parma: *°


362 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


“IT have just taken the opportunity of asking our most
esteemed prince to lend his powerful support to my re-
quest, and the gracious reply which I have received from
his Highness justifies me in anticipating that if you will
only be so good as to make a suggestion in that quarter,
his Highness will not be averse from .. . graciously
acceding to it.

“I leave it to you to choose the most propitious moment
for putting forward the proposal, having full confidence
in your feelings of friendship for me, which I know how
to value. I feel a correspondingly lively desire to find a
suitable occasion for reciprocating them, and you will
afford me the best possible proof of your friendship if you
will give me an opportunity of being of use to you on
the earliest possible occasion.”

Leopold von Wertheimstein set off for Parma with
full powers to conclude the business. He brought with
him a secret letter from Metternich to Neipperg. “To
my great satisfaction the matter has gone through,” the
letter ran,*° “and something must be done for the bearer.
Fe is Rothschild’s right-hand man, and a splendid young
fellow of first-rate intelligence. He hopes to get the minor
cross; you know my views on that matter. Give him a
nice present of a more useful kind.”

The deeds were sealed, signed and delivered.4t The
two contracting firms underwrote 284,000 lire 5 per
cent perpetual annuities representing a nominal capital
of 5,680,000 lire at 75 per cent, i.€., 4,260,000 lire alto-
gether were to be paid in monthly instalments of 355,000
lire. Rothschild and Mirabaud were if possible to sell
the securities within six months, and they received as
their commission 2 per cent of the nominal capital of the
whole public debt of Parma, which amounted to
12,008,000 lire, so that they got 240,160 lire. Marie
Louise informed her father *? that they had now con-
cluded the contract with Rothschild and Mirabaud which


{
{


following terms:


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 363


Prince Metternich had prepared at Vienna, and that she
was exceedingly relieved.

No sooner had the transaction been completed than
Solomon Rothschild began to wonder how Marie Louise
proposed to invest the sums of which she would become
possessed. He meant to get this business for himself to
the exclusion of his partner Mirabaud; and he proposed
to Metternich that the duchess should purchase shares
in the Austrian National Bank through the firm of Roths-
child “at a fixed average price to be agreed,” and deposit
these shares in Vienna. Metternich supported Solomon’s
plan because he hoped that the money would thus cer-
tainly remain in Vienna, and would not, as the emperor
feared, be dissipated by the duchess. He therefore used
his influence with Marie Louise and Neipperg in sup-
port of Solomon’s proposal, without considering that
Solomon was hoping thus to derive further profit from
the transaction.

While Wertheimstein was on his way to Parma, Met-
ternich had accordingly written to the duchess in the
*8 “Rothschild has some ideas regard-
ing a transaction which is as easy as it should be advan-
tageous for your Majesty, and which he would like to
negotiate discreetly with someone who can be trusted.
Monsieur Mirabaud will be in Parma, and Rothschild’s
authorized agent will not be able to discuss this matter
in his presence. I know what Rothschild has in mind,
and I guarantee that your Majesty cannot do better than
to act in accordance with his suggestions.”

Metternich wrote in the same sense to Neipperg and
asked him to send Werklein to Vienna. Werklein
brought with him a letter from Marie Louise to Metter-
nich in which she said: ‘““You-have always given me such
good advice that my interests cannot be in better hands,
and I am entirely relieved with regard to my future.” **

He also received a letter from Neipperg*®* stating:


364. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


“Herr von Wertheimstein has displayed as much zeal as
he has understanding, and her Majesty has recommended
that a ring with monogram of the value of 3,000 francs
be given him.”

Marie Louise also asked Metternich to let her know
what would be a suitable present for Solomon, as the
statutes of the Order of St. George made it quite im-
possible to admit him.

Metternich and Rothschild discussed the proposed in-
vestment of the money with Werklein at Vienna, and
Werklein brought a detailed memorandum to Marie
Louise ** in which Rothschild showed that it would be to
her advantage to sell the Parma bonds, and to invest the
money thus made available in other suitable public se-
curities. He pointed out that the Parma bonds did not
constitute as good a security as those of larger states,
since it was always the smaller states that were first en-
dangered through political movements of any impor-
tance. He suggested that shares in the national bank
would constitute an exceedingly good and safe invest-
ment.

Solomon Rothschild offered to carry through the busi-
ness on the basis of the average purchase price of the
shares during the years 1825 and 1826, this price to re-
main unaffected by any future changes, provided that
he was granted a share in the dividends. Marie Louise
accepted his offer, subject to the one condition that one-
third of the share certificates should be sent to her at
Parma, the others being deposited in the treasury at
Vienna.**

Marie Louise maintained a constant business relation-
ship with the House of Rothschild, even after the death
of her second husband Neipperg. Everything connected
both with the loan and with the budget of Parma went
off sc well that in 1828 fully three million francs 4® were
made available for Rothschild to apply in the purchase
of 1,054 national bank shares. Marie Louise also en-


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 365


trusted Solomon with the settlement of the moneys due
from her Bohemian estates, i.e., those of the Duke of
Reichstadt; and Moritz Goldschmidt, a second secretary
and confidential agent of Solomon, had to make several
journeys to Parma.

When Marie Louise was staying in Vienna in July,
1828, Solomon had the great pleasure of being received
in audience by her. At the end of 1829 Solomon sold
Marie Louise’s share, and the money received was di-
vided into three parts. The amount of 484,824 gulden
realized by 360 shares was put to a separate account
“M,” as a present to the children, William Albert and
Albertine Montenuovo.*® Two other accounts were
opened for Marie Louise and for the Duke of Reich-
stadt. ‘The money was first of all left with the Roths-
childs to be invested in other securities at a suitable op-
portunity. The House of Rothschild had thus become
the trustees of the property of the Montenuovo family,
in which were merged the amounts standing in the ac-
counts of the Duke of Reichstadt (who died early) and
of Marie Louise on their respective deaths.

In view of the important position which the Princes
Montenuovo came to occupy, owing to their relationship
with the Imperial House of Austria, Rothschild’s connec-
tion with the family was of great importance.

Gentz viewed with satisfaction the successes of his
friend Solomon, for when his protégé later prospered,
he was not left out in the cold. At such times Rothschild
was easier in the matter of presents, and Gentz scarcely
ever allowed the occasion of one of Rothschild’s visits to
pass without obtaining a loan he had no intention of re-
paying. In return Gentz used his influence with Metter-
nich in Rothschild’s favor.

On the occasion of one of these visits the conversation
turned upon Goethe, who had requested the Austrian gov-
ernment to forbid the printing of one of his works in
that country. Gentz asked whether the House of Roths-


366 The Rise of the House of Rothschild :


child had come into touch with the poet, who was also :
of Frankfort origin. They had in fact scarcely come into
touch with each other at all, there having been only oc-
casional and casual meetings between them. This was

due primarily to the fact that Goethe did not stay at

Frankfort at all during the period between 1796 and

1814, when the House of Rothschild was first coming to

the front, and that in later years his visits to the town

were always quite short; he was indeed not much at-

tached to his native town, as is indicated by the fact that

in 1817 he renounced Frankfort citizenship.

Nevertheless he, like the rest of the world, heard of
the remarkable success of the family which had origi-
nated in the Jewish quarter of Frankfort. Born of
patrician parents, Goethe had as a child, as he tells us in
“Dichtung und Wahrheit,” only rarely peered at the
ghetto, as at a strange world.

From his earliest days he had been brought up in an
atmosphere of hostility toward the Jews, and later when
his intelligence matured he had scarcely developed any
more friendly attitude toward them. These sentiments —
were often revealed in his conversation, and the efforts
of the Jews to secure their emancipation would evoke
harsh comments. The growing prominence of the Roths-
childs, when he had reached an advanced age, often led
to Goethe expressing his attitude on Jewish questions.
The introduction at Frankfort on September 23, 1823, of
a new law, permitting marriage between Christians and
Jews, was the occasion of a passionate outburst in con-
versation with the Chancellor von Miller.

“This scandalous law,” the poet exclaimed, “will
undermine all family sense of morality, intimately asso-
ciated with religion as it is. When this goes through, how
can a Jewess be prevented from becoming principal Lady
of the Bedchamber? Foreigners are bound to think that
bribery has been at work to make such a law possible. I
suspect the all-powerful Rothschilds are behind it.” *°


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 367


In 1823, therefore, Goethe was already referring to
the Rothschilds as all-powerful, recognizing the fact
that it was through their money and influence that the
Jews had been enabled, with the support of foreign pow-
ers, to get their way against the senate and citizens of
Frankfort. The poet also inferred quite rightly that the
widely current myth that the Rothschilds had made all
their money very easily, and practically at one stroke,
was a pure fabrication.

On October 20, 1828, he was talking to Eckermann
about the period required for cultural or any other great
achievements and said: “Yes, my dear fellows, it all
amounts to this; in order to do something you must be
something. We think Dante great, but he had a civiliza-
tion of centuries behind him; the House of Rothschild
is rich, but it has required more than one generation to
attain such wealth. Such things all lie deeper than one
thinks.” °?

In any case this remark shows that Goethe found food
for thought in the phenomenon of the rise of this family
of fellow Frankforters. With the Bethmanns Goethe
was more intimate, and he was interested in watching the
rivalry between the two leading Frankfort banking firms;
however, as he had little understanding for financial mat-
ters, he was amused rather than concerned about their
rivalry, and enjoyed retailing good Frankfort jokes about
Rothschild and Bethmann, and stories of the way in
which they spoiled each other’s game.*”

It was only toward the end of his life that Goethe actu-
ally met any members of the Rothschild family. In his
diaries we have only the short entry that on May 2, 1827,
two young Rothschilds with their tutor John Darby
called on Goethe. They were Nathan’s two sons, Lionel
and Anthony, who were twenty-three and twenty-one
years old at the time. On August 7, 1831, Goethe noted:
“Afterwards Frau von Rothschild, a young bright per-
son.” This may have been Betty, the wife of James


368 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Rothschild of Paris, or more probably, perhaps, the wife —
of Solomon’s son Anselm, who had married his cousin ©
Charlotte, Nathan’s twenty-four-year-old daughter.

The members of the Frankfort line are not mentioned ~
by Goethe at all. The only other reference we find is to ©
the effect that, a few days before his death, on March 14, ©
1832, Goethe was contemplating an oil painting, propped ~
up on his easel, of the old bridge at Prague which was
to go to “Baron Rothschild at Vienna.” **

In view of these scanty references it is not unreason-
able to assume that any personal intercourse during the
latter years was of an exceedingly superficial nature, and
that the colossus of intellect and the colossus of money,
both originating from the same native city had had only
the most casual intercourse, their knowledge of one an-
other being derived practically from reading and hear-
SON

The Rothschild visitors referred to in the diaries were
no doubt typical of the innumerable persons who called
out of curiosity. Goethe had to receive many such, espe- —
cially during the last years of his life. It had become a
special honor to have seen the famous aged poet face to
face, and this visit no doubt constituted a small step on
the long road of social advancement.

James in Paris had had the best success, relatively, in
making his way socially, since society in that city, hav-
ing been convulsed by the changes of revolution and im-
perialism, did not hang together with the same con-
sistency as in England and Austria. With few excep-
tions the most distinguished representatives of all parties
and classes were to be found at James’s house. At that
time Metternich’s son Victor,®’ who had already con-
tracted a fatal disease of the lungs, was an attaché at the
Austrian embassy in Paris. In accordance with his
father’s wish he had got into touch with James; and he
told the chancellor of a visite d’amitié which he had paid
to Rothschild.


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 369


“IT paid a friendly visit,’ he wrote, “to Baron James
yesterday morning. His office was positively like a magic
lantern, for people of the most various appearance and
every kind of expression were constantly coming in and
out. On that particular day the coming and going was
specially noticeable, as securities quoted on the Bourse
were fluctuating violently. The great banker himself,
who generally maintained an attitude of such dignified
calm, betrayed a certain nervousness. Our conversation
was frequently interrupted by Bourse agents reporting
quotations to their chief. The Duke of Dalberg was
there, too, indulging in outbursts of liberalism.”

Prince Victor Metternich described other strange
callers who would take James aside, and all of whom
wanted much the same thing—money and more money.
This description of the office of the Paris money king
showed how the House was constantly extending its
sphere of influence. In the course of time, however,
an opposition party grew up both in Paris and in London
which attempted to check the firm’s growing power.

Nathan Rothschild had not acquired the Austrian
title of Baron, as he would have had to complete certain
formalities as a naturalized British subject. He also
feared that it might be damaging to his recently acquired
British citizenship if he made use of a foreign prefix.
But he did not conceal from the Austrian ambassador
Prince Esterhazy that the title would have been wel-
come.°® ‘The ambassador asked Peel and Lord Aber-
deen whether Nathan could be granted permission to
use it, and they stated that they were aware of no objec-
tion, either legal or customary, to this being done.
Nathan, however, decided to go no further in the
matter, as he feared that his new fellow countrymen
might regard him as a tool of the reactionary Metter-
nich, and in general as a supporter of the system repre-
sented by the government of Austria.

Strong opposition against the Rothschilds made itself


370 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


felt when their friend Herries was suggested for the office
of chancellor of the exchequer, on the reconstruction of
the ministry consequent upon the death of Canning in
1827. The appointment of a Tory who would be so en-
tirely amenable to the king aroused a storm of indigna-
tion amongst the Whigs. The appointment of Herries
had actually been approved by the king, and he had
been summoned to Windsor. Thereupon Lord Lans-
downe and his party suddenly offered the strongest oppo-
sition and endeavored to persuade Herries to refuse office
on the ground of ill health.

Herries refused to accede to their wishes, with the re-
sult that his opponents mobilized the press against him
in order, if possible, to delay the appointment. The Times
and the Morning Chronicle expressed the view that the
appointment of Herries was out of the question, as he
was Closely associated with a big financier who controlled
the European money-market. Other papers took up
the cry that this fact made it quite impossible to appoint
Herries chancellor of the exchequer.

The conservative papers took up the issue, and for a
week the whole British press was full of the relation-
ship between Nathan and Herries. The First Lord of
the Treasury actually felt called upon to intervene in the
discussion with a public denial.

In the end, Herries was appointed, but he held office
only for a few months. When the ministry, of which he
was a member, was succeeded in January by a new gov-
ernment under Wellington, Herries had to resign the
office of chancellor of the exchequer and content himself
with the post of master of the mint. Nathan expressed
his regret in a letter to Carl °* written half in German and
half in Yiddish, which was intercepted by the Austrian
Police.

“Consols,” he said, “have gone up because of our minis-
ters. Our friend Herries is broges [slang for ‘annoyed’ |
because he has been given a poor job—he is broges but


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 371


I cannot help him. He must be patient and perhaps he
will get another job. Praise be to God that we have
good news as Russia will wait, through Wellington every-
body is for peace [scholem]| which does not surprise me,
for our king in his speeches is nothing but scholem al
letchem | peace be unto you ].”

In France, too, a new ministry had come to the helm
in January, 1828. The harsh reactionary and clerical
‘régime of Charles X had aroused such opposition in the
country that in an election affecting 428 seats, only 125
supporters of the government were returned. Charles X
was therefore forced to dismiss Villéle, and to send for
Martignac to form a moderate ministry; but he cherished
secret plans of revenge.

Although the state of things in France afforded the
Rothschilds some ground for satisfaction, the general situ-
ation in Europe was anything but pleasant. The Greek
problem was still unsolved, and the battle of Navarino,
in which the Turko-Egyptian fleet was destroyed, pro-
duced a tense situation. This sought relief in open hos-
tilities between Russia and Turkey. The Porte went so
' far as to declare that the tsar was the arch-enemy of the
Turks.

In these circumstances Emperor Alexander’s succes-
sor Nicholas began to think of war. Whereas Metter-
nich still congratulated himself on having converted
Alexander into an Ultra from being a Jacobin,*® and on
having attached him permanently to his system, Nicholas
inclined to a Russo-Nationalist policy. But for this, and
especially for war against Turkey, he needed money.
The Russian government therefore inquired of the House
of Rothschild in Paris, toward the end of March, 1828,
whether it would place its services at the disposal of the
Russian government for floating a large loan.

The bank fully appreciated the political nature of the
question of financial assistance at such a time and for
such a purpose. While on the one hand it was offered


372 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


an opportunity of doing big business, it might on the
other lose powerful patrons. ‘The Rothschilds had struck
their roots in Western and Central Europe. They had
no considerable interests or connections in Russia, and:
their minds were oppressed by the ill treatment to which
Jews were subjected in that country. It would, more-
over, have been exceedingly dangerous to come to Rus-
sia’s assistance without the chancellor’s knowledge, at a
time when Russian policy was starting out on a line hos-
tile to Metternich.

James therefore decided to communicate the inquiry
he had received to Metternich through his brother Solo-
mon, asking the chancellor to express his opinion. Met-
ternich naturally advised refusal, although his advice
was clothed in soft words. ‘Through a third person, prob-
ably Gentz, Solomon was shown a memorandum in reply,
entirely in Metternich’s handwriting, although composed
in the third person. “The prince says,” the memorandum
ran, “that he entirely shares the opinions and sentiments
of Solomon Rothschild. There are two questions that
have especially to be considered in this matter. One is
the purpose to which Russia is going to devote the money;
and on this there can be no doubt. Russia is seeking
money in order to pursue her plans, and these plans
threaten the political peace of the world. In this case,
therefore, the money would be applied to the most evil
ends conceivable in the present dangerous condition of
governments and of affairs generally.

“The other question is whether, if the House of Roths-
child refuses to do the business, Russia will still find
means for carrying through her plans. There is no one
better qualified to answer this question than Herr Solo-
mon Meyer Rothschild, for he alone can judge whether
in the present state of credit there is a possibility of other
firms being able to carry through such a considerable, if
acceptable, business as Russia requires, without the as-
sistance of the Rothschild bank. If the answer to this


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 373


question be in the negative, the House of Rothschild
would alone have to accept the moral responsibility for
all the evil which would result from its acquiescence. If
the answer be in the affirmative, it remains for the House
of Rothschild to decide whether, merely to prevent others
from securing the profit, they wish to take upon them-
selves such a heavy responsibility, and incidentally
whether under prevailing conditions, and in view of the
risks necessarily attendant upon the carrying out of Rus-
sia’s plans, the entrepreneur would be reasonably certain
of realizing his profit.

“All these are questions which Herr Rothschild is
alone qualified to decide. If the prince be asked what
he considers sensible, he feels he must declare against the
business. In any case, he advises Herr S. M. Roths-
child to discuss the matter quite frankly with Wellington,
and ascertain his views. Indeed, he has no objection to
the duke being informed of his (the prince’s) views .. .”

England was fundamentally opposed to Russia’s war-
like operations against Turkey, and Nathan was there-
fore also against granting the loan. Metternich’s memo-
randum, moreover, did not fail of its desired effect. For
the Rothschilds, who had acquired their enormous for-
tune by taking advantage of the cross-currents of war,
were now opposed to all wars, with their inevitable effect
of shattering public credit. They were also able to claim
approval from their coreligionists for their refusal as
constituting a protest against the ill treatment of the Jews
in Russia.

The Russian loan was frustrated, and Metternich as-
cribed this fact principally to Ais dominant influence.
The chancellor deemed himself superior to everybody,
including the Rothschilds; he credited them with a spe-
cial knowledge of technical financial matters that he him-
self lacked, but it never for a moment occurred to him
that they might be cleverer than he. Whenever the
Rothschilds did, or omitted to do, anything from motives


374 The Rise of the House of Rothschild :


of personal interest, which happened to coincide with
Metternich’s wishes, they always conveyed the impres-
sion that it was Metternich who had won the day, and
that they were making a sacrifice. Although not free
from vanity themselves they recognized the great man’s
weakness very well, and exploited it cleverly.

It is true that their refusal did not prevent the Russo-
Turkish war, for other financiers were found to pro-
vide the Russian government with the necessary cash.
Solomon made great play with his refusal of Russia’s
request, to emphasize the extent to which the intentions
of the Austrian government and Metternich’s wishes
were regarded as commands. Gentz especially had this
dinned into him daily, so that he might be sure of re-
tailing it to Metternich. In return, Wertheimstein indus-
triously discounted Gentz’s bills, greatly “facilitating
his little financial transactions.” ‘The Rothschilds made
extensive use of Gentz in other ways, too. He was paid
to supply the banking firm with political information,
the correspondence being carried on in the form of pri-
vate letters.°° This was an exceedingly important factor
during such an unsettled period. Solomon, who was con-
stantly traveling on business, was thus able to keep abreast
of events. The written method of communication was,
however, maintained, even when Solomon was staying in
Vienna, as he sent the information on to his brothers.

Meanwhile the development of events in France was
becoming more and more menacing. Although Charles
X had at first seemed to yield, he demonstrated that he
was unteachable by summoning on August 8, 1829, the
ultra-royalist cabinet of Prince Polignac, whose slogan
was “No more concessions.”

Solomon, who was staying in Paris at the time, ex-
pected that the news of the change of ministry in France
would exercise a marked influence on the Vienna bourse.
He therefore sent a special courier with this news and
appropriate financial instructions, to Wertheimstein at


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 375


Vienna. The letter was somewhat delayed, and when it
arrived, Wertheimstein feared that he might not be the
only person to have received the news, in which case he
would be selling during a slump, and might sustain a
loss.

“T had difficulty,” he replied to Solomon, in the He-
braic language,** “in carrying out your instructions re-
ceived by the post of the day before yesterday to sell 500
Métalliques and all our shares on the bourse. This was
much increased by the fact that the postmaster of Sieg-
hardskirchen, who brought us your letter himself, told us
that another post had arrived at the same time as yours,
which most probably also brought news of the change in
the French ministry.” ‘The above letter was intercepted
by the police, and a copy was laid before Metternich. It
shows the manner in which the Rothschilds exploited
political events, regarding which they always endeavored,
through their own news and courier service, to have the
earliest possible information.

The Russians had meanwhile been carrying on war
against Turkey with varying success, and in August,
1829, they had advanced through the Balkans as far as
Adrianople. Although their position was not by any
means free from danger, their display of energy led the
sultan to sign a treaty of peace at Adrianople on Septem-
ber 14, 1829, which, although it did not put Russia in
possession of Constantinople, certainly secured her pre-
dominance in the East, improved her boundaries against
Turkey, and offered great political and economic advan-
tages.

The Danube Principalities served as a pledge for Rus-
sia. The Russians controlled the mouth of the river, and
the straits were open to them. ‘Turkey was to pay
11,500,000 Dutch ducats as war indemnity; in order to
carry out this obligation, she applied to the principal
European bankers, including Nathan Rothschild, for a
loan.


376 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Russia’s successes gave little ground for satisfaction
in England or Vienna. They had necessarily been
achieved at the expense of England’s influence; more-
over, since the beginning of the war Russia had ignored
all the protests made by England. Polignac was also dis-
appointed, as he had hoped that European Turkey would
be partitioned, and France would be indemnified by ter-
ritorial acquisitions on the Rhine. Nathan sent a re-
port on the situation to his brother Solomon in a letter
written in Hebrew, of which Solomon made a personal,
and therefore very poor, translation for Metternich’s in-
formation.

“I am now going to tell you, my dear Solomon,” the
letter ran, “all about how everything is here so far.
There are some here who want to quarrel, and that with
Lieven ® . . . and want us to send angry notes, because
Polignac is angry, too. Now I have spoken about the
Turkish loan, and they said to me: ‘Austria will do it,
but it can’t be done without us in England. Rothschild,
speak to Wellington.’

“YT must tell you Wellington and Peel would like to
quarrel with Russia, but in the end we should have to go
to war. JI am not for demonstrations, and we must see
to maintaining peace. What’s the good of quarreling?
The Russians have gone too far, and the world will be
angry with us and will say: ‘Why didn’t you do it twelve
months agor’ If England now says ‘Yes, we are angry
and want to go to war,’ Austria and France will say: ‘We
will remain out.’ They will leave us in the lurch, and
we shall be involved alone.

“I went to Wellington and congratulated him on peace.
He said: ‘Peace is not yet. It is not yet ratified.’ I spoke
with him about Turkish loan as to whether he would
give a guarantee. He replied, ‘No, I cannot do so at the
moment; you must get Austria to see to that.’ Another
minister said to me: ‘I am afraid we shall make an enemy
of Russia if we guarantee a loan.’ The matter needs con-


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm aT


sideration. Perhaps the Turks will give the Island of
Candia as guarantee.

“Wellington also said to me that many people had been
to him who wanted a guarantee. There is dissatisfaction
with the Russian Peace in every respect. The cabinet
has now decided for the present to remain quite calm
and not to write a word to Russia, to keep quiet and to
let come what may. I shall certainly not leave you with-
out news as soon as I hear anything further.”

Political considerations alone prevented the Roths-
childs from participating in a Russian loan before the
war, or in a Turkish loan after the war, for they had not
been severely hit by such few failures as they had suf-
fered, and their wealth had increased enormously during
the last few years. So that the “banking firm of the five
brothers of Europe,” as the House of Rothschild was
called in several papers, had several million of cash avail-
able, for which it was seeking profitable employment. As
a result of their happy knack in floating loans that almost
immediately afterward were most favorably quoted, all
countries wanted to have recourse to the Rothschilds for
their loans, and a positively jealous rivalry developed to
secure their favor.

While needy states were seeking opportunities for ob-
taining money on credit, the brothers Rothschild were
looking for safe and profitable investments for their ac-
cumulated capital. The state of Prussia again entered
into negotiations with the banking firm. The 5% in-
terest payable on the £5,000,000 loan of 1818 was a
heavy burden on the state budget. All states at that time
were endeavoring to convert their public debt, and the
Prussian finance minister, Motz, wished to reduce the
interest payable on the state debt of 36,000,000 thalers
from 5% to 4%.

The finance minister entrusted the preliminary nego-
tiations to Christian Rother, an important treasury official
and president of the Public Debt Administration, who


had arranged the loan of 1818 with the Rothschilds.
Rother asked ** that he should not be hampered by de-
tailed instructions, but that full confidence should be
placed in him, as that was the only way in which he
could be sure of success. From the start, Rother thought
of no one but the Rothschilds. He went to Helgoland in
July, 1829, where he met a confidential agent of Nathan’s,
and had a non-committal discussion with him about the
business. He then went to Frankfort and negotiated
with the house there. But he was offered conditions he |
could not accept.

“Gratuitous interference by business men here,” Rother
reported to his sovereign,®’ “has caused the Frankfort
house to suspect the possibility of making large profits.
In the course of our conversation conditions emerged, all
of which I had to reject as being damaging to the interests
of your Royal Majesty. I stated definitely that I would
have to transact the business in question through the
shipping interests, unless Solomon von Rothschild at
Vienna would carry on the further negotiations, as I
could not undertake a journey to London.”

Rother thereupon decided to negotiate with Solomon,
who, as he believed, had unlimited confidence in him. He
met him at Troppau on December 24. They agreed—
subject to Nathan’s concurrence—“after two days’ dis-
cussion, which was sometimes heated,” *° on a draft agree-
ment which Rother declared to be “extraordinarily ad-
vantageous,” adding that “the state could not have secured
such conditions through other channels or with other
firms.”

Rother wrote: “I have succeeded in obtaining what
we wanted throughout—and in some matters far beyond
my expectations—through the good nature of Solomon
von Rothschild, who is really an estimable person.”

Under the agreement the state of Prussia was to issue
a new loan of £3,860,400 in 4 per cent Prussian
bonds, at 98%, through the House of Rothschild, the pro-


378 The Rise of the House of Rothschild :
|


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 379


ceeds of which were to be devoted to redeeming a like
amount of five per cent bonds of the 1818 loan within
about two years. On signing the agreement Rother had
to promise Solomon to indicate to his Royal Majesty that
Solomon had not ‘“‘done this business for financial gain,
but regarded the whole affair as a matter of honor.”

Benecke von Groeditzberg reported some details of the
Troppau discussion to Berlin.** ‘Solomon Rothschild
told me at the time,” he wrote, “that in concluding this
business—a highly profitable one for the State of Prus-
sia, in my opinion—he had had the honor of his House
particularly in view. He attached the greatest value to
demonstrating to the royal government of Prussia that
the consolidation of its public credit and the fulfilment
of the assurances which his House had given in this mat-
ter were of more importance in his eyes than any con-
siderations of private profit.

‘While I do not wish to suggest that the least value
should be attached to the unimportant part which I have
played in this transaction, I consider it to be my duty in
all humility to inform your Excellency of the sentiments
expressed by Herr von Rothschild, which I believe to be
sincere. We owe it entirely to him and to the efforts
of Herr Rother that this business has been put through
to the credit and profit of Prussia’s finances.”

Rother similarly reported °° to the king that this ex-
traordinarily favorable agreement had far exceeded any-
thing that he had expected.

Nathan in London and his brother at Frankfort were
Jess well satisfied. At first they turned the agreement
down absolutely; but they had misgivings about disavow-
ing their brother in Vienna, and Nathan contented him-
self with sending Solomon’s son Anselm, who was then
twenty-seven years old, to Berlin, to delay the signature
of the agreement, and to secure improvements and alle-
viations. He was to agree only if better conditions were
unobtainable.


380 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Rother offered a stout resistance, and in the end, after ©
some mutual concessions of minor importance, the mat-
ter was settled. The £3,809,400 in 5% debentures still |
outstanding with respect to the 1818 loan were to be
fully exchanged for 4% bonds for the same amount, by
October 1, 1832, in five half-yearly transactions. Rother
himself was very high in praise of his own work. “This
contract,” he reported to his sovereign, “is purely ad-
vantageous to the state, and constitutes the first example
of a financial operation by a great state for the reduction
of interest on a large scale in which the nominal amount
of the debt has not been increased, the interest payable
on a debt of about 27,000,000 thalers being reduced from
5 to 4%. ‘The commission of 114% is quite negligible
and scarcely covers the cost of such a transaction.”

The king expressed his satisfaction with Rother, and
wrote saying,®® “I gladly assure you also that the condi-
tions have led me to the conviction that Baron Solomon
von Rothschild concluded the agreement with you in the
interests of the state of Prussia, as a matter affecting the
honor of his house, wherefore I particularly instruct
you to convey to him my satisfaction.”

It was all an affair of ‘“disinterestedness and honor,”
and Rother was zealous in emphasizing this aspect to his
royal master. It was a matter of satisfaction to him, too,
that the business had gone through so well, and in prais-
ing Solomon, he was indirectly praising himself for get-
ting such good terms out of an astute business man. Yet
in normal circumstances Solomon might have been able
to make the transaction a highly profitable one. All that
he needed was a continuance of fair weather on the bourse
and the absence of any violent external influences, while
the operation affecting the millions of pounds’ worth of
Prussian securities was carried through. Such condi-
tions apparently obtained at the time, for the Russo-
Turkish war was over, the general situation in Europe


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 381


was tranquil, and there then seemed to be no risk in car-
rying through operations on the bourse.

Further loans immediately followed on that of Prus-
sia. The Austrian government also wished gradually to
proceed to the conversion of her 57 state debt to 4%, and
the ministerial conference decided on the issue of a loan
of from twenty to thirty million gulden 4% state deben-
tures through the four native banking firms, in which
Solomon Rothschild had come to be included, after the
ruin of the Fries Bank.”

Count Kolowrat, who had been appointed head of the
commission of the privy council to control the financial
administration, had recommended this issue on the
ground that™ the interest rates obtaining in Germany,
France, England, and Holland were lower than 4% and
a reduction in those countries either had been or was
about to be undertaken. It did not seem that there was
any prospect of political complications for some time.

The loan was decided upon, and on April 3, the em-
peror expressed his special satisfaction with the conduct
of the four banks on this occasion.

Rothschild certainly endeavored to get rid of the bonds
as speedily as possible, and invested all the ready cash
in the three accounts of Marie Louise of Parma in the
new 4% Métalliques bonds, at the issue price (subject
to a commission for his trouble), on the ground that they
were a particularly safe investment.

Metternich had—to use Solomon’s words—“in con-
stant and zealous endeavor to be of service to her Ma-
jesty the Archduchess,” made it clear to him that he
must devote himself as much as possible to the interests
of the Montenuovo family... .

“T have repeatedly endeavored to demonstrate,” Roths-
child replied,” “that I am filled with the same zeal. To
show this to her Majesty again, and also to please your


~ Highness, I will now undertake to forego the commis-


382 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


sion which her Majesty has allowed me in the past on >
the investments that I have effected in Austrian securi-
ties, as far as the capital of the Montenuovo family under
my control is concerned; and I hereby declare that when
the time comes, that family shall enter into the new
bonds at their issue price, without my having derived any
benefit from them.”

Rothschild did in fact waive the commission on Ac-
count M. and reduced the commission on the two other
accounts by one-half. He did this the more readily as he
had already made a large profit out of the Parma busi-
ness; but his sacrifice of the relatively trivial commission
made a good impression. It was just such an occasion
as Solomon would use for playing up to his reputation
for “disinterestedness and honor.” In any case Solomon
was unable at once to find purchasers for the large volume
of security issued in connection with the Austrian loan.

In addition to the Prussian and Austrian loans just
described, they undertook an operation on a far larger
scale, fraught with far more serious consequences, namely
the underwriting of 80,000,000 francs of French rentes,
needed by the French government to pay for the Algiers
campaign on which it had just embarked. Several rival
firms had stated that they were prepared to deal with it.
Aguado offered “ to underwrite it at 97.55%, a consor-
tium headed by Mallet Fréres offered 98%, the Syndi-
cat des Receveurs-Généraux offered 100%, and the
Rothschilds—102.721%4%. “The rivals perceived,” wrote
Capefigue, “that in future nobody would be able to stand
against the Rothschilds.”

Even these gigantic transactions left them unsatisfied.
They suggested to Marie Louise that the public debt of
Parma should be converted, and they also wanted to
maneuver the House of Bethmann in Frankfort out of a
connection it had recently established with Austria.

Solomon Rothschild had been informed by the finance
minister Count Nadasdy that the Austrian administra-


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 383


tion was proposing to convert all its 5% securities to 4%.
He promised on his journeys to ascertain foreign senti-
ment regarding this proposal, and to let Vienna know
the result of his investigations. In June, 1830, he made
his first report to Nadasdy;™ it was sent from Frankfort
and contained a proposal which in its essentials was di-
rected against the House of Bethmann. His idea was
that the 5% Bethmann bonds, which were still in circu-
lation, should be redeemed at Frankfort by cash pay-
ments at par, through the Frankfort branch of the
House.

“Your Excellency,” he wrote, “is not unaware of my
deep devotion to the Austrian state, which is shared by
all my brothers and partners. I trust that you are con-
vinced that we always have the best interests of the treas-
ury in view, and that it must be our principal concern
to fulfil your Excellency’s wishes to the best of our
ability.”

The taking over of the Bethmann bonds was to serve
“to secure and hasten the conversion operation as far as
possible, and create enthusiasm abroad for the transac-
tion.” Not until he had delivered the 5% debentures did
‘Solomon wish that his firm should receive 4% debentures
at the rate of 105 florins for each hundred, or treasury
notes, or money, or whatever else the authorities consid-
ered most convenient.

“Since my brothers and I,” Solomon continued, “have
no keener desire than constantly to furnish proofs to the
Austrian state of our most disinterested service, unaf-
fected by any private interests, we flatter ourselves that
your Excellency will receive our most dutiful offer with
your customary kindness.” He hoped thereby to make
the conversion more popular abroad.

“Your Excellency,” he continued, “may be convinced
it is neither pride nor self-interest that induces me to
take this matter up. As I have already had the honor
to prove to your Excellency, I always speak openly and


384. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


sincerely; and I can absolutely assure you that if my sug-
gestion be adopted the conversion will go through ©
speedily and successfully. If therefore your Excellency
is agreed that direct cash payments shall be made through
my Frankfort house—which, I flatter myself, possesses
the confidence of the public—we shall arrange for such
payments to be made, not to Herr Bethmann here, but
by us direct to the holders of the bonds.”

The Austrian treasury thereupon asked the firm of
Bethmann to submit a preliminary memorandum on the
question of conversion. This was done, and the authori-
ties forthwith sent this memorandum, which naturally
differed in many respects from the Rothschilds’ offers,
to Amschel at Frankfort. He made some very sharp
comments on Bethmann’s document, ascribing its feeble-
ness to that bank’s lack of resources and knowledge.

“If that firm,” he wrote,” “is really serious about the
conversion, and means to throw itself heart and soul into
the business, it is inconceivable that it should have neither
the confidence nor the means to acquire the small quantity
of six hundred 4% Méetalliques bonds in advance.
Smaller firms, without such a well-known name or such
a position as the firm in question, would certainly have
offered to do so.”

The Rothschild memorandum described the reasons
put forward by Bethmann as evasions, because that firm
was not strong enough, and did not sufficiently possess
the confidence of the public to carry out so great an op-
eration. Amschel Meyer asked Solomon, who was about
to make a journey to Paris, to come and see him at Frank-
fort in order to discuss the matter. —The memorandum of
the Frankfort Rothschild, written in grotesque German,
ran:

‘The same [Solomon] assured me on his honor that
he was not actuated by the least resentment at the con-
version having been entrusted to the House of Bethmann.
He also asseverated that his house was devoted life and


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 385


soul to the Austrian government, and that both his honor
and his private interests were involved in carrying
through the conversion. He had negotiated the French
and the Prussian loan, ‘all these things hanging upon
one another and being interdependent,’ and he did not
propose to act against his own interest. His house held
fifteen to sixteen million gulden of Austrian public se-
curities, which he could produce on demand, whereas
the House of Bethmann had neither the resources nor the
knowledge of markets nor the influence that were neces-
sary. Not one of its partners had the requisite energy
to take control of such a business.”

The memorandum went on to state: “It is possible and
indeed probable that one or more banking firms and their
supporters believe, if they directly or indirectly got fabri-
cated articles into the papers, and spread unfounded
rumors on several bourses, they could put the House of
Rothschild in an unfavorable light to the Austrian gov-
ernment, and at the same time extend their own sphere
of influence. We had expected such irresponsible news-
paper articles as those that recently appeared in some
French papers, attributing the fall in rentes to the action
of the House of Rothschild, on the ground that we wanted
to get rid of all our rentes at any price because we had
taken over a Turkish loan of eighty million francs. They
will not be the last, as they are not the first, of their
kind.”

The memorandum set forth that important firms deal-
ing with governments would always have such fanciful
stories attached to them. Truth and justice were, how-
ever, bound to prevail, and such lies would meet their
own reward. By coming to the rescue with the greater
part of its cash resources, the House of Rothschild had
quite recently, in May, prevented a terrible crisis on the
Frankfort bourse, which would have had serious conse-
“quences in other money-markets. Even now the political
situation was far from satisfactory. In France nobody


h


386 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


knew what was going to happen, while in England the
king was ill and a change of ministry expected. The ©
memorandum concluded on its original note, asking that —
the Rothschilds might convert the Bethmann debentures.

The finance minister Count Nadasdy ** was, however,
unshakable. He was not willing to offend the House of
Bethmann by allowing the conversion to be carried
through by a different firm from that which had origi-
nally negotiated the loan. The brothers Rothschild were
then holding enormous quantities of state securities; in
addition to their large Austrian investments they held —
miliions of the newly issued French rentes as well as the ©
bonds of the conversion loan of Prussia. The Rothschilds —
were therefore overstocked with bonds at a time when
the general state of Europe might change from one of
apparent calm to one of acute crisis.

While James did not feel that the political situation
in France was wholly satisfactory, he did not realize
how critical it really was. He gave balls, which were
attended by princes such as the Duke of Chartres and the
Duke of Brunswick. He supported French theatrical
undertakings to give performances abroad, as in Vienna
for instance. He was associating with princes and
ministers and financiers. But the opinions that he
heard were so various and so conflicting that he did not
feel he could predict the future with any confidence.

James’s own particular domain, the sensitive bourse,
was already showing signs of the coming storm. On
June 1 there was a severe slump, and several politicians
implored Rothschild to use his power to prevent a col-
lapse.” ‘The Duke of Decazes wrote to him: “If you
do not succeed in preventing the fall in values, everyone
will believe that a coup d’état will occur such as you so
rightly fear, for you may be sure that in such a case no
creditor would be paid his debts.” 8

James Rothschild thereupon hastily went to see Poli-


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 387


gnac, as he had so often done before, and was again reas-
sured by him. Anything of the kind was again out of
the question; the bourse and the public were nervous,
that was all.

Solomon, the chief of the Vienna house, had in the
meantime also come from Frankfort to Paris. He had
promised Metternich he would send an accurate report
as to the state of affairs in France, and faithfully ful-
filled his promise in spite of all difficulties.

His first report, dated June 19, 1830, reads as follows :”


Most EMINENT PRINCE:

I hope that your Highness is enjoying perfect and
constant well-being on your beautiful estate ...
am taking the liberty of reporting to you my arrival
here the day before yesterday. I am venturing al-
ready to avail myself of the permission accorded me
by your Highness to inform you occasionally of
political events here through other than the ordinary
channels. So far as I have had the opportunity dur-
ing my short stay here of ascertaining from conver-
sations with well-informed persons of all parties and
opinions, it seems that the spirit of opposition, which
has grown so very much more embittered in the last
month, is directed not against the sacred person of
the king and the dynasty of the Bourbons, but only
against the leaders of the present cabinet, Messieurs
de Polignac and Peyronnet.


Solomon still hoped that peace might be maintained,
but he viewed with dismay Polignac’s intention of chang-
ing the electoral and press laws, to which he adhered
in spite of the strongest representations. ‘The whole
tenor of Solomon’s report revealed his uneasiness.

Shortly afterwards Solomon reported that the result
of the new elections had been markedly unfavorable to
the government. The generally prevailing spirit of op-
position had infected everybody, with the result that


388 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


elements hostile to the ministry had been returned to the
chamber. In fact the elections had resulted in only 125
supporters of the ministry being returned for 428 seats.


“The list is odious and contemptible,” Count Apponyi |


reported to Vienna. The ministry was dismayed and
shocked by the result. The idea of changing the elec-
toral law was again being mooted.

“Such a step,” Solomon wrote to Metternich, “might
lead to the most unforeseen results. Meanwhile the king
is firmly determined not to weaken his royal prerogative
at any point, for he knows only too well from his own
experience how quickly one concession leads to another,
and how gravely the royal authority is endangered
thereby.”

The general situation was exceedingly unpleasant, al-
though Solomon and James, especially James, still hoped.
that the storm would pass over. But at the end of June
rumors were thickening to the effect that the king and
Polignac meditated a coup d’état to rid themselves of
the inconvenient liberal chamber before it met and to
limit still further the rights of the people. Those who
accepted these rumors, or whose actual knowledge con-
firmed them, secretly sold large holdings of bonds in
the London market; and the House of Rothschild, being
interested in maintaining their value, was forced to buy
them.

James Rothschild, believing that as state banker *° he
must necessarily be in the confidence of the government,
was convinced that before any such fatal decisions were
made he would surely be consulted, or that at any rate
he would be given a hint before any vital step was taken.
He heard nothing, however; and the rumors of serious
steps contemplated by the government increased. On
Sunday, July 24, James accordingly decided to go to
Monsieur Peyronnet, minister of the interior, and ask
him what it all meant.8t. The minister expressed his
astonishment that such an intelligent and well-informed


7
.


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 389


man as James should attach any significance to such gos-
sip, and pointed to his office desk, covered with letters
summoning the newly elected delegates to the first ses-
sion of the chamber.

In a reassured frame of mind, Rothschild went to dine
at the country house of Madame de Thuret, where the
whole diplomatic corps had been invited. People
asked him anxiously about the situation. He told them
about his call on the minister, and the letters summon-
ing the delegates which he had seen, and his statements
reassured the diplomats who were present.

Meanwhile the ministers were secretly framing the
famous ordinances in which the king, on Polignac’s ad-
vice, dissolved the hostile chamber before it had ever
met, ordered new elections on a different electoral basis,
and severely limited the freedom of the press.

Early on July 26, 1830, the ordinances were published,
to the general astonishment. The secret had been most
scrupulously kept. The whole capital was swept by in-
dignation. Everyone said that this meant the end of all
liberty, and the relapse of France into the darkest medie-
valism. The press was particularly vocal, and protested
most vehemently, in spite of any ordinance.

The excitement in Paris was prodigious. High barri-
cades were erected in the principal streets; the populace
collected in groups, marching through the streets shout-
ing menaces at the king; shops with weapons and mili-
tary stores were plundered, and strong opposition was
offered to the royal troops, who were completely unpre-
pared, and were present only in small numbers under the
command of Marshal Marmont, who was himself taken
by surprise. Stones were thrown at the windows of Poli-
gnac’s private house, and his carriage was almost smashed
to pieces. By July 28 the rising was in full swing. The
streets reechoed with shouts of “Down with the Bour-
bons!” “Down with the ministers!” The garrison con-
sisted of only twelve thousand men, and large sections


390 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


had gone over to the rebels. The remainder were far
from being sufficient to hold down the indignant city.
By July 29 the revolt had extended to the whole of
Paris. The royal troops were slowly forced back on
Saint-Cloud, where the king anxiously awaited the de-
velopment of events. He was now prepared to revoke
the ordinances; but it was too late. Not only his posi-
tion, but that of the whole of his House, had collapsed.


The Louvre and the Tuileries, defended by Swiss troops,


were stormed by the populace.

The revolution was victorious all along the line; on
July 31 Charles X and his guilty ministers fled. Their
dominion was at an end. If the monarchy was to be
maintained, only one thing could make this possible: the
old line of the Bourbons must be eliminated. Recourse
would have to be had to the king’s rival, Louis Philippe


of Orléans, son of the notorious Philippe Egalité, of the —


days of the great revolution. This prince played his part


very cleverly; he contrived to make the people feel that —


|


.


they were conferring the crown upon him. His liberal —


views, and his simple, unadorned appearance as he cour-
ageously showed himself to the angry mob, did not fail
of its effect. The old royal house was finished, the Or-
léans followed it, and Louis Philippe became head of
the state.

James and Solomon were both in Paris during this
period, and were reduced to a state of the greatest anxiety
as the revolution proceeded. They were not only afraid
for their wealth. As foreigners who had been so closely
associated with the hated king and his ministers, they
went in fear of their lives. Holding, as they still did,
such a large amount of paper from the state loan they had
just taken over, they had watched with the greatest dis-
may the catastrophic fall in rentes, amounting to 20 to
30% during the first days of the revolution.

But this fear was for a moment kept in the background
by their immediate bodily danger, although their ner-


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 391


vousness in this respect proved to be unfounded. The
revolution of July was a bourgeois revolution. The
people, it is true, sacked a few royal chateaux, but the life
and property of private persons were spared.

Nathan Rothschild appears to have been the first man
in London—apparently by means of a carrier pigeon
sent by his brother—to receive news of the great event.
Even if this particular is unfounded, it is clear that he
received news of events at Paris before the British gov-
ernment. Talleyrand once stated in a letter to Madame
Adélaide, the sister and adviser of King Louis
Philippe: *? “The English ministry is always informed
of everything by Rothschild ten to twelve hours before
Lord Stuart’s dispatches ** arrive. This is necessarily
so because the vessels used by the Rothschild couriers
belong to that House; they take no passengers and sail
in all weathers.”

On July 30, by which time peace had been restored in
the capital after the “unexampled tumult and indescrib-
able disturbances” of the previous three days, Solomon
Rothschild remembered his promise to report to Metter-
nich.

“We have been completely out of touch with the minis-
try for several days,” he wrote,** “as we do not even know
where the ministers are. We are also told that the king
has left his residence today for the Vendée; the tricolor
flag is flying on all public buildings, and the diplomatic
corps here has ceased to function.” Solomon’s view was
that the issue of events must be quietly awaited. He
feared a civil war, and according to rumor the Duke of
Orléans had accepted the crown. “Such is the state,”
he continued, “to which the self-confidence of three or
four ministers has reduced France in three or four days.”

Rothschild described how a new administration was
being set up in the capital with the support of from thirty
to forty thousand men, drawn from the dregs of the
population, who had been “let loose against the king’s


392 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


troops.” It could certainly not be denied that the people


had behaved well, for apart from the king’s property,
no public or private property had been touched, even
while the excitement was at its height. “It is satisfac-
tory,” Solomon admitted, “to see the uniforms of the


regular citizen guard appearing at every corner; they ©
are forty thousand strong, and often protected the city


from pillage in 1814 and 1815.”

The confirmation of the rumor that the Duke of Or-
léans had accepted the crown was a great relief to the
brothers Rothschild. In spite of their connection with
Charles X and his ministers, they had rendered financial
services to the Duke of Orléans too, and had thus come
into touch with his house. They felt that they had been
in a sense betrayed by Charles X, as he had never in-
formed them of the ordinances; and now that the duke’s
star was in the ascendant, they saw a profitable oppor-
tunity of changing their allegiance. They accordingly
began to sympathize with the victorious revolution, and
a letter from Solomon to a friend *° clearly shows that
they were preparing to play up to the new powers. In
that letter Solomon spoke of the general indignation
aroused by the ordinances.

“There was no armed force,” he said, “that could have
controlled a people beside themselves with rage, who
felt that they were being led to the slaughter by their
king’s command. The nation would have let itself be cut
in pieces before submitting again to the domination of
the Bourbon family.”

Solomon referred to the fears aroused by such a ter-
rible explosion, but said that everything had fallen out
in the most amazingly satisfactory manner. Private
property had not been in danger for one moment; and in
fact the people had refused money they had been offered.
The troops and the people had fraternized everywhere ;
and all were forsaking the cause of Charles X and turn-
ing to Louis Philippe, who claimed to have been always


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 393


devoted to liberty and to constitutional ideas. He was
being received with the greatest enthusiasm wherever
he appeared.

The Rothschilds’ change of front was thus clearly
stated ; the revolution had triumphed, and the old powers
were finished with, and the new man in whom they trusted
seemed to be firmly in the saddle. They immediately
adjusted their policy accordingly, and James offered his
financial services to the new powers in the state, in spite
of the losses incurred through the fall in the funds and
the continuing uncertainty.

The news of the entirely unexpected revolution and
the success it had gained in such a short time profoundly
affected the whole of Europe. All governments saw with
dismay how France—“Pandora’s box,” as Leopold of
Coburg called her—was again spreading terror and un-
rest over Europe. There was a slump on all the bourses,
while the hope of liberty ran high among the peoples;
the consequences for Metternich’s “peace of the world”
seemed unpredictable.

It had been the worst possible blow for the chancellor
and his system. At the time of the outbreak of the dis-
turbances he was staying with Gentz at his country place
K6nigswart in Bohemia, and he received the first news
of these events through the Frankfort ambassador Baron
von Miinch-Bellinghausen, who had received the news
from Rothschild. It is remarkable evidence of the effi-
ciency of the Rothschild news service even during times
of such disturbance, that both the British government and
the powerful chancellor, who controlled the vast diplo-
matic machine of the Austrian Empire, should have re-
ceived the first news of these important events from the
House of Rothschild.

Miinch-Bellinghausen’s report, dated Frankfort, July
31,°° was based on a letter from Solomon and James in
Paris, which Meyer Amschel had received at Frank-
fort on the 30th, and upon a short report brought by a


394 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


messenger. ‘Rothschild has just received through a
courier who left Paris on the 28th,” the report ran, “a
short letter from his brothers, telling him not to worry
about them, as they were well and hoped that things
would improve within a few days. They could not write
him any news, and the courier would tell them every-
thing verbally. The courier’s statement is to the effect
that Paris is in a state of great commotion.” ‘There fol-
lowed a description of the serious disturbances at the
beginning of the revolution.

Metternich and Gentz were at first unwilling to be-
lieve the news. The chancellor had just expressed his
great satisfaction at the issue of the ordinances. He was
now quite terrified. He kept hoping that the news would
not be substantiated.

“T confess to you,’ Gentz wrote to Pilat immediately
after the first news was received,*’ “that I believe all this
to be only partially true. The mysterious letter from a
panic-stricken Rothschild and the stories of a courier are
doubtful sources. But it is certain that things are not
well.”

Nevertheless the Rothschild courier was right; and
liberals throughout Europe took courage from what had
happened in Paris, and felt that freedom was in the air.
The news of the revolution resulted in a catastrophic
slump on the Frankfort bourse, and masses of securities
were thrown on the market. While Meyer Amschel, be-
ing the first to receive the news, had made some provi-
sion for this, he had not been able to do much in the short
time available, and the collapse of all public securities
reduced him to a state of panic. He applied his efforts,
to keep the disaster within bounds.

When disturbances consequently broke out in several
German cities, and it was feared that they might occur
in Frankfort too, the senate called up the special con-
stabulary, so as to be ready for possible attacks. Amschel,
who as a result of the last settlement enjoyed the rights


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 395


of citizenship, took up his duties as a special constable
when his turn came. He had more reason than anyone
else in Frankfort to fear for his possessions, and he heard
with terror that outside the city walls the peasants were
plundering country houses and driving landed proprie-
tors from their estates.

He anxiously awaited his brother Solomon, who had
just informed him that he would arrive from Paris early
in September. He wanted to enlighten the head branch
of the firm as to the present political situation in Paris,
and to discuss the measures to be taken to meet the terri-
ble losses which the House had incurred. In these hours
of danger affecting the very existence of the House, the
unity and harmonious collaboration of the brothers was
particularly vital.

On his arrival at Frankfort, Solomon was able some-
what to reassure Amschel, at any rate as to the momen-
tary position in Paris. After the abdication of the king,
the funds had somewhat improved during the last few
days, as compared with the lowest point which they had
touched, and the proclamation of the Duke of Orléans
had had a very good effect.

Solomon described that event as a particularly fortu-
nate one for the House of Rothschild. Their difficulties
consisted in their large holdings of securities. They
would not be able at the moment to get rid of the enor-
mous stock of French rentes except at very heavy loss.
The conversion loan with the Prussian government, ar-
ranged during a boom period, would also prove to be a
ruinous business. Austrian securities were still the best,
but these too had suffered somewhat. The solution was:
Get out of all engagements! Have loan agreements
rescinded wherever possible; and especially the new
Prussian loan.

Amschel promised to put out feelers in that direction,
and especially to try to secure Rother’s support. After
the most pressing matters had been agreed upon, Solomon


396 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


immediately returned to Paris, where his presence was
urgently required. The news of the July revolution had
already begun to produce disturbances in all the states
of Europe, and there was the danger of fresh complica-
tions in the form of military intervention by the abso-
lutist conservative powers, whose peace was threatened.

There was still a possibility that the danger to the
House of Rothschild arising out of the July revolution
might be averted. But if a European war were to break
out, securities would continue to fall in value and the
very existence of the House would be imperiled. The
brothers’ slogan therefore was: Avert war at any price.

It was in their favor that the new king feared a cam-
paign against his usurped powers, and was anxious at
all costs to avoid external complications. He was at pains
to show the powers that if he had not stepped into the
breach, France must have fared far worse, and that pos-
sibly it would even have come to the establishment of a
republic.

In order to put this view to Metternich more particu-
larly, the king made use of James Rothschild. In the
middle of August, as a member of the Société des An-
tiquités, James was one of a deputation to congratulate
Louis Philippe on ascending the throne. As the deputa-
tion was leaving, the king signaled to James to remain
behind, and made the following remarks to him:

“Having seen the happiness that I enjoyed in the bosom
of my family, such as accorded with my peaceful and
entirely unambitious disposition, you know me too well
to be deceived for a moment as to the state of mind in
which I am approaching my present task. . . . In giving
up such a pleasant and carefree existence in order to
mount to a throne set with dangers and difficulties, I have
made an enormous sacrifice for my country. . . . France
was heading straight for a republic. She would have
ruined herself and perhaps the whole of Europe with
her. . . . The monarchist principle has triumphed over


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 397


anarchy. . . . My most ardent desires are centered upon
the peace of Europe, and I hope that the states will re-
sume their former friendly relations with France, and
come to have confidence in France’s new government.” **

James saw to it that this was accurately conveyed to
Metternich at Vienna, and that the call to peace was
properly emphasized.

Meanwhile there were occurrences in Paris that threat-
ened further risings in various states of Europe. Count-
less emigrants from the period of the Neapolitan and
Spanish revolutions thought that the moment had come
for resuming their revolutionary activities. The Roths-
childs knew some of these people and heard of their
plans, and they did everything possible to induce the new
authorities in Paris to refrain from supporting their ef-
forts. What, for instance, would be the fate of Neapoli-
tan bonds, which had already slumped heavily, if General
Pepe, who was staying in Paris, were, as Solomon put
it,*® “again to arouse the spirit of the Carbonari’’?

A rising was expected hourly in Spain. The Roths-
childs immediately informed the newly constituted
French government of everything that they heard of these
activities, and through a common friend they also put
Metternich in possession of such information.

“Count de Molé,”®® Solomon wrote to Vienna,” “is
well aware of all these activities, and has been enlight-
ened as to the importance of suppressing them in the
general interests of peace and of the tranquillity of
France. He fully shares our convictions in this matter,
and is applying all the means at his disposal to frustrate
these unscrupulous schemes. I hope, my dear friend,
that you will observe the strictest confidence in the use
you make of this communication. It was made to me
under the seal of the strictest secrecy . . . it would be
exceedingly unpleasant for me if there were the slightest
- suspicion that I had breathed a word about it. For this
reason I am not signing this letter.”


398 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Owing to their excellent connections, the Rothschilds
were thus receiving the most important and confidential
information in spite of the complete change in affairs.
The new king, Louis Philippe, and the bourgeois minis-
ters who now received the seals of office had the greatest
interest themselves in seeing that peace was maintained,
that law and order was restored, and that private prop-
erty was not interfered with. The aims of the Roths-
childs were identical and they were to learn Louis
Philippe’s intentions from the best possible source,
namely, the king himself.

On September 7, 1830, James was received by Louis
Philippe in private audience, and discussed the general
situation with him. “My brother,’ Solomon reported
thereon to Vienna,” “yesterday had the opportunity of
a leisured discussion with the King of France. The king
said with regard to Austria, which was strengthening her
forces in the Italian provinces, that she should not go too
far with her military preparations, as this alone would
automatically lead to war in the end. My brother rep-
resented to the king that he was not dealing firmly enough
with the activities of the Spanish and Neapolitan exiles
in the heart of the capital itself, and that such laxity
might produce the most pernicious results. The king re-
plied that he was using every means in his power to frus-
trate the agitators’ schemes, but that his mandate as a
constitutional monarch involved limitations which he
could not legally exceed.

“The king assured me that he was opposing revolution-
aries in all countries as far as his position as a constitu-
tional monarch allowed him to do, but he stated that he
was compelled to show a certain regard for liberal as-
pirations.

““(T should be exceedingly glad,’ he said to James, ‘if
you could possibly be the means of communicating my
views to his Highness Prince von Metternich, and re-
quest him in his wisdom to make urgent representations


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 399


to the court of Naples, so that it may be moved to make a
few concessions in the general interests of the country,
and in accordance with the progress of contemporary
ideas.’ ” :

Solomon skilfully incorporated in this letter, which
he intended Metternich to read, a few flattering remarks
about the chancellor, attributed to Louis Philippe. The
letter concluded with the following words: “Such, my
dear friend, are the essential points mentioned in my
brother’s conversation with the king. With the excep-
tion of certain highly placed persons, observe the strictest
secrecy in regard to it, and accept again the assurance of
my most friendly sentiments.”

The fears that the revolutionary movement might
spread prove to be well founded. The July revolution
produced repercussions throughout Europe. Apart from
minor disturbances in Germany, Italy and Spain, there
were serious risings leading to important results. The
peoples of the kingdom of the United Netherlands, which
had been welded together in 1815 without any considera-
tion of the diverse populations of Belgium and Holland
living within its boundaries, had long been restive. On
August 25, 1830, revolution broke out in Brussels, as the
result of which a change in the form of government,
separation from the dynasty of Orange, and indeed the
severance of Belgium from Holland were demanded and
soon afterwards achieved. This produced a severe crisis
in the commercial world, and increased the fears of a
general European war, for news was received from both
Vienna and St. Petersburg that the authorities were not
merely determined to suppress these revolutionary up-
risings individually, but also proposing to use military
force against the new régime in France, as the breeding-
place of all these dangerous movements.

Meanwhile Solomon had returned from Paris on a


‘most important mission. His brothers had urged him to


bring all his influence to bear upon Metternich—to re-


400 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


strain his warlike zeal from embarking on such an adven-
ture, which—quite otherwise than in the case of Naples—
would be fraught with the gravest consequences, such as
nobody could foresee, for Europe in general and for the
House of Rothschild in particular. Solomon was to do
what he could in the way of direct written and verbal
communications with the chancellor, and also to bring
pressure to bear upon Gentz daily, while enlisting the
influence of third persons whom he had placed under
financial obligations. His brothers in London and Paris
unceasingly urged him in their letters not to flag in his
efforts.
James wrote on November 24, 1830: ®


My DEAR BROTHER:

An Austrian courier will be passing through
Frankfort, so I am taking this opportunity of writing
to you. I hope that as Uncle [ Metternich] will be
back in Vienna, you will know more about what is
happening. You know that Count Sebastiani, minis-
ter for foreign affairs, has given me permission to
call on him every morning. I am on the most friendly
terms with him, a fact which is not likely to be dis-
pleasing to Uncle, as it enables me often to let you
have advance news. He said to me, “My dear Roths-
child, the one question is, are the foreign powers
seeking an excuse to declare war on the king? It
will be a murderous one if they are, and God’ knows
when and how it will end. We will leave nothing
undone to preserve peace. We will do everything
posstble; and the king sent a man to Brussels yester-
day to beg that the Nassau dynasty should not be ex-
cluded, and to say that if it behaved foolishly it was
at its own risk, as France would not interfere.”

Talleyrand has been written to in London to try
and settle the question between Holland and Luxem-
bourg. Sebastiani told me that the king had had a
very long conversation with Apponyi and had no
other wish than to preserve peace. Therefore, my


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 401


dear Solomon, do try to find out the position, for even
though we are not carrying out any transaction in
rentes, we have a holding of 900,000 rentes (i.e., 18
million francs nominal). If peace is preserved they
will be worth 75%, while in case of war they will
drop to 45. We should not be certain of dropping
25 to 30%, and IJ should say that we better go straight
and secure ourselves.

You have no idea what the position is here with
regard to actual rentes. People are selling every day
in England, and today I sold 25,000 francs again in
London; but I see no real sellers, and in spite of all
the military preparations, the rentiers are not get-
ting nervous, because it is not consistent with sanity
that the powers should now undermine industry,
trade, and public credit through a war.

Meanwhile, my dear Solomon, the whole world is
arming, and this fact alarms me. They are already
telling us here that they are going to station a defense
force of 300,000 men on the frontiers. Now experi-
ence unfortunately teaches us that military prepara-
tions very easily lead to war, and if anybody wants
war we shall have it. Believe me, I feel sure that it
depends now on the prince alone, and he can use the
opportunity to influence France as he wishes. If
Uncle wants peace and convinces our government
that he does, we shall have peace; and he will cer-
tainly have a firmer control over affairs here than he
had in Polignac’s time. For neither the ministry
nor the chambers are, as has been supposed, ultra-
liberal; indeed their views have been modified so
much that they are much more inclined to royalism
than in Polignac’s time. You can see a proof of this
in their way of dealing with the Spanish revolution-
aries; there are no more clubs or popular gatherings.
Each day we have new laws for maintaining peace;
there are no posters or tub-thumpers; the revolu-
tionary papers are being suppressed.

Sebastiani also said to me: “The one person for
whom I have unbounded admiration in all the minis-


402 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


tries is Prince Metternich, and he will find me a
straight man to deal with. I want to maintain the
existing agreements, but if he means to declare war
on us we must conclude an agreement with England,
but believe that I am making every effort to maintain
peace. .. . As far as I can see the issue of peace or
war depends entirely upon your prince.”

Stuart ** believes that peace will be maintained;
that peace and war are being discussed a great deal,
but that peace will prevail. I beg you, if there is any
news, send somebody to Strassburg, or send a special
courier here, because it makes a great difference. We |
have been cautious enough to consolidate our posi-
tion by realizing a large holding of rentes at a loss,
and I am convinced that if peace is maintained,
rentes will improve in three months by at least ten
percent, since there is a shortage of actual rentes on
the market, and the bear speculators require millions
to cover. And it would be a very good thing to
recover part of their ill-gotten gains from these
wretched people, and this is just the moment for do-
ing so. You yourself will see, my dear brother, how
exceedingly important it is that I should have the
earliest possible news of what we are to expect. Peo-
ple are for war here today because of an article in
the Journal des Débats. Everybody here is very
pleased with Apponyi. I assure you one nearly loses
one’s head here, because common sense is in favor
of peace, but warlike ideas are getting the upper
hand. I am hoping to have full news from you at an
early date, and am your very affectionate brother [no
signature |.


This effusion was followed three days later by a sec-
ond letter:


My DEAR BROTHERS: °°

The news that the Belgians have dethroned the
Orange dynasty has shocked everybody deeply.
Rentes fell to 60.25, but closed at 61.19, and the five


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 403


per cents at 91.15 while ducats were 65.40. As the
Bourse was closing it was stated that Laffitte®* would
make a speech on Monday demanding 500,000 men;
not that France should intervene in Belgian affairs,
but only for her own security. I spent a long time
with Laffitte and Sebastiani. I have never known
them so moderate. They said to me, “We sent some-
body to Brussels and they did not listen to us. Are
we to set Europe ablaze in order to put Monsieur
Meérode on the Belgian throne? ‘The powers are

_ arming and we must do the same; we have bought
100,000 muskets in Hamburg; we have also bought
munitions at Frankfort, as we must take precautions,
and the interests of the powers are identical with
ours.’ ‘They said that they definitely believed that
there would be no war; but the Belgian affair com-
plicates everything very much.

Good news is supposed to have been received from
Russia. JI shall probably send you a courier on Mon-
day night or on Tuesday with the speech, if it is im-
portant and likely to be helpful. ‘The moderates,
such as Périer and all the rest are wild, and are
screaming against Russia, saying that the publication
of Emperor Nicholas’s letter was an insult to the
nation. You have no idea of the war spirit among
these people; but it is clear that none of those in real
authority wants war.

Do tell the prince these things, my dear Solomon.
The massing-of troops exasperates them, hence these
great preparations. Be assured, however, that it de-
pends entirely on the prince, whether we have peace
or war. If we have war I see the whole of France
putting up barricades, and J assure you I tremble for
Germany. The people are like a lion; and it is not
well to rouse such a strong and powerful nation.


This all amounted to the fact that Sebastiani wished
to warn Austria through Rothschild not to prompt Rus-
sia to make war or to arm herself. While such develop-
ments might prove embarrassing to the new government


404. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


in France, they might also produce results disastrous to
all absolute governments.**

On receipt of these letters Solomon went to see the
prince and Gentz, and gave them copies. He tried to
read the mind of the chancellor, and if possible to influ-
ence him. Metternich repeated his well-worn phrases,
and realizing that his reply would be conveyed to the
French government through James, just as that govern-
ment’s views had been conveyed to him by Solomon, he
uttered an emphatic warning that Louis Philippe should
render no assistance to revolutionaries, in any country, if
he was concerned for the continuance of his rule and the
maintenance of peace.

Solomon thereupon replied to James: °°


My DEAR BROTHER:

I have received your valued communication of
November, and conveyed its contents to the prince.
One may now infer that the French government must
be principally concerned to secure its own position,
and will therefore have no use for mere adventurers
like Molé and Broglie.°°


On behalf of the prince, Solomon conveyed an assur-
ance that he also desired peace, but that he would strike
a blow in Italy, not against a power but against the
revolution which had to be fought everywhere in the
interests of peace and order. If France permitted this, it
would not be troubled, and peace would be maintained;
but if not, there would be war, in which case Austria
would certainly not stand alone, for it would be in the
interests of all governments to support the state which
desired nothing but peace and order.

“T have also informed the prince of your inquiry,”
Solomon continued. “If General Sebastiani wishes to
say anything to him as man to man it is perfectly open
to him to do so, either through you or through any par-
ticular person in whom he has confidence.”


—


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 405


Metternich thus appointed the Rothschilds over the
nead of his Paris ambassador as the channel of communi-
sation between him and the French cabinet. This im-
dlied extensive confidence in them, and was a priceless
idvantage to the Rothschilds, for it meant that during
hose dangerous times they would receive news of the
nost important decisions before anyone else. However,
hey continued to be in a state of great anxiety as to
vhether peace would be maintained. Their losses al-
‘eady amounted to millions; in accordance with their own
stimate, perhaps deliberately somewhat exaggerated,
hey had irrevocably lost about 17 million gulden at one
low through the July revolution.*°° A war might cause
urther losses, and perhaps occasion the collapse of their
douse. Even the tame extracts from the Rothschild
aris letter made for Prince Metternich’s benefit still
ounded exceedingly menacing.

“We have received your valued letter of the tenth of
his month,” one of these letters ran,1 “and regret to
earn that your securities are falling as badly as ours.
Yesterday things got a great deal worse. War is on
verybody’s lips; there are those who want war for its
wn sake, and those who want it to take the public’s mind
fi the proceedings against the ministers.1°? Sebastiani
emarked today that it would be better for the public to
lave something else to think of now than these proceed-
ngs, and that after the action things would be much
etter.

“Others, such as our friend Stuart, are of a different
pinion, and think that after the action things will be
nuch worse, and that we shall have nothing but war to
hink about then, and that the present ministers are not
trong enough to adopt an unpopular line. Rentes re-
nain at 58.50, and from today all the gardes nationaux
nust wear uniforms, so that you will see nothing but sol-
fiers. On the Bourse were several soldiers in uniform.
his does not look like peace.


406 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


“Last night Laffitte said that war was less likely now
than ever, and that everything possible will be done to


avoid it. He hopes that Prince Metternich will seriously |


think of means for settling matters before all the powers
have their armies equipped, and everything is ready for
war. For as soon as the young French are ready, and
anything happens to set them off, the devil himself won't
stop them. . . . Frankness and mutual forbearance are
more than ever necessary.

“T read out to General Sebastiani what you told me
about Uncle. He said that he was pleased with every-
thing I had heard from the good gentleman; I assure
you that he actually used the word ‘good.’ He went on
to say, ‘I am doing everything possible for peace...
and I do not see what we should go to war about. I have
given orders in Italy to be accommodating to Austria in
all matters. If, however, which God forbid, anything
should happen there, I do ask for God’s sake not to let
troops march into any other country, for that might pro-
duce war.’

“You see, my dear brother, that the issue of war and
peace really does hang on a thread today; God grant that
everything may remain peaceful in Italy, for if God does
not maintain peace, He alone can say what will become of
Europe.”

James might have added “and of us” after “Europe.”
It is exceedingly probable that the original letter did
contain some such phrase, for the passage quoted was
only a carefully selected extract made for the benefit of
the chancellor.

And indeed, when, in the last days of November, a
rising broke out in Poland against Russian rule, the dan-
ger of hostilities against France, which stood before the
world as the originator of all these revolutionary troubles,
became particularly acute. The future destinies of the
House of Rothschild largely depended upon whether the
decision should be for peace or for war. They redoubled


The House of Rothschild Rides the Storm 407


their efforts to win the statesmen and persons in power for
the cause of peace. The three brothers in Paris, London,
and Vienna rivaled one another in their feverish efforts
to influence their countries’ policies.

Amschel Meyer at Frankfort had meanwhile been al-
lotted the task of relieving the House of Rothschild from
as many of its financial agreements and obligations as he
possibly could. Carl stayed with him in order to help
in this labor of Sisyphus, involved in dealing with the
enormous ramifications of businesses that were mostly in
a bad way. The great question continued to be, war or
peace?


» 1 ¥ ae ke - WH
\ Seto’ 7)
r t LS - ‘ rs Pi 7 " had
ae |
i :
el
youd 2" op aeSs
ry
or ey $
; Saks
‘
. ae
’
hod
: 3
%
4
‘
5
~
‘
%
%
.
Sa
i
‘ -
.
| :
’
By Une 6
an DP os ’
VFR) Tus tv


seein | Pye ai!
thie’ er" iy yu Wi:


NiO) Leo
CHAPTER I


(1) For further details see Geschichte von Frankfurt am Main in
ausgewahlten Darstellungen, Kriegk (Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1871).
(2) “Meyer Amschel Rothschild;’ der Griinder des Rothschildschen
Bankhauses, Berghoeffer (Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1923) p. 5. (3)
The usual story, which is given in all publications except Berghoeffer’s,
and according to which Rothschild was announced to the prince as he
and Estorff were playing chess, is a myth. On the other hand we may
take it as proved that General von Estorff effected the introduction,
relying on the family connections between him and Hesse. (4) Pub-
lished in full by Berghoeffer; see above, p. 7. (5) The original cata-
logues are in the Municipal Library at Frankfort. The reproductions
here given of a title-page and a portion of the text are taken from one
of these. (6) Dr. Philipp Losch, Kurfirst Wilhelm I., Landgraf von
Hessen, (Marburg, 1923), p. 71. (7) Vehse in his Geschichte der
deutschen Héfe (pp. 27 and 266) declares that there were seventy-four
illegitimate children in existence. Others put the number even higher.
For further details see appendix to Losch’s book referred to above. (8)
Losch, as above, p. 43. (9) The family later received the name “von
Carlshausen” as also did the estate which remains in their possession.
The family is still flourishing, but now only bears the name of Barons
von Carlshausen, without Buderus. (10) Losch, see above, p. 158.
(11) Der Soldatenhandel deutscher Fiirsten nach Amerika, 1775-
1783, Friedrich Kapp (Berlin, 1864), p. 57. (12) Berghoeffer, as
above; p. 20. (13) Carlshausen archives: accounts entry dated Nov.
9, 1790. Laubtaler (“leaf thaler) were silver coins, so called from
the foliage which formed part of the design. They were worth one
Prussian thaler, fifteen silver groats. (14) The “green” shield has
given rise to a good deal of error. The name is:in fact derived from
the earlier house with the red shield. (15) The illustration gives an
excellent idea of the Rothschild house in its original condition. ‘The
Schiffs’ old-clothes shop can also be seen. The descendants of this
family have also achieved great things, particularly in America where
they have made a huge fortune. (16) Reichsgulden; the Convention-
gulden—so called because, in accordance with a Convention, 20 gulden
(in 20 florin measure) or 24 gulden (in 24 florin measure) were
coined out of 1 mark (16 Joth) of fine silver—was worth rather more.
One florin Convention coin in 24 florin measure was worth about 1%
reichsgulden. (17) The Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel to Francis of Aus-


409


410 The Rise of the House of. Rothschild


tria, Weissenstein, Apr. 30, 1792, State Archives, Vienna. (18) Fran-
cis of Austria to the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, May 10, 1792, State
Archives, Vienna. (19) Die Fugger, Rothschild, Krupp, Richard
Ehrenberg (Jena, 1925) p. 136. (20) Emperor Francis to the Land-
grave of Hesse-Cassel (Baden, September 8, 1797) Draft in the State
Archives, Vienna. (21) The eldest son’s actual name was Amschel
Meyer, but he later adopted the name of Anselm.


CHAPTER II


(1) Ehrenberg; see former ref., p. 50. (2) Berghoeffer; see former —
ref., page 75. (3) Lawaetz to Buderus (Altona, Feb. 2, 1805), Carls- ©
hausen Archives. (4) See Scherb, Geschichte des Hauses Rothschild
(Berlin, 1872), p. 27. (5) Berghoeffer; see former ref., p. 35. (6)
Losch; see former ref. p. 151. (7) Wilhelm Kurfirst of Hesse to
His Majesty the Roman Emperor and Hereditary Emperor of Austria,
Cassel, Jan. 11, 1805, State Archives, Vienna. (8).Baron von Wessen-
berg to Count Stadion, State Archives, Vienna. (9) Baron von Wessen-
berg to Count Colloredo, in September, 1805, State Archives, Vienna.
(10) Correspondance de Napoleon I (Paris, 1863). (11) Berghoeffer,
p. 37. (12) Baron von Wessenberg to Count Stadion, Cassel, Jan. 10,
1808, very secret special dossier. State Archives, Vienna. (13) Bu-
derus to Lorentz, Hessian Chargé d’Affaires in London; from Schles-
wig, Nov. 17, 1806. Carlshausen Archives. (14) The passage in the
memoirs of General Baron de Marbot (Paris, 1891), Vol. I, pp. 309-
311, from which the possible presence of Rothschild at Cassel might be
inferred, will not bear serious examination, for it was not Marshal
Augereau, but Mortier, who occupied Cassel, and the domiciliary search
of the Rothschild house, as well as the cross-examination of the mem-
bers of the family, occurred much later, at Frankfort, and not, in 1806,
at Cassel. In publishing these “Memoirs,” which appeared more than
eighty years later, the writer was obviously influenced by the old and
widely current legend regarding the rescue of the electoral property
by the Rothschild family, the modest facts regarding which Berg-
hoeffer was the first to bring to light. (15) Correspondance de Na-
poleon I, XIII, p. 588. (16) From Buderus in Schleswig to Lorentz
in London, Nov. 17, 1806. Carlshausen Archives. (17) From Meyer
Amschel Rothschild to William of Hesse, Dec. 15, 1806. Berghoeffer,
p. 70. (18) Buderus to the elector, Hanau, Mar. 8, 1807. Carls-
hausen Archives. (19) Buderus to the elector, Hanau, Mar. 10, 1807.
Carlshausen Archives. (20) Berghoeffer, p.64. (21) Elector William
of Hesse to King Frederick William III of Prussia, Rendsburg, Mar.
8, 1807. Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin. (22) Elector William
of Hesse to Emperor Francis, Rendsburg, Mar. 23, 1807. State
Archives, Vienna. (23) Prince Wittgenstein to Frederick William
III of Prussia, Altona, Mar. 31, 1807, Prussian Secret. State Archives,
Berlin. (24) For further details see Berghoeffer, p. 79. (25) Berg-


Notes 4II


hoeffer, p. 78. (26) Berghoeffer, p. 132. (27) Emperor Francis
to the Elector of Hesse, Vienna, Jan. 22, 1808, State Archives, Vienna.
(28) Berghoeffer, p. 109. (29) An anonymous correspondent to Em-
peror Francis, June, 1808, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (30) Em-
peror Francis to Count Zichy, Mar.-July, 1808, Treasury Archives,
Vienna. (31) Secret Police Report from Prague, Sept. 9, 1808, Treas-
-ury Archives, Vienna. (32) Autograph letter from Emperor Francis
to Count O’Donnell, dated Sept. 13, 1808, Treasury Archives, Vienna.
(33) Most humble ministerial address from Count O’Donnell, Sept.
14, 1808, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (34) Emperor Francis to Count
O’Donnell, Oct. 6, 1808, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (35) Stein to
Wittgenstein, Kénigsberg, Aug. 15, 1808. Published in the Monitor
of Sept. 8, 1808. (36) Memorandum from Wittgenstein to Metter-
nich, Hamburg, Mar. 20, 1809, State Archives, Vienna. (37) Berg-
hoeffer, p. 123. (38) Vienna Police Report, Feb. 25, 1809, Police
Archives, Vienna. (39) Report of the Prague Chief of Police, Mar.
12, 1809, Police Archives, Vienna. (40) Berghoeffer, p. 112 and fol-
lowing pages. (41) Agreement between Buderus and Meyer Amschel
Rothschild, Frankfort, Feb. 17, 1809. Copy in the Carlshausen
Archives. (42) Elector William of Hesse to Emperor Francis, Prague,
Mar. 6, 1809, State Archives, Vienna. (43) Berghoeffer, p. 173.
(44) Les Rothschild, une famille de financiers juifs au XIXiéme
siecle (Paris, 1896) and in Les Rothschilds by a “petit porteur de
fonds russes,’ who has used Démachy’s distorted book and his docu-
ments in a manner showing extreme malice toward the Rothschild
family.—Police Report of the French Imperial Police of Jan. 17,
1812, and Dec. 23, 1813, National Archives, Paris. Les Rothschild, p.
139 and following pages, and p. 158 and following pages. (45) Elec-
tor William of Hesse to Count Stadion, Prague, Nov. 4, 1809, State
Archives, Vienna. (46) See the Police Report from the French Na-~
tional Archives, published in Les Rothschild, as above, p. 1'51. (47)
William of Hesse to Count Metternich, Prague, Feb. 20, 1810, State
Archives, Vienna. (48) Elector William of Hesse to Barbier, Prague,
Aug. 31, 1810, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (49) The Treasury to
the Elector of Hesse, Sept. 25, 1810, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (50)
Baron yon Higel to Count Stadion, Frankfort, Aug. 20, 1810, and
Apr. 15, 1812, State Archives, Vienna. (51) The fifteen articles, from
the Municipal Archives of Frankfort-on-the-Main, are published in
full by Berghoeffer, p. 195 and following pages. (52) Ehrenberg:
see former ref., p. 56. (53) Buderus to the elector, Nov. 12, 1810,
Carlshausen Archives. (54) Buderus to the elector, Carlshausen, Nov.
2, 1810, Carlshausen Archives. (55) Baron von Hiigel to Count
Stadion, Frankfort, Feb. 16, 1812. There is a list attached to this
report in which Meyer Amschel features under No. 41. State Archives,
Vienna. (56) The elector to Buderus, Prague, Dec. 6, 1810, Carls-
hausen Archives. (57) Archives Nationales, Paris. Mainz, Mar. 3,
1812. Published in Les Rothschild, see former ref., p. 121. (58)
Buderus to the elector, Hanau, Apr. 7, 1811, Carlshausen Archives.


412 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


(59) The elector to Buderus, Prague, May 20, 1811. (60) Buderus
to the elector, undated, Carlshausen Archives. (61) The elector to
Buderus, Prague, Aug. 28, r811, Carlshausen Archives. (62) The
elector to Buderus, Prague, Aug. 28, 1811, Carlshausen Archives.
(63) Buderus to the elector, Carlshausen, Sept. 21, 1811, Carlshausen
Archives. (64) Buderus to the elector, Carlshausen, Sept. 21, 1811.
Carlshausen Archives. (65) Buderus to the elector, Carlshausen, Sept.
25, 1811, Carlshausen Archives. (66) Buderus to the elector, Hanau,
Feb, 24, 1812, Carlshausen Archives. (67) The elector to Buderus,
May 24, 1812. Carlshausen Archives. (68) An extract is published in
translation in Les Rothschild, p. 132 and following pages. (69) Les
Rothschild, p. 135. (70) Bacher to Savary, Feb. 17, 1812. Les
Rothschild, p. 144. (71) Les Rothschild, p. 153. (72) Israel Jacob-
sohn, Privy Revenue Councilor. Most respectful plea to his Highness,
the Prince President of the Confederation of the Rhine, concerning his
new settlement and regulation for the protection of the Jews in Frank-
fort-on-the-Main. Brunswick, 1808. (73) Meyer Amschel Roths-
child to a Land Registrar, Frankfort, Jan. 29, 1811. See facsimile in
the Frankfort Municipal Library. (74) Dispatch from Weyland to
Emperor Francis, Vienna, Oct. 27, 1814. Police Archives. (75) A
copy was enclosed in Hiigel’s report to Metternich. Frankfort, Jan.
22, 1815. State Archives, Vienna. (76) Decree of the Grand Duke
Carl Dalberg. Fulda, Oct. 17, 1812. (77) The Will, which is in
the Municipal Archives of Frankfort-on-the-Main, is published in
Berghoeffer, p. 201 and following pages.


CHAPTER Ill


(1) In 1834, on the occasion of a dinner to a friend, Nathan spoke
about his career in England. This is described in the Memoirs of Sir
Thomas Fowell Buxton, Bart., edited by his son Charles Buxton,
Esq. (London, 1848), pp. 333 and foll, It has been often quoted
and reprinted, but we should bear in mind that an account given
by Nathan during a good dinner should not be taken too literally,
and that it also had the object of increasing the prestige of the House
of Rothschild. Critically regarded, the account is worthy of considera-
tion. (2) See Démachy and Les Rothschild, p. 168. (3) Mollien to
Napoleon, Mar. 26, 1811. See Histoire financiére de la France depuis
1715, Marion (Paris, 1914), IV, p. 358. (4) Marion; see above, p.
358. (5) Wellington to R. H. J. Villiers, Ciomba, May 25, 1809.
The Dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington During His
Various Campaigns, from 1799 to 1811, IV, p. 374. (6) Wellington
to Huskisson, Corticada, July 28, 1809. Wellington “Dispatches, IV,
p. 473. (7) Wellington to the Earl of Liverpool, from Sanct Ma-
rinca, Mar. 23, 1811. Wellington Dispatches, VII, p. 392. (8) Well-
ington to Earl Bathurst. Madrid, Aug. 18, 1812. Dispatches, IX, p.
368. (9) In the somewhat boastful dinner conversation in 1834 with


Notes 413


' Sir Thomas Buxton, Nathan estimated the value of this gold at


£800,000. (10) James Rothschild to Nathan Rothschild, Paris, Apr.
6, 1812, Les Rothschild, p. 183. (11) Report of the Chief of Police
in Hamburg of Jan. 24, 1812, Les Rothschild, p. 106. (12) Marshal
Davoust, Duke of Auerstadt, to Emperor Napoleon, Hamburg, Feb. 13,
1812, Les Rothschild, p. 108 and following pages. (13) From Hubert,
the Commissioner of Police in Mainz, to Desmarets in Paris, Mainz,
Mar. 3, 1812. Les Rothschild, p. 117. (14) Count von Real, dis-
patch to Paris, Feb. 6, 1812, Les Rothschild, p. 77 and following pages.
(15) James Rothschild to Nathan, Mar. 28, 1812, Les Rothschild, p.
181 and following pages. (16) Marion, see former ref., IV, p. 359.
(17) The elector to Emperor Francis, July 14, 1813, State Archives,
Vienna. (18) Die Judenfrage auf dem Wiener Kongress, Baron
(Vienna and Berlin, 1920), p. 32. (19) Herries, Memoirs, p. 86.
(20) Buxton, see former ref., p. 343. (21) Metternich, der Staats-
mann und der Mensch, Srbik, I, p. 130. (22) As in 1808, when
Metternich was ambassador in Paris, 80,000 francs, and in September,
1813, 43,000 gulden for his personal expenses. “These advances were
made out of state money, and the emperor’s action was to be kept
strictly secret. Autograph letters from Emperor F rancis, Dec., 1808,
and Sept., 1813. Instructions from Count Stadion, Treasury Archives,
Vienna. (23) Humboldt to Goethe, Jan. 10, 1797. Goethes Brief-
wechsel mit den Gebriidern von Humboldt, Bratranek, p. 24 and fol-
lowing pages. (24) Count Ugarte to Count von Metternich, Memo-
randum dated Sept. 15, 1813, State Archives, Vienna. (25) Baron
von Wessenberg to Count von Metternich, London, Oct. 30, 1813,
Court Archives, Vienna. (26) Emperor Francis to Count Ugarte,
Dec. 12, 1813, Court Archives, Vienna. (27) Count Ugarte to the
emperor, Dec. 24, 1813, Count Archives, Vienna. (28) Imperial
Order from Freiburg, dated Jan. 11, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna.
(29) The elector to Emperor Francis, Cassel, Apr. 14, 1814, State
Archives, Vienna. (30) Barbier to Count Ugarte, Frankfort, July 28,
1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (31) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and
Sons to Barbier, Frankfort, July 28, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna.
(32) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons to Barbier, Frankfort, Aug.
1, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (33) Barbier to Count Ugarte, July
28, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (34) Barbier to Count Ugarte,
Frankfort, Aug. 6, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (35) Meyer
Amschel Rothschild and Sons to Barbier, Frankfort, Aug. 8, 1814,
Court Archives, Vienna. (36) Barbier to Ugarte, Frankfort, Aug.
18, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (37) Count Ugarte to Barbier,
Vienna, Aug. 11, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (38) Meyer Amschel
Rothschild and Sons to Barbier (written by Amschel), Aug. 22, 1814,
Court Archives, Vienna. (39) Barbier to Count Ugarte, Aug. 29,
1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (40) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and


Sons to Barbier, Frankfort, Aug. 8, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna.


(41) Barbier to Ugarte, Aug. 9, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (42)
Barbier to Ugarte, July 13, 1814, Court Archives, Vienna. (43) Meyer


A14 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Amschel Rothschild and Sons to Barbier, July 29, 1814, from Frank-
fort, Court Archives, Vienna. (44) Count Ugarte to Barbier, Aug.
17, 1814, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (45) Baron von Hiugel in
Frankfort to Metternich, Jan. 11, 1815, State Archives, Vienna. (46)
Ehrenberg; see former ref., p. 65. (47) Histoire des grandes opéra-
tions financieres, M. Capefigue (Paris, 1858), III, pp. 5 and 49. (48)
Herries; see former ref., p. 92 and following pp. (49) Buderus to
Lorentz, Cassel, May 13, 1814, Carlshausen Archives. (50) Baron
von Hiigel to Baron von Stein, Frankfort, Aug. 31, 1814, State
Archives, Vienna. (51) Metternich to the attorney, Dr. Buchholz,
Vienna, June 9, 1815, State Archives, Vienna. (52) For particulars
see Ehrenberg, pp. 68-69. (53) Selbstbiographie und Bildnisse, Grill-
parzer (Vienna, 1923), p. 143. (54) Ibid., p. 118. (55) Ibid.,
p. 132. (56) Stadion to Prince Metternich, Vienna, Apr. 22, 1815,
State Archives, Vienna. (57) Privy Council office to Count Stadion,
May 4, 1815, State Archives, Vienna. (58) See Chapter II. (59)
From Neumann, Counselor of Legation in London, to Baron von
Hiigel at Frankfort, London, May 22, 1815. State.Archives, Vienna.
(60) See National Biography, Vol. XLIX, p. 307. (61) Neumann to
Schwinner, London, May 5, 181'5, State Archives, Vienna. (62)
Schwinner to Neumann, Frankfort, Nov. 13, 1815, State Archives,
Vienna. (63) Limburger to Schwinner, Frankfort, Sept. 2, 1815,
State Archives, Vienna. (64) Solomon and Carl Rothschild to Har-
denberg, from Paris (undated ; from its position in the files, was probably
written in the summer of 1815), Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin.
(65) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons to Hardenberg and Metter-
nich, Paris, Aug. 29, 1815, Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin. (66)
Hardenberg to Metternich, Paris, Oct. 12, 1815. Above source. (67) ©
Buol to Metternich, Frankfort, Dec. 5, 1815, State Archives, Vienna.
(68) Barbier to Count Stadion, Paris, Nov. 10, 1815, Treasury Ar-
chives, Vienna. (69) Barbier to Count Stadion, Paris, Jan. 10, 1816,
Treasury Archives, Vienna. (70) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Gon-
tard to Barbier, Paris, Jan. 6, 1816, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (71)
Baron Frimont to the vice-president of the treasury Count von Herber-
stein, Colmar, Apr. 29, 1816, State Archives, Vienna. (72) Thus three
million francs on Jan. 31, 1816. Barbier to Stadion, Jan. 1, 1816, Treas-
ury Archives, Vienna. (73) Herries, see former ref., p. 108. (74) Mr.
Herries’s memorandum to Lord Liverpool and Vansittart, July 12,
1816. Herries, former ref., p. 247. (75) Mr. Herries’s memorandum
to Lord Liverpool and Vansittart, July 12, 1816. Herries, former
ref., pp. 86-87. (76) Count Stadion to Barbier, Mar. 2, 1816, Treas-
ury Archives, Vienna. (77) Report of the finance minister Count
Stadion of July 18, 1816, State Archives, Vienna. (78) Report of
the finance minister, Count Stadion of July 30, 1816, State Archives,
Vienna. (79) Advice of Baron von Lederer, Aug. 6, 1816, State
Archives, Vienna. (80) Note by Count Zichy (known as “Zuputz”
among his colleagues) on Baron von Lederer’s advice, State Archives,
Vienna. (81) Emperor Francis to Metternich, undated, State Archives,


Notes 415.


Vienna. (82) Emperor Francis to Ugarte, Vienna, Sept. 25, 1816,
Old Gratz Registry, Vienna. (83) Emperor Francis to Ugarte, Vienna,
Oct. 21, 1816, Old Gratz Registry, Vienna. (84) Count Stadion to
Count Ugarte, Vienna, Sept. 30, 1816, Old Gratz Registry, Vienna.
(85) Design for the Rothschild coat-of-arms, Old Gratz Registry,
Vienna. (86) Escutcheon Inspector von Holza. Most Obedient Re-
port, Vienna, Jan. 28, 1817, Old Gratz Registry, Vienna. (87) James
Rothschild to Barbier, July 2, 1817, from Paris, Treasury Archives,
Vienna. (88) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons and J. Friedrich
Gontard and Sons to Barbier, from Paris, July 8, 1817, Treasury
Archives, Vienna. It is not my intention, and it is in any case im-
possible to give a full account of the money transactions of the House
of Rothschild; I have given as examples those which helped it to attain
its unique position. (89) Barbier to Stadion, July 9, 1817, Treasury
Archives, Vienna. (90) Stadion to Barbier, Vienna, Aug. 3, 1817,
Treasury Archives, Vienna. (91) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and
Sons and J. F. Gontard and Sons to Barbier, Paris, July 8, 1817, Treas-
uty Archives, Vienna. (92) Ehrenberg, see former ref., p. 81. (93)
Jordan to Buol, Berlin, Nov. 8, 1816, Prussian Secret State Archives.
(94) Amschel Rothschild to Metternich, Frankfort, November, 1817,
State Archives, Vienna. (95) Amschel Rothschild to Stadion, Frank-
fort, November, 1817, State Archives, Vienna. (96) Carl Rothschild
to Count Zichy, Berlin, Nov. 5, 1817, State Archives, Vienna. (97)
Count Zichy to Metternich, Berlin, Nov. 23, 1817, State Archives,
Vienna.


CHAPTER IV


(1) Les hommes de mon temps, Ignotus (Paris, 1889), p. 289. (2)
Amschel Meyer to Hardenberg, Frankfort, Jan. 16, 1818, Prussian
Secret State Archives, Berlin. (3) King Frederick William III of
Prussia to Prince Hardenberg, Berlin, Nov. 25, 1817, Prussian Secret
State Archives, Berlin. (4) Hardenberg’s notes on the above. (5)
Simon Moritz von Bethmann und seine Vorfahren (¥Frankfort-on-the-
Main, 1898), p. 227. (6) Rother to King Frederick William III,
Berlin, Mar. 9, 1830, Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin. (7)
Prince Hardenberg to Rother, Feb. 10, 1818, Prussian Secret State
Archives, Berlin. (8) This report of Humboldt has often been printed,
as in Ehrenberg, p. 86, and Balla, Die Rothschilds, p. 96. The Prus-
sian loan of 1818 in England is dealt with only shortly here, as Ehren-
berg’s work, referred to above, deals with the matter exhaustively
and admirably. (9) Rother to King Frederick William III, Berlin,
Mar. 9, 1830, Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin. (10) Ehren-
berg, see former ref., p. 9. (11) Wilhelm und Caroline von Hum-
_ boldt in ihren Briefen, 1815-1817, Vol. VI, p. 320. (12) Meyer
Amschel Rothschild and Sons to the Elector of Hesse, Frankfort, July
10, 1818, Carlshausen Archives. (13) The Elector of Hesse to Bu-
derus, Cassel, July 26, 1808, Carlshausen Archives. (14) Buderus |


416 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


to the elector, Hanau, Aug. 4, 1818, Carlshausen Archives. (15) The q
elector to Buderus, Cassel, Aug. 12, 1818, Carlshausen Archives. (16) —
Buderus to the elector, Hanau, Aug. 15, 1818. Carlshausen Archives.
(17) Concluding letter, dated Oct. 15, 1818, Carlshausen Archives.
(18) The Elector of Hesse to Buderus, Feb. 6, 18109. Carlshausen
Archives. (19) The Elector of Hesse to Carlshausen, Feb. 9, 1819,
same source. (20) Meyer Amschel von Rothschild and Sons to Carls-
hausen, Frankfort, Mar. 10, 1819, Carlshausen Archives. (21) Tage-
biicher von Friedrich Gentz (Leipzig, 1874), Vol. I, pp. 365 and 430;
Vol. II, pp. 27, 37, 39 and following. (22) Gentz, see above, Vol.
II, p. 280. (23) Die Judenfrage auf dem Wiener Kongress, Baron
(Vienna, 1920), pp. 191 and 192. (24) Meyer Amschel von Roths-
child and Sons to Hardenberg, Frankfort, Sept. 11, 1818, Prussian
Secret State Archives, Berlin. (25) Geschichte der Freien Stadt
Frankfurt a. M., Schwemer (Frankfort, 1910), Vol. II, p. 138. (26)
Gentz, see former ref., Vol. II, p. 277. (27) Gentz, Vol. II, p. 280. °

(28) Briefwechsel zwischen Friedrich Gentz und Adam Heinrich —
Miller, 1800-1829, Gentz (Stuttgart, 1857), p. 267. (29) Brief-
wechsel Gentz an Miiller, as above, p. 267, Munich, Dec. 12, 1818.
(30) Baron von Handel to Prince Metternich, Darmstadt, Dec. 12,
1818, State Archives, Vienna. (31) Will of Carl Frederick Buderus
von Carlshausen, Hanau, Aug. 2, 1818, Carlshausen Archives. (32)
Police report from Frankfort, dated June 19, 1819, Police Archives,
Vienna. (33) A reference to the raising of the family to the nobility.
(34) Deutsche Geschichte im 19. Jahrhundert, Heinrich von Treitschke
(Leigzig, 1897), Vol. III, p. 756. (35) A derisive cry dating from
the medieval hatred of the Jews. The term appears to have been de-
rived from the sound which a goat makes, having reference to the
traditional appearance of the Jews, with their goatee beards. (36) Le
Monnier, secretary of the legation, to the president of the police Count
Sedlnitzky, Frankfort, Aug. 6, 1819, Police Archives, Vienna. (37)
Himly to the Frankfort Senate, Aug. 11, 1819, Prussian Secret State
Archives, Berlin. (38) Burgomasters Metzler and Usemer to Himly,
Aug. 11, 1819, Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin. (39) Extract
from a letter from James Meyer von Rothschild to David Parish, in
Carlsbad, Paris, Aug. 18, 1819, State Archives, Vienna. (40) Baron
von Handel to Metternich, Frankfort, Sept. 3, 1819, State Archives,
Vienna. (41) The Treasury to the Commercial Department, Sept.
16, 1819, State Archives, Vienna. (42) Ritter von Stahl to Count
Stadion, Vienna, Sept. 27, 1819, State Archives, Vienna. (43) Count
Stadion to Count Saurau, Vienna, Sept. 26, 1819, State Archives,
Vienna. (44) Count Saurau to Ritter von Stahl, Vienna, Sept. 29,
1819, State Archives, Vienna. (45) Police Report of Le Monnier,
from Frankfort, Oct. 8, 1819, Police Archives, Vienna. (46) Barbier
to Count Saurau, Paris, Oct. 8, 1819, Treasury Archives, Vienna.
(47) Barbier to Stadion, Paris, Sept. 23, 1819, Treasury Archives,
Vienna. (48) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons to Count Stadion,
Dec. 20, 1819, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (49) See “Kaiser Franz


Notes A417.


und Metternich;’ ein nachgelassenes Fragment, Hormayr (Leipzig,
1848). (50) Tagebiicher des Karl Friedrich Freiherrn Kiibeck von
Kiibau (Vienna, 1909), Vol. I, Part 2, p. 319. (51) Simon Moritz
von Bethmann, see former ref. (52) Handel to Metternich, Feb. 19,
1820, State Archives, Vienna. (53) Handel to Metternich, Frank-
fort, Nov. 28, 1819, State Archives, Vienna. (54) Le Monnier to
the director of the Secret Service Dept., Vienna, Frankfort, Feb. 22,
1821, State Archives, Vienna. (55) Schwemer, see former ref., II,
p. 33. (56) Stahl to Metternich, Vienna, Apr. 4, 1820, Archives
of the Ministry of the Interior. (57) Metternich to Esterhazy, May
31, 1820, State Archives, Vienna. (58) The chancellor to Stahl,
Vienna, May 27, 1820, State Archives, Vienna. (59) See Handel to
Metternich, in the files of the period between the 6th and the 11th
Nov., 1819, State Archives, Vienna. (60) Police Report dated May
1, 1820. Police Archives, Vienna. (61) See story by Siegfried
Loewy, “Hotel Rothschild,” in the Neues Wiener Journal of Apr. 29,
1927. (62) Metternich to Barbier, Vienna, Oct. 6, 1820, Treasury
Archives, Vienna. (63) Private letter from Barbier to Buol, Paris,
July 11, 1820, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (64) Memorandum on
the discussion between ‘I'sar Alexander and Metternich of Jan. 13,
1821, State Archives, Vienna. (65) Private letter from Count Stadion
to Metternich, Jan. 29, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (66) Solomon
Rothschild to Count Nesselrode, Vienna, Jan. 29, 1821, State Archives,
Vienna. (67) Stadion to Metternich, Feb. 18, 1821, State Archives,
Vienna. (68) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich, Vienna, Feb. 3,
1821, State Archives, Vienna. (69) Stadion to Metternich, Feb. 18,
1821, State Archives, Vienna. (70) Stadion to Metternich, Vienna,
_ Feb. 15, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (71) Stadion to Metternich,
Feb. 20, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (72) Stadion to Metternich,
Vienna, Mar. 2, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (73) Stadion to
Metternich, Vienna, Mar. 6, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (74)
Count SedInitzky to Metternich, Vienna, Mar. 3, 1821, State Archives,
Vienna. (75) Count Stadion to Metternich, Vienna, Mar. 8, 1821,
State Archives, Vienna. (76) Stadion to Metternich, a few days after
Mar. 8, 1821, no nearer date being given, State Archives, Vienna.
(77) Metternich to Field Marshal Count Bubna, Laibach, Mar. 10,
1821, State Archives, Vienna. (78) Carl Rothschild to Metternich,
Laibach, Mar. 13, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (79) Count Ficquel-
mont to Metternich, Rome, Mar. 13, 1821, State Archives, Vienna.
(80) Tagebiicher von Friedrich von Gentz, see former ref., Vol. II,
p. 297. (81) Stadion to Metternich, Vienna, Mar. 22, 1821, State
Archives, Vienna. (82) Stadion to Metternich, second letter of Mar.
22, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (83) Metternich to Baron Vincent,
Austrian Ambassador in Florence, Mar. 19, 1821, State Archives,
Vienna. (84) Metternich to Baron Vincent, Laibach, Jan. 1, 1821,
State Archives, Vienna. (85) Metternich to Baron Vincent, Laibach,
Mar. 22, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (86) Vincent to Metternich,
Florence, Apr. 2, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (87) Vincent to


A18 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Metternich, Florence, Apr. 5, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (88)
Vincent to Metternich, Florence, Apr. 5 and 8, 1821, State Archives,
Vienna. (89) Vincent to Metternich, Florence, Apr. 8, 1821, State
Archives, Vienna. (90) Carl Rothschild’s offer of a loan to the Nea-
politan Government, Apr. 19, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (91)
Count Ficquelmont to Metternich, Naples, Apr. 19, 1821, State
Archives, Vienna. (92) Count Ficquelmont to Metternich, Naples,
Apr. 19, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (93) Carl Rothschild to
Metternich, Naples, Apr. 28, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (94)
Losch, see former ref., p. 368. (95) President of the Commercial De-
partment Ritter von Stahl to Emperor Francis, Vienna, Mar. 4, 1821,
State Archives, Vienna. (96) Count Stadion to Emperor Francis,
Mar. 6, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (97) Baron von Lederer’s
note on Stadion’s report, Apr. 14, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (98)
Count Stadion to Emperor Francis, Vienna, Apr. 11, 1821, State
Archives, Vienna. (99) Histoire des grandes opérations financieres,
M. Capefigue (Paris, 1858), Vol. III, p. 103. (100) Ritter von
Stahl to Count Stadion, Vienna, Apr. 23, 1821, State Archives, Vienna.
(101) Metternich to Ritter von Stahl, Vienna, July 10, 1821. (102)
Metternich to Ficquelmont, July 4, 1821, State Archives, Vienna.
(103) Project for Naples Convention, Aug. 4, 1821, State Archives, ~
Vienna. (104) Metternich to Count Ficquelmont, Vienna, July 21,

1821, State Archives, Vienna. (105) Carl Meyer Rothschild to Fic-
quelmont, Naples, Sept. 10, 1821, State Archives, Vienna. (106)

Marquis d’Andrea, Finance Minister, to Ficquelmont, Naples, Sept.

5, 1821. (107) Marquis d’Andrea to Carl Rothschild, Naples, Oct.

27, 1821, copy in the State Archives, Vienna. (108) Carl Rothschild
to Ficquelmont, Naples, Nov. 17, 1821’, State Archives, Vienna. (109)

Marquis d’Andrea to Carl Rothschild, Naples, Jan. 31, 1822, State
Archives, Vienna. (110) Schwemer, see former ref., Vol. II, p. 138
and following pp. (111) Schwemer, Aug. 30, 1820, see former ref.,

II, p. 149. (112) Deed of Surety with respect to Barbaia’s obliga-
tions, Archives of the Ministry of the Interior, Vienna. (113) Amschel
Meyer Rothschild to Metternich, Frankfort, Nov. 3, 1821, State
Archives, Vienna. (114) From the publishing firm of J. G. Cotta,

of Stuttgart, which kindly put its archives at the author’s disposal. (115)

Die Allgemeine Zeitung, 1798-1898, Heyck (Munich, 1898), p. 252
and following pp. (116) See Gentz’s Diary for June 7, 1821. Gentz,
former ref., Vol. II, p. 431. (117) The same, Vol. II, p. 432. (118)

The same, Vol. II, p. 438. (119) The,same, Vol. II, p. 439. (120)

For several years Gentz had written political letters to the Princes of
Moldavia and Wallachia, for pay. (121) Gentz’s Diary for Dec. 22,

1821. See former ref., Vol. II, p. 484. (122) Abstract of the Cash
Payments of the Neapolitan State Treasury for the Royal. Imperial

Treasury, Appendix to Report of Ficquelmont to Metternich, Naples,

Dec. 5, 1824, Vienna, State Archives. (123) Count Mentz to Metter-
nich, Naples, Feb. 16, 1824, State Archives, Vienna. (124) Count
Ficquelmont to Metternich, Naples, Dec. 5, 1824, State Archives,


Notes 419


Vienna. (125) Stadion’s memorandum to the emperor and Metter-
nich, January, 1822, State Archives, Vienna. (126) Bethmann, see
former ref., p. 228. (127) Memorandum by Pillersdorff, Vienna, Apr.
12, 1822, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (128) Meyer Amschel Roths-
child and Sons to Pillersdorff, Vienna, Apr. 12, 1822, Treasury Archives,
Vienna. (129) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons and Parish to
Pillersdorff, Vienna, Apr. 12, 1822, Treasury Archives, Vienna. (130)
Gentz’s Diaries, see former ref., Vol. III, p. 34.


CHAPTER V


(1) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich, Verona, Oct. 22, 1822, State
Archives, Vienna. (2) Gentz’s Diaries, see former ref., Vol. III, p.
97. (3) Briefe von Friedrich von Gentz an Pilat (Leipzig, 1868),
Vol. II, p. 105. (4) An anonymous correspondent to Montmorency,
Paris, Nov. 12, 1822, State Archives, Vienna. (5) Mémoires et Cor-
respondances du Comte de Villéle (Paris, 1888), Villéle to Montmo-
rency, Feb. 18, 1822, Vol. III; p. 219. (6) Meyer Amschel Roths-
child and Sons to the Chancellor’s Office at Vienna, Vienna, Jan. 22,
1823, State Archives, Vienna. (7) Nathan Rothschild to the Com-
mercial Commission, London, Sept. 3, 1822, State Archives, Vienna.
(8) Bertran de Lis to the brothers Rothschild in Paris, Madrid, Feb.
20, 1823, copy in the State Archives, Vienna. Underneath is written
in a different handwriting the words: “We beg that these lines may be
kept secret, as we should not like them to be seen in the papers.” (9)
Bertran de Lis to the brothers Rothschild, via H. Belin in Bayonne,
copy from the State Archives, Vienna. (10) Gentz’s Diaries, see
former ref., Vol. III, p. 155. (11) Villéle to the Duke of Angouléme,
Paris, May 11, 1823. See Mémoires et correspondances, Villéle, Vol.
III, p. 366 and following pp. (12) Villéle, see above, Vol. IV, p. 90.
(13) Villéle, see above, Vol. IV, p. 51. Letter dated June 26, 1823.
(14) Villele, see former ref., Vol. III, p. 335. Letter dated May 30,
1823. (15) Villéle, see former ref., Vol. IV, p. 212. Letter from
Villele to Angouléme, July 10, 1823. (16) Villéle, see former ref.,
Vol. IV, p. 228. Letter from Villéle to Angouléme, July 11, 1823.
(17) Villéle; see former ref., Vol. IV, p. 244, Villéle to Angouléme,
July 19, 1823. (18) Villéle, see former ref., Vol. IV, p. 276, Villéle
to Angouleme, July 31, 1823. (19) Francis Baring, John Irving, and
James Rothschild to Villéle, one letter undated, and another dated
Dec. 28, 1823. (20) Villéle to Baring, Irving, and Rothschild, Paris,
Dec. 25, 1823, copy in the State Archives, Vienna. (21) Gentz’s
Diaries, see former ref., Vol. III, p. 39. (22) Miinch-Bellinghausen
to Metternich, Frankfort, Mar. 15, 1823, State Archives, Vienna. (23)
Schwemer, see former ref., Vol. II, p. 157. (24) Schwemer, see for-
_ mer ref., Vol. II, p. 161. (25) Protocol dated Apr. 1'3, 1822, State
Archives, Vienna. (26) Rescript of Emperor Francis, dated May 22,
1822, State Archives, Vienna. (27) Report from Stadion, dated Apr.


420 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


29, 1823, State Archives, Vienna. (28) Osterreichische Staatsver-
trage, Alfred Francis Pribram (Vienna, 1913), p. 454 and following
pp. (29) The same, p. 558. (30) Solomon to Nathan, undated,
1823, State Archives, Vienna. (31) Baring, Rothschild and Irving
to Stadion, Oct. 15, 1823, State Archives, Vienna. (32) Solomon
Rothschild to Metternich, Vienna, Oct. 31, 1823, State Archives,
Vienna. (33) Count Zichy’s Memorandum, Jan. 28, 1824, State
Archives, Vienna. (34) Written in the Emperor Francis’s hand, dated
Feb. 18, 1824, State Archives, Vienna. (35) Pribram, see former ref.,
p. 573. From Neumann’s report from London, dated Apr. 9, 1824.
(36) Anton Schnapper to Emperor Francis, July 7, 1823, State
Archives, Vienna. (37) Anton Schnapper to Solomon Rothschild,
Vienna, Nov. 9, 1823, State Archives, Vienna. (38) Solomon Roths-
child to Metternich, Vienna, Nov. 1'1, 1823, State Archives, Vienna.
(39) Report of the finance minister, Count Stadion, dated Feb. 20,
1824, State Archives, Vienna. (40) Villéle to James Rothschild in
Paris, undated copy in the Vienna State Archives for 1824. (41)
Nathan to James, London, Mar. 6, 1824, copy in State Archives,
Vienna. (42) Vincent to Metternich, Paris, Mar. 25, 1824. In-
formation supplied by Count Senft. State Archives, Vienna. (43)
Ouvrard, Mémoires de, sur sa vie et ses diverses opérations financieres
(Paris, 1826), Vol. III, p. 289. See Ehrenberg, former ref., pp. 110
and 111. (44) Briefe von und an Friedrich von Gentz (Berlin, 1909),
Vol. II, Part II, p. 206. (45) Ficquelmont to Prince Metternich,
Naples, Apr. 21, 1824, State Archives, Vienna. (46) Ficquelmont to
Metternich, Naples, Aug. 17, 1824, State Archives, Vienna. (47)
Ficquelmont to Metternich, Naples, July 19, 1824, State Archives,
Vienna. (48) Postmaster Berger, from Milan, Mar. 24, 1825, Po-
lice Archives, Vienna. (49) Instructions to the Chief of Police in
Milan, dated July 13, 1825, Police Archives, Vienna. (50) Kaiser
Franz und Metternich, Hormayr (Leipzig, 1848), p. 80. (50a) A
reference to the money for building fortresses which had been entrusted
to Rothschild. See Chapter IV. (51) The Migration of British
Capital to 1875, Leland Hamilton Jenks (New York-London, 1927).
(52) Nathan Rothschild to Prince Metternich, London, Apr. 16, 1825,
State Archives, Vienna. (53) Aus Metternichs mnachgelassenen
Papieren, Richard, Prince Metternich (Vienna, 1880), Vol. IV, p.
174. Private letter from Metternich to Gentz, dated June 30, 1825.
(54) Vincent to Metternich, Paris, May 5, 1825, State Archives,
Vienna. (55) Vincent to Metternich, Paris, June 8, 1825, State
Archives, Vienna. (56) Vincent to Metternich, Paris, June 9, 1825.
Lettre particuliére. State Archives, Vienna. (57) Metternich, see
former ref., Vol. IV, p. 174. Private letter from Metternich to Gentz,
June 30, 1825. (58) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich, Paris, June
18, 1825, State Archives, Vienna. (59) Metternich, see former ref.,
p. 474. (60) Vincent to Metternich, Paris, Aug. 14, 1825, State
Archives, Vienna. (61) Communication from Schirding, Commis-
sioner of Frontier Police, Linz, July 5, 1825, Police Archives, Vienna.


Notes 421


(62) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich, Paris, June 18, 1825, State
Archives, Vienna. (63) Marmont to Metternich, May 20, 1825.
Same source. (64) Metternich to Rothschild, Milan, June 28, 1825.
(65) Marmont to Metternich, Paris, Nov. 6, 1825, State Archives,
Vienna. (66) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich, Vienna, Apr. 30,
1827, State Archives, Vienna. (67) Vincent to Metternich, Paris,
Aug. 26, 1825, State Archives, Vienna. (68) Vincent to Metternich,
Paris, Sept. 14, 1825, State Archives, Vienna. (69) Carl Rothschild
to Louis Philippe of Bombelles, Paris, Sept. 12, 1825, State Archives,
Vienna. (70) Count Villeneuve to Metternich, through the medium
of James Rothschild, Paris, Oct. 20, 1825, State Archives, Vienna.
(71) Jablonovski’s Statement, Mar., 1827, Treasury Archives,
Vienna. (72) Barbier to Stadion, Paris, June 16, 1819, Treasury
Archives, Vienna. (73) Meyer Amschel Rothschild and Sons and
J. F. Gontard and Sons to Baron Barbier, Paris, June 16, 1819, Treas-
ury Archives, Vienna. (74) Jablonovski’s report of June 20, 1819,
Treasury Archives, Vienna. (75) Vienna, Sept. 30, 1827, Treasury
Archives, Vienna. (76) A total of 300,485 florins. (77) Amschel
(Anselm) Meyer von Rothschild to Metternich, F rankfort, Mar. 20,
1826, State Archives, Vienna. (78) Ehrenberg, see former ref., p.
117. (79) Gentz’s Diaries, see former ref., Vol. III, pp. 231 and 247.
(80) Allgemeine deutsche Realenzyklopadie fiir die gebildeten Stande,
F. A. Brockhaus (Leipzig, 1826), Vol. IX, article on Rothschild. (81)
Letters between Gentz and Miiller, see former ref., p. 406. (82)
Gentz’s Diaries, see former ref., Vol. IV, p. 61. (83) Gentz’s Diaries,
see former ref., Vol. IV, p. 164. (84) “Biographische Nachrichten iiber
das Haus Rothschild,” printed in Schlesier’s Ungedruckte Denkschrif-
ten, Tagebiicher und Briefe von Gentz (Mannheim, 1840).


CHAPTER VI


(1) Ficquelmont to Metternich, Nov. 21, 1822, State Archives,
Vienna, (2) Ficquelmont to Metternich, Aug. 17, 1824, State
Archives, Vienna. (3) Ficquelmont to the general-commander Count
Frimont, Naples, Sept. 27, 1824, State Archives, Vienna. -(4) Count
Apponyi to Metternich, Naples, Feb. 22, 1825, State Archives, Vienna.
(5) Baron von Koller to Nadasdy, Naples, Sept. 20, 1825, State Ar-
chives, Vienna. (6) Koller to Nadasdy, Naples, Dec. 10, 1825, State
Archives, Vienna. (7) De’ Medici to Carl Rothschild, Naples, May
30, 1826, State Archives, Vienna. (8) See the author’s biography of
Leopold I af Belgium (Vienna, London, and Brussels). (9) Carl
Rothschild to Count Louis Philippe of Bombelles, Naples, Jan. 20, 1827,
State Archives, Vienna. (10) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich,
Vienna, Jan. 21, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (11) Metternich’s
note on a report of Ficquelmont’s dated Feb. 20, 1827, State Archives,
Vienna. (12) Memorandum by the Neapolitan Embassy in Vienna,
Aug. 1'1, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (13) The dates of the births


422 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


of the Montenuovo children have been obtained from a letter of Em-
press Marie Louise to Metternich, dated Mar. 17, 1829 (State Ar-
chives, Vienna) in which, to use her own expression, she “confesses”
these dates to the prince. Hitherto she had pretended, even to her
own father, Emperor Francis, that the Montenuovo children had not
been born until after Napoleon’s death, and after her marriage with
Neipperg. In Gotha (1914), however, William Montenuovo’s birth-
day is wrongly given as August 9, 1821. (14) Neipperg to Metter-
nich, Parma, Dec. 16, 1825, State Archives, Vienna. (15) See state-
ment in the imperial family papers, State Archives, Vienna. (16)
Count Neipperg to Metternich, Parma, Dec. 16, 1825. (17) Memo-
randum from Neipperg dated Dec. 16, 1825, State Archives, Vienna.
(18) Metternich to Neipperg, Jan. 14, 1826, State Archives, Vienna.
(19) Memorandum from Neipperg, dated June 26, 1826, State Ar-
chives, Vienna. (20) Metternich to Solomon Rothschild, Johannisberg,
Aug. 28, 1826, State Archives, Vienna. (21) Solomon: Rothschild to
Metternich, Paris, Nov. 1, 1826, State Archives, Vienna. (22) Enclo-
sure in fetter from Salomon to Metternich, dated Sept. 1, 1826, State
Archives, Vienna. (23) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich, Vienna,
Nov. 27, 1826, State Archives, Vienna. (24) Marie Louise¢tov Eni-
peror Francis, Parma, Jan. 13, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (25)
Remarks on the projected loan to her Highness the Duchess of Parma,
signed by Solomon Rothschild, Vienna, Jan. 31, 1827, State Archives,
Vienna. (26) Agreement dated Feb. 4, 1827, signed by Metternich,
Werklein, Solomon Rothschild, and Mirabaud and Co. (27) Metter-
nich to Neipperg, Vienna, Feb. 4, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (28)
Metternich to Marie Louise, Feb. 4, 1827, State Archives, Vienna.
(29) A capital sum, therefore, of six million francs. (30) Marie
Louise to Emperor Francis, June 7, 1827, State Archives, Vienna.
(31) Solomon Rothschild to Metternich, Vienna, Mar. 2, 1827, State
Archives, Vienna. (32) Metternich to Count Neipperg, Vienna, Mar.
6, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (33) Werklein in Lucca, to Count
Neipperg, May 13, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (34) Metternich
to Marie Louise, Vienna, June 3, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (35)
Metternich to Neipperg, Vienna, Apr. 18, 1827, State Archives,
Vienna. (36) Wertheimstein. (37) This word is difficult to decipher
in the original. Author’s note. (38) Metternich subsequently denied
the permanent validity of his decision. (39) Solomon Rothschild to
Werklein, undated, State Archives, Vienna. (40) Metternich to Neip-
perg, Vienna, June 3, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (41) Decree,
beginning “Noi Maria Luigia;’ etc., Parma, June 18, 1826, original
in the State Archives, Vienna. (42) Marie Louise to Emperor Francis,
June 17, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (43) Metternich to Marie
Louise, Vienna, May 3, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (44) Marie
Louise to Metternich, June 17, 1827, State Archives, Vienna. (45)
Neipperg to Metternich, Parma, June 17, 1827, State Archives; Vienna.
(46) Memorandum by Solomon Rothschild, Vienna, June 30, 1827,
State Archives, Vienna. (47) Marie Louise’s dowry dispositions,


Notes 423


Casino dei Boschi, July 9, 1827. (48) Solomon Rothschild to Werk-
lein, Vienna, Feb. 2, 1828, State Archives, Vienna. (49) Deed of
gift, dated Jan. 1, 1829, State Archives, Vienna. (50) Goethe to
Chancellor von Miiller, Sept. 23, 1823. (51) Goethe to Eckermann,
Oct. 20, 1828. (52) Eckermann, Apr. 11, 1829. (53) Eckermann,
Mar. 14, 1832. (54) My efforts to discover dates of possible relations
between Goethe and the Rothschilds yielded poor results. The keeper
of the Goethe and Schiller archives at Weimar informed me that there
were no letters or other documents that mentioned any connections
between Goethe and the House of Rothschild. Tewele’s Goethe und
die Juden, as well as Bab’s essay under the same title, mention only the
passages which I have quoted. Dr. Max Maurenbrecher’s Goethe und
die Juden (Munich, 1921) introduces further material bearing on the
poet’s general attitude toward the Jews, but fails to furnish any other
dates relative to the problem of Goethe and the Rothschild family. (55)
By the marriage between Metternich and Eleonore Kaunitz; like his
brothers and sister he died prematurely at Naples in 1829. (56) Prince
Esterhazy to Metternich, London, Apr. 24, 1829, State Archives,
Vienna. (57) See for instance the Morning Chronicle of Aug. 28,
1827. (58) Extract from a German-Hebraic communication from
Nathan Rothschild to Carl, London, Jan. 19, 1828, Police Archives,
Vienna. (59) Srbik’s Metternich, see former ref., Vol. I, p. 628.
(60) Aus dem Nachlasse Friedrichs von Gentz (Vienna, 1867), Vol.
I, p. 9. The letters cover the period from October, 1828, to December,
1831. (61) Wertheimstein to Rothschild in Paris, from the Hebrew,
Vienna, Aug. 13, 1829, Police Archives, Vienna. (62) Extract from
a letter from Nathan to Solomon, Oct. 12, 1829, State Archives,
Vienna. (63) Russian Ambassador in London. (64) Rother to von
' Motz, Apr. 14, 1829, Prussian Secret State Archives. (65) Rother
to Frederick William III, Berlin, Mar. 9, 1830, Prussian Secret State
Archives. (66) Rother to the privy councilor Count von Lottum, and
to Motz, Jan. 9, 1830, Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin. (67)
Benecke to Count von Lottum, Rome, Jan. 14, 1830, Prussian Secret
State Archives, Berlin. (68) Rother to the king, Berlin, Mar. 9, 1830.
Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin. (69) King Frederick William
III to Rother, Mar. 17, 1830, Prussian Secret State Archives, Berlin.
(70) The four Houses were Arnstein and Eskeles, Geymiiller and Co.,
S. G. Sina, and M. A. Rothschild and Sons. (71) Count Kolowrat
to Emperor Francis, Feb. 18, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (72)
Rothschild to Metternich, Vienna, Feb. 17, 1830, State Archives,
Vienna. (73) Historie des grandes opérations financiéres, Capefigue
(Paris, 1858), Vol. III, p. 158. (74) Solomon Rothschild to Count
Nadasdy, Mainz, June 14, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (75) Memo-
randum from the Frankfort branch of the House of Rothschild, June,
1830, State Archives, Vienna. (76) Nadasdy to Kolowrat. Memo-
-randum dated Aug. 5, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (77) La révo-
lution de juillet en 1830 et l'Europe, Guichen (Paris, 1907). (78)
Apponyi to Metternich, June 2, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (79)


424. The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Solomon Rothschild to Prince Metternich, Paris, June r'9, 1830, State
Archives, Vienna. (80) Capefigue; see former ref., Vol. III, p. 312.
(81) Mémoires de la Princesse de Boigne, Charles Nicoullaud (Paris,
1908), Vol. III, p. 312. (82) Talleyrand to Mme. Adeélaide, Lon-
don, Oct. 15, 1830, Mémoires du Prince Talleyrand (Paris, 1892),
Vol. III, p. 456. (83) British ambassador in Paris. (84) Solomon
Rothschild to Metternich, Paris, July 30, 1830. Because the letter
might have fallen into the hands of the revolutionaries, it lacks the
usual formal beginning and ending. State Archives, Vienna. (85)
Probably Wertheimstein. Report from Solomon in Paris, dated July
31, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (86) State Archives, Vienna. (87)
Briefe von Friedrich von Gentz an Pilat (Leipzig, 1868), Vol. II, p.
288. (88) Apponyi to Metternich, Paris, Aug. 16, 1830, State Ar-
chives, Vienna. (89) Solomon Rothschild to a friend, Paris, Septem-
ber, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (90) Minister of foreign affairs
in Louis Philippe’s new ministry. (91) Solomon Rothschild “to a
friend,” Paris, September, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (92) Sol-
omon Rothschild to a friend (in this case possibly Gentz), Paris,
Sept. 9, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (93) James to Solomon, Paris,
Nov. 24, 1830, State Archives, Vienna. (94) British ambassador in
Paris. (95) James to Solomon, Paris, Nov. 27, 1830, State Archives,
Vienna. (96) France’s new finance minister. (97) Also from a
communication from Solomon to Baron von Kiibeck. See T'agebiicher
des Karl Friedrich Freiherrn Kiibeck von Kiibau (Vienna, 1909), Vol.
I, Part II, p. 302. (98) Solomon to James, Vienna, Dec. 3, 1830,
State Archives, Vienna. (99) Duke of Broglie, in the first Ministry
of Aug. 11, 1830, when Molé was minister for foreign affairs. (100)
Estimate of Rother in a report to King Frederick William III, based
on a letter from Rothschild, Mar. 30, 1831, Prussian Secret State
Archives, Berlin. (101) Extract from Rothschild’s Paris letters dated
Dec. 10 and 14, 1830, which Solomon handed to Metternich on Dec.
22, 1830, “for his gracious perusal,” waiting upon Metternich per-
sonally later. State Archives, Vienna. (102) The intention was to
take legal proceedings against Polignac, as being the originator of the
ordinances, and against several of his fellow ministers.


_ =


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
on the principal persons mentioned


Bethmann, Simon Moritz von: Born 1768. Head of the Frankfort
banking firm. Ennobled by Emperor Francis. Appointed consul-
general and counselor by the Tsar. A patron of science and the
arts. On his march through Frankfort, Napoleon I stopped at
the Villa Bethmann in 1813. Died 1826.

Buderus von Carlshausen, Carl Friedrich: Born 1759. Son of a
schoolmaster. Became principal revenue officer of Hesse and soon
afterwards administrator of William of Hesse’s estates, and his
financial adviser. Later he became president of the Hessian Treas-
ury at Hanau, minister plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary
to the German Diet at Frankfort, and to the grand-ducal court
at Darmstadt, as well as electoral privy councilor. Died 1819.

Dalberg, Karl Theodor, Baron von: Born 1744. Last Elector of
Mainz, and electoral high chancellor. In 1806 he was the presid-
ing prince of the Confederation of the Rhine, his residence being
at Frankfort. In 1810 made Grand Duke of Frankfort. The fall
of Napoleon brought about the end of his rule. Died at Regens-
burg, 1817.

Gentz, Friedrich von: Born 1764 in Breslau. Was first in the Prus-
sian, and later in the Austrian service. Was a publicist and secre-
tary to Metternich. Was councilor in the chancellor’s office, and
became his most trusted adviser. Died at Vienna, 1832.

Hardenberg, Karl August, Prince von: Born 1750. Prussian states-
man. Minister of Foreign Affairs, 1803, 1806 and during part
of 1807. Appointed chancellor and head of the government after
Stein’s retirement in 18ro. Died at Genoa, 1822.

Herries, John Charles: Born 1778. Private secretary to Vansittart,
Chancellor of the Exchequer. Commissary-in-chief for financing
the British and Allied forces on the Continent from Oct. 1, 1811,
to Oct. 24, 1816. Appointed chancellor of the exchequer i in 1827,
but had to retire shortly afterwards.

Louis Philippe of Orléans, King of France: Born 1773. Joined the
National Guard on the outbreak of the revolution, and served in
the Republican army until 1793. After his father’s execution he
emigrated to Switzerland, and during the Napoleonic period he
lived in America, England, Sicily, and Spain, not returning to
France until the restoration of the elder line of the Bourbons.
Having been placed on the throne after the July Revolution of


425


426 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


1830, he ruled until the February Revolution of 1848, and then
went to England, where he died in 1850.

Marie Louise: Born 1791. Eldest daughter of Emperor Francis.
Married Napoleon 1810, and bore him a son 1811, the King of
Rome, afterwards Duke of Reichstadt. Left her husband on his
abdication. Assumed the government of Parma, Piacenza, and
Guastalla in 1816. After Napoleon’s death, in 1822 married Count
Neipperg morganatically, and after his death, Count Bombelles.
Died 1847 at Vienna.

Marmont, Auguste Frédéric de, Duke of Ragusa, Marshal of France:
Born 1774. Regarded as an exceptionally fine general by Napo-
leon. Appointed administrator of the Illyrian Provinces. One of
the first to desert Napoleon in 1814 and submit to the Bourbons.
Commanded the household troops of King Louis XVIII and
Charles X, but failed to suppress the revolution in 1830. Left
Paris and accompanied Charles X abroad. Died at Venice, 1852.

Metternich, Clemens Lothar, Prince von: Born 1773. Married
Princess Marie Eleonore Kaunitz in 1795. In Austrian diplomatic
service until 1809. Appointed minister of foreign affairs October 8,
1809. Chancellor and secretary of state 1821. Appointed president
of ministerial conference for internal affairs 1826. Fled from
Austria on account of the revolution in 1848. Did not return to
Vienna until 1851. Died there 1859. Metternich’s second wife
was Baroness von Leykam. Third wife (1831) Melanie, Countess
Zichy-Ferraris.

Neipperg, Adam Adalbert, Count von: Born 1775. General in the
Austrian service. Concluded an alliance with Murat at Naples
in 1814. Intervened again in the military affairs of that town in
1815. Became majordomo to Marie Louise in Parma, and her
morganatic husband in 1822. Died Feb. 22, 1829 at Parma.

Parish, David, Baron von Senftenberg: Son of a Hamburg banker.
Set up on his own, and later became a partner of the Vienna
banking firm Fries and Co., in whose fall he was involved. Com-
mitted suicide at Vienna in April, 1826.

Rother, Christian von: Born 1778. Prussian Treasury official.
Principal accountant to Hardenberg, who entrusted him with
most important business. Director of the merchant service 1819.
Reorganized the financial department 1820. Minister of state
1836. Died 1849.

Rothschild, Meyer Amschel: Born at Frankfort-on-the-Main 1743.
Founder of the firm. Married Gutli Schnapper on Aug. 29, 1770.
Died at Frankfort 1812.

Rothschild, Amschel Meyer: Eldest son of the above. Born June 12,
1773. Married Eva Hanau Nov. 16, 1796. Head of the Frank-
fort Bank. Died Dec. 6, 1855.

Rothschild, Salomon Meyer: Eldest son of the above. Born Sept. 9,
1774. Married Caroline Stern Nov. 26, 1800. Head of the
Vienna Bank. Died July 27, 1855.


Biographical Notes 427


Rothschild, Nathan Meyer: Brother of the above. Born Sept. 16,
1777. Married Oct. 22, 1806, Hannah Barent Cohen. Head of
the London Bank. Died July 28, 1836.

Rothschild, Carl Meyer: _ Brother of the above. Born Apr. 24, 1788.
Married Adelheid Hertz Sept. 16, 1818. Head of the Naples
Bank. Died Mar. 10, 1855.

Rothschild, James Meyer: Brother of the above. Born May 15, 1792.
Married daughter of Salomon Rothschild on July 11, 1824. Head
of the Paris Bank. Died Nov. 15, 1868.

Stadion, Johann Philipp, Count von: Born 1763. Entered Austrian
diplomatic service. Minister of foreign affairs 1805-1809. After
1812, sometimes employed diplomatically and was appointed pres-
ident of the treasury and finance minister. Died at Baden, near
Vienna, 1824.

Villele, Joseph, Count: Born 1773. French statesman. Member
of the Chamber from 181'5, and leader of the royalist ultras.
Finance minister 1821. Prime minister 1822 to 1828. Died 1854.

Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of, Prince of Waterloo: Born
1769. Fought in East Indies and Denmark. Commanded British
Expedition to Portugal 1808. Commander-in-chief against the
French in Spain and Portugal until Napoleon’s fall in 1814. Won
the battle of Waterloo June 18, 1815. "Took part in politics and
represented England at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, and at the Con-
gress of Verona in 1822. Commander-in-chief of the British forces
on land in 1827. Member of the House of Lords. Tory. Prime
minister 1828. After the July Revolution resigned, on William
IV coming to the throne in November, 1830. Secretary of state

| for foreign affairs 1834-1835, under Peel. Died 1852 at Dover.

Wilhelm von Hesse: Born 1743. Ruled as Landgrave Wilhelm IX
from 1785-1803, then as Elector Wilhelm I. Died at Cassel, 1821.


1 . " ¥
ie i gs guts ve Py '
¥ i | ' aa » Lar Serta ct Ae a i
We bid
; “ ry ee suis
so0% ‘upoblyueanedag nls, Wi rsd Pee ae
. ; A E . cot d 2
+ ry, ets «LM dae) ee oral Dat


apr! va AD 9401 an i 2 Leen
pnp 0/1 ie year


Ls 4 :
le i ry


a a Ae ue


bya ui lg wi


Wil


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Anonymous, Les Rothschild (Paris, 1925).

Ayer, Jules, d Century of Finance, 1804 to 1904 (The London House
of Rothschild).

Balla, Ignatz, Die Rothschilds (Berlin, 1912).

Baron, Dr. Salo. Die Judenfrage auf dem Wiener Kongress (Vienna
and Berlin, 1920).

Beaulieu-Marconnay, Karl, Baron von, Karl von Dalberg und seiner
Zeit (Weimar, 1879).

Beer, Die Gsterreichische Handelspolitik im 19. Jahrhundert (Vienna,
1891).

Beer, Adolf, Die Finanzen Osterreichs im 19. Jahrhundert (Prague,
1877).

Berghoeffer, Chr. W., Meyer Amschel Rothschild (¥rankfort-on-the-
Main, 1923).

Bethmann, Simon Moritz von, und seine Vorfahren (¥rankfort-on-the-
Main, 1898).

Bianchini, Cav. Lodovico, Della storia delle finance del regno di Napoli
libri sette (Palermo, 1839).

Biographie, Allgemeine deutsche.

Biographie générale, Nouvelle (Paris, 1863).

Biography and Obituary, The Annual, 1857, Vol. XXI1.

 Boigne, Mémoires de la Comtesse de (Paris, 1907).

Bounatian, Dr. Mentor, Geschichte der Handelskrisen in Engiand 1640
—1840 (Munich, 1908).

Brialmont, A., Histoire du Duc de Wellington (Paris, 1856).

Brunner, Dr. Hugo, General Lagrange (Cassel, 1897).

Buxton, Charles, ed., Memoirs of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, Baronet
(London, 1848).

Capefigue, M., Histoire des grandes opérations financiéres (Paris,
1858), Vol. III.

Castelli, I. F. Memoiren meines Lebens (Munich, 1914).

Cussy, Souvenirs du chevalier de, 1795-1866 (Paris, 1909).

Démachy, Edouard, Les Rothschild, une famille de financiers juifs au
A1IXe siecle (Paris, 1896).

Despatches, Correspondence and Memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur,
Duke of Wellington, edited by his son, the Duke of Wellington
(London, 1867).

Dietz, Dr. Alex, Frankfurter Handelsgeschichte (Frankfort-on-the-
Main, 1921 to 1925). ‘This excellent and comprehensive five-
volume work, in those pages devoted to Rothschild, points out the
necessity of “reading between the lines” of Berghoeffer’s work.


429


430 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Drumont, Edouard, La France juive (Paris).

Ehrenberg, Dr. Richard, Die Fugger, Rothschild, Krupp, 3rd ed.
(Jena, 1925).

Ehrenberg, Dr. Richard, Das Haus Parish in Hamburg (Jena, 1905).

Elking, Max von, Die deutschen Hilfstruppen im nordamerikanischen
Befreiungskriege 1776-1783.

Enzyklopadie fiir die gebildeten Stande, Allgemeine deutsche Real. ...

Faber, Herr von Hormayr und die Lebensbilder aus dem Befreiungs-
kriege (Leipzig, 1844).

Fournier, Napoleon I (Vienna, 1822).

Frankfurter Zeitung, Geschichte der (Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1911).

Gentz, Briefwechsel zwischen Friedrich Gentz und Adam Miller 1800
bis 1829 (Stuttgart, 1857).

Gentz, dus dem Nachlass Friedrich von Gentz (Vienna, 1867).

Gentz, Briefe von Friedrich von Gentz an Pilat (Leipzig, 1868).

Gentz, Tagebiicher von Friedrich von Gentz aus dem Nachlass Varn-
hagens von Ense (Leipzig, 1874).

Gentz, Briefe von und an Friedrich von Gentz (Vienna, 1867).

Grillparzer, Selbstbiographie und Bildnisse (Vienna, 1923).

Guichen, La révolution de juillet en 1830 et Europe (Paris, 1917):

Herries, Edward, Memoirs of the Public Life of the Right Hon. John
Charles Herries in the Reigns of George Ill, George IV, William
IV, and Victoria (London, 1880).

Heyck, Die Allgemeine Zeitung (Munich, 1898).

Heyden, Galerie beriihmter und merkwiralger Frankfurter (Frank-
fort-on-the-Main, 1861).

(Hormayr zu Hartenburg), Kaiser Franz und Metternich (Leipzig,
1848).

Humboldt, Wilhelm und Caroline von, im ihren Briefen 1815-1817
(Berlin, 1912).

Jakobson, Israel, Unterthanigste Vorstellung an S.H. den Fiirstprimas
der Rheinkonfoderation iiber dessen neue Stattigkeitsschutzordnung
fiir die Judenschaft in Frankfurt a. Main (Braunschweig, 1808).

Jost, Neuere Geschichte der Israeliten 1815-1845 (Berlin, 1846).

Kapp, Friedrich, Der Soldatenhandel deutscher Fiirsten nach Amerika
1775-1783 (Berlin, 1864).

Kohout, Dr. Adolph, Finanzgréssen und grosse Finanzen (Berlin, 1909).

Kralik, Geschichte der neuesten Zeit von 1815 bis zur Gegenwart —
(Vienna and Graz, 1820).

Kriegk, G. L., Geschichte von Frankfurt a. M. in ausgewahlten Dars-
tellungen (Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1871).

Kiibeck von Kiibau, Tagebiicher des Carl Friedrich, Frh. v (Vienna,
1909).

Kiibeck von Kiibau, Metternich und Kibeck—Ein Briefwechsel
(Vienna, 1910).

Lee, Sidney, Dictionary of National Biography (London, 1897).

Losch, Dr. Philipp, Kurfirst Wilhelm I (Marburg, 1923).

Marbot, Mémoires du général baron de (Paris, 1891)


' i


Bibliography 431


Marion, Marcel, Histoire financiére de la France depuis 1715 (Paris,
1914).
Matrac, a Rothschild, leur origine, Waterloo, leur fortune (Paris,
1909).
Metternich, Richard, Prince, Aus Metternichs nachgelassenen Papieren
(Vienna, 1880).
Nervo, Baron de, Les finances frangaises sous la restauration 18 14-1830
(Paris, 1867).
Nicoullaud, Charles, Mémoires de la Comtesse de Boigne (Paris, 1908).
Ouvrard, G. I., Mémoires de, sur sa vie et ses diverses opérations finan-
ciéres (Paris, 1926).
Picciotto, James, Sketches of Anglo-Jewish History (London, 1875).
Pribram, Alfred Francis, Osterreichische Staatsvertrage (Vienna, 1913).
Rabinowics, Dr. I. M., La famille de Rothschild (1882).
Reeves, John, The Rothschilds—The Financial Rulers of Nations
(London, 1887).
Rother, Christian von, Obituary Notice. Special edition of the Preus-
sischer Staatsanzeiger of Dec. 15 and 16, 1849 (Berlin, 1849).
Scharf von Scharffenstein, Das geheime Treiben, der Einfluss und die
Macht des Judentums in Frankreich seit too Jahren (1771-
1871) (Stuttgart, 1872).
Scherb, von, Geschichte des Hauses Rothschild (Berlin, 1872).
Schlesier, Gustav von, Ungedruckte Denkschriften, Tagebicher und
Briefe von Gentz (Mannheim, 1840).
Schmidt-Weissenfels, E., Geschichte des modernen Reichtums (Berlin,
1893).
Schmidt-Weissenfels, E., Friedrich Gentz (Prague, 1859).
Schwemer, Geschichte der freien Stadt Frankfurt a. M. 1814-1856
! (Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1910).
Smidt, Johann, Ein Gedenkbuch zur Sdacularfeier seines Geburtstags
(Bremen, 1878).
Srbik, Heinrich von, Metternich, der Staatsmann und der Mensch
(Munich, 1'925).
Statistical review of all coin, exchange and bond values between the
years 1796-1832, State Archives, Vienna.
Steinmann, Fr., Das Haus Rothschild. Seine Geschichte und seine
Geschafte (Prague and Leipzig, 1857).
Strobl von Ravelsberg, Metternich und seine Zeit 1773-1859 (Vienna
and Leipzig, 1907).
Talleyrand, Mémoires du Prince, publiés par le Duc de Broglie (Paris,
1892).
Treskow, A. von, Biographische Notizen iiber Nathan Meyer Roths-
child (Quedlinburg, 1837).
Ubersicht der Lage und der rechtlichen Gesuche der Fuldaischen und
Hanauischen Domdanenkdufer (Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1814).
_Vehse, Geschichte der deutschen Héfe.
Verschner, O. C., Baron von, Die deutschen Hilfstruppen im ameri-
kanischen Revolutionskriege (Brunswick, 1901).


432 The Rise of the House of Rothschild


Verschner, O. C., Baron von, Die Hessen und die anderen deutschen
Hilfstruppen im Kriege Grossbritanniens gegen Amerika 1776-
1783 (Brunswick and Leipzig, 1901).

Villéle, Mémoires et correspondances du Comte de (Paris, 1888).

Wachstein, Die Inschriften des alten Judenfriedhofes in Wien (Vienna,
I9I2).

Walpole, Spencer, History of France from the Conclusion of the Great
Wear in 1815 (London, 1878).

Ward and Gooch, The Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy,
1783-1919.

Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1815-1822 (London,
1925).

Weil, Les dessous du Congrés de Vienne (Paris, 1917).

Weill, Rothschild und die europdischen Staaten (Stuttgart, 1844).

Wellington, The Dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke of, During his
Various Campaigns, from 1799 to 1848 (London, 1837).

Wirth, Max, Geschichte der Handelskrisen (¥rankfort-on-the-Main,
1883). ‘

Zichy, Grof Széchényi Istvan (Budapest, 1896).


MM


3 e652 ogee”? |
Corti, Egon Gaesar,/Rise of th


HG

Wes 272 Corti, Egon

.R8 Rise of the house of
C6 Rothschild


HG

1552 Corti, Hgon

-RS Rise of the house of
C6 Rothschild


ISSUED TO


id #8. Sacidsos


Concordia College Library
Bronxville, NY 10708


BR PRINTED IN U.S.A.
