Letters of Cortes: The Five Letters of Relation, Vol. 1 (Hernán Cortés (Francis Augustus MacNutt, trans.), 1520)
==========================================================
Cortés's Cartas de Relación (1520-26) - the conquest of Mexico in the conqueror's own dispatches to Charles V; the founding document of Spanish America. MacNutt's 1908 translation (2 vols.); the First Letter is historically lost, so the edition holds letters 2-5. Vol. 1 of 2: Biographical introduction and the Second Letter (1520).

Letters  of  Cortes

The  Five  Letters  of  Relation  from  Fernando
Cortes  to  the  Emperor  Charles  V.

Translated,  and  Edited,  with  a Biographical  Introduction
and  Notes  Compiled  from  Original  Sources

By

Francis  Augustus  MacNutt

In  Two  Volumes
Volume  One

G.  P.  Putnam’s  Sons
New  York  and  London
Gbe  fíntcherbocker  Press
1908

Copyright,  1908
BY

FRANCIS  AUGUSTUS  MacNUTT

(¿)

Ube  'fcnícfeerboclier  prees,  flew  fiotfe

PREFACE

THE  narrative  contained  in  the  Letters  of  Fernando
Cortes  is  the  first  description  ever  written  of  the
most  highly  developed  civilisation  on  the  conti-
nent  of  North  America  at  the  date  of  its  discovery.  Astro-
nomical  science  has  brought  the  existence  of  planets  within
common  knowledge,  and  our  imagination  is  already  so
familiar  with  the  possibility  of  a Martian  population,  that
a discovery  positively  demonstrating  such  a fact  would
be  received  as  confirmatory  rather  than  surprising.  By
the  disco veries  of  Christopher  Columbus,  the  civilisations
of  two  worlds  as  absolutely  strange  to  one  another  as
different  planets  were  brought  into  sudden  contact  pro-
ductive  of  conflict  and  that  conflict  was  naturally  fiercest
where  the  alien  invaders  were  confronted  by  the  best
organised  effort  to  contest  their  advance ; henee  the  period
of  the  Spanish  conquest  of  México,  which  is  depicted  by
Cortes  in  these  letters  to  Charles  V.  was  prolific  in  deeds
the  most  striking  to  the  imagination  of  any  that  modern
history  records.  No  element  of  drama  was  absent,  for
the  most  heroic  qualities,  as  well  as  the  blackest  passions
of  the  human  heart,  were  engaged  on  both  sides  in  a life-
and-death  struggle,  which  culminated  in  an  appalling
race-tragedy,  replete  with  epic  horror.  The  piratical
complexión  of  the  Conqueror’s  initial  movements  forced
him  to  wrest  justification  from  success,  and  this  was  only
made  possible  by  the  exercise  of  his  indomitable  courage,
his  relentless  and  unscrupulous  diplomacy,  and  by  that
strange  favour,  which  capricious  Fortune  sometimes
destines  as  a reward  for  sheer  audacity.

Fortúnate  for  posterity  was  the  anxious  need  of  Cortes

VI

Preface

to  win  royal  approval  for  his  lawless  courses,  for  from  it
sprang  the  inspiration  which  prompted  him  to  pen  his
descriptions  of  the  Aztec  civilisation  at  the  zenith  of  its
splendour  and  to  report  in  detail  to  his  sovereign  the
progress  of  his  conquest.

Although  historians  ha  ve  from  the  beginning  recognised
the  superlative  valué  of  these  letters  and  several  editions
of  them  are  accessible  to  students  familiar  with  the  Spanish
language,  it  has  been  left  to  my  modest  labours  to  provide
an  English  translation  of  the  complete  series  of  Relaciones.
The  translation  of  sixteenth  century  Spanish  into  read-
able,  modern  English  is  not  devoid  of  difficulty,  though
greater  demands  are  made  on  the  translator’s  patience
and  ingenuity  than  on  his  erudition.

Cortes  wrote  with  soldier-like  terseness,  but  his  powers
of  observation  were  acute  and  accurate ; henee  his  descrip-
tions are  both  lucid  and  striking.  His  vocabulary  was
very  limited,  and  as  he  was  unf amiliar  with  the  classical
and  scholastic  styles  of  composition  then  in  vogue  amongst
men  of  letters,  his  plain  tale  is  ungamished  with  the
digressions  into  philosophy  and  theology  and  the  lengthy
citations  from  scripture  and  the  classics,  which  abound  in
the  more  polished  writings  of  his  times.  I suspect,  more-
over,  that  he  had  in  mind  to  capture  the  faney  of  the
royal  youth  to  whom  he  wrote,  and,  in  days  when  novéis
were  not,  and  court  life  must  have  weighed  on  a monarch
of  seventeen,  still  too  young  to  be  engrossed  either  in  the
delusive  pleasures  of  prívate  dissipation  or  in  the  ab-
sorbing  intrigues  of  public  ambition,  many  of  his  pages
may  have  furnished  the  youthful  sovereign  with  diverting
reading  in  his  leisure  hours

I have  aimed  rather  to  preserve  accuracy  and  the
characteristics  of  Cortes’s  original  style  than  to  produce
a more  finished  piece  of  English  literature,  by  excessive
rearrangement  and  the  employment  of  a richer  vocabulary
than  he  commanded.

Preface

Vil

The  subjects  touched  upon  in  the  Letters  are  so  little
known  to  the  general  reader  (though  they  constantly
engage  the  attention  of  able  specialists)  that  I have
supplied  notes  to  accompany  the  text,  which  are  intended
to  explain  and  complete  the  narrative  of  Cortes.  These
notes  deal  with  various  and  very  large  subjects,  on  some
of  which  historical  authorities  are  not  in  agreement,  while
on  many  others  of  the  greatest  interest  and  importance
the  last  word  has  not  yet  been  spoken.  The  statements
I have  made  and  the  opinions  I have  expressed  on  these
debatable  questions  are  based  upon  the  results  of  my
researches  in  the  works  cited  in  the  Bibliographical  Note
preceding  the  Letters:  their  scope  is  explanatory  and
complementary — not  controversial.

The  portrait  of  Cortes  which  appears  as  a frontispiece
is  after  the  alleged  Titian,  now  in  the  possession  of  the
Duque  de  Plasencia.

The  portrait  of  Charles  V.  represents  that  monarch  in
his  early  youth,  at  the  time  when  Cortes  first  began  his
correspondence ; it  is  reproduced  from  a print  in  the
British  Museum.

The  plan  of  the  City  of  México  is  taken  from  the  His-
toria Antigua  of  Señor  Manuel  Orozco  y Berra  and  the
several  maps  are  from  the  editions  in  which  they  originally
appeared  of  the  Storia  Antica  del  Messico  of  Clavigero,
1780,  Lorenzana’s  Historia  de  Nueva  España,  1770,  and
of  C.  St.  John  Fancourt’s  History  of  Yucatán  from  its
Discovery  to  the  Cióse  of  the  Seventeenth  Century.

Since  the  days  when  those  illustrious  pioneers  in  this
particular  field  of  historical  research,  Washington  Irving
and  William  H.  Prescott  laboured  with  results  that  have
won  them  enduring  fame,  the  classification  of  the  vast
and  scattered  archives  of  Spain  has  gone  steadily  forward,
with  the  result  that  the  worker  of  to-day  finds  a mass  of
valuable  material  easily  accessible  that  had  formerly  to
be  sought  at  great  cost  of  time,  labour,  and  expense  in  the

Vlll

Preface

collections  of  state  papers  and  correspondence  which  were
not  infrequently  in  a condition  of  disheartening  and  baf-
fling  confusión.  The  collections  of  inedited  documents
published  by  Rivadeneira  under  the  title  of  Biblioteca  de
Autores  Españoles,  that  of  Navarrete  published  in  Madrid
in  1842,  the  Biblioteca  Occidental  of  Barcia,  the  voluminous
French  translations  of  Temaux-Compans,  and  finally  the
indefatigable  labours  of  Señor  García  Icazbalceta  and
Don  Pascual  Gayangos  have  cleared  the  modera  student’s
path  of  formidable  difficulties.

Although  I am  the  fortúnate  possessor  of  a number  of
these  valuable  collections,  I have  likewise  had  to  make
researches  in  libraries  and  collections,  both  public  and
prívate,  in  México,  Spain,  Italy,  and  England,  in  the
course  of  which  I have  met  with  courteous  and  helpful
encouragement  from  many  to  whom  my  sense  of  obliga-
tion  is  profound ; but  primarily  I owe  the  pleasure  and
interest  which  the  preparation  of  this  work  has  afforded
me  to  the  late  Abbé  Augustin  Fischer,  sometime  chaplain
to  the  ill-fated  Emperor  Maximilian  of  México,  under
whose  cultured  guidance  it  was  my  privilege  to  begin
my  studies  in  Spanish-American  history.  The  death  of
my  delightful  and  accomplished  mentor,  after  a life  of
great  vicissitudes,  deprives  me  of  one  of  the  chief  satis-
factions  which  the  publication  of  this  work  would  other-
wise  have  afforded  me,  but  it  does  not  lessen  my  obligation
to  pay  a tribute  of  grateful  thanks  to  his  memory.

Francis  A.  MacNutt.

Palazzo  Pamphilj,

Rome,  October,  1907.

CONTE NTS

PAGE

Biographical  Note:

EARLY  DAYS  .......  3

COLONIAL  LIFE  IN  CUBA  .....  8

THE  CONQUEROR  ......  25

MARQUES  DEL  VALLE  ......  52

Last  Will  and  Testament  of  Fernando  Cortes  . 77

Bibliographical  Note  ......  101

First  Letter,  July  10,  1519  .....  123

Second  Letter,  October  30,  1520  ....  185

IX

ILLU  STRATIONS

PAGB

Fernando  Cortes  .....  Frontispiece
From  an  Engraving  by  Ferdin  Selma,  after  the  Painting  by
Titian

Cortes  Coat-of-Arms  . ...  On  cover

Plan  of  México — Tenochtitlan  ....  188

From  Conquista  de  México,  vol.  iv. , by  Orozco  y Berra

The  Wall  of  Tlascala  ......  200

From  Storia  Antica  del  Messico,  vol.  ii. , by  Clavigero

xi

BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE

CHAPTER  I

EARLY  DAYS

FERNANDO  CORTES,  son  of  Martin  Cortes  y
Monroy  and  of  Catalina  Pizarro  Altamirano,  his
wife,  was  bom  in  1485  at  Medellin,  an  unim-
portant  town  in  Estremadura.  The  house  in  which  he
first  saw  the  light  stood  in  the  Calle  de  la  Feria  until  it
was  destroyed  by  the  French  in  the  campaign  of  1809.
(Alaman,  Dissertazioni  sulla  Storia  del  Messico;  Dis-
sert.  V.)  Both  his  father’s  and  his  mother’s  fami-
lies  were  of  good  descent,  and  respected,  though
poor.  Martin  Cortes  had  been  a captain  of  fifty  light
cavalry,  and  he  is  further  described  by  the  anonymous
author  of  De  Rebus  Gestis  as  ‘ ‘ pnetate  tamen  et  religione
toto  vita  tempore  clarus ,”  while  to  his  wife  the  same
writer  gives  the  highest  praise,  saying,  “ C aterina  namque
probitate  pudicitia  et  in  conjugem  amore  nulli  cetatis  suae
femina  cessit.  Las  Casas  also  States  that  he  had  known
Martin  Cortes  in  a poor  and  humble  condition,  but  that
he  was  a Cristiano  viejo,  and  said  to  be  a gentleman.
Later  when  the  great  fame  of  Cortes  had  converted  him
into  an  ancestor  of  whom  the  most  illustrious  family
might  be  proud,  ingenious  genealogists  sought  to  prove
him  also  the  descendant  of  very  noble,  and  even  royal,
forefathers;  but  these  unconvincing  efforts  must  seem
somewhat  unimportant  in  the  case  of  one  whose  ñame
and  place  in  history  were  won  by  his  own  achievements,
unaided  by  the  support  either  of  influential  family  or
superior  fortune.

VOL.  I. — 1

3

4

Letters  of  Cortes

During  his  early  childhood  his  health  was  so  frail  that
he  was  several  times  thought  to  be  at  death’s  door.
It  seemed,  therefore,  all  important  to  provide  him  with
a powerful  patrón  saint,  who  was  finally  chosen  by  draw-
ing  lots  among  the  twelve  apostles,  the  choice  thus  falling
upon  St.  Peter,  to  whom  Cortes  rendered  profound  de-
votion  during  all  his  life  and  to  whose  protection  he
constantly  attributed  his  victories.

When  their  son  was  fourteen  years  oíd,  his  parents  sent
him  to  the  University  of  Salamanca  to  prepare  himself
for  the  practice  of  law,  which  was  held  in  high  esteem
and  opened  a promising  career  to  a young  man  of  ability.
During  the  two  years  he  remained  there,  he  lodged  in  the
house  of  his  paternal  aunt,  Inez  de  Paz,  who  was  married
to  one  Francisco  Nuñez  Valera.  This  brief  course  of
study  was  sufíicient  to  prove  that  he  was  in  no  way  fitted
for  the  profession  his  parents  had  chosen  for  him,  so
in  1501  he  caused  them  the  liveliest  chagrín  by  retuming
to  Medellin.

An  idle  year  of  rather  disorderly  life  followed.  The
boy’s  taste  was  for  arms  and  adventures,  and,  after
hovering  between  the  rival  attractions  of  the  Italian
campaign  under  Gonsalvo  de  Córdoba,  and  those  of
Service  with  Don  Nicolás  de  Ovando,  the  recently  ap-
pointed  Governor  of  Hispaniola,  he  finally  decided  to
join  the  latter,  who  was  preparing  to  sail,  with  an  ím-
portant  fleet  of  thirty  ships,  fitted  out  at  the  royal  ex-
pense, to  take  possession  of  his  office.  In  this  he  was
urged,  probably,  by  the  consideration  that  the  Governor
was  a family  friend,  who  might  be  counted  upon  to  ad-
vance  his  interests.  Just  before  sailing,  however,  Cortes
had  the  mishap  of  falling  from  a wall  which  he  was
scaling  to  keep  an  appointment  with  a lady,  an  accident
which  might  have  ended  fatally  for  him  but  for  the
intervention  of  an  oíd  woman  who,  attracted  by  the
noise  of  his  fall  at  her  very  door,  arrived  just  in  time  to

5

Early  Days

prevent  her  son-in-law  from  running  him  through  the
body  as  he  lay  prostrate.  As  it  was,  his  bruises  laid  him
up  until  after  Ovando’s  fleet  had  sailed,  and,  upon  his
recovery,  he  went  to  Valencia  with  the  intention  of
embarking  for  Italy  to  join  the  torces  of  the  great  Captain.
What  defeated  his  purpose  is  not  recorded,  but,  upon  his
return  to  Medellin  about  a year  later,  his  parents  con-
sented  to  his  following  Ovando  and  provided  him  with
the  money  for  his  joumey.  He  was  thus  enabled  to
sail  from  San  Lucar  de  Barameda  in  1504  on  the  trading
vessel  of  one  Alonzo  Quintero  of  Palos,  bound  with  four
others  carrying  merchandise  to  the  Indies.

The  little  fleet  touched  first  at  the  Canaries  which  was
the  usual  route.  Alonzo  Quintero  was  a shifty  fellow,
who,  twice  on  the  voyage,  sought  to  overreach  his  brother
captains  by  detaching  himself  from  the  fleet  in  the  hope
of  making  port  ahead  of  them  and  disposing  of  his  cargo
to  advantage  and  without  their  competition.  Both  times,
however,  untoward  weather  overtook  him,  and,  the  second
time,  his  pilot,  Francisco  Niño,  lost  his  bearings,  and
the  ship,  in  a bad  condition,  short  of  water  and  pro-
visions  was  like  to  be  lost.  At  dawn  on  Good  Friday  a
dove  was  seen  perching  on  the  rigging,  and,  by  following
the  flight  of  the  bird  of  good  ornen,  land  was  sighted
by  Cristóbal  Zomo  on  Easter  Day,  and  four  days  later,
the  weather-beaten  craft  reached  port  where  the  others  of
the  fleet  had  long  since  arrived  and  disposed  of  their  goods.

Seekers  after  signs  and  wonders  were  not  slow  to  claim
the  appearance  of  this  dove  to  guide  Quintero’s  ship
at  such  a critical  moment  as  evidence  of  the  celestial
protection  and  miraculous  intervention  of  providence
in  the  direction  of  Cortes’s  fortunes,  of  which  numerous
other  similar  examples  are  cited,  and  to  which  he  him-
self was  always  ready  to  ascribe  his  success;  and,  in
the  early  chronicle,  De  Rebus  Gestis  of  authoritative  but
unknown  authorship,  it  is  stated  that,  even  at  the  time

6

Letters  of  Cortes

of  this  occurrence,  there  were  those  prese nt  who  claimed
to  recognise  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  white-winged  pilot
sent  to  rescue  the  hapless  ship. — “ Alius , Sanctum  esse
Spiritum,  qui  in  illius  alitis  s pe  cié,  ut  meestos  et  aflictos
solaretur,  venir e erat  dignatns."

The  Governor  being  absent,  his  secretary,  Medina,  who
airead  y knew  Cortes,  met  him  upon  his  landing,  and  gave
him  hospitality  in  his  house,  acquainting  him  with  the  con-
dition  of  things  in  the  island,  and  advising  him  to  settle
near  the  town.  To  this  Cortes  is  said  to  have  replied
that  he  had  come  to  seek  gold  rather  than  to  till  the
ground.  During  the  war  against  Queen  Anacoana  of
Hayti,  which  followed  cióse  upon  his  arrival,  the  horrors
of  which  have  been  described  first  by  Las  Casas  and  later
by  Washington  Irving,  Cortes  gave  a very  good  account  of
himself,  and  upon  the  establishment  of  peace  he  received
a grant  of  good  land  and  a repartimiento  of  Indians  at
Daiguao  where  he  was  likewise  appointed  notary  of  the
newly  founded  town  of  Azua.  (Gomara,  Crónica.  Cap.
ni]  De  Rebus  Gestis) . During  the  five  or  six  ensuing  years,
his  life  was  that  of  a planter,  and  was  barren  of  any  salient
event,  though  Bernal  Diaz  says  that  he  was  involved
in  several  affairs  about  women  which  led  to  quarrels
and  duels,  in  one  of  which  he  was  wounded  in  the  lip.
He  was  prevented  by  an  opportune  illness  from  ioining  the
luckless  expedition  of  Alonso  de  Ojedo  and  Diego  de
Nicuesa  to  Darien.  Don  Nicolás  de  Ovando  was  succeeded
in  the  office  of  Governor  by  Don  Diego  Columbus,  who
in  1511  fitted  out  an  expedition  for  the  conquest  of  Cuba,
which  he  placed  under  the  command  of  Don  Diego  Velas-
quez,  and  in  which  Cortes  volunteered.

His  conduct  at  this  time  advanced  his  interests  in  every
respect,  for  his  genial  character  and  lively  conversaron
soon  made  him  a favourite  with  his  companions  m arms,
while  his  bravery  and  address  acquired  him  the  best
reputation  as  a soldier  and  attracted  the  attention  of  his

7

Early  Days

commander.  This  conquest  afforded  indeed  but  scanty
opportunity  either  to  the  commander  or  the  soldiers  of
the  invading  forcé  to  display  their  prowess,  for  the  pacific
natives  were  hunted  through  the  island  like  timorous
hares  to  yield  after  the  feeblest  resistance  only.  Thus
they  were  brought  into  subjection  with  the  barest  sem-
blance  o£  serious  military  operations.  Yet  such  mild
warfare  and  the  equally  nerveless  conflicts  in  the  island
of  Hispaniola  (San  Domingo)  supplied  Cortes  with  the  only
training  in  campaigning  he  ever  received.  The  skill  he
later  displayed  in  military  tactics,  and  his  masterly
generalship,  were  due  to  his  latent  genius,  which  sprang
fully  fledged  into  consciousness  in  response  to  the  first
demand  made  upon  it,  furnishing  him  liberally  with  an
equipment  for  conquest  which  less  gifted  commanders
must  wrest  from  experience.

He  received  in  recognition  of  his  Services  in  Cuba,  an
encomienda  of  Indians  at  Manicaro  where  he  settled,
becoming  a citizen  of  Santiago.  Gomara  States  that  he
was  successful  in  the  management  of  his  estáte,  and  was
the  first  of  the  colonists  to  introduce  certain  breeds  of
sheep  and  cattle  into  the  island.  He  had  as  his  partner
at  Manicaro,  Juan  Xuarez.

Here  may  be  said  to  cióse  the  first  period  of  the  life
of  Cortes,  which  might  ha  ve  been  that  of  any  spirited
young  Spaniard  of  his  class  and  times,  fretting  within
the  restrictions  of  a provincial  town,  averse  to  the  plodding
career  offered  him  by  his  parents,  and  finally  cutting  loose
and  winning  his  place  in  a new  life  in  the  colonies,  by
forcé  of  valour  in  feats  of  arms,  and  his  ability  in  man-
aging  affairs.

CHAPTER  II

COLONIAL  LIFE  IN  CUBA

INFORMATION  concerning  the  events  of  the  first
years  of  the  residence  of  Cortes  in  the  island  of  Cuba
is  scanty,  but  it  may  be  assumed  that  he  attended
to  his  interests,  which  prospered,  and  enjoyed  considerable
popularity  among  his  fellow-colonists  as  well  as  the
favour  of  the  Govemor,  Diego  Velasquez,  who  extended
a protecting  friendship  to  him  such  as  an  older  man  of
high  rank  might  naturally  feel  for  one  of  the  most  promis-
ingyoungmen  among  his  colonists.  Mr.  George  Folsom,
in  the  Introduction  tohis  English  translation  of  the  De-
spatches  of  Hernando  Cortes  (New  York,  1843),  says  that
Velasquez  was  brother-in-law  to  Cortes,  having  married
one  of  the  Xuarez  sisters.  I have  found  no  authority  for
this'assertion,  and,  a few  pages  farther  on,  the  same  writer
describes  Velasquez  as  seeking  to  arrange  a marriage  for
himself  with  a sister  of  the  Bishop  of  Burgos.  This
alleged  relationship  between  the  two  through  their
marriages  is  apocryphal.

As  the  changes  which  the  relations  between  these  two
men  underwent,  worked  powerfully  and  far  upon  the
course  of  events  in  the  New  World,  it  is  necessary  before
going  further  to  consider  somewhat  the  character  of
Diego  Velasquez,  and  the  causes  which  brought  about  the
breach  in  their  friendship.  Oviedo  States  that  Velasquez
was  of  noble  family,  and,  though  arriving  in  the  Indies
poor,  had  there  accumulated  an  ampie  fortune.  His
military  experience  had  been  gained  by  seventeen  years

8

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

9

of  Service  in  European  wars.  The  anonymous  author
of  De  Rebus  Gestis  confináis  these  points  adding,  “ He
was  covetous  of  glory  and  sornewhat  more  so  of  money.
The  latter  also  represents  that  an  intimate  friendship
existed  during  several  years  between  the  two  in  Hispaniola,
and  that  Velasquez  had  insiste d on  Cortes  s joininghis  ex-
pedition,  to  which  the  latter  counselled  by  friendship  and
his  longing  for  adventures,  readily  consented.  Velasquez
had  the  habit  of  command,  which  as  Governor  of  Cuba
he  exercised  with  the  scarcely  restricted  and  arbitrary
freedom  which  his  own  temperament  dictated,  and  the
usage  amongst  Spanish  colonial  govemors  sanctioned.
With  all  this  he  was  amiable,  accessible,  and  fond  of
dispensing  favours.  Prescott  estimates  him  as  one  of
those  captious  persons  who  “ when  things  do  not  go  ex-
actly  to  their  taste,  shift  the  responsibility  from  their
own  shoulders  where  it  should  lie  to  those  of  others,”
and  Herrera  describes  him  as  “ ungenerous,  credulous,  and
suspicious  ! ’ ’ Fray  B artolomé deLasCasas,  who kne w him
personally  in  Cuba  gives  more  place  to  his  virtues  in  the
description  he  has  left  of  him,  than  do  some  others;  while
admitting  that  he  was  quick  to  resent  a liberty,  jealous
of  his  dignity,  easily  taking  offence,  he  adds  that  he  was
not  vindictive  ñor  slow  to  forgive.  As  an  administrator
of  the  affairs  of  the  island  he  showed  himself  active  and
capable,  encouraging  immigration,  assisting  the  colonists,
and  extending  the  zone  of  Spanish  influence.  He  founded
many  towns,  some  of  which  still  bear  the  ñames  he
gave  them,  notably  Havana,  Puerto  del  Principe,  Mat-
anzas, Trinidad,  and  Santiago  where  he  had  his  seat  of
govemment.  It  appears  therefore  that  Diego  Velasquez
was  a man  whose  rather  petty  defects  of  character  did  not
usually  interfere  with  his  public  conduct  and  who  dis-
charged  his  official  duties  satisfactorily  to  the  colonists
and  as  a faithful  represe ntative  of  the  crown.  He  was,
however,  unquestionably  avaricious,  egotistical,  and

IO

Letters  of  Cortes

ambitious;  withal  no  easy  master  to  serve.  Commenting
on  the  reproaches  he  afterwards  heaped  upon  Cortes  for
his  ingratitude  towards  him,  Oviedo  says  that  it  was
no  whit  worse  than  his  own  had  been  towards  his  bene-
factor, Diego  Columbus,  and  henee  it  was  “measure  for
measure.”  His  desire  to  explore  and  conquer  by  deputy,
and  to  win  distinction  vicariously,  was  defeated  by  the
impossibility  of  finding  men  possessed  of  the  required
ability  to  undertake  successfully  such  ventures,  combined
with  sufficient  docility  to  surrender  to  him  the  glory  and
profits  resulting  from  them.

The  two  fundamental  versions  of  the  historie  quarrel  be-
tween  Cortes  and  Velasquez  are  contradictory.  One  is
fumished  by  Gomara,  the  other  by  Las  Casas,  and,  upon
one  or  the  other,  later  historians  ha  ve  based  their  accounts.
The  versión  of  Las  Casas  is  that  of  an  eye-witness,  for  he
was  present  in  Cuba  at  the  time,  and  knew  both  men  well.
He  stood  high  in  the  favour  of  the  Governor,  but,  even
allowing  something  for  the  bias  of  personal  friendship
and  possibly  something  more  for  the  influence  of  Velas-
quez’s position,  his  acknowledged  integrity  exeludes  the
possibility  of  a conscious  mis-statement  of  faets,  and
henee  the  greatest  weight  attaches  to  his  testimony.
Gomara,  on  the  other  hand,  was  never  inCuba  in  his  life
and  only  began  his  Crónica  de  la  C onquista  some  twenty-
five  years  or  more  after  the  events  of  which  he  wrote,  under
the  inspiration  and  direction  of  Cortes,  then  Marques
del  Valle,  whose  chaplain  he  had  shortly  before  become.

Gomara’ s chronicle  was  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  an
apología,  and  it  no  sooner  appeared  than  its  accuracy
and  veracity  were  impugned  by  participants  in  the  events
he  described;  notably  by  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo,  whose
work  was  undertaken  for  the  declared  purpose  of  correct-
ing  Gomara,  and  was  called  with  emphasis  the  “True
History  ” of  the  conquest.  Gomara’ s account  is  briefly
as  follows:  Cortes  at  that  time  paid  court  to  Catalina

II

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

Xuarez  la  Marcaida,  one  of  the  poor  but  beautiful  sisters
of  his  partner  in  Manicaro,  Juan  Xuarez,  and  won  such
favours  from  the  lady  as  entitled  her  to  exact  the  ful-
filment  of  a promise  of  marriage  which  she  declared  he  had
made  her,  but  with  which  he  refused  to  comply.  The
Xuarez  family  was  from  Granada  and  carne  originally  in
the  suite  of  Doña  Maria  de  Toledo,  wife  of  theViceroy
Don  Diego  Columbus  to]  Hispaniola,  where  it  was  hoped
the  four  girls  whose  only  dowry  was  their  beauty  might
malee  good  marriages  among  the  rich  planters.  This
hope  was  not  realised  in  San  Domingo  and  they  removed
to  Cuba.  Catalina,  the  eldest,  was  the  most  beautiful
of  all  and  had  many  admirers,  amongst  whom  her  pre-
ference  fell  upon  Cortes,  who  was  ever  ready  for  gallant
adventures.  The  matter  was  brought  before  the  Governor
who  summoned  Cortes  ad  audiendum  verbum,  influenced
in  Catalina’ s favour  it  was  said,  by  one  of  her  sisters  to
whose  charms  he  himself  was  not  indifferent.  But,  in
spite  of  official  pressure,  Cortes  refused  to  make  the
reparation  exacted  of  him.  Such  high  words  followed  that
the  Governor  ordered  him  to  be  imprisoned  in  the  fortress
under  the  charge  of  the  alcalde  Cristóbal  de  Lagos.  His
imprisonment  was  brief.for  he  managed  to  escape,  carrying
off  the  sword  and  buckler  of  his  gaoler,  and  took  sanctuary
in  a church,  from  which  neither  the  promises  ñor  the
threats  of  Velasquez  could  beguile  him.  One  day,  how-
ever,  when  he  unwarily  showed  himself  before  the  church
door,  the  alguacil  Juan  Escudero  seized  him  from  behind,
and,  aided  by  others,  carried  him  on  board  a ship  ly-
ing  in  the  harbour.  Cortes  feared  this  foreshadowed
transportation,  and,  setting  his  wits  to  work,  he  contrived
to  escape  a second  time,  dressed  in  the  clothes  of  a servant
who  attended  him.  He  let  himself  down  into  a small  skiff
and  pulled  for  the  shore,  but  the  strength  of  the  current
at  that  point,  where  the  waters  of  the  Macaguanigua  River
flow  into  the  sea,  was  such  that  his  frail  craft  capsized,

12

Letters  of  Cortes

and  he  reached  the  shore  swimming,  with  certain  valuable
papers  tied  in  a packet  on  the  top  of  his  head.  He  then
betook  himself  to  Juan  Xuarez,  from  whom  he  procured
clothes  and  arms,  and  again  took  sanctuary  in  the  church.
These  repeated  escapes  suggest  sympathetic  collusion
on  the  part  of  his  gaolers.

Velasquez  professed  to  be  won  over  by  such  bravery
and  resource,  and  sent  mutual  friends  to  make  peace.
But  Cortes,  although  he  married  Catalina,  refused  the
Govemor’s  overtures  and  would  not  even  speak  to  him,
until,  some  Indian  troubles  breaking  out,  and  Velasquez
being  at  his  headquarters  outside  the  town,  he  somewhat
alarmed  the  Govemor  by  suddenly  appearing  before  him
late  one  night,  fully  armed,  saying  that  he  had  come  to
make  peace  and  to  offer  his  Services.  They  shook  hands
and  spent  a long  time  in  conversation  together,  and  slept
that  night  in  the  same  bed,  where  they  were  found  next
moming  by  Diego  de  Orellana  who  carne  to  announce
to  the  Govemor  that  Cortes  had  fled  from  the  church.
This  versión  is  accepted  by  the  author  of  De  Rebus  Gestis
without  reservation;  Solis,  whilel  omitting  the  details,
also  dwells  upon  the  intímate  friendship  existing  between
the  two  men.

Las  Casas  tells  a different  tale,  in  which  no  mention  is
made  of  the  refusal  to  marry  Catalina  Xuarez  as  having
any  part  in  the  quarrel,  but  asserts  rather  that  Cortes
was  secretary  to  Velasquez,  and  that  the  news  of  the
arrival  of  certain  appellate  judges  in  Hispaniola  having
reached  Cuba,  all  the  malcontents  in  the  colony,  and
those  disaffected  towards  Velasquez,  began  secretly  to
collect  material  on  which  to  base  accusations  against  him,
and  that  Cortes,  acting  with  them,  had  been  chosen  to
carry  this  information  to  the  judges.  The  Governor  was
informed  of  the  plot,  and  arrested  Cortes  in  the  act  of  em-
barking,  with  the  incriminating  papers  in  his  possession,
and  would  have  ordered  him  to  be  hanged  on  the  spot  but

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

13

for  the  intervention  of  his  friends  who  pleaded  for  him.
A memorial  presented  to  the  King  on  behalf  of  Velasquez
by  his  chaplain  Benito  Martinez  enumerates  this,
amongst  other  grie  vanees  of  the  Governor,  and
fully  confirms  the  statement  of  Las  Casas  on  this  point.
Las  Casas  admits  the  story  of  the  imprisonment,  the  es-
cape, and  the  sanctuary  in  the  church,  but  he  scouts  the
idea  of  any  such  reconciliation  as  Gomara  describes,  and
says  that  the  Governor,  although  he  pardoned  him,  would
not  have  him  back  as  secretary,  adding,  “ I saw  Cortes
in  those  days  so  small  and  humble  that  he  would  have
craved  the  notice  of  the  meanest  servant  of  Velasquez.”
Las  Casas  reminds  his  readers  that  Gomara  wrote  of
things  about  which  he  knew  only  what  Cortes  and  his
adherents  told  him,  and  at  a time  when  Cortes,  who  had
risen  from  small  beginnings  to  great  rank  and  fame,  was
anxious  to  have  his  former  humble  condition  forgotten.
It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  Las  Casas  never  ceased  to
regard  Cortes  as  other  than  an  exceptionally  bold  and
lucky  adventurer,  ñor  did  he  ever  miss  an  opportunity
of  recalling  his  humble  origin  and  irregular  beginnings.
The  wrath  of  Velasquez  was  short  lived,  for  he  afterwards
made  Cortes,  alcalde,  and  stood  godfather  to  one  of
his  children.  During  the  succeeding  years  the  fortunes  of
Cortes  improved,  and  he  amassed  a capital  of  some  three
thousand  castellanos,  of  which  Las  Casas  remarks
“ God  will  have  kept  a better  account  than  I of  the  lives
it  cost.”  Though  married  reluctantly,  he  seems  to  have
been  contented,  and  he  described  himself  to  the  bishop
as  just  as  happy  with  Catalina  as  though  she  were  the
daughter  of  a duchess  (Las  Casas,  Hist.  de  las  Indias,
lib.  iii,  cap.  xxvii.).

Don  Manuel  Orozco  y Berra  unhesitatingly  accepts  the
versión  of  Las  Casas,  and  Prescott  inclines  also  to  the
Opinión  that  Gomara’s  account  is  improbable.  Indeed
he  seeks  to  prove  too  much,  and  his  description  of  the

14

Letters  of  Cortes

reconciliation  is  overcharged,  for  the  Govemor  was  more
than  dignified — he  was  pompous,  and  something  of  a
martinet  in  his  ideas  of  discipline,  being  so  tenacious  of
etiquette  that  no  one,  not  even  the  first  citizens  in  the
colony  sat  uninvited  in  his  presence.  Ñor  had  he  ever
stood  in  relations  of  equal  comradeship  to  Cortes,  how-
ever  friendly  he  may  have  been,  henee  it  is  not  to  be
imagined  that  he  humbled  himself  to  offer  a reconciliation,
being  first  rebuffed  by  his  subordínate,  and  afterwards,
when  it  suited  the  latter  to  present  himself  before  him,  that
he  celebrated  the  resumption  of  friendly  relations  with
such  demonstrations  of  affection  and  intimacy  as  Gomara
describes.  If  the  Gomara  versión  is  the  true  one,  and  the
quarrel  had  no  other  origin  than  the  hot  words  exchanged
concerning  Cortes’ s conduct  in  a prívate  affair  which,
strictly  speaking,  was  no  concern  of  the  Governor’s,
Velasquez  might  easily  have  forgiven  and  forgotten,  es-
peciallv  as  the  lady’s  honour  was  saved,  if  but  tardily.
But  if  the  statement  of  Las  Casas  is  correct,  and  the
Govemor  discovered  his  secretary  in  the  act  of  plotting
with  his  enemies  for  his  overthrow,  then  Diego  Velasquez
must  be  considered  to  have  been  the  most  fatuous  and
frivolous  of  men.  Magnanimity  might  prompt  forgiveness
of  even  such  treachery,  and  Velasquez  might  choose  to
forget  the  falsity  of  a man  whose  enmity  he  could  afford
to  ignore  or  despise,  but  to  afterwards  confide  the  most
important  venture  of  his  life  to  such  a one  was  a blunder,
than  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  a greater.  Yet
Diego  Velasquez’ s vast  capacity  for  blundering  enabled
him  even  to  do  this.

Gold  was  the  magnet  which  drew  the  Spanish  adven-
turers  to  the  New  World,  and  though  it  had  nowhere  been
found  either  so  easily  or  so  plentifully  as  they  expected,
enough  had  been  discovered  to  whet  their  appetites  for
more.  They  lived  in  the  midst  of  a world  of  mysterious
possibilities  which  might  any  day  by  a lucky  discovery

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

i5

become  realities.  One  navigator  after  another  sailed
the  seas  of  unknown  limits,  discovered  islands,  landed  on
strange  coasts,  beheld  prinieval  forests  and  lofty  mountain-
peaks  clothed  with  untrodden  snows,  and,  returning  to
the  settlements  on  the  islands,  they  brought  back  more
or  less  accurate  accounts  of  lands  where  gold  and  pearls
were  plentiful,  peopled  by  natives  eager  to  exchange  these
treasures  for  Spanish  trinkets,  at  the  same  time  producing
enough  specimens  of  precious  metal  to  vouch  for  the
truth  of  their  descriptions.  Rich  colonists,  as  well  as
merchants  in  Cádiz  and  Seville,  were  easily  found  to
risk  funds  in  fitting  out  expeditions  for  the  dual  purpose
of  exploration  and  trade,  while  numberless  were  the  skilful
pilots,  daring  sailors,  and  bold  soldiers  of  fortune  ready
to  enlist  for  such  Service.  After  conquering  Puerto  Rico,
Juan  Ponce  de  León  cruised  among  the  Lucayan  Islands,
and  in  1512,  discovered  the  coast  which  he  named
Florida,  where,  instead  of  the  fountain  of  etemal  youth
he  sought,  he  met  his  death;  in  1513.  Balboa  first  beheld
the  Pacific  Ocean  from  the  mountain  ridge  on  the  isthmus
of  Darien ; in  1 5 1 5 Juan  Diaz  de  Solis  discovered  the  mouth
of  the  river  Píate.

In  1517  Francisco  Hernández  de  Córdoba,  a rich  planter
of  Cuba,  organised  and  equipped  a fleet  of  three  vessels,
manned  in  part  by  some  of  the  survivors  of  the  first
colony  at  Darien,  and  of  which  he  himself  took  command.
The  principal  object  of  this  expedition  was  to  capture
Indians  to  be  sold  as  slaves  in  Cuba,  and  the  Govemor
fumished  one  ship  on  condition  that  he  should  be  reim-
bursed  in  slaves  (Bemal  Diaz,  Hist.  de  la  Conquista,  cap.
i.) . The  first  land  discovered  was  a small  island  to  which
the  ñame  of  Las  Mugeres  (Women’s  Island)  was  given,  be-
cause  of  the  images  of  female  deities  which  they  found  in
the  temple  there.  This  island  lies  off  the  extreme  point
of  Yucatán,  and  from  it  the  Spaniards  saw  what  seemed  to
them  a large  and  important  city  with  many  towers  and

ió

Letters  of  Cortes

lofty  buildings,  to  which  they  gave  the  fanciful  ñame  of
Grand  Cairo.  They  discovered  the  island  of  Cozumel,  and,
in  a battle  with  the  Indians  at  Catoche,  they  captured
two  natives  who  afterwards  became  Christians,  baptised
under  the  ñames  of  Julián  and  Melchor,  and  rendered
valuable  Services  as  interpreters.  Besides  the  coast  of
Yucatán,  the  most  interesting  discovery  made  by  this  ex-
pedition  was  the  mysterious  crosses  which  they  found  the
Indians  venerating  at  Cozumel.  Francisco  Hernández  de
Córdoba  died  a few  days  after  his  arrival  in  Cuba  from  the
wounds  he  had  received  at  Catoche,  and  the  other  members
of  the  expedition  made  their  way  back  to  Santiago  where
the  spoils  taken  from  the  temples,  the  small  quantity
of  gold,  the  two  strange  Indians,  and  most  of  all  the
marvellous  tales  of  the  men  served  to  excite  the  eager
cupidity  of  the  colonists,  ever  ready  to  believe  that  El-
dorado  was  found.  The  news  spread  throughout  the
islands,  and  even  reached  Spain  and  Flanders,  where  the
young  King  Charles  the  First  (the  Emperor  Charles  V.),
then  was.

Diego  Velasquez  promptly  organised  an  expedition  to
follow  up  these  discoveries,  and  establish  trading  relations
with  the  natives,  which  he  placed  under  the  command
of  his  kinsman,  Juan  de  Grijalba.  It  was  composed  of
four  ships,  the  San  Sebastian,  La  Trinidad,  Santiago,  and
Santa  Maria . The  captains  under  Grij  alba  were  F rancisco
de  Avila,  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  and  Francisco  de  Monte] o
(Bemal  Diaz,  cap.  viii;  Oviedo,  Sumario,  lib.  xvii.,  cap.
viü  , Orozco  y Berra,  Conquista  de  México,  vol.  iv.,  cap.  i).
This  fleet  set  sail  on  May  i,  1518,  and  after  a fair  voy  age
reached  the  island  of  Cozumel  on  May  3rd  (. Itinerario  de
larmata  del  Re  Cattolico  apud  Icazbalceta,  Documentos
Inéditos,  vol.  i.).

Grijalba  visited  several  points  along  the  coast,  giving
Spanish  ñames  to  various  bays,  islands,  rivers,  and  towns.
The  Tabasco  River,  of  which  the  correct  Indian  ñame

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

17

seems  to  have  been  Tabzcoob,  received  the  ñame  of
Grijalba.  On  arriving  at  the  river  which  they  named
Banderas,  because  of  the  numerous  Indians  carrying
white  flags  whom  they  saw  along  the  coast,  they  first
heard  of  the  existence  of  Montezuma,  of  whom  these
people  were  vassals,  and  by  whom  they  had  been  ordered
to  keep  a look  out  for  the  possible  retum  of  the  white
men,  whose  former  visit  to  Cozumel  had  been  reported
to  the  Emperor.  On  the  1 7th  of  June,  a landing  was  made
on  a small  island,  where  the  Spaniards  first  discovered
proofs  that  human  sacrifices  and  cannibalism  were
practised  by  the  natives,  for  they  found  there  a blood-
stained  idol,  human  heads,  members,  and  whole  bodies,
with  the  breasts  cut  open  and  the  hearts  gone.  They
named  the  island  Isla  de  los  Sacrificios  (Oviedo,  lib.  xvii.,
cap.  xiv.).

From  the  island  which  they  named  San  Juan  de  Ulua
(from  the  word  Culua  which  they  imperfectly  caught
from  the  natives),  Grijalba  sent  Pedro  de  Alv arado  on
June  24th,  with  the  San  Sebastian  to  carry  the  results
of  his  trading  operations,  and  an  account  of  his  disco v-
eries  to  Diego  Velasquez,  and  to  ask  for  an  authorisation
to  colonise  which  had  not  been  given  in  his  original
instructions,  but  which  the  members  of  the  expedition
exacted  should  now  be  granted  (Las  Casas,  Hist.  de  las
Indias,  lib.  iii.,  cap.  cxii.).

Diego  Velasquez  had  meanwhile  felt  some  impatience,
which  gradually  became  alarm  at  hearing  nothing  from
his  expedition,  so  he  sent  Cristóbal  de  Olid  with  a ship
to  look  for  it.  Olid  landed  also  at  Cozumel,  and  took
formal  possession  by  right,  as  he  supposed,  of  discovery.
After  coasting  about  for  some  time,  and  finding  no  traces
of  Grijalba,  and  having  been  obliged  to  cut  his  cables
in  a storm  which  had  lost  him  his  anchors,  he  re  turne  d
to  Cuba  to  augment  the  uneasiness  of  the  Govemor.  At
this  juncture,  however,  Alvarado  arrived  with  the  treasure

VOL.  I 2

i8

Letters  of  Cortes

and  Grijalba’s  report,  which  threw  the  Govemor  into
an  ecstasy  of  hope,  and  plunged  all  the  colony  into  the
greatest  excitement.  Without  waiting  for  more  news,
Velasquez  set  about  preparing  another  expedition,  and
sent  Juan  de  Saucedo  to  Hispaniola  to  solicit  from
the  Jeronymite  Fathers  the  necessary  authority  for  his
undertaking,  whose  objects  it  was  stated  were  to  look
for  Grijalba’s  lost  armada,  which  might  be  in  danger,
to  seek  for  Cristóbal  de  Olid  fnotwithstanding  he  was
already  safely  retumed),  and  to  rescue  six  Spanish
captives  who  were  said  to  be  prisoners  of  a cacique
in  Yucatán.  On  October  5th,  Grijalba  arrived  in  Cuba
with  his  ships,  and  was  coldly  recerved  by  the  Govemor,
who  professed  himself  much  disappointed  at  the  meagre
results  of  the  voyage,  and  criticised  the  captain  severely
for  not  having  vielded  to  his  companions’  wishes  to  found
a settlement  on  the  newly  discovered  coast,  despite  his
own  instructions  to  the  contrary.

Several  ñames  were  under  consideration  for  the  com-
mandership  of  the  new  armada  but  one  after  another  was
excluded,  and  the  Govemor  s final  choice  fixed  upon
Femando  Cortes  (Las  Casas,  lib.  iii.,  cap.  civ. ; Bernal
Diaz,  cap.  xix.).

This  selection  was  attributed  to  the  inñuence  of  Amador
de  Lares,  a royal  official  of  astute  character  who  exercised
a certain  ascendency  over  Velasquez,  and  of  Andrés  de
Duero,  the  Govemor’s  prívate  secretary,  both  of  whom
Cortes  had  induced  to  present  his  ñame  and  secure  his
appointment,  by  promises  of  a generous  share  of  the
treasures  to  be  discovered.  Since  both  Grijalba  and
Olid  were  safely  back  in  Cuba,  the  only  one  of  the  three
reasons  first  advanced  for  this  expedition  which  remained
was  the  rescue  of  the  Christian  captives  in  Yucatán,
and,  although  Velasquez  had  severely  censured  Grijalba
for  not  establishing  a colony  or  trading  post  somewhere,
he  also  omitted  this  authorisation  in  his  instructions

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

19

to  Cortes.  These  instructions  are  dated  October  23,
1518,  and  consist  of  thirty  Ítems  of  minute  and  tedious
directions  and  counsels,  covering  every  imaginable  emer-
gency.  They  are  quoted  in  full  in  the  Documentos  Inédi-
tos del  Archivo  de  Indias  in  pages  59-79, ' inclusive,  in  the
fourth  volume  of  Orozco  y Berra.  The  document  opens
by  stating  that  the  glorv  of  God  and  the  spread  of  the
faith  being  the  chief  objects  of  the  undertaking,  only
God-fearing  and  loyal  men  should  be  allowed  to  compose
it;  swearing  and  blasphemy  against  God,  the  blessed
Virgin,  and  the  saints  are  provided  against  by  the  severest
penalties ; the  men  are  not  to  take  concubines  with  them
ñor  to  give  scandal  by  communication  with  native  women ;
ñor  is  gambling  to  be  permitted  in  any  form,  dice  being
forbidden  on  board  the  ships.  The  exhaustive  instructions
concerning  exploration  and  trading  contain  no  mention
of  any  authorisation  to  colonise,  but  very  full  powers
are  granted  the  commander  to  cover  unforeseen  cases.

Cortes  threw  himself  heart  and  soul  into  the  new
enterprise  which  offered  him  exactly  the  opportunity
in  search  of  which  he  had  come  to  the  Indies  fourteen
vears  before.  The  mutual  recriminations,  afterwards
indulged  in,  so  obscure  the  facts  that  it  is  difficult  to
discover  exactly  what  share  of  the  expense  of  the  equip-
ment  was  borne  by  each,  but  of  Cortes  it  must  be  said  that
he  staked  everything  he  possessed  or  could  procure  on
the  venture,  even  raising  loans  by  mortgages  on  his  pro-
perty.  Bemal  Díaz  States  that  the  amount  he  expended
was  four  thousand  dollars  ingold,  besides  supplying  many
provisions.  In  the  sworn  statement  of  Puertocarrero  made
in  La  Coruña,  April,  1520,  the  witness  said  that  Cortes
had  paid  two  thirds  of  the  total  costs.  Gomara  de-
scribes Velasquez  as  stingy  and  timid,  wishing  to  fit  out
the  armada  with  the  least  possible  risk  to  himself,  and
that  he  proposed  to  halve  the  cost.

The  appointment  of  Cortesto  suchan  important  com-

20

Letters  of  Cortes

mand  did  not  fail  to  arouse  jealousies  on  the  part  of  some,
and  the  increased  consequence  which  he  gave  himself  in  his
dress,  manners,  and  way  of  living  served  to  stimulate  these
sentiments,  so  that  hardly  had  the  work  of  organisation
got  fairly  under  way,  when  these  mischief  makers  adroitly
began  to  work  on  the  suspicious  spirit  of  Velasquez.  A
dwarf , who  played  court  jester  in  the  Govemor’s  household,
was  inspire d to  make  oracular  jokes  in  which  thinlyveiled
wamings  of  what  was  to  be  expected  from  Cortes’s  over-
masterful  spirit,  once  he  was  free  from  control  and  in  com-
mand  of  such  an  armada,  were  conveyed  to  Velasquez;
these  double  barbed  jestsdidnot  fail  of  their  purpose,  so
that  his  distrust  finally  completely  mastered  his  reason,  and
pushed  him  to  the  incredible  folly  of  deciding  to  revoke
Cortes’s  appointment  as  commander,  and  substitute  one
Vasco  Porcallo  a native  of  Caceres.  This  decisión  he
made  known  to  Lares  and  Duero,  the  very  men  through
whom  Cortes  had  negotiated  to  obtain  his  place,  and  they
hastened  to  warn  their  protégé  of  the  Governor’s  intention.
To  accept  the  humiliation,  the  public  ridicule,  to  say
nothing  of  the  financial  ruin  into  which  the  revocation
of  his  appointment  almost  on  the  eve  of  sailing  would
have  plunged  him,  was  an  altemative  which  never  could
have  been  for  a moment  considered  by  Cortes,  who  im-
mediately  took  the  one  step  essential  to  his  salvation,
which  was  to  hasten  his  preparations,  and,  by  unflagging
efforts,  to  get  his  provisions  and  men  on  board  that  same
day,  and  stand  down  the  bay  with  all  his  ships  during
the  night.  He  even  seized  the  entire  meat  supply  of  the
town  for  which  he  paid  with  a gold  chain  he  wore.  The
accounts  of  the  manner  of  the  departure  of  the  fleet  also
conflict.  It  has  been  represented  as  a veritable  flight,
but  Bemal  Diaz  avers  that,  although  he  got  everythmg
ready  very  quickly  and  hastened  the  date  of  sailing,  Cortes
went  with  a number  of  others,  and  took  formal  leave  of
the  Governor  with  embraces  and  mutual  good  wishes.

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

21

and  that  after  he  had  heard  mass,  Diego  Velasquez  carne
down  to  the  port  to  see  the  armada  off.  Las  Casas  how-
ever  says  that  Velasquez  only  heard  very  early  in
the  moming  (from  the  butcher  probably),  that  the  pre-
parations  had  been  so  rapidly  pushed  forward,  and  that
rising  from  bed  he  made  haste  to  the  port  accompanied
by  all  the  citizens  in  a state  of  great  wonder  and  ex-
citement.  As  soon  as  the  Governor  appeared,  Cortes
approached  within  a bow-shot  of  the  shore  in  a boat
full  of  his  friends,  all  fully  armed,  and,  in  reply  to  the
Govemor’s  upbraidings  and  reproaches  for  such  un-
seemly  haste  in  his  leave-taking,  replied  that,  “ some
things  were  better  done  first  and  thought  about  afterwards
and  this  was  one  of  them  ” ; after  which  bit  of  exculpating
philosophy  he  returned  to  his  ship,  and  the  armada  sailed
away.  Although  Gomara,  in  whom  we  hear  Cortes  him-
self,  agrees  essentially  with  Las  Casas  in  thus  describing
the  departure,  the  story  of  the  dialogue  between  Cortes
in  the  midst  of  a boat-load  of  armed  friends  and  Velas-
quez, helpless  on  the  quay,  surrounded  by  excited  col-
onists,  savours  more  of  fiction  than  of  fact.  The  simple
and  natural  versión  of  Bernal  Diaz  is  more  in  consonance
with  Cortes’s  character,  and  he  doubtless  exercised
scrupulous  care  to  avoid  provoking  the  testy  Governor.
Aware  of  the  intrigues  against  him  and  the  uncertainty
of  his  position,  his  safety  lay  in  pushing  forward  his
preparations  with  unostentatious  haste,  masking  his
determination  under  an  astute  display  of  increased  defer-
ence  towards  his  suspicious  superior.  Although  Cortes
had  evidently  secured  his  captains,  and  could  count  on
his  crews,  the  moment  for  an  act  of  open  defiance  was  not
yet,  ñor  did  Velasquez,  in  a letter  dated  November  17,1519,
to  the  licenciate  Figueroa  which  was  to  be  delivered  to
Charles  V.,  allege  any  such,  though  he  would  hardly  have
failed  to  make  the  most  of  each  item  in  his  arraignment
of  his  rebellious  lieutenant.  Stopping  at  Macaca,  Trini-

22

Letters  of  Cortes

dad,  and  Havana,  he  forcibly  seized  stores  at  these  places,
and  also  from  ships  which  he  stopped,  sometimes  paying
for  them,  and  sometimes  giving  receipts  and  promises.
Everywhere  he  increased  his  armament,  and  enlisted
more  men.

The  Governor’s  uneasy  suspicions  augmented  after  the
sailing  of  the  fleet,  being  also  aggravated  by  the  acts  of
the  members  of  his  household  who  were  jealous  of  the
sudden  rise  in  Cortes’ s fortunes,  and  possibly  also  honestly
distrustful  of  the  signs  of  independence  he  had  already
manifested.  In  the  work  of  fretting  Velasquez,  a half
foolish  astrologer  was  called  in,  who  delivered  oracular
warnings,  and  imputed  to  Cortes  schemes  of  revenge
for  past  wrongs,  (referring  to  his  imprisonment  by  the
Govemor’s  orders),  and  forecasting  treachery.  These
representations  harmonised  but  too  well  with  Velasquez  s
own  fears,  and  easily  prevailed  upon  him  to  try  to  recall
his  attainted  lieutenant  by  sending  decisive  orders  to  his
brother-in-law,  Francisco  Verdugo,  alcalde  mayor  of  Trini-
dad, to  assume  command  of  the  fleet  until  Vasco  Porcallo,
who  had  been  appointed  successor  to  Cortes  should  arrive.
For  greater  security,  he  repeated  these  instructions  to
Diego  de  Ordaz,  Francisco  de  Moría,  and  others  on  whose
loyalty  to  himself  the  hapless  Govemor  thought  he  could
count.  Nobody,  however,  undertook  to  carry  out  the
orders  to  displace  and  imprison  Cortes,  whose  faculty
for  making  friends  was  such  that  he  had  already  won
overall  those  on  whom  Velasquez  relied,  especially  Ordaz
and  Verdugo.  The  very  messengers  who  brought  the
oficial  orders  to  degrade  and  imprison  him  went  over  to
Cortes,  and  joined  the  expedition.  Public  sympathy  was
entirely  with  him,  for  he  had  rallied  some  of  the  best  men
in  Cuba  to  his  standard,  who  thus  had  a stake  in  the
success  of  the  enterprise  which  depended  primarily  on  the
ability  of  the  commander.  In  Cortes  they  had  full  con-
fidence,  and  it  suited  neither  their  temper  ñor  their  mterest

Colonial  Life  in  Cuba

23

to  see  him  superseded.  It  was  Cortes  himself  who  replied
to  the  Governor’s  letters,  seeking  to  reassure  him  with
protestations  of  loyalty  and  aífection,  counselling  him
meanwhile  to  silence  the  malicious  tongues  of  the  mischief
makers  in  Santiago.

The  Govemor  was  in  no  way  tranqnillised  by  such  a com-
munication;  on  the  hontrary,  the  suppression  of  his  orders
by  Verdugo  enraged  him  beyond  measure.  The  fleet
had  meanwhile  gone  to  Havana  whither  a confidential
messenger,  one  Gamica,  was  sent  with  fresh,  and  more
stringent  orders  to  the  lieutenant-governor,  Pedro  Barba,
who  resided  there,  positively  forbidding  the  fleet  to  sail,
and  ordering  the  immediate  imprisonment  of  Cortes.
Diego  Velasquez  was  rarely  happy  in  his  choice  of  men
and,  in  this  instance  his  “confidential”  messenger  not
only  brought  these  offlcial  orders  to  the  lieutenant-
governor,  but  he  likewise  delivered  to  Fray  Bartolomé
Olmedo,  the  chaplain  of  the  expedition,  a certain  letter
from  another  priest  who  was  in  the  executive  household,
waming  Cortes  of  the  sense  of  the  Govemor’s  orders.
Failure  attended  all  Velasquez’s  efforts,  for  Don  Pedro
Barba  replied,  telling  him  plainly  that  it  was  not  in  his
power  to  stop  Cortes,  who  was  so  popular,  not  only  with
his  troops  but  also  with  the  townspeople,  that  any  attempt
to  interfere  with  him  would  result  in  a general  rising
in  his  favour.  Bernal  Diaz  declares  that  they  would
ha  ve  died  for  him,  to  a man.

During  these  days  he  played,  as  he  himself  afterwards
described  it  to  Las  Casas,  the  “ part  of  the  gentle  corsair.”
Parting  in  this  manner  from  the  royal  Governor  of  Cuba,
joint  owner  of  the  ships  and  their  contents,  it  is  obvious
that  there  was  no  turning  back  for  Cortes ; he  was  hence-
forth  driven  forward  by  the  knowledge  that  sure  disgrace,
very  likely  death  was  behind  him,  and  drawn  on  by  the
enticing  prospect  of  achieving  such  complete  success
as  should  vindícate  his  lawless  courses.  To  redeem  the

24

Letters  of  Cortes

irregularity  of  these  initial  proceedings,  it  was  incumbent
on  Cortes  from  thenceforth  to  hedge  his  every  act  with
the  strictest  legal  sanctions,  and  we  search  in  vain  for  the
slightest  lapse  from  prescribed  forms  in  all  the  succeeding
acts  of  his  career.

CHAPTER  III

THE  CONQUEROR

THE  entire  fleet  sailed  for  the  island  of  Cozumel
on  February  xo,  1519,  and  the  first  vessel  to
land  was  the  one  commanded  by  Pedro  de  Alvar-
ado.  AI  varado  began  his  career  by  an  act  of  disobedience
to  orders,  characteristic  of  his  headstrong  and  ci'uel  tem-
perament,  which  procured  him  a severe  reprimand  from
the  commander,  who  arrived  two  days  later  and  found
that  the  Indians  had  all  been  frightened  away  by  the
Spaniards’  violence  in  plundering  their  town  and  taking
some  of  them  prisoners.  Cortes’s  policy  in  dealing  with
the  natives  was  forcibly  declared  at  the  very  outset,  for
the  pilot  Camacho,  who  had  brought  the  vessel  to  land
before  the  others,  he  clapped  into  irons,  for  disobeying
his  orders,  and  he  rebuked  Alvarado,  explaining  to  him
that  his  measures  were  fatal  to  the  success  of  the  expedi-
tion.  The  Indian  prisoners  were  not  only  released,  but
each  received  gifts,  and  all  were  assured  through  the  inter-
preten, Melchor  and  Julián,  that  they  should  suffer  no
further  harm,  and  that  they  should  therefore  go  and  cali
back  the  others  who  had  fled.  Everything  that  had  been
stolen  from  the  town  was  restored,  and  the  fowls  and  other
provisions  which  had  been  eaten  were  all  paid  for  liberally.
Discipline  was  enforced  also  among  the  Spaniards,  and
seven  sailors,  who  were  found  guilty  of  stealing  some
bacon  from  a soldier,  were  sentenced  to  be  publicly
whipped.

The  opinión  that  Cortes’s  followers  formed  a lawless

25

2 6

Letters  of  Cortes

band  of  marauders,  which  rioted  unchecked  through
México,  pillaging,  torturing,  and  outraging  the  natives,
has  been  lightlv  formed,  and  too  generally  accepted.
The  se  facts,  however,  point  to  a different  State  of  things.

We  read  in  the  first  letter  the  concise  and  simple
account  of  the  change  in  the  character  of  the  expedition,
and  of  the  founding  of  a Spanish  settlement  at  Vera
Cruz,  and  that  this  decisión  originated  spontaneously,
and  all  but  unanimously,  among  the  members  of  it.
Their  high  motives — the  conversión  of  barbarians  to  the
true  faith,  and  the  subjection  of  vast  and  fabulously
rich  kingdoms  to  the  Spanish  crown — impelled  them  in
these  superlative  interests  to  set  aside  the  trivial  pro-
jects  of  Diego  Velasquez,  and  to  impose  upon  Cortes
the  office  of  His  Majesty’s  lieutenant.  They  required  his
acceptance  of  this  duty  by  formal  act  of  a notary  public,
and  under  menace  of  reporting  his  disloyalty  to  the
emperor  should  he  refuse  to  comply  with  the  will  of  the
community.  Thus,  from  the  simple  commander  of  a
few  trading  vessels  commissioned  by  the  Governor  of
Cuba  to  take  soundings  and  exchange  Spanish  beads  for
Mexican  gold,  in  the  interest  of  his  employer,  Cortes
appears,  transformed  into  the  Spanish  sovereign’s  lawful
representative,  holding  power  conferred  by  a legally
established  Spanish  municipal  Corporation,  recognising
no  superior  in  the  new  world,  and  exercising  his  functions
in  the  royal  ñame;  and  the  band  of  adventurers  becomes
a regularly  organised  colony,  with  its  administration  and
its  municipal  officers  bearing  the  same  titles,  and  em-
powered  to  perform  the  same  functions,  as  though  the
scrambling  settlement  of  Vera  Cruz  were  stately  Seville
or  historie  Toledo.  All  these  creations  are  described  as
existing  subject  to  an  expression  of  the  sovereign  s
will,  and  the  royal  sanction  for  all  that  had  been  done
in  the  interest  of  the  crown  is  humbly  petitioned.

In  dealing  with  the  Indians  the  same  strict  observance

27

The  Conqueror  •

of  legal  form  was  never  once  relaxed.  They  were  first
invited  to  renounce  idolatry  and  embrace  Christianity ,
and  they  were  “ required  ” — just  as  solemnly  as  Cortes
was  by  the  Vera  Cruz  magistrates— to  acknowledge  the
supremacy  of  the  Spanish  crown.  A notary  public
performed  this  function  of  his  office  as  gravely  as  a sheriff
in  our  own  day  reads  the  riot  act,  and  calis  on  a mob  to
disperse  before  resorting  to  forcé.  That  the  “ requiie-
ment  ” was  unintelligible  to  the  Indians  did  not  invalídate
the  act  of  promulgation.  The  strength,  also,  of  Cortes  s
position  invariably  lay  in  the  identity  of  his  ambitions
with  the  interests  of  the  crown;  he  was  always  right.  By
no  other  conceivable  policy  could  he  have  accomplished
what  he  did.  The  men  whom  Velasquez,  in  his  helpless
rage,  sent  to  supersede  or  overthrow  hiña,  were  mere
playthings  for  his  far-seeing  statecraft  and  his  overpower-
ing  will.  The  story  of  these  events  appears  in  all  its
wonderful  simplicity  and  astounding  significance,  told
in  Cortes’ s own  words  in  these  letters,  which  have  been
compared  with  the  Commentaries  of  Cassar  on  his
campaigns  in  Gaul,  without  suffering  by  the  comparison.

Gaul,  wlien  overrun  and  conquered  by  Julius  Csesar,
possessed  no  such  political  organisation  as  did  the  Aztec
Empire  when  it  was  subdued  by  Cortes.  There  were
neither  cities  comparable  with  Tlascala  and  Cholula,  ñor
was  there  any  central  military  organisation  corresponding
to  the  triple  alliance  of  Tenochtitlan,  Texcoco,  and  Tlaco-
pan,  with  their  vast  dependencies,  from  which  countless
hordes  of  warriors  were  drawn.  On  the  other  hand
while  Cassar  led  the  flower  of  the  Román  legions,  Cortes
captained  a mixed  band  of  a few  hundred  men,  ill-trained,
undisciplined,  indifferent  to  schemes  of  conquest,  and  bent
only  on  their  own  individual  aggrandisement ; of  whom
many  were  also  disaffected  towards  the  commanders,
and  required  altérnate  cajoling  and  threats  to  hold  them
in  hand.  The  very  men  who  were  sent  under  Narvaez

28

Letters  of  Cortes

to  take  him  alive  or  dead,  and  bring  him  back  to  the
vengeance  of  Diego  Velasquez,  were  won  over  to  his  stand-
ard, and  fought  under  his  leadership  until  México  fell,
while  their  rightful  commander  lay  a prisoner  at  Vera
Cruz.  Tapia  was  stripped  of  his  goods  and  bundled
ignominiously  back  to  Cuba  with  their  price  in  his  pock-
ets,  and  Cortes’s  delusive  arguments  in  his  ears,  and,
when  Francisco  de  Garay’s  mission  arrived  by  a fortuitous
coincidence,  simultaneously  with  the  long  delayed  royal
commission  which  recognised  Cortes  as  Captain-General
of  the  New  Spain,  his  men  also  enthusiastically  deserted
in  a body  to  Cortes,  leaving  Garay  to  humble  himself
before  the  man  he  had  come  to  supplant,  and  to  remain  as
his  guest  until  death  suddenly  brought  his  career  to  an
end.

Nothing  more  disastrous  for  Spain  or  for  México  could
be  imagined  than  the  success  of  any  one  of  these  ignorant
and  incompetent  men.  The  mission  of  Cristóbal  de
Tapia  and  its  inglorious  failure  illustrate  the  deplorable
conflict  of  authorities  which  rendered  the  Spanish  colonial
administration  of  that  time  almost  farcical.  The  con-
fusión and  uncertainty  prevailing  in  the  direction  of
colonial  affairs  left  many  loopholes  of  escape  for  all  who
wished  to  disregard  unpalatable  orders.  The  President
of  the  Royal  Council  for  the  Indies,  who  was  in  reality
the  highest  authority,  might  order  one  thing,  but  the
Jeronymite  Fathers,  who  were  supported  by  the  audiencia
in  Hispaniola,  and  who  exercised  vague  but  supreme
power  in  the  Islands,  would  oppose  or  suspend  the  exe-
cution  of  his  commands.  There  was  also  the  Viceroy
with  his  immense  pretensions  to  be  considered,  and  the
Governors  of  Cuba  and  Jamaica,  who  were  jealous  of  any
trespass  on  their  prerogatives,  while  over  alljdiere  was  the
Sovereign,  from  whom  cédulas  or  decrees  could  be  ob-
tained  granting  jurisdiction  which  contradicted  the  exer-
cise  of  authority  already  established,  or  annulled  all  other

The  Conqueror  29

orders.  As  Cristóbal  de  Tapia  brought  no  letters  from
the  Emperor,  but  only  from  the  President  of  the
Council,  the  lieutenant  at  Vera  Cruz,  while  receiving
him  with  respect,  and  protesting  every  intention  to  ob-
serve his  commands,  declared  that  his  credentials  must
first  be  submitted  to  the  Municipal  Council.  That  rather
vagrant  body  was  composed  chiefly  of  captains,  who  were
either  in  México  with  Cortes,  or  off  executing  his  orders
in  various  places,  and  it  was  not  an  easy  thing  to  unite
them  promptly.  Cortes  claimed  to  hold  his  authority
from  that  Council,  which  he  had  himself  created,  and  which
in  its  turn  recognised  no  superior  short  of  the  Emperor.
Treating  with  Tapia  through  Fray  Pedro  Melgarejo  de
Urea,  and  members  of  the  Council,  it  was  quickly  dis-
covered  that  he  was  accessible  to  golden  arguments,  so
he  was  loaded  with  gifts,  and,  after  selling  his  negro  slaves,
horses.'arms,  etc.,  at  a good  price,  he  consented  to  return
to  Hispaniola.  Here  he  was  sharply  censured  by  the
audiencia  and  the  Jeronymites,  who  had  originally  for-
bidden  him  to  land  in  México,  or  interfere  in  any  way  with
the  conquests  of  Cortes.

The  foundations  of  a liberal  and  independent  colonial
administration  already  existed  in  México,  on  which  a
stable  System  of  govemment  might  ha  ve  been  built  up,
but  unfortunately  these  principies,  which  were  better
known  to  Spaniards  in  that  century  than  to  any  other
continental  people,  were  in  their  decadence.  Under
Charles  V.,  began  the  disintegration  of  the  people’s
liberties,  which  affected  likewise  the  government  of  all
the  dependencies,  and  the  System  of  rule  by  Viceroys
and  a horde  of  rapacious  bureaucrats  was  initiated,
which  lasted  in  Latin-America  until  the  last  Spanish
colony  aisappeared  with  the  proclamation  of  Cuba’s
independence.

Cortes  was  daring  but  never  rash.  His  plans  were
carefully  formed,  and  his  decisions  were  the  result  of

3o

Letters  of  Cortes

cautious  calculations  which  seemed  to  take  cognisance
of  every  emergency,  to  forestall  every  risk.  In  the  exe-
cution  of  his  designs,  he  was  as  relentless  as  he  was  daring.
Both  his  resolution  and  his  perse veranee  were  implacable,
and  those  who  did  not  choose  to  bend  to  his  will  were
made  to  break;  but  if  his  hand  was  iron,  soft  was  the
velvet  of  his  glove.  Sois  mon  frére  ou  je  te  tue,  de-
scribes his  dealings  with  all  about  him.  Equanimity  and
resolution  were  the  chief  characteristics  of  his  conduct.
His  self-possession  was  never  disturbed  by  misfortune,
and  as  he  sustained  success  without  undue  elation,  so  did
he  support  reverses  with  fortitude,  recognising  defeat
as  a momentary  check,  but  never  accepting  it  as  final.

Besides  being  compared  with  Julius  Csesar  as  a general,
he  has  been  ranked  with  Augustus  and  Charles  V.
as  a statesman,  and  he  unquestionably  possessed  many
of  the  qualities  essential  to  greatness  in  common  with
them.  He  ruled  his  motley  band  with  a happv  mixture
of  genial  comradeship  and  inflexible  discipline,  and  henee
succeeded,  where  an  excess  of  either  the  one  or  the  other
would  have  brought  failure.  He  knew  whom  and  when
to  trust,  giving  his  friendship  he  avoided  favouritism,
with  the  consequence  that  his  men  were  united  by
the  bond  of  a common  trust  in  their  commander.  He
shared  their  hardships,  sympathised  with  their  sufferings,
and  joined  in  their  pleasures,  but  he  hanged  a soldier
who  robbed  an  Indian,  he  cut  off  the  feet  of  another  who
plotted  desertion,  while/in  the  supreme  moment  when  the
conspiracy  to  kill  him  was  discovered  in  Texcoco,  he
hanged  the  leader  before  his  own  door,  but  wisely  ignored
the  trembling  accomplices,  though  he  had  the  list  of  their
ñames  in  his  pocket  at  the  time.

From  the  moment  Cortes  learned  from  the  Indian
chief  of  Cempoal  that  the  Aztec  rule  was  heavy  on  the
subject  tribes,  and  that  disloyalty  seethed  throughout
the  Empire  only  waiting  the  propitious  moment  to  thiow

The  Conqueror  31

off  the  supremacy  of  fear,  his  plan  to  unite  all  the  dis-
contented  elements  in  the  land  under  his  standard,  and
to  overthrow  Montezuma  by  the  very  instrument  his  own
cruelties  and  extortions  had  created,  took  shape.  His
first  move  was  to  persuade  the  Cacique  of  Cempoal  to
refuse  the  tribute  of  twenty  men  for  sacrifice,  and  to
imprison  the  collectors  sent  by  Montezuma;  by  this  act
of  open  rebellion  the  Totonac  tribes  exposed  themselves
to  the  summary  vengeance  of  the  Aztecs,  and  were  left
with  the  solé  hope  of  alliance  with  the  Spaniards  to  save
themselves  from  the  consequences  of  their  insubordination.
This  much  accomplished,  the  next  step  was  to  win  the
gratitude  of  the  tax  collectors,  and  put  Montezuma  under
obligations.  This  was  done  by  opposing  the  Cempoalans’
wish  to  sacrifice  the  collectors  forthwith,  and  by  later
arranging  for  the  escape  by  night  of  two  of  them,  and
sending  them  to  Montezuma  with  his  expressions  of  re-
gret  at  the  indignities  they  had  suffered,  and  his  assurance
to  the  Emperor  that  he  would  also  effect  the  escape
of  the  remaining  three.  These  he  held  as  hostages,  for
when  the  escape  of  the  two  became  known  the  next  day,
Cortes  feigned  great  wrath  at  the  negligence  of  the  guards
and,  in  order  to  secure  the  remaining  prisoners,  he  put
them  in  irons  and  sent  them  on  board  one  of  his  own
caravels.  The  news  of  these  events  spread  quickly,
and  the  Totanacs,  convinced  that  the  hour  of  successful
re  volt  against  Aztec  oppression  was  at  hand,  rose  as  one
man  against  Montezuma,  and  committed  their  lives  and
fortunes  to  the  Spaniards.  This  result  was  a diplomatic
victory  of  no  mean  valué.

He  next  beat  the  Tlascalans,  not  into  submission  but
into  an  alliance,  and  this  pact  he  cemented  by  every  art
of  which  he  was  master.  The  astonishment,  which  many
ha  ve  lightly  expressed,  that  a mighty  State  should  be  so
easily  invaded  and  overthrown  by  a handful  of  adventurers
is  considerably  lessened  when  the  political  and  racial

32

Letters  of  Cortes

conditions  in  the  decay ing  Empire  are  understood,  and
the  part  played  by  the  Tlascalans  in  the  conquest  is  rightly
estimated.  They  were  a warlike  people  who  had  preserved
the  independence  of  their  mountain  republic  against  the
might  of  Montezuma,  somewhat  as  the  Montenegrins
have  ever  defended  themselves  against  the  Ottoman
power.  They  were  from  a military  point  of  view  the
equals,  if  not  the  superiors,  of  the  Aztecs  in  the  field,
fighting  with  the  same  weapons  and  employing  like
tactics ; henee  one  hundred  thousand  Tlascalans,  captained
by  Cortes,  who  carne  as  the  fulfiller  of  prophecies,  almost
a supernatural  being  with  demigods  in  his  train,  com-
manding  thunder  and  lightning,  and  mounted  upon
unknown  and  formidable  beasts,  were  invincible.  The
Tlascalans  had  long  bided  the  time  for  their  vengeance,
and  in  the  alliance  with  Cortes  they  saw  their  opportunity.
In  two  potential  moments  Tlascala  held  the  balance  of
victory  or  defeat,  and  a hair  would  have  tipped  it  either
way.  When  the  famished,  blood-stained  remnant  of  the
Spaniards,  flying  from  the  horrors  of  the  Noche  Triste,
fell  exhausted  at  the  gates  of  their  capital,  to  annihilate
them  was  within  their  choice,  but  these  loyal,  short-
sighted  Indians  stood  fast  to  their  bond,  took  the  wreck
of  the  army  in  as  brothers,  nursed  them,  cured  their
wounds,  and  played  the  good  Samaritan  with  suicidal
success.  Again,  without  the  brigantines,  the  capture  of
México  was  more  than  doubtful ; the  brigantines  meant
famine  for  the  invested  city,  and  even  with  them  it
took  seventy-five  days  to  reduce  it.  Tlascala  provided
the  material,  built  the  brigantines,  paid  for  them,  and
sent  eight  thousand  men  to  carry  them  across  the  moun-
tain passes,  escorted  by  twenty  thousand  more  to  pro-
tect  the  convoy,  and  finally  built  the  canal  from  which
they  were  launched  on  the  lake  of  Texcoco.  Throw
the  weight  of  Tlascala  on  the  Aztec  side,  and  the  history
of  the  conquest  of  México  would  have  to  be  re-written.

The  Conqueror  33

But  even  these  brave  people  were  wanting  in  the  true
spirit  of  unitv  and  discipline  essential  to  the  success
of  large  military  operations,  and  their  leaders,  despite
their  unquestioned  bravery,  invited  defeat  by  their  foolish
jealousies  and  petty  quarrels  o ver  questions.  of  personal
vanity.  The  Indian  tribes  in  México  would  indeed  seem
to  have  been  destitute  of  patriotic  sentiment,  tribal
feeling  undoubtedly  existed,  but  was,  unfortunately  for
them,  a source  rather  of  disunion  than  a bond  of  strength.
In  his  description  of  the  engagements  between  the
arañes  under  Xicotencatl  and  the  forces  of  Cortes,  Bernal
Diaz  ascribes  the  victory  to  three  causes,  saying  that
next  to  God’s  help,  it  was  owing  to  the  cavalry  (as  the
elephants  of  Pyrrhus  struck  terror  to  the  Romans,  so
did  the  Spaniards’  horses  spread  panic  amongst  the
Indians) ; secondly  to  the  inexperience  of  the  Tlascalans,
which  prevented  their  bringing  up  their  troops  without
confusión,  instead  of  which  they  massed  them  together,
thus  enabling  the  Spanish  artillery  to  do  fearful  execution
amongst  them;  and  finally  bccause  the  forces  of  Guaxo-
cingo,  commanded  by  the  chief  Chichimecatl,  did  not
support  the  action  of  the  commander-in-chief,  owing
to  their  leader’s  sulkiness  over  some  observations  of
Xicotencatl  on  his  conduct  during  the  engagement  of  the
previous  day.  This  chieftain  was  plagued  with  a morbid
touchiness  which  despoiled  his  bravery  of  its  virtue,  and
Cortes  later  mentions  with  what  difficulty  he  was  induced
to  take  the  rear-guard  rather  than  the  lead,  during  the
famous  convoy  of  the  brigantines  from  Tlascala  o ver  the
mountain  passes  to  the  lake  of  Texcoco,  and  how  he
was  only  finally  persuaded  by  being  assured  that  the
rear-guard  was  the  post  of  greatest  honour  and  danger;
even  then  he  made  the  condition  that  no  Spaniards  should
share  the  responsibility  with  him.  Similar  rivalries  pre-
vailed  likewise  in  the  Senate,  and  during  the  discussion  on
the  reception  to  be  given  the  Spaniards,  the  venerable

YOL.  I. — 3

34

Letters  of  Cortes

princes  actually  carne  to  blows.  The  story  of  the  con-
quest  is,  on  the  Indian  side,  a humiliating  recital  of
treachery,  mutual  betrayals,  and  tribe  plotting  against
tribe,  each  foolishly  thinking  to  use  the  Spaniards  as  an
instrument  of  vengeance  against  their  neighbours,  whereas
the  fact  was  that  the  astute  Cortes  saw  with  eminent
satisfaction  these  enervating  dissensions,  all  of  which
he  deftly  tumed  to  his  own  profit.

A perpetual  coming  and  going  of  Aztec  ambassadors  ac-
companied  the  march  from  V era  Cruz.  These  unfortunate
messengers,  burdened  with  conflicting  and  impossible
instructions,  must  have  felt  themselves  sent  upon  a fool’s
errand,  pulled  hither  and  thither  according  as  Monte-
zuma’s  hopes  or  fears  happened  to  be  in  the  ascendant.
The  task  of  tuming  back  the  obnoxious  strangers,  but
without  offending  them,  lest,  being  gods,  they  might  wreak
vengeance  on  the  Empire,  was  laid  upon  them.  They
carefully  watched  and  quickly  reported  every  step  in  ad-
vance  made  by  the  Spaniards,  but  their  despatches  were
disheartening  reading  for  their  imperial  master,  being
but  chronicles  of  Spanish  victories,  and  the  defection
of  provinces.  Only  half  convinced,  yet  not  daring  to
disclose  his  doubts,  of  the  semi-divine  character  of  the
invaders,  Montezuma  ordered  every  attention  to  be
lavished  upon  them,  while  at  the  same  time  he  consulted
astrologers  and  magicians  to  disco  ver  some  means  to  bañe
the  pests,  or  inspired  plans  for  their  destruction,  as  at
Cholula  where,  upon  the  discovery  of  the  plot,  he  disa-
vowed  ’responsibility,  and  left  the  Cholulans  to  suffer

the  consequences.  .

The  absence  or  control  of  impulse  in  Cortes  saved  him

from  many  a disaster  which  daring  alone  would  have
brought  upon  a leader  of  equal  boldness  but  less  wisdom,
placed  as  he  was.  Perhaps  the  most  supremely  audacious
act  which  history  records  is  the  seizure  of  Montezuma  in
the  midst  of  his  own  court,  and  his  conveyance  to  the

35

The  Conqueror

Spanish  quarters;  an  undertaking  so  stupefying  in  its
conception  and  so  incredible  in  its  execution  that  only
the  multitude  and  unanimity  of  testimony  serve  to
remo  ve  it  from  the  sphere  of  fable  into  that  of  history.
This,  however,  was  not  an  act  of  mere  daring,  but  as  he
explains  to  the  Emperor  in  his  second  letter,  a measure  of
carefully  pondered  policy.  We  are  now  accustomed  to
see  “political  agents,”  or  financial  and  military  “ad-
visers,”  near  the  persons  of  nominal  rulers,  to  whom  the
controlhng  foreign  power  concedes  sufficient  semblance
of  independence  to  mask  their  essential  servitude,  but
the  system  of  ruling  a nation  through  the  person  of  its
enslaved  sovereign  originated  with  the  seizure  of  Monte-
zuma  by  Cortes.  He  was  a man  of  unfeigned  piety,  of
the  stuff  of  which  martyrs  are  made,  ñor  did  his  conviction
that  he  was  leading  a holy  crusade  to  win  lost  souls  to
salvation  ever  waver.  He  says  in  his  Ordenanzas  at
Tlascala,  that,  were  the  war  carried  on  for  any  other
motive  than  to  overthrow  idolatry  and  to  secure  the
salvation  of  so  many  souls  by  converting  the  Indians  to
the  holy  faith,  it  would  be  unjust  and  obnoxious,  ñor
would  the  Emperor  be  justified  in  rewarding  those  who
took  part  in  it.

Among  other  ordinances  goveming  the  moral  and
religious  welfare  of  the  people  in  México  after  the  con-
quest,  was  one  which  prescribed  attendance  at  the  in-
structions  in  Christian  doctrine,  given  on  Sundays  and
feast  days  under  pain  of  stripes.  The  Jesuit  historian
Cavo  ( Los  Tres  Siglos  de  México,  tom.  i.,  p.  151)  says
that  on  one  occasion  when  Cortes  had  himself  been  absent,
he  was  reprimanded  from  the  pulpit  on  the  following
Sunday,  and,  to  the  stupefaction  of  the  Indians,  sub-
mitted  to  the  prescribed  flogging  in  public.  Cortes  re-
sembled  the  publican  who  struck  his  breast  and  invoked
mercy  for  his  sins,  rather  than  the  Pharisee  who  found
his  chief  cause  for  thankfulness  in  the  contemplation

36

Letters  of  Cortes

his  own  superior  virtues.  Prescott  was  uncertain  whether
this  submission  to  a public  whipping  should  be  at-
tributed  to  “ bigotry  ” or  to  “ policy.”  It  seems  to  have
been  first  of  all  an  act  of  simple  consistency  by  which
the  commander  sanctioned  the  law  he  had  himself  es-
tablished.  Precept  is  ever  plentiful  but  example  is  the
better  teacher,  and  a more  striking  and  unforgetable
example  of  the  equality  of  all  under  the  law,  it  would
indeed  be  difficult  to  find  in  history.  The  policy  of
demonstrating  that  no  one’s  faults  were  exempt  from
the  punishment  provided  by  the  law  was  unquestionably
present,  and  deserving  only  of  applause,  but  for  bigotry
there  seems  to  be  no  place  whatever,  unless  indeed  the
provisión  of  compulsory  instruction  for  both  the  natives
and  the  Spaniards  in  Christian  doctrine  be  so  described.

His  religious  zeal  was  sometimes  intemperate,  ñor
was  it  always  guided  by  prudence,  but  he  usually  showed
wisdom  in  submitting  to  the  restraining  inñuence  of  some
handy  friar  whose  saner  and  more  persuasive  methods
promised  surer  results  than  his  own  strenuous  system  of
conversión  would  have  secured.  Nowhere  is  the  vindica-
tion  of  the  religious  orders  in  dealing  with  native  races
more  convincingly  established  than  in  the  history  of
their  early  relations  with  the  Mexicans.  The  restraints
the  commander  placed  on  the  license  of  his  soldiers  might
well  have  been  prompted  by  his  policy  of  winning  the
friendly  confidence  of  the  Xndians,  but  his  measures  for
repressing  profanity  of  every  sort,  gambling  and  other
camp  vices,  and  his  insistence  upon  daily  mass  and
prayer  before  and  thanksgivings  after  battle,  are  traceable
to  no  such  motive,  and  it  is  more  than  once  recorded  that
the  Indians  were  profoundly  impressed  by  the  decorous
solemnity  of  the  religious  ceremonies  and  the  devotion
shown  by  the  Spaniards.

Shortcomings  in  the  practice  of  the  moral  precepts  of
religión,  either  in  that  century  or  in  this,  are  not  con-

37

The  Conqueror

fined  to  men  who  find  themselves  cut  adrift  from  the
usual  restraints  of  civilised  society,  isolated  and  para-
mount  amidst  barbarians,  whose  inferior  moral  standard
provides  constant  and  easy  temptations  to  lapse,  and,
while  it  were  as  difficult  as  it  is  unnecessary  to  attempt
a defence  of  the  excesses  which  the  Spaniards  undoubtedly
committed  in  México,  it  is  equally  impossible  to  condemn
them  as  exceptional.  Commenting  upon  the  strange
contradiction  between  professed  piety,  and  practised
vice  and  cruelty , Prescott  writes : ‘ ‘ When  we  see  the

hand,  red  with  the  blood  of  the  wretched  native,  raised
to  invoke  the  blessing  of  heaven,  we  experience  something
like  a sensation  of  disgust,  and  a doubt  of  its  sincerity.”
The  distinguished  historian  here  voices  a facile  assumption
all  too  common  amongst  many  who,  lacking  his  luminous
comprehension  of  the  spirit  of  that  age,  commit  the
injustice  of  measuring  the  acts  of  its  men  by  the  more
humane  standards  of  our  own  times.  He  himself  acquits
Cortes  of  the  imputation  of  insincerity,  and  declares  that
no  one  who  reads  his  correspondence,  or  studies  the  events
of  his  career,  can  doubt  that  he  would  have  been  the
first  to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  Faith.  Too  many  barriers,
however,  interposed  between  the  Anglo-Saxon  protestant
historian  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  the  Spanish  Catho-
licism  of  the  sixteenth  to  allow  even  one  of  his  superior  his-
torical  acumen  to  accurately  appreciate  the  operation  of
religious  influences  on  the  character  of  such  a man  as
Fernando  Cortes,  whose  military  conquest  was  prompted
in  a large  measure  by  genuinely  religious  motives,  but
whose  fervent  practice  of  the  Church’s  teachings  unfortun-
ately  alternated  with  lapses  into  grievous  sensuality.

Whatever  else  may  be  doubted,  the  religious  sincerity
and  martial  courage  of  Femando  Cortes  are  above  im-
peachment.  He  was  a stranger  to  hypocrisy  which  is  a
smug  vice  of  cowards  and  if  his  reasons  for  acts  of  policy,
which  cost  many  lives,  may  be  deplored  by  the  humane,

38

Letters  of  Cortes

their  honesty  may  be  reasonably  impugned  by  none.  Had
the  influence  of  his  faith  on  his  moráis  been  proportionate
to  its  strength,  he  would  ha  ve  merited  canonisation.

Sixteenth  century  Spain  produced  a race  of  Christian
warriors  whose  piety,  born  of  an  intense  realisation  of,
and  lo  ve  for  a militant  Christ,  was  of  a martial  complexión,
beholding  in  the  Symbol  of  salvation — the  Cross — the
standard  of  Christendom,around  which  the  faith  ful  must
rally,  and  for  whose  protection  and  exaltation  swords
must  be  drawn  and  blood  spilled  if  need  be.  They  were
the  children  of  the  generation  which  had  expelled  the
last  Moor  from  Spain,  and  had  brought  centuries  of  re-
ligious  and  patriotic  warfare  to  a triumphant  cióse,  in
which  their  country  was  finally  united  under  the  crown
of  Castile.  From  such  forebears  the  generation  of  Cortes
received  their  heritage  of  Christian  chivalry.  The  dis-
covery  of  a new  world,  peopled  by  barbarians,  opened  a
new  field  to  Spanish  missionary  zeal,  in  which  the  kingdom
of  God  upon  earth  was  to  be  extended,  and  countless
souls  rescued  from  the  obscene  idolatries  and  debasing
cannibalism  which  enslaved  them.  This  was  the  white
man ’s  burden  ” which  that  century  laid  on  the  Spaniard  s
shoulders.  To  the  scoffing  philosopher  of  the  eighteenth
century,  these  crusading  buccaneers  in  whose  characters
the  mystic  and  the  sensualist  fought  for  the  mastery
seemed  but  knaves  clumsily  masquerading  as  fools.  The
fierce  piety,  which  furnished  entertainment  to  the  age
of  Voltaire,  somewhat  puzzles  our  own.  Expeditions
now  set  forth  into  dark  continents  unburdened  with
professions  of  concern  for  the  spiritual  or  moral  welfare
of  the  natives.  Indeed,  nothing  is  deemed  more  foolish
than  attempts  to  interfere  with  the  religious  beliefs  and
practices  of  barbarians,  and  the  commander  in  our  times,
who  would  overturn  an  idol  merely  to  set  up  a wooden
cross,  thereby  exposing  his  followers  to  the  nsk  of  being
massacred,  would  be  court-martialled  and  degiaded,  i

39

The  Conqueror

indeed  he  ever  ventured  to  return  to  civilisation.  If
such  work  is  to  be  done  at  all,  there  are  richly  endowed
missionary  societies  to  attend  to  it.  But  even  the
equipment  of  the  missionaries  who  undertake  to  carry
evangelical  doctrine  amongst  savage  peoples  presents
some  striking  contrasts  to  the  barefooted  Spanish  friars
who  first  preached  Christianity  to  the  Mexicans.  If  the
heathen  are  no  longer  brought  by  compulsión  into  the
light,  we  make  them  pay  a heavy  indemnity  for  their
privilege  of  sitting  in  darkness,  and,  whenever  their
opposition  to  the  dissemination  of  Christian  teaching
amongst  them  emerges  from  quiesence  into  activity,  a
warship  is  ready  to  bombard  their  coasts  while  troops
are  at  hand  to  annex  a province.

In  the  eighth  of  Lord  Lyttleton’s  Dialogues  of  the  Dead
the  shades  of  Femando  Cortes  and  William  Penn  are
made  to  discourse  with  one  another  upon  the  merits  of
their  respective  undertakings  in  North  America,  each  ghost
defending  its  own  system.  Friend  Penn  in  one  passage
says  to  Cortes:

I know  very  well  that  thou  wast  as  fierce  as  a lion  and  as
subtle  as  a serpent.  The  Devil,  perhaps,  may  place  thee  as
high  in  his  black  list  of  heroes  as  Alexander  or  Caesar.  It  is  not
my  business  to  interfere  with  him  in  settling  thy  rank.  But
hark  thee,  Friend  Cortes, — What  right  hadst  thou  or  had  the
King  of  Spain  himself  to  the  Mexican  Empire?  Answer  me
that,  if  thou  canst.

Cortes.  The  Pope  gave  it  to  my  Master.

Penn.  The  Devil  offered  to  give  our  Lord  all  the  king-
doms  of  the  earth,  and  I suppose  the  Pope  as  His  Vicar  gave
thy  Master  this;  in  return  for  which  he  fell  down  and  wor-
shipped  him  like  an  idolater  as  he  was,  etc.

The  ghost  of  Penn  defends  his  possession  of  Pennsyl-
vania,  alleging  the  honest  right  of  fair  purchase ; to  which
Cortes  replies :

40

Letters  of  Cortes

I am  afraid  there  was  a little  fraud  in  the  purchase  thy
followers,  William  Penn,  are  said  to  think  cheating  in  a quiet,
sober  way  no  mortal  sin.

The  verbal  skirmish  continúes  in  this  vein,  and  con-
cludes  thus:

Penn.  Ask  thy  heart  whether  ambition  was  not  thy
real  motive,  and  zeal  the  pretence?

Cortes.  Ask  thine  whether  thy  zeal  had  no  worldly
views,  and  whether  thou  didst  believe  all  the  nonsense  of  the
sect  at  the  head  of  which  thou  wast  pleased  to  become  a
legislator.  Adieu,  self-examination  requires  retirement.

The  author  does  not  allow  for  any  clearing  of  the  human
perceptions  in  the  spirit  world,  and  it  is  probable  that
had  Femando  Cortes  and  William  Penn  been  contempo-
raries  and  able  to  discuss  their  respective  Systems  of  deal-
ing  with  Indians,  and  founding  settlements,  they  would
have  found  more  points  of  agreement  than  their  loqua-
cious  ghosts  were  able  to  disco  ver.  The  flaccid  defence
advanced  by  Cortes’ s shade  betrays  some  deteriora-
tion  of  mental  power,  for  in  his  lifetime  the  conqueror  was
hardly  less  formidable  in  polemics  than  he  was  on  the
battle-field,  but,  in  the  feeble  discourse  put  in  the  mouth
of  this  palé  spirit,  we  find  nothing  of  the  fierceness  of
the  lion  or  the  subtlety  of  the  serpent  which  Friend  Penn

attributed  to  Cortes  in  the  flesh.

Penn’s  ghost  professes  to  find  Cortes’s  religious  motives
suspect,  yet  there  are  not  more  proofs  of  his  presence  in
México  than  there  are  of  his  absolute  belief  in  himself  as  a
divinely  chosen  instrument  for  the  conversión  of  souls.
Purging  the  human  soul  from  the  taint  of  idolatry  or
heresy  by  means  of  physical  torments  is  a familiar  blot
on  the  pages  of  the  history  of  religions.

More  than  a century  after  the  conquest  of  México  the
New  England  Puritans  were  torturing  and  killing  by
process  of  law,— not  savage  enemies  who  threatened

The  Conqueror

their  security,  but  one  another,  and  all  withm  their
power,  who  dissented  from  their  own  gloomy  and  pecul-
iar theological  delusions.  They  may  have  belieyed  m
the  mercy  of  God,  but  they  gnmly  preferred  to  see

themselves  as  ministers  of  His  wrath.

Nothing,  more  than  the  exercise  of  great  power  by  a
conscientious  man,  imbued  with  faith  in  himself  as  a
chosen  instrument  for  executing  divine  justice  on  his
fellow  men,  is  surer  to  produce  a very  Frankenstem  ot
fanaticism,  and  all  peoples  and  creeds  have  furnished
the  spectacle  of  men  of  professing  godliness,  who  slew
to  save,  and  whose  claim  to  a great  mission  was  wntten
in  the  blood  of  those  who  were  described  as  God’s  enemies.
There  is  even  Scripture  warranty  for  it.  If  invasión  of  an
unoftending  nation  for  the  purpose  of  conquest  be  justi-
fiable,  either  by  moral  or  utilitarian  arguments,  then
the  sufíerings  which  inevitable  resistance  must  bring  are
covered  by  the  same  justifications.

The  accusation  of  wanton  cruelty,  too  lightly  brought

against  Cortes  has  been  diligently  propagated  by  the
interested,  and  complacently  accepted  by  the  indiscrim-
inating,  until  dissent  from  it  awakens  incredulous  sur-
prise.  Nevertheless,  all  that  can  be  learned  of  his
character  proves  that  Cortes  was  not  by  nature  cruel,  ñor
did  he  take  wanton  pleasure  in  the  sufíerings  of  others.
Conciliation  and  coerción  were  both  amongst  his  weapons,
his  natural  preference  being  for  the  former,  as  is  seen  by
his  never  once  failing  in  his  dealings  with  the  Indians
to  exhaust  peaceful  methods  before  resorting  to  forcé.
The  secret  of  carrying  on  a war  of  conquest  mercifully
has  not  yet  been  discovered,  and  recent  reports  from
Africa  and  the  Philippines  do  not  show  much  ad vanee
on  the  policy  of  the  Spaniards  in  México  four  hundred
years  ago,  though  it  cannot  be  pretended  that  our
modem  expeditions  are  attended  by  the  perils,  known, —
and  most  of  all  the  unknown, — which  awaited  the

42

Letters  of  Cortes

ignorant  adventurers  in  the  New  World  at  every
turn.

There  were  three  ends  which  according  to  Cortes’s
ethics  justified  any  measures  for  their  accomplishment,
ist,  the  spread  of  the  faith,  2nd,  the  subjugation  of  the
Indians  to  Spanish  rule,  and  3rd,  the  possession  of  their
treasures;  and  as  his  nairative  of  the  conquest  unfolds
itself,  it  will  be  seen  that  his  resolution  stopped  at  nothing
for  the  achievement  of  these  ends.  But  there  is  no
instance  of  tortures  and  suffering  being  treated  by  him
as  a sport.  Whether  he  might  not  have  accomplished
all  he  did  with  less  bloodshed,  is  a purely  speculative
question.  Fr.  Acosta  ( Storia  de  las  Indias,  lib.  vii.,  cap.
xxv.)  States  that  so  entirely  were  the  Mexicans  imbued
with  the  belief  that  the  Spaniards  carne  in  fulfilment  of  the
prophecy  of  their  most  beneficent  deity,  Quetzalcoatl,  that
Montezuma  would  have  abdicated,  and  the  whole  erapire
have  passed  into  their  hands  without  a struggle,  had
Cortes  but  comprehended  the  forcé  of  the  prevailing
superstition,  and  met  the  popular  expectation  by  rising
consistently  to  his  róle  of  demigod.  There  are  facts
which  tend  to  lend  weight  to  this  argument,  and  had  Cortes
but  realised  the  possibilities,  he  might  have  been  equal  to
the  part,  though  his  followers  fell  so  lamentably  short,
that  it  is  doubtful  if  the  illusion  could  have  been  long
sustained.  As  it  was,  the  awful  tragedy  of  the  Sorrowful
Night,  and  the  downfall,  amidst  bloodshed  and  suffering
unspeakable  of  México,  was  precipitated  by  the  brutal
folly  of  Al  varado, — not  of  Cortes.

In  his  relations  with  women,  Cortes  shows  his  primi-
tive  polygamous  temperament.  Even  at  the  age  of
sixteen  in  his  native  Medellin,  we  find  him  falling  from
a wall  and  all  but  losing  his  life  in  an  amorous  adventure
with  an  anonymous  fair  one,  and  throughout  his  life
these  intrigues  succeeded  one  another  unbrokenly;  but
his  lo  ves  were  so  entirely  things  “ of  his  life  apart,  that

43

The  Conqueror

their  influence  upon  his  motives  or  his  actions  is  never
discernible.  In  Cuba  his  róle  of  Don  Juan  brought  him
into  a conflict  with  the  Governor,  which  was  the  ongm
of  their  life-long  duel  for  supremacy  in  the  colonies.  But
Catalina  Xuarez,  about  whom  the  trouble  first  began,  is
quickly  lost  sight  of;  she  passes  like  a palé  shade  across
that  epoch  of  her  husband’s  life,  and  is  never  heard  of
again,  until  her  uninvited  presence  in  México,  followed
quickly  by  her  unlamented  death,  is  briefly  mentioned.
The  most  important  woman  in  his  life  was  his  Indian
interpreter,  Marina,  and  some  writers  have  sought  to
weave  a romance  into  the  story  of  their  relations,  for  which
there  seems,  upon  examination,  to  be  little  enough  sub-
stantial  material.  During  the  period  when  she  was  in-
dispensable to  the  business  in  hand,  she  was  never
separated  from  Cortes,  but  we  know  that  he  was  not
faithful  to  her  even  then,  while,  as  soon  as  she  ceased
to  be  necessary,  she  was  got  rid  of  as  easily  as  she  had
been  acquired.

Montezuma  gave  him  his  daughter,  who  first  received
Christian  baptism  to  render  her  worthy  of  the  commander’s
companionship,  and  was  known  as  Doña  Ana.  She
lived  openly  with  Cortes  in  his  quarters,  and  had  with
her,  her  two  sisters,  Inez  and  Elvira,  and  a sister  of  the
King  of  Texcoco  who  was  called  Doña  Francisca.  Doña
Ana  was  killed  during  the  retreat  on  the  Sorrowful  Night,
and  was  pregnant  at  the  time.  A third  daughter  of  the
Emperor,  Doña  Isabel,  married  Alonso  de  Grado,  who
shortly  afterwards  died,  when  she  also  passed  into  the
household  of  the  conqueror,  to  whom  she  bore  a daughter.
(Bernal  Diaz,  cap.  cvii. ; Bernaldino  Vasquez  de  Tapia,
tom.  ii. , pp.  244,  305-306;  Gonzalo  Mejia,  tom.  ii.,  pp.
240—241) . According  to  Juan  Tirado  two  of  Montezuma’s
daughters  bore  sons  to  Cortes,  and  one  bore  a daughter.
(Orozco  y Berra,  Conquista  de  México,  lib.  ii. , cap.  vi. , note.)

In  his  last  will,  Cortes  mentions  another  natural

44

Letters  of  Cortes

daughter,  whose  mother  was  Leonor  Pizarro,  who  after-
wards  married  Juan  de  Salcedo.

It  is  thus  positively  known  that  besides  Marina,  there
were  four  other  ladies  who  shared  in  his  affections  during
this  period  of  the  conquest,  and  meanwhile  his  first  wife
Catalina  Xuarez  la  Marcaida  was  alive  in  Cuba.  These
undisguised  philanderings  must  have  somewhat  blighted
Marina’s  romance.

His  marriage  with  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga  took  place
when  he  was  at  the  zenith  of  his  fame.  The  advantages
such  an  alliance  with  a noble  and  powerful  family  of
Castile  seemed  to  promise,  though  many,  were  perhaps
not  as  tangible  as  the  ambitious  conqueror  had  hoped.
The  marriage  was  negotiated  before  he  and  the  lady  had
met,  but  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  less  happy  for
this  conformity  to  a custom  which  at  that  time  was  uni-
versal in  noble  families.  Doña  Juana  could  have  seen
but  little  of  her  restless  husband,  who  was  perpetually
engaged  elsewhere,  but  she  was  a good  wife,  and  loved
him,  just  as  did  Catalina  Xuarez  and  all  his  mistresses
while  his  uxorious  instincts  made  it  easy  for  him  to  be
equally  happy  with  all  of  them.  He  was  aífectionate  and
tender,  devoted  to  all  of  his  children,  distinguishing  but
little  between  his  legitímate  and  his  natural  offspring  in
a truly  patiarchal  fashion.  For  the  latter  he  secured
Bulls  of  legitimacy  from  the  Pope,  and  provided  generously
in  his  will.  Not  less  strong  was  his  filial  piety,  and  among
the  first  treasure  sent  to  Spain,  there  went  gifts  to  his
father  and  mother  in  Medellin,  and,  after  his  father’s
death,  he  brought  his  mother  to  México,  where  she  died,
and  was  buried  in  the  vault  at  Texcoco,  where  his  own
body  was  afterwards  laid.

The  Fifth  Letter  reports  the  events  of  his  long  journey
of  exploration  through  Yucatán.  In  setting  forth  on
this  expedition  which  was  to  cover  a distance  of  five
hundred  leagues  through  savage  wilds,  Cortes  affected

45

The  Conqueror

the  pomp  of  an  Oriental  satrap,  taking  with  him  besides
the  necessary  soldiers,  guides,  Indian  allies,  and  camp
followers,  a complete  household  of  stewards,  valets,
pages,  grooms,  and  other  attendants,  all  under  the  com-
mand  of  a major-domo  of  the  household.  Gold  and
silver  píate  for  his  table  was  provided,  also  musicians,
j ugglers,  and  acrobats  to  amuse  the  company.  Spanish
muleteers  and  equerries  were  taken  to  have  charge  of
the  carriages  and  horses,  and,  in  addition  to  the  usual
provender,  to  ensure  a supply  of  meat,  an  immense  drove
of  pigs  was  driven  along,  which  could  not  have  accelerated
the  march.  He  had  a map  painted  on  cloth  by  native
artists,  which  showed  after  their  fashion  the  rivers  and
mountain  chains  to  be  crossed.  This  and  his  compass
were  all  Cortes  could  rely  upon  to  guide  him  during  his
perilous  undertaking.  Doña  Marina  went  as  chief
interpreter,  but  Gerónimo  de  Aguilar  did  not  accompany
this  expedition,  though  he  was  not  dead,  as  Bernal  Diaz
States,  for  in  1525  he  applied  for  a piece  of  land  on  which
to  build  a house  in  the  Street  now  called  Balvanera
(Alaman,  Dissertazioni  IV.).  The  record  of  these  events,
however  noteworthy,  may  seem  tame  reading  after  the
exciting  chronicle  of  the  siege  and  fall  of  México — a war
drama  of  the  most  intense  kind,  but,  in  forming  a correct
estímate  of  Cortes’s  character  we  must  not  restrict  our-
selves  to  a study  of  the  qualities  displayed  in  the  course
of  the  conquest,  and  which  prove  him  a most  resourceful
military  genius.  At  five  and  thirty  years  of  age  he  had
successfully  completed  as  daring  and  momentous  an
undertaking  as  history  records,  and  it  is  as  conqueror
of  México  that  he  takes  his  place  among  the  world’ s
great  heroes.  M.  Desiré  Charnay,  in  the  preface  to  his
French  translation  of  the  Five  Letters,  says : “La  conquéte

de  Cortes coúta  au  Mexique  plus  de  dix  millions

d'étres  humains  emportés  par  la  guerre,  les  maladies  et
les  mauvais  traitments:  de  sorte  que  cet’  homme  de  génie

46

Letters  of  Cortes

peut  entrer  sans  conteste  dans  la  redoutable  phalange  des
fléaux  de  Vhumanité

His  subsequent  undertakings  called  for  the  exercise
of  qualities  hardly  less  remarkable,  though  of  a different
order,  and  it  was  absence  of  productive  success  which
has  caused  them  to  be  overlooked  in  a world  where
results  count  for  more  than  effort.

It  was  never  the  policy  of  the  Spanish  crown  to  entrust
the  government  of  dependencies  to  their  discoverers
or  conquerors,  and  when  powerful  friends  at  Court  sought
in  1529  to  prevail  upon  Charles  the  Fifth  to  grant  Cortes
supreme  power  under  the  crown  in  México,  His  Majestv
was  not  to  be  persuaded ; and  in  refusing  he  pointed  out
that  his  royal  precedessors  had  never  done  this,  even
in  the  case  of  Columbus,  or  of  Gonsalvo  de  Córdoba,  the
conqueror  of  Naples.  Had  it  been  possible,  however,
or  the  Emperor  to  free  himself  from  the  suspicions  which
the  persistent  intrigues  of  Cortes’ s enemies  fomented,
especially  from  the  jealous  fear  of  a possible  aspiration  to
independent  sovereignty,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the
wisest  thing,  both  for  México  and  for  the  royal  interests,
would  have  been  the  installation  of  Cortes  in  as  inde-
pendent a vice-royalty  as  was  compatible  with  the  main-
tenance  of  the  royal  supremacy.  While  Cortes,  in
common  with  all  his  kind,  loved  gold,  he  was  not  a mere
vulgar  plunderer,  seeking  to  hastily  enrich  himself,  at
no  matter  what  cost  to  the  country,  in  order  to  retire
to  a life  of  luxury  in  Spain.  Moreover  even  granting
that  he  had  started  with  no  larger  purpose,  it  is  plain
that  he  was  himself  at  the  outset  unconscious,  both  of
his  own  powers  and  of  the  strange  drama  about  to  unfold,
in  which  destiny  reserved  him  the  first  part.  By  the
time  the  conquest  was  completed,  his  knowledge  of  the
possibilities  of  México  had  expanded,  so  that  his  views
on  all  questions  connected  with  the  occupation,  the
government  and  the  future  welfare  of  the  country,  hap

47

The  Conqueror

developed  from  the  schemes  of  a mere  adventurer  mto  the
policy  of  a statesman.  The  constan  tly  revi  ved  accusation
of  aspiring  to  independent  sovereignty  was  a myth,  for
the  Emperor  had  no  more  faithful  subject  than  Cortes,  in
whom  the  dual  mainsprings  of  action  weie  religión  and
loyalty.

His  better  judgment  condemned  the  system  of  enco-
miendas, and  only  admitted  slavery  as  a form  of  punish-
ment  for  the  crime  of  rebellion,  even  then  to  bemitigated
by  every  possible  safeguard.  Far  from  driving  the
natives  from  their  homes,  or  wishing  to  deport  them  to
the  islands,  he  used  every  inducement  to  encourage  them  to
remain  in  their  towns,  to  rebuild  their  cities,  and  resume
their  industries,  realising  full  well  that  the  true  strength
of  government,  as  well  as  the  surest  source  of  revenue,
lay  in  a pacific  and  busy  population.  To  this  end  he
adopted  the  system  of  restoring  or  maintaining  the  native
chiefs  in  their  jurisdiction  and  dignity,  imposing  upon
them  the  obligation  of  ruling  their  tribes, — and  persuading
those  who  had  been  frightened  away  to  the  mountains
to  return  to  their  villages.  The  exceptions  to  this  policy
were  in  the  cases  of  certain  rebellious  princes,  whom  he
considered  powerful  enough  to  be  dangerous.

That  Cortes  understood  the  Indians  and  had  a kindly
feeling  for  them,  is  proven  many  times  over,  while  the
proofs  of  their  affection  for  him  are  even  more  numerous.
Malintzin  was  a ñame  to  conjure  with  amongst  them,
and  while  familiar  relations  with  most  of  the  other  Span-
iards  speedily  bred  contempt,  their  attachment  to  Cortes
increased  as  time  went  on.  The  iron  policy  which  used
massacres,  torture,  and  slavery  for  its  instruments  of
conquest,  did  not  revolt  the  Indians,  since  it  presented
no  contrast  to  the  usage  common  among  themselves  in
time  of  war;  vce  victis  comprised  the  ethics  of  native
kings,  who  in  addition  to  wars  for  aggrandisement  of
territory  and  increase  of  glory  also  waged  them  solely

48

Letters  of  Cortes

to  obtain  victims  for  the  sacrificial  altars  of  their  gods.
This  ghastly  levy  ceased  with  the  introduction  of
Malintzin’s  religión,  and  he  brought  no  hitherto  un-
f amiliar  horror  as  a substitute  for  it.

Some  writers  have  even  essayed  to  parallel  the  cruelties
incident  to  the  procedure  of  the  Inquisition,  and  the
executions  after  sentence  by  that  tribunal,  with  the  human
sacrifices  of  the  Aztecs.  Without  here  embarking  upon
an  investigation  of  the  methods  of  the  Inquisition,  it
may,  in  strict  justice,  be  pointed  out  that,  as  far  as  México
was  concerned,  the  researches  of  the  learned  archaeologist,
Garcia  Icazbalceta,  have  shown  that  during  the  two  hun-
dred  and  seventy  years  of  its  existence  in  that  country,
the  number  of  persons  delivered  to  the  secular  arm  for
execution  was  forty-seven  ( Bibliografía  Mexicana  del
Siglo,  XVI-,  page  382).  Moreover  the  Indians  were
exempt  from  molestation  for  they  were  expressly  defined
as  being  outside  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Holy  Office.

Except  the  independent  Tlascalans,  all  the  other
peoples  of  Anahuac  were  held  in  stem  subjection  by  the
Aztec  emperor;  heavy  taxes  were  collected  from  them,
human  life  was  without  valué,  torture  was  in  common
use;  their  sons  were  seized  for  sacrifice,  their  daughters
replenished  the  harems  of  the  confederated  kings  and  great
nobles,  so  that  Cortes  was  welcomed  as  the  liberator  of
subject  peoples,  the  redresser  of  wrongs.  He  had  pro-
cured  them  the  sweets  of  a long  nourished,  but  despaired
of,  vengeance,  and,  though  it  was  but  the  exchange  of
one  master  for  another,  they  tasted  the  satisfaction  of
having  squared  some  oíd  scores  with  their  oppressors.
The  conquest  completed,  Cortes  bent  all  his  efforts  to
creating  systems  of  government  under  which  the  different
peoples  might  live  and  prosper  in  common  security,  and,
with  the  disappearance  of  the  need  for  them,  the  harsher
methods  also  vanished.  Few  of  his  cherished  intentions
were  realised,  however,  and  the  power  which  would  have

The  Conqueror  49

enabled  him  to  bring  his  wiser  plans  to  fruition  was
denied  him.

The  fruits  of  conquest  are  bitterness  of  spirit  and
disappointment,  though  Cortes  fared  better  than  his
great  contemporaries  Columbus,  Balboa,  and  Pizarro,
who  after  discovering  continents  and  oceans  and  sub-
duing  empires  were  requited  with  chains,  the  scaffold,
and  the  traitor’s  dagger.  True,  he  saw  himself  defrauded
of  his  deserts,  while  royal  promises  were  found  to  be
elastic;  and  in  his  last  years  he  was  even  treated  as  an
importúnate  suppliant,  being  excluded  from  the  presence
of  the  sovereign  to  whose  crown  he  had  given  an  empire.

Lesser  men  would  have  been  content  with  the  world-
wide  fame,  the  great  title,  and  vast  estates  to  which
from  modest  beginnings  Cortes  had  risen  in  a few  brief
years,  but  a lesser  man  would  never  have  accomplished
such  vast  undertakings,  and  it  was  his  curse  that  his
ambitions  kept  pace  with  his  achievements.  From  the
fall  of  México  until  his  death,  his  life  was  a series  of
disappointments,  unfulfilled  ambitions,  and  petty  miseries,
due  to  the  malice  of  rivals,  and  the  faithlessness  of
friends,  relieved  only  by  some  brief  periods  of  splendid
triumph,  illumined  by  royal  favour.  Even  financial
embarrassments  were  not  spared  him.  A curse  was
on  the  Aztec  gold,  and  it  was  not  enough  that  little
treasure  was  found  in  the  city,  but  Cortes  must  be  ac-
cused,  in  the  unreasoning  fury  of  the  general  disappoint-
ment, of  being  in  collusion  with  Quauhtemotzin  to
conceal  the  hoard  and  share  it  together  later  on.  He
yielded  to  this  murmuring  and  consented  to  the  torture
of  the  captive  Emperor,  for  whose  safety  he  had  pledged
his  word,  thus  staining  his  ñame  with  an  indelible  blot  of
shame.  His  journeys  to  Yucatán  and  Honduras,  so  fully
related  in  the  Fifth  Letter,  would  have  won  renown  for
another  but  they  added  nothing  to  his  reputation.  The
several  expeditions  to  the  South  Sea,  and  his  discovery

VOL.  I. — 4

Letters  of  Cortes

5o

of  California,  all  cost  him  immense  sums,  plunged  hira
into  debt,  and  merely  served  to  pave  the  way  for  later
undertakings,  so  that  he  might  with  reason  have  ex-
claimed  with  Columbus,  “I  have  opened  the  door  for
others  to  enter.”  During  this  time  he  was  surrounded  by
enemies  hidden  and  declared,  who  sent  complaints  of  him
to  Spain  by  every  ship ; he  was  accused  of  murdering  his
wife  Catalina  Xuarez  who  had  died  within  a few  months
after  her  arrival  in  México  where,  though  possibly  unwel-
come,  she  was  received  with  due  honours ; he  was  accused
of  defrauding  the  royal  treasury,  as  well  as  his  companions
in  arms,  and  of  taking  an  undue  share  of  the  spoils  for  him-
self ; and  finally  he  was  accused  of  planning  to  throw  off  his
allegiance  to  Spain,  and  set  up  an  independent  government
with  himself  as  king.  These  ceaseless  intrigues  against
him  finally  decided  the  Emperor  to  send  a high  commis-
sioner  (juez  de  residencia)  to  investígate,  not  only  all
charges  against  the  Captain-General,  but  also  to  report
upon  the  general  condition  of  affairs  in  New  Spain.  This
was  the  means  usually  employed  in  such  cases  and  did
not  necessarily  constitute  any  indignity  to  Cortes,  to
whom  the  Emperor  took  occasion  to  write,  notifying
him  of  his  decisión,  and  assuring  him  that  ít  was
in  no  sense  prompted  by  suspicions  of  his  loyalty  or
honesty,  but  rather  to  furnish  him  with  the  opportunity
of  silencing  his  calumniators  once  for  all  by  proving  his
innocence.  Don  Luis  Ponce  de  León,  a young  man  of
high  character  and  unusual  attainments,  was  charged
with  this  delicate  mission,  and  his  appointment  was
universally  applauded  as  an  admirable  one.

He  was  received  upon  his  arrival  in  México  by  Cortes
and  all  the  authorities  with  every  distinction  due  to  him,
but  his  untimely  death  of  a fever  within  a few  weeks  after
his  arrival  defeated  the  good  results  expected  from  his
labours,  and  also  fumished  Cortes’s  enemies  with  another
accusation — that  of  poisoning  the  royal  commissioner.

The  Conqueror  51

His  powers  devolved  upon  Marcos  de  Aguilar,  who  was
not  only  too  oíd  for  such  an  arduous  post,  but  was  ill  of
a disease  which,  it  was  said,  obliged  hun  to  take  nourish-
ment  by  suckling,  for  which  purpose  wet  nurses  and
she-goats  were  daily  furnished  him.  The  speedy  death  of
this  harmless  oíd  man  started  another  story  of  poisoning,
and  was  followed  by  the  supreme  disaster  of  Estrada’ s
succession  to  the  ill-starred  commissionership,  under
whom  the  baiting  of  Cortes  went  on  apace,  while  the  en-
tire population,  Spanish  as  well  as  native,  groaned  under
oppressions  and  vexations  innumerable.  The  slave-trade
was  carried  on  shamelessly  with  nameless  cruelties,
chiefly  by  the  brutal  Nuñez  de  Guzman,  a partisan  of
Diego  Velasquez,  who  had  been  placed  by  the  latter’s
influence  as  Governor  of  Panuco,  for  the  express  purpose
of  tormenting  Cortes,  and  fomenting  cabals  against  his
authority.  This  petty  tyrant  committed  barbarities
never  before  heard  of  in  México.

Wearied  out  with  persecutions  and  insults,  and  hopeless
of  obtaining  justice  from  such  officials  as  Estrada  and  his
subordinates,  Cortes  decided  to  go  to  Spain  and  lay  his
own  case  before  the  Emperor.  His  decisión  created  some
consternation  amongst  his  opponents,  and  Estrada  realised
that  it  was  a grave  blunder  to  drive  the  Captain-General
to  make  a personal  appeal  to  the  Emperor.  If  opposition
or  concessions  could  have  stopped  him,  Cortes  would
have  relinquished  his  plan,  for  overtures  were  made
through  the  bishop  of  Tlascala,  and  promises  of  satisfac-
tion  were  not  spared;  but  his  preparations  were  well
under  way,  and,  though  perhaps  somewhat  mollified  by
the  changed  tone  of  Estrada,  he  remained  firm  in  his
purpose.  Sailing  with  two  ships  from  Vera  Cruz  (where
he  learned  the  news  of  his  father’s  death) , he  landed  after
an  unusually  brief  and  prosperous  voyage  at  the  historie
port  of  Palos  in  May,  1528.

CHAPTER  IV

MARQUES  DEL  VALLE

CORTES  had  arranged  that  his  arrival  at  the  Spanish
Court  should  be  of  the  nature  of  a veritable
pageant.  Different  estimates  of  the  treasure  he
took  with  him  are  given  by  different  authorities,  but
these  are  mere  matters  of  figures;  the  amount  was
fabulous,  and,  in  addition  to  this,  he  carried  a perfect
museum  of  Mexican  objects,  such  as  the  unique  feather-
work  in  which  the  Indians  excelled,  arms,  embroideries,
implements  of  obsidian,  rare  plants;  indigenous  products
such  as  chocolate,  tobáceo,  vanilla,  and  liquid  amber,
gorgeous  parrots,  herons,  jaguars,  and  other  beautiful
birds  and  animáis  unknown  in  Spain  were  carried
or  led  by  Indians,  in  the  dress  of  their  tribes.  That
nothing  might  be  wanting,  he  took  with  him  many
skilful  jugglers,  acrobats,  dwarfs,  albinos,  and  human
monstrosities,  which  were  much  the  fashion  at  that  time,
and  these  curiosities  made  such  a sensation  upon  his
arrival,  that  Charles  the  Fifth  could  think  of  no  fitter
destinátion  for  them  than  to  send  them  on  to  His  Holiness
Clement  the  Seventh,  before  whom  they  performed
and  showed  themselves  to  the  delight  and  wonder  of  the
pontifical  Court.  In  the  personal  suite  of  the  Conqueror,
besides  the  numerous  officials  of  his  household,  there
went  about  forty  Indian  princes  in  their  most  gorgeous
robes  and  jewels,  amongst  whom  were  the  . sons  of
Montezuma  and  of  the  Tlascalan  chief , Maxixcatzin.

The  arrival  of  this  magnificent  cortége  at  Palos  was

52

53

Marques  del  Valle

unannounced,  and  henee  no  fitting  reception  had  been
prepared  there,  but  accident  supplied  a more  remarkable
grouping  of  interesting  men  of  the  century  than  design
could  have  provided.  Within  the  modest  walls  of  Santa
María  la  Rabida,  where  Columbus  had  found  hospitality,
there  met  with  Cortes,  who  was  accompanied  by  Gonzalo
de  Sandoval  and  Andrés  de  Tapia,  Francisco  Pizarro,
whose  brilliant  career  in  South  America,  rivalling  that
of  Cortes  in  the  North,  was  just  dawning;  and  by  a fateful
coincidence,  there  was  also  in  the  suite  of  Cortes,  the
Spanish  soldier  Juan  de  Rada,  by  whose  hand  Pizarro
was  destined  to  perish  in  Perú.  The  date  of  his  arrival
at  Palos  is  given  by  Bemal  Diaz  as  December  1527,  but
Herrera’s  authority  for  the  later  date  has  been  followed
by  Prescott,  Alaman,  and  other  historians.

The  triumphal  home-coming  was  marred  at  the  very
outset  by  the  death  of  Gonzalo  de  Sandoval  at  Palos,  a
few  days  after  their  landing.  For  none  of  his  captains
did  Cortes  cherish  the  affection  he  felt  for  this  gallant
young  soldier,  who  was  his  fellow-townsman  and  loyal
friend.  Sandoval  was  buried  at  La  Rabida,  and  Cortes
first  went  on  a pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  Guadeloupe,
where  he  spent  some  days  in  mourning  his  loss,  and  having
masses  celebrated  for  the  departed  soul.  This  pious
duty  accomplished  he  set  out  for  Toledo,  where  the  Court
then  was,  and  as  the  news  of  his  arrival  had  spread,  and
had  also  been  announced  by  his  own  letter  to  the  Emperor,
he  was  everywhere  accorded  a veritable  triumph  by  the
people,  who  flocked  from  all  sides  to  see  the  hero  of  the
great  conquest,  and  to  gaze  upon  the  marvellous  trophies
which  he  brought ; so  that  since  the  first  return  of  Columbus
no  such  demonstrations  had  been  seen  in  Spain.

A brilliant  group  of  nobles  comprising  the  Duke  of
Bejar,  the  Counts  of  Aguilar  and  Medellin,  the  Grand
Prior  of  St.  John,  and  many  of  the  first  citizens  of  Toledo,
rodé  out  from  the  city  to  meet  the  conqueror  on  the

54

Letters  of  Cortes

plain,  and  the  next  day  the  Emperor  received  him  with
every  mark  of  favour,  raising  him  up  when  he  would
have  knelt  in  the  royal  presence,  and  seating  him  by  his
side.  The  moment  was  an  auspicious  one,  for  influences
had  been  at  work  in  his  favour.  Since  the  appointment
of  the  new  commission  of  residencia,  presided  over  by  the
infamous  Nuñez  de  Guzman,  which  had  already  left  Spain,
the  Emperor’s  information  as  to  the  real  State  of  things  in
México  and  the  respective  merits  of  the  contending  parties,
had  been  much  extended  and  perfected.  He  consulted
Cortes  during  his  stay  at  Court  upon  everything  pertaining
to  the  new  realm;  its  resources,  the  natives,  their  customs,
the  Spanish  colonists,  and  especially  concerning  the  best
means  for  establishing  a stable  government,  and  develop-
ing  industries  and  agriculture.

Besides  full  power  to  continué  his  explorations,  and
the  confirmation  of  his  rank  of  Captain-General,  the  title
of  Marques  del  Valle  de  Oaxaca  was  conferred  upon  Cortes
and  his  descendants,  by  patents  dated  July  6,  i529>
which  was  joined  a vast  grant  of  lands,  comprising  twenty-
eight  towns  and  villages;  one  twelfth  of  all  his  future
discoveries  was  to  be  his  own.  He  received  the  knight-
hood  and  habit  of  Santiago,  and  when  he  was  confined  to
his  lodgings  by  illness,  the  Emperor  visited  him  in  person,
this  latter  being  such  a singular  honour,  that,  as  Prescott
caustically  observes,  the  Spanish  writers  of  the  time
seemed  to  regard  it  as  ampie  recompense  for  all  he  had
done  and  suffered.  It  does  not  seem  certain  that  he
accepted  the  knighthood  of  Santiago,  though  Herrera
says  that  he  had  already  possessed  it  since  1525.  His
reason  for  his  alleged  refusal  was  that  no  commenda  was
attached  to  the  dignity,  and  Alaman  ( Dissertazione  V.)  says
that  while  his  ñame  is  on  the  rolls  of  the  order,  the
insignia  do  not  appear  either  in  his  arms  or  his  portraits,
ñor  is  any  mention  found  of  his  possession  of  this  grade
in  the  list  of  his  honours.

Marques  del  Valle  55

It  is  good  to  note  that  Cortes  did  not  forget  his  friends
while  he  was  at  court,  but  profited  by  the  Emperor  s
hour  of  graciousness  to  obtain  countless  favours  for  them,
especially  for  the  Indians.  The  Tlascalans,  in  recognition
of  their  loyalty,  were  exempted  for  ever  from  taxes  and
tribute;  the  Cempoalans  were  granted  a like  exemption
for  a period  of  two  years ; a college  for  the  sons  of  Mexi-
can  nobles,  and  another  for  girls,  were  endowed.  Money
was  awarded  to  the  Franciscan  order  for  building  churches
and  schools ; tithes  were  established  to  maintain  the
Bishop  Zumarraga;  various  privileges  were  secured  for
the  original  “conquerors”  who  had  settled  in  the  coun-
try.  Also  generous  doweries  were  appointed  to  the  four
daughters  of  Montezuma,  who  were  being  educated  in  a
convent  in  Texcoco,  as  well  as  to  the  daughters  of  Mex-
ican  nobles  who  married  Spaniards.

During  his  stay  in  Spain,  Cortes  married  his  second
wife  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga,  a daughter  of  the  Count  of
Aguilar,  and  niece  of  the  Duke  of  Bejar.  His  gifts  to  his
bride  were  of  such  magnificence  as  to  arouse  even  the
Queen’s  envy,  especially  the  five  large  stones  described
as  emeralds,  which  excelled  any  jewels  ever  seen,  and
were  worth  a nation’s  ransom.  There  were  no  emeralds
in  México,  and  these  stones  were  probably  a kind  of  jade
or  serpentine  of  great  brilliancy  and  valué,  which  were
easily  confounded  with  emeralds.  One  of  these  stones
was  cut  as  a bell,  whose  tongue  was  formed  of  a large
pear-shaped  pearl,  and  which  bore  the  inscription  benedito
sea  el  que  te  crió;  another  was  shaped  like  a fish  with
golden  eyes;  the  third  was  in  the  form  of  a rose;  the
fourth  in  that  of  a trumpet;  and  the  fifth  was  fashioned
into  a cup,  surmounted  by  a superb  pearl,  and  standing
on  a base  of  gold,  on  which  was  the  inscription,  ínter  natos
mulierum  non  surexit  major.  For  this  last  jewel  alone,
some  Genoese  merchants  who  saw  it  at  Palos  offered
forty  thousand  ducats.  The  fame  of  these  jewels  was

56

Letters  of  Cortes

such  that  the  Queen  expressed  a wish  to  have  them,  and,
had  not  Cortes  forestalled  the  royal  desire  by  presenting
them  to  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga  as  a marriage  gift  they
would  doubtless  have  passed  into  the  crown  jewels  of
Spain.

In  the  meantime,  while  Cortes  was  being  lionised  and
honoured  in  Spain,  his  enemies  in  México  were  not  idle,
for  Nuñez  de  Guzman  from  the  moment  of  arriving  there
had  begun  secretly  to  collect  information  against  him,  and
by  unscrupulous  and  inquisitorial  methods  easily  succeeded
in  forming  a voluminous  budget  of  accusations,  among
which  figured  the  alleged  poisoning  of  Luis  Ponce  de  León,
the  conspiracy  to  establish  himself  as  independent  sovereign
in  México,  defrauding  the  royal  fisc,  and  incitement  of  the
Indians  to  rebel  against  the  royal  authority  while  he  was
absent  in  Spain.  Encouraging  the  enemies  of  Cortes
to  depose  against  him  on  the  one  hand,  Guzman  found
excuses  for  persecuting  his  friends  on  the  other,  even  to
the  extent  of  imprisoning,  torturing,  and  hanging  them
on  one  pretext  or  another.  Things  reached  such  a pass
through  the  violence  of  the  president’s  conduct,  that  the
Bishop  Fray  Juan  Zumarraga,  a man  whose  exemplary
life  gave  him  great  influence,  and  the  Franciscan  monks,
sent  a vigorous  protest  to  Spain  against  Guzman
and  his  auditors,  praying  that  he  be  deposed.  This
petition  provoked  an  order  from  the  Empress-Regent  and
the  Royal  Council,  to  take  their  residencia,  and  that  they
be  imprisoned  if  found  guilty  of  the  abuses  imputed
to  them.  The  bishop  himself  was  appointed,  ad  interim,
president  of  the  new  audiencia,  which  was  composed
of  Quiroga,  Salmerón,  and  Ceynos  pending  the  arrival  of
the  permanent  president,  Don  Sebastian  Ramirez  de
Fuenleal,  then  Bishop  of  San  Domingo,  and  afterwards
of  Cuenca.

Nuñez  de  Guzman  sought  to  evade  the  issue  by  organ-
ising,  against  the  Chichimecas,  an  expedition  which  he

57

Marques  del  Valle

conducted  with  characteristic  brutality.  He  left  the
city  at  the  head  of  five  hundred  Spaniards,  and  over
two  thousand  Indians,  between  auxiliaries  and  camp
servants,  before  Cortes  returned  from  Spain.

The  powers  conceded  to  Cortes  as  Captain-General,
and  for  the  continuation  of  his  explorations  and  discover-
ies,  were  so  large,  and  so  ill-defined,  that  they  could  hardly
fail  to  conflict  with  those  of  the  royal  audiencia,  and
this  carne  to  pass  immediately  after  his  arrival  at  Vera
Cruz  on  July  15,  1530.  The  Marques,  as  he  was  hence-
forward  called,  was  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  his
mother,  and  was  received  upon  landing  with  jubilation
by  Spaniards  and  Indians  alike,  who  flocked  in  thousands
from  all  parts  to  welcome  him,  and  to  present  their
grievances  for  his  adjustment.  The  new  audiencia  was
not  yet  constituted,  and  the  auditors,  Matienzo  and
Delgadillo,  sent  strict  orders  to  Vera  Cruz  that  the  people
assembled  there  in  Cortes’s  honour  disperse  to  their
homes,  while  to  Cortes  himself,  who  had  meanwhile
marched  amid  ovations  by  the  way  of  Tlascala  to  Texcoco,
they  delivered  a prohibition  to  enter  the  capital.  This
order  was  in  conformity  with  the  instructions  given  him
before  leaving  Spain,  so  he  was  obliged  to  respect  it,  and
to  establish  himself  at  Texcoco  until  the  arrival  of  the
new  audiencia  which  took  place  in  December  of  the  same
year,  1530.  At  the  outset  everything  went  well,  and
the  new  auditors  rendered  justice  in  several  of  Cortes’s
claims,  and  took  counsel  with  him  concerning  affairs  and
the  measures  to  be  adopted.  This  promising  State  of
things,  however,  was  of  brief  duration,  and,  in  their
letter  of  February  22,  1531,  to  the  Emperor,  they  made
complaints  of  his  pretensions,  and  mentioned  among
other  things  that  the  bishop  in  reading  the  prayers  for
the  King  and  royal  family  added  after  the  words  cum
prole  regia  “ et  duce  exercitus  nostri,”  and  that  they  had
corrected  him  for  so  doing.

58

Letters  of  Cortes

Another  of  their  letters,  in  August,  1532,  complains  of
his  great  influence  over  the  natives,  and  of  his  using
his  powers  as  Captain- General  to  revenge  himself  on  his
enemies,  adding,  “ He  says  he  will  resign  the  Captaincy
General  and  return  to  Spain.  Oh  if  he  would  only  do  it ! ”
(Muñoz,  tom.  lxxix.,  fol.  118).  The  auditors  at  other
times  advised  that  he  be  called  to  Spain  on  some
pretext, — the  more  so  as  he  wanted  to  go.

The  conquest  finished,  Cortes’s  occupation  was  gone.
His  proud  spirit  and  active  temperament  could  ill  brook
the  checks  of  the  audiencia,  and  the  limitations  set  to  his
enterprises  by  men  who  neither  understood  ñor  sym-
pathised  with  them.  At  one  time  he  retired  in  disgust
from  the  capital,  intending  to  devote  himself  to  the  ad-
ministration  of  the  affairsof  his  vast  marquisate  of  Oaxaca.
The  capture  of  the  picturesque  town  of  Cuerna  vaca  is
described  in  the  third  letter,  and  for  beauty  of  position
it  has  few  rivals  even  in  México.  Here  Cortes  had  built
himself  a handsome  palace  and  a large  church,  both
of  which  are  still  standing,  though  in  a lamentable  State
of  advancing  delapidation.  As  a planter  in  Cuba,  he  had
already  shown  initiative  and  capacity,  and  he  profited
by  his  former  experience  to  introduce  successfully  the
sugar  cañe,  the  silk-worm  culture,  new  breeds  of  the
merino  sheep  and  various  other  kinds  of  cattle.  Mills
for  the  handling  of  raw  products  were  established  in
various  places,  and  these  new  industries  with  which
Cortes  endowed  México  have  continued  to  be  among
her  chief  sources  of  wealth.  But  this  was  msufficient
to  occupy  his  restless  activities,  which,  by  the  news  of
events  in  Perú,  and  of  the  rich  countries  discovei  cd  in  the
South  Sea  and  along  the  Gulf  of  California,  were  constantly
excited  to  plan  fresh  enterprises.  In  May,  1 5 3 2 »
fitted  out  two  vessels  which  sailed  from  Acapulco,  under
command  of  his  cousin  Diego  Hurtado  de  Mendoza,  one
of  which  with  the  commander  on  board  was  never  heai  d of

59

Marques  del  Valle

again,  while  the  other  reached  Jalisco  after  many  peiils.
The  misfortunes  of  this  expedition  began  with  a mutiny.

Two  years  later  (1534)  he  built  two  more  vessels  at
Tehuantepec,  which  he  entrusted  to  Hernando  Grijalba,
and  Diego  de  Bezerra  de  Mendoza  (a  relative)  respectively ,
with  Ortun  Jiménez  as  pilot.  The  ships  got  separated
the  first  night  out  and  never  saw  one  another  again.  The
one  commanded  by  Grijalba  discovered  a deserted  island
called  Santo  Tomé,  somewhere  off  the  point  of  Lower  Cali-
fornia, and  returned  thence  to  Tehuantepec;  the  fate  of
the  other  was  tragical,  for  Bezerra  was  murdered  in  his
sleep  by  the  pilot  Jiménez,  who  took  command,  and,  after
coasting  along  Jalisco,  landed  at  the  Bay  of  Santa  Cruz,
where  he,  with  twenty'Spaniards,  was  killed  by  the  natives.
The  remaining  sailors  got  back  to  the  port  of  Chiametla,
where  Nuñez  de  Guzman,  who  was  then  in  Jalisco,  took
possession  of  the  vessel.

These  two  fruitless  ventures  decided  Cortes  to  take
command  himself,  and  in  1536  he  sent  three  ships  from
Tehuantepec  to  the  port  of  Chiametla  where  he  joined
them,  marching  overland  from  México.  He  regained
possession  of  the  ship  which  Guzman  had  seized  from
the  sailors  of  Jiménez,  refitted  it,  and  set  out  on  his
voyage,  exploring  the  coast  for  some  fifty  leagues  beyond
Santa  Cruz  (or  La  Paz),  during  which  trip  he  suffered
innumerable  hardships,  and  lost  many  of  his  men  from
sickness.  The  news  of  his  own  death  reached  México,
and  his  wife  sent  two  ships  and  a caravel  to  look  for  him
and  bring  him  back.  His  wife’s  letters,  together  with
others  from  the  royal  audiencia  and  the  Viceroy  Don
Antonio  de  Mendoza,  urging  his  return  as  very  necessary,
decided  Cortes  to  abandon  further  explorations,  and
after  leaving  Francisco  de  Ulloa  in  California,  he  returned
to  Acapulco  in  the  early  part  of  1537.

He  sent  three  ships,  the  Santa  Agueda,  La  Trinidad ,
and  the  Santo  Tomas,  back  to  Francisco  de  Ulloa  in

6o

Letters  of  Cortes

May  of  that  same  year,  which  after  some  fruitless  cruising
about,  retumed  to  Acapulco,  the  whole  venture  having
cost  Cortes  some  two  hundred  thousand  ducats  ( Noticia
Histórica.  Lorenzana  Cartas  de  Cortes,  edition  1776).  A
royal  cédula,  dated  April  1,  1539  from  Saragossa,  pro-
vided  for  the  payment  of  this  claim,  but  remained  inef-
fective  (Alaman,  Dissertazioni.  V.  Italian  translation
1859).

Thus  the  only  results  obtained  from  these  various
undertakings  were  debts,  and  he  complained  that  he  had
so  many  that  he  was  obliged  to  raise  money,  even  on  his
wife’s  jewels.  He  wrote  in  despair  to  the  Emperor  that
it  was  easier  to  fight  the  Indians  than  to  contend  with
His  Majesty’s  officials,  and  after  years  of  litigation,  during
which  the  royal  authoiities  seemed  to  study  how  best  to  vex
and  circumvent  him,  and  after  the  series  of  useless  but
costly  expeditions  in  the  Pacific,  he  started  on  his  second
joumey  to  Spain,  which  was  to  be  his  last.

A very  different  reception  from  the  former  one  awaited
him,  for  the  Emperor  was  coldly  civil,  and  the  Court
in  consequence  was  colder.  His  constant  complaints
and  demands  for  satisfaction  fell  upon  deaf  or  weary
ears,  for  Court  favours  usually  reckon  more  with  present
than  with  past  Services,  and  there  was  nothing  more  to  be
obtained  from  Cortes,  who  was  broken  in  health  and  no
longer  young.  At  this  time,  too,  Spain  was  all  aflame
with  excitement  over  the  brilliant  achievements  of
Pizarro  in  Perú,  which  eclipsed  the  familiar  exploits  in
México,  now  grown  stale.

He  joined  the  unsuccessful  expedition  sent  against
Algiers  in  1541,  in  which  the  ship  on  which  he  and  his
sons  Martin  and  Luis  sailed  was  wrecked,  together  with
eleven  galleys  of  Andrea  Doria.  They  barely  escaped
with  their  lives,  and  the  five  famous  emeralds,  which
constituted  an  important  item  in  his  fortune,  and  which
he  always  carried  on  his  person,  were  lost.

Marques  del  Valle  61

The  supreme  slight  of  leaving  him  out  of  the  council
of  war,  summoned  to  consider  the  plan  of  the  campaign,
was  at  this  time  put  upon  him,  and,  to  his  boast  that  with
his  Mexican  veterans  he  could  take  Algiers,  one  of  the
generáis  superciliously  rephed,  that  fighting  the  Moois
was  different  work  from  killing  naked  Indians.  His
situation  became  less  and  less  worthy,  and  an  anecdote,
dramatically  illustrating  the  depth  to  which  he  sunk,  re-
lates that  after  vain  efforts  to  get  a hearing  from  the
Emperor,  he  thrust  himself  forward  to  the  steps  of  the
royal  carriage,  where  upon  perceiving  him  the  Sovereign
haughtily  exclaimed,  “And  who  are  you?”  to  which
Cortes  proudly  answered,  “Sire,  I am  a man  who  has
given  Your  Majesty  more  provinces  than  you  possessed
cities.”  What  happened  next  we  are  not  told.  If  it
were  true,  the  incident  would  picture  eloquently  the
degradation  of  the  greatest  captain  of  his  age,  forced
to  waylay  his  Sovereign  at  his  carriage  steps  like  the
meanest  beggar.  There  is  no  evidence  forthcoming,
however,  to  show  that  any  such  dialogue  was  ever  spoken.
Those  who  have  believed  and  repeated  this  story, —
and  they  are  many, — have  done  so  on  the  solé  authority
of  Voltaire,  with  whom  it  apparently  originated.  (Es sai
sur  les  Moeurs,  cap.  1 47.)  He  does  not  indicate  from  what
source  the  information  reached  him.  The  scene  as  de-
scribed  seems  to  epitomise  a very  tragedy  of  disappoint-
ment  and  humiliation,  so  despite  the  staring  stamp  of
fiction  it  bears,  it  will  doubtless  continué  to  pass  for
history  when  less  dramatic  facts  are  consigned  to  forget-
fulness.  Voltaire  sceptically  sneered  at  the  credulity  of
the  Spaniards,  which  enabled  them,  in  the  heat  of  the
fight,  to  see  St.  James  and  St.  Peter  hovering  over  the
Mexican  battlefields  but  he  himself  had  no  difficulty  in
beholding  Cortes  in  such  a singularly  improbable  situa-
tion as  this  story  depicts,  though  indeed  nothing  that  is
told  of  the  appearances  of  those  holy  apostles  seems

Ó2

Letters  of  Cortes

further  beyond  the  limits  of  credibility.  As  an  un-
heeded  suppliant,  the  Marques  suffered  snubs  enough,
without  fictitious  situations  being  invented  to  illustrate
his  fallen  State.  One  last  effort  to  attract  his  Sovereign’s
attention  to  his  claims,  and  secure  the  fulfilment  of  the
royal  grants  and  promises,  was  made  in  the  following
pathetic  letter, — the  last  he  ever  wrote  to  Charles  V., —
to  which  no  response  was  ever  made :

Sacred  Catholic  Casarían  Majesty:

I thought  that  the  labour  of  my  youth  would  have  pro-
cured  me  repose  in  my  oíd  age,  and  thus  for  forty  years  I
have  given  myself  to  God’s  Service,  deprived  of  sleep,  eating
poorly,  and  even  at  times  not  eating  at  all,  with  my  arms
always  at  my  side,  myself  exposed  to  dangers  and  my  fortune
sacrificed  to  bring  into  His  fold  the  sheep  of  a distant  and
unknown  hemisphere,  of  which  we  even  had  no  record,  and
to  magnify  the  ñame,  and  extend  the  patrimony  of  my  King
by  conquering  and  bringing  under  his  royal  yoke  and  sceptre
the  great  kingdoms  and  dominions  of  barbarous  peoples.
And  this  I have  done  at  my  own  expense,  unaided  in  any  way,
— nay  rather  hindered  by  emulous  rivals,  who  like  leeches
have  sucked  my  very  blood.

My  hardships  and  vigils  are  sufficiently  recompensed  by
God,  in  that  He  chose  me  for  this,  His  work,  and  though
people  may  attribute  some  merit  to  me,  it  will  be  clearly
seen  that  not  without  reason  did  Divine  Providence  choose
the  meanest  instrument  for  its  greatest  work,  so  that  to  God
alone  might  be  the  glory.

As  for  the  remuneration  due  me  from  my  King,  I have
ever  been  confident  that,  c aterís  paribus,  it  would  not  be  less
for  being  inYour  Majesty’s  reign;  for  never  did  these  king-
doms of  my  native  Spain,  to  which  these  benefits  accrue,
possess  so  great  and  catholic  a prince,  so  magnanimous  and
powerful  a King.  Thus  when  first  I kissed  Your  Majesty’s
hands,  and  presented  the  fruits  of  my  labours,  you  showed
appreciation  of  them,  and  demonstrated  intentions  to  recom-
pense me  with  honours  which,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  they

Marques  del  Valle  63

were  not  equivalent  to  my  deserts,  Your  Majesty  knows  I de-
murred  at  accepting.

Your  Majesty  commanded,  however,  that  I should  accept
them,  saying  they  were  not  in  payment  for  my  Services,  but
to  demónstrate  your  disposition  to  favour  me,  for  Your  Ma-
jesty would  do  as  those  who  when  shooting  with  the  crossbow,
begin  by  firing  beside  the  mark,  but  end  by  piercing  the
bull’s-eye,  for  the  favours  Your  Majesty  conferred  upon  me
were  outside  the  mark,  but  would  improve  until  they  struck
the  bull’s-eye  of  my  deserts.  I was  also  assured  that  nothing
should  be  taken  from  me,  and  that  I must  accept  what  was
given  me;  henee  I kissed  Your  Majesty ’s  hands  in  gratitude.
When  you  turned  your  back,  all  that  I had  was  taken  from
me,  ñor  were  Your  Majesty’s  promises  to  me  fulfilled,  for
since  Your  Majesty  has  such  a good  memory,  you  will  not
have  forgotten  that  besides  these  words  and  the  promises
Your  Majesty  made  me,  I possess  still  more  and  greater  ones
in  Your  Majesty’s  letters,  signed  with  your  Royal  ñame.
If  my  Services  up  to  that  time  merited  such  acts  and  the
promises  Your  Majesty  made  me,  they  have  not  since  then
diminished,  for  I have  never  ceased  to  increase  the  patrimony
of  these  kingdoms,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  thousand  ob-
stacles  opposed  to  me,  I would  have  accomplished  as  much
since  I received  Your  Majesty’s  favours,  as  I had  before  done
to  merit  them.  I do  not  know  wherefore  the  promised  benefits
are  now  withheld,  ñor  why  I am  deprived  of  those  I possessed.
And  if  it  be  said  that  nothing  has  been  taken  since  I still
possess  something,  I reply  that  to  have  nothing,  or  to  have
useless  possessions,  is  one  and  the  same  thing,  for  what  I
have  produces  me  nothing;  better  were  it  to  have  nothing
at  all  than  to  have  to  use  its  profits  to  defend  myself  against
Your  Majesty’s  fiscal  officers,  which  indeed  is  harder  than  it
was  to  win  the  country  from  the  Indians.  Thus  my  labour
has  procured  me  peace  of  mind  for  having  done  my  duty,  but
has  brought  me  no  profit,  for  not  only  am  I without  rest  in
my  oíd  age,  but  work  on  until  my  death,  should  it  not  please
God  to  finish  me  now;  for  he  who  is  so  occupied  in  defending
his  body  must  needs  neglect  his  soul.

I beseech  Your  Majesty  not  to  requite  such  conspicuous

64

Letters  of  Cortes

Services  with  so  small  a recompense,  and  since  it  must  be
believed  that  this  is  not  Your  Majesty’s  fault,  let  it  be  known;
for,  this  work  which  God  has  accomplished  through  me  is  so
great  and  marvellous,  and  its  fame  has  spread  so  far  through
all  your  kingdoms,  and  through  all  Christendom,  and  even
amongst  the  infidels,  that  everywhere  the  dissension  between
the  Royal  fisc  and  me  is  a subject  of  scandal.  Some  blame
the  fiscal  officers,  others  blame  me;  but  since  the  blame  suffices
neither  to  deprive  me  of  the  compensation  ñor  to  take  írom
me  my  life,  my  honour,  and  my  estáte,  (since  none  of  this
is  done),  it  is  clear  that  the  fault  is  not  mine.  No  one  im-
putes it  to  Your  Majesty,  for  did  you  wish  to  deprive  me  of
all  you  had  given  me,  the  power  to  do  so  is  yours,  and  nothing
is  impossible  to  your  wish  and  power.  To  say  that  a form
is  sought  in  which  the  intention  may  be  realised,  does  not
sound  credible,  for  it  suffices  for  a King  anointed  of  God  to
declare  “thus  I will  and  thus  I command,”  for  all  to  be  ac-
complished without  regard  to  forms.

I beseech  that  Your  Majesty  may  be  pleased  to  explain
in  Madrid  your  intention  to  requite  my  Services,  and  I now
recall  some  of  these  to  your  memory.  Your  Majesty  told
me  you  would  order  the  Council  to  despatch  my  affairs,  and
I thought  this  order  was  given  since  Your  Majesty  said
that  you  desired  there  should  be  no  contention  with  the
fiscal  officers.  When  I asked  for  information,  they  told  me
I must  defend  myself  in  a suit  against  the  claim  of  the  fiscal
officers,  and  abide  by  the  sentence  of  the  Court.  This  seemed
to  me  to  be  grave,  and  I wrote  to  Your  Majesty  at  Barcelona,
begging  that  if  Your  Majesty  was  pleased  to  enter  into  liti-
gation  with  your  servant,  that  it  should  be  before  judges  who
were  above  suspicion,  and  that  Your  Majesty  should  order
others  to  sit  with  those  of  the  Council  for  the  Indies,  and
jointly  reach  a decisión.  Your  Majesty  was  not  pleased  to
do  this,  though  I cannot  divine  the  cause,  since  the  more
numerous  the  judges  the  better  would  be  their  decisión.

I am  oíd  and  poor,  with  more  than  twenty  thousand
ducats  of  debts  in  the  kingdom,  besides  a hundred  more  which
I brought  or  were  sent  after  me,  and  of  which  I also  owe  some-
thing,  for  they  were  borrowed  to  be  sent  to  me.  And  all  draw

65

Marques  del  Valle

interest.  During  the  five  years  which  have  elapsed  since  I
left  home,  my  expenses  have  been  great,  for  I have  main-
tained  my  three  sons  at  Court,  without  once  leaving,  and
besides  them  men  of  learning,  procurators,  and  solicitors,
who  were  all  employed  that  Your  Majesty  might  make  use
of  them.  I also  assisted  in  the  expedition  to  Algiers.  It
seems  to  me  the  fruit  of  my  labours  should  not  be  thrown  away,
or  left  to  the  decisión  of  a few,  without  my  again  begging  that
Your  Majesty  should  be  pleased  to  allow  that  all  your  judges  of
the  Council  should  understand  this  case  and  decide  it  justly.

I have  heard  that  the  Bishop  of  Cuenca  desired  more
judges  than  there  are,  because  it  is  against  him  and  the
licenciate  Salmerón,  the  new  auditor  of  the  Indian  Council,
that  I am  contending  for  sums  of  money,  with  interest,  of
which  they  deprived  me  when  they  were  judges  in  New  Spain,
and  it  is  clear  that  they  cannot  be  asked  to  decide  against
themselves.  I have  not  wished  to  recuse  them  in  this  case,
because  I always  believed  Your  Majesty  would  not  permit
it  to  reach  this  stage,  but  since  Your  Majesty  does  not  please
to  increase  the  number  of  judges,  I am  forced  to  recuse  the
Bishop  of  Cuenca  and  Salmerón,  which  I do  unwillingly  as  it
wastes  time.  This  is  the  most  damaging  thing  for  me  at
sixty  years  of  age,  and,  after  five  years’  absence  from  home.
I have  but  one  son  to  succeed  me,  and  though  my  wife  is
young  enough  to  bear  more,  my  age  leaves  little  hope,  and
should  it  please  God  to  dispose  of  this  one  before  the  suc-
cession,  who  will  profit  by  what  I have  acquired?  My  very
memory  were  lost  in  the  succession  of  women.  Again  and
again  I implore  Your  Majesty  to  associate  other  judges  with
those  of  the  Council ; since  all  are  your  servants  to  whom  the
direction  of  your  Kingdoms  and  your  Royal  conscience  is
confided,  so  also  may  they  be  trusted  to  decide  upon  Your
Majesty’s  grant  to  your  vassal  of  a part  of  all  which  he  won
for  Your  Majesty,  without  labour  or  cost  to  your  Royal Person,
ñor  the  responsibility  of  directing  ñor  the  expense  of  paying
the  men,  who  did  the  work,  and  who  so  loyally  made  over  to
Your  Majesty,  not  only  the  country  he  conquered,  but  a vast
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  and  jewels  which  he  obtained  as
spoils.

VOL.  I — 5

66

Letters  of  Cortes

May  Your  Majesty  also  be  pleased  to  order  the  judges  to
give  their  decisión  within  a certain  time  Your  Majesty  shall
fix  and  without  delay.  This  will  be  a great  grace  to  me,  for
waiting  is  my  loss,  as  I must  return  home,  being  now  no
longer  of  an  age  to  travel  from  inn  to  inn,  but  rather  to  with-
draw  and  settle  my  account  with  God,  for  it  is  a long  one,
and  little  life  is  left  me  to  discharge  it;  better  to  lose  my
estáte  than  my  soul.

May  God  our  Lord  guard  the  Royal  Person  of  Your
Majesty,  with  the  extensión  of  your  Kingdoms  and  glory  as
Your  Majesty  may  desire.

From  Valladolid,  the  3rd  of  February,  1544.

Your  Catholic  Majesty’s  very  humble  servant  and  vassal,
who  kisses  your  Royal  hands  and  feet.

The  Marques  del  Valle.

No  reply  uecessctTy,  is  the  laconic  annotation  at  the
bottom  of  the  last  page  of  this  letter.

The  marriage  arranged  for  his  daughter  with  a son  of
the  Marquis  of  Astorga  was  broken  off,  the  bridegroom
withdrawing  because  the  full  amount  of  the  stipulated
dowry  was  not  forthcoming,  and  after  this  mortification,
Cortes  obtained  permission  to  return  to  México,  trav elling
first  to  Seville,  where  he  was  accorded  a public  reception.
His  rapidly  failing  health  made  it  apparent  that  his  end
was  approaching,  and  prompted  him  to  withdraw  for
quiet  to  Castelleja  de  la  Cuesta,  a small  town  near  Se-
ville where  he  died  in  the  house  of  a magistrate,  Juan
Rodríguez,  in  the  Calle  Real,  on  the  2nd  of  December,
1547,  attended  by  his  son  Don  Martin.

Fernando  Cortes  was  a man  of  médium  height,  deep
chested  and  slender  limbed;  his  complexión  was  rather
palé  and  his  expression  was  serious  even  sad,  though
the  glance  of  his  eyes,  which  in  repose  were  impenetrable,
could  be  kindly  and  responsive.  His  hair  and  beard  were
dark  and  rather  scanty.

67

Marques  del  Valle

Trained  from  his  youth  to  the  exercise  of  arms,  he
was  a most  dexterous  swordsman,  very  light  on  his  feet,
and  at  home  in  the  saddle.

His  speech  was  cahn,  ñor  did  he  ever  use  oaths  or
strong  language,  ñor  give  away  to  exhibitions  of  temper
though  a mounting  flush  and  the  swelling  veins  of  his
forehead  betrayed  his  mastered  passion  when  he  was
vexed,  while  a characteristic  gesture  of  annoyance  or
impatience  was  the  casting  aside  of  his  cloak.

He  dressed  with  exquisite  care  and  great  sobriety,
eschewing  any  excess  of  ornament.  One  splendid  jewel
adomed  his  hand,  a gold  medal  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,
with  St.  John  on  the  reverse,  hung  from  a finely  wrought
gold  chain  around  his  neck,  and  just  under  the  feathers
of  his  cap  was  also  a gold  medal;  these  were  his  only
ornaments.  He  had  some  knowledge  of  Latin,  and  many
of  the  psalms,  hymns,  and  parts  of  the  Church  liturgy,
which  he  knew  by  heart,  he  was  fond  of  reciting.

Though  careless  of  his  food,  he  was  a great  eater,  but
modérate  in  drinking,  and  no  one  could  better  withstand
privations  than  he,  as  was  constantly  shown  on  his  long
marches.  His  chief  relaxation  was  games  of  chance,  in
which  he  indulged  habitually,  but  dispassionately,  making
either  his  winnings  or  losses  a subject  for  jokes  and
laughter.  When  strict  laws  were  enacted  suppressing
gambling  in  México,  his  enemies  alleged  that  he  himself
violated  the  law,  and  that  the  tables  and  cards  were
always  ready  in  his  own  house.

One  of  the  most  notable  things  in  his  last  will  is  the
mention  of  his  doubts  about  the  right  of  holding  slaves.
He  admonishes  his  eldest  son  to  look  well  into  the  ques-
tion,  and  if  it  should  be  decided  by  competent  opinión
that  the  practice  was  wrong,  he  must  act  in  accordance
with  strict  justice;  mean  while  he  must  give  great  attention
to  the  welfare  and  education  of  his  people.  He  left  a
foundation  and  endowment  fund  for  the  hospital  of  Jesús

68

Letters  of  Cortes

(la  Concepción)  in  México,  and  for  a college  and  monastery
at  Coyohuacan,  but  the  funds  ran  short,  and  only  the
hospital  was  really  established  according  to  his  intention.
Masses  were  directed  to  be  said  at  his  father’s  tomb,  and
two  thousand  masses  were  provided  for  the  souls  of  those
who  had  fought  with  him  in  the  conquest,  a provisión
which  cannot  be  considered  in  excess  of  their  probable
spiritual  necessities.

In  his  will  it  was  provided  also  that  his  body  should
be  buried  wherever  he  died  for  a period  of  ten  years,  at
the  expiration  of  which  time  his  remains  were  to  be  taken
to  México,  to  be  there  entombed  in  the  monastery  he  had
founded  in  Coyohuacan;  consequently  his  body  was
first  laid  to  rest  with  fitting  ceremonies  in  the  family
Chapel  of  the  Dukes  of  Medina  Sidonia,  in  the  Church  of
San  Isidro  at  Seville.

The  f ollowing  epitaph  was  composed  by  his  son  Martin :

Padre,  cuya  suerte  impropiamente
Aqueste  bajo  mundo  poseía,

Valor  que  nuestra  edad  enriquecía
Descansa  ahora  en  paz,  eternamente.

(Andrés  Calvo,  Los  Tres  Siglos  do  México.)

There  his  body  lay,  until  by  order  of  his  son  Don
Martin  Cortes,  second  Marques  del  Valle,  it  was  removed
in  1562  to  México,  but,  contrary  to  the  provisions  in  the
will,  the  place  of  sepulture  was  chosen  in  the  monastery
of  St.  Francis  in  Texcoco,  where  his  mother  and  one  of
his  daughters  were  already  buried.

In  1629  Don  Pedro  Cortes  fourth  Marques  del  Valle
died  in  México,  and  with  his  death  the  male  descendance
of  Cortes  carne  to  an  end.

It  was  decided  between  the  Viceroy,  the  Marques  de
Cerralbo,  and  the  Archbishop  of  México,  D.  Francisco
Manso  de  Zuñiga,  to  transíate  the  body  of  the  Conqueror

Marques  del  Valle  69

to  the  capital  and  bury  it  together  with  that  of  his  last
descendant  in  the  Church  of  St.  Francis.

An  elabórate  funeral  procession  was  organised,  which
set  forth  from  the  Cortes  palace  headed  by  all  the  re-
ligious  associations  and  confratemities,  carrying  their
respective  banners,  after  which  followed  the  civil  tribu-
nals.  Next  carne  the  Archbishop  accompanied  by  the
cathedral  chapter  in  full  canonicals.  The  body  of  Don
Pedro  Cortes  was  exposed  to  view  in  an  open  coffin  carried
by  knights  of  the  chapter  of  Santiago,  while  the  coffin  of
his  great  ancestor  covered  with  a black  velvet  pall  was
borne  by  the  royal  judges,  escorted  by  standard  bearers
carrying  a white  banner  on  which  were  embroidered  the
figures  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  St.  John;  another  dis-
playing  the  royal  arms  of  Spain  and  a third  of  black
velvet  showing  the  arms  of  the  Marques  del  Valle.  Mem-
bers  of  the  University  followed,  and  the  procession  closed
with  the  Viceroy  and  all  his  court  with  an  escort  of
soldiers  carrying  arms  reversed  and  banners  trailing.
This  funeral  pageant — probably  the  most  magnificent
ever  seen  in  the  new  world — advanced  to  the  accompani-
ment  of  muffled  drums  and  solemn  chantings,  halting  at
six  different  places  for  brief  religious  rites.

During  more  than  a century  and  a half  the  bones  of
Cortes  were  left  undisturbed,  until  in  1794  they  were
moved  once  more,  and  this  time  to  the  hospital  of  Jesús
of  Nazareth,  which  he  had  founded  and  endowed,  and  in
whose  chapel  a monument  was  prepared  to  receive  the
body,  which  was  coffined  in  a crystal  case  riveted  with
silver  bars.  Would  that  this  translation  had  been  the
last,  and  that  the  pilgrimages  of  this  poor  body  had
ended  within  the  walls  its  owner’s  piety  had  built.

During  the  period  of  unrest  which  followed  immedi-
ately  upon  the  establishment  of  Mexican  independence,
a design  was  said  to  have  been  formed  by  some  “ patriots  ”
to  rifle  the  tomb,  and  scatter  the  conqueror’s  ashes  to

7o

Letters  of  Cortes

the  winds,  of  which  profanation  the  authorities  were  said
to  be  aware,  but  either  unwilling  or  unable  to  prevent  it.
Others  contrived  to  forestall  the  threatened  violation,
and  from  1823  the  body  of  Cortes  disappeared.  Señor
García  Icazbalceta  wrote  to  Mr.  Henry  Harrisse  upon  the
subject  saying:

The  place  of  the  present  sepulture  of  Cortes  is  wrapped  in
mystery.  Don  Lucas  Alaman  has  told  the  history  of  the
remains  of  this  great  man.  Without  positively  saying  so,  he
lets  it  be  understood  that  they  were  taken  to  Italy.

It  is  generally  believed  that  the  bones  of  Cortes  are  in
Palermo.  But  some  persons  insist  that  they  are  still  in  México,
hidden  in  some  place  absolutely  unknown.  Notwithstanding
the  friendship  with  which  Señor  Alaman  has  honoured  me,  I
never  could  obtain  from  him  a positive  explanation;  he  would
always  find  some  pretext  to  change  the  conversation.

Señor  Alaman ’s  description  of  what  occurred  in  1823
is  substantially  as  follows:

Early  in  the  year  1822  discussions  began  in  the  Mexi-
can  Congress,  in  which  the  project  of  destroying  the
monument  in  the  hospital  (of  Jesús)  chapel  was  mooted;
in  the  month  of  August  of  that  year,  Father  Mier,  in  the
hope  of  forestalling  the  intended  desecration,  proposed  that
the  monument  should  be  transferred  to  the  National  Mu-
seum.  The  following  year,  1823,  was  marked  by  the  trans-
port  to  the  capital  of  the  remains  of  the  patriots  who  had
proclaimed  the  independence  of  1810,  and  certain  newspa-
pers  published  violent  articles,  inciting  the  people  to  celé-
brate this  event  by  rifling  the  tomb  of  the  Conqueror,  and
burning  his  body  at  St.  Lazaro.  Fearing  the  execution  of
this  threat,  which  would  have  left  an  indelible  stain  on  the
national  hónour,  the  Vicar  General  directed  the  chaplain
of  the  hospital  to  conceal  the  body  in  a secure  place,  and
both  Señor  Alaman  himself  and  Count  Fernando  Lucchesi,
who  represented  the  Duke  of  Terranova  s interests  in

Marques  del  Valle  71

México  at  that  time,  assisted  at  the  temporary  hiding
away  of  the  remains  under  the  steps  of  the  altar.  The
bust  and  arms  of  gilded  bronze  were  sent  to  the  Duke  of
Terranova  in  Palermo,  and  the  dismantled  monument
remained  in  the  chapel  until  1833,  when  ít  also  disap-
peared  (Alaman  Dissertazioni  sulla  Storia  del  Mess'ico
Dissert.  V.,  Itahan  translation  by  Pelaez,  1859).

Thus  far  Señor  Alaman  is  as  explicit  as  possible,  but
concerning  the  final  resting  place  of  the  body  he  says
nothing  whatever  on  his  own  account,  closing  the  sub-
ject  by  introducing  a quotation  from  Dr.  Mora  (who,
he  says,  was  the  first  to  publish  these  facts),  which  States
that  “ afterwards  the  remains  were  sent  to  his  family.”

In  the  collaborated  work  published  under  the  special
direction  of  Don  Vincente  Riva  Palacio,  entitled  México
a Través  los  Siglos,  it  is  stated  in  a note  on  page  353  of
the  second  volume,  that  Cortes’ s body  was  sent  to  the
Duke  of  Monteleone  in  Italy  in  1823.  (“  fueren  rimitidos

a Italia  a la  casa  de  los  Duques  de  Monteleone  ).  In  the
chapters  of  the  fourth  volume,  which  chronicle  the  events
of  the  year  1823,  no  mention  is  made  of  this  occurrence,
which  it  would  surely  seem  was  of  sufficient  importance
to  merit  notice.  Neither  Mr.  Prescott  ñor  Sir  Arthur
Helps,  ñor  any  other  as  far  as  I can  discover,  has  left  a
record  of  any  attempts  to  clear  up  this  mystery.

If  the  remains  of  the  conqueror  were  taken  to  Palermo
or  consigned  to  the  family  of  the  Dukes  of  Monteleone,
there  is  no  record  of  the  transaction,  ñor  is  any  tradition
of  it  known,  even  by  hearsay,  to  the  present  members  of
the  family,  or  to  the  keepers  of  the  family  archives.

Not  the  least  of  the  glories  of  the  Pignatelli  family,
which  has  kept  its  place  among  the  foremost  of  Sicily
and  Naples,  is  their  descent  from  the  Spanish  conqueror
of  México,  and  it  seems  inadmissible  that  the  body  of
this  illustrious  anees tor  should  arrive  at  Palermo  as
recently  as  1823,  be  buried  nobody  knows  where,  and  no

72

Letters  of  Cortes

record  of  any  sort  be  kept  of  such  an  important  and
interesting  event  in  the  annals  of  the  family.  The  ab-
sence,  therefore,  of  any  record,  or  even  oral  tradition,
of  such  an  event  seems  to  be  at  least  a negative  proof
that  it  never  took  place.  It  is  quite  thinkable  that  the
custodians  of  the  hospital  chapel,  where  the  body  lay  in
1823,  should  have  invented  and  circulated  the  fiction  of
its  transport  out  of  the  country  to  convince  the  intending
desecrators  that  it  had  been  put  beyond  their  reach;
meanwhile  it  was  easy  to  hide  the  coffin  in  some  secret
place,  doubtless  within  the  walls  of  the  hospital  itself,
where  it  may  still  lie  in  a forgotten  grave.  The  legend  of
the  transport  to  Italy  and  the  burial  in  Palermo  being  thus
started  and  doubtless  diligently  spread  with  a purpose,
encountered  no  contradiction,  and,  with  the  death  of  the
necessarily  few  persons  who  possessed  the  secret,  all
knowledge  of  the  facts  was  lost,  while  the  invention  passed
from  legend  into  history,  and  has  been  commonly  ac-
cepted  and  quoted.  Señor  Garcia  Icazbalceta’s  letter
to  Mr.  Harrisse  does, however, state  that  “some  persons
insist  that  they  are  still  in  México  hidden  in  some  place
absolutely  unknown,  ” and  these  persons  are  doubtless
right.  Why  Señor  Alaman  should  have  made  any
mystery  about  the  matter,  even  with  his  friend  Icazbal-
ceta,  does  not  seem  easy  to  explain,  especially  if  he  knew
the  body  to  be  in  Palermo.  If  Señor  Alaman  knew  the
body  was  in  México,  but  wished  to  encourage  the  belief
that  it  was  in  Palermo,  his  reticence  with  Señor  Garcia
Icazbalceta  is  explicable,  for  it  must  also  be  borne  in
mind  that  he  never  positively  said  he  knew  it  to  be  in
Palermo, — he  merely  gave  it  to  be  understood  that  he
thought  so  by  quoting  Dr.  Mora,  who  stated  the  fact
without  oflering  any  proofs  of  its  truth.  If  he  wished
what  he  knew  was  not  true  to  be  believed,  his  regard  for
truth  forbade  his  going  to  the  length  of  a positive  state-
ment,  but  he  might  feel  justified  for  motives  which,  what-

73

Marques  del  Valle

ever  they  were,  in  the  first  half  of  the  last  century,  have
no  existence  now,  in  encouraging  the  spread  of  the  Pa-
lermo  legend.  Or  it  may  also  well  be  that  Señor  Alaman
was  partly  convinced  by  what  he  heard  that  the  body
was  in  Palermo,  but  in  the  face  of  the  contrary  assertions
made  by  some  persons,  and  the  absence  of  any  authentic
record  of  the  transaction,  was  reluctant  to  commit  him-
self  to  a positive  statement.

The  Republic  of  México  has  emerged  from  its  State
of  infancy,  and  has  successfully  survived  the  periods  of
triáis,  and  perilous  struggles,  which  all  new  nations  must
traverse  to  reach  the  state  of  permanent  and  prosperous
peace,  indispensable  to  national  greatness.  The  four
hundredth  anniversary  of  the  discovery  and  conquest,
which  looms  in  sight,  will  find  her  in  the  foremost  ranks
of  the  republics  of  the  New  World,  and  these  great  events
will  doubtless  be  commemorated  by  becoming  celebra-
tions,  which  shah  suitably  revive  the  memory  of  the
great  Conqueror,  and  his  intrepid  allies  of  Tlascala.
If  there  be  any  clue  or  trace  by  which  the  body  of  Cortes
can  be  found,  it  should  be  diligently  followed  up,  until
the  remains  are  recovered  and  restored  to  the  place  of
honour  in  the  national  pantheon.

LAST  WILL  AND  TESTAMENT  OF  FERNANDO
CORTES  MARQUES  DEL  VALLE  DE  OAXACA

75

LAST  WILL  AND  TESTAMENT

1N  the  ñame  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  Father,  Son,  and
Holy  Ghost,  who  are  three  persons  and  one,  only,  and
true  God  Whom  I hold,  believe,  and  confess  to  be  my
true  God  and  Redeemer,  and  of  the  most  glorious  and  for-
túnate Virgin  His  Blessed  Mother,  our  Lady  and  Advócate.

Let  all  who  may  see  this  Testament  know  that  I,  Don
Femando  Cortes,  Marques  del  Valle  de  Oaxaca,  Captain
General  of  New  Spain  and  the  South  Sea  for  the  Caesarian
Majesty  of  the  Emperor  Charles,  fifth  of  this  ñame,  my  sover-
eign  Prince  and  Lord,  being  ill,  but  in  such  free  and  sound
judgment  with  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  endow  me,  fearing
death,  as  is  natural  to  every  creature,  and  desiring  to  prepare
myself  against  such  time  as  it  may  please  God  to  cali  me
henee,  do  for  the  good  of  my  soul,  and  the  peace  and  discharge
of  my  conscience,  execute,  and  recognise  this  document  which
I do  make,  and  order  as  my  last  testament  and  final  will,  in
the  following  form  and  manner.

I.  First  I direct  that,  should  I die  in  the  Spanish  realm,
my  body  shall  be  interred  in  the  church  of  that  parish  wherein
shall  stand  the  house  in  which  I die,  and  that  there  it  shall
remain  until  such  time  as  it  may  please  my  successor  to  trans-
port  my  bones  to  New  Spain;  this  I charge  and  direct  him  to
do  within  ten  years  and  sooner  if  possible,  and  that  he  trans-
port  them  thence  to  my  town  of  Coyoacan,  and  there  give
them  sepulture  in  the  monastery  of  the  nuns  called  La  Con-
cepción, of  the  order  of  St.  Francis  which  I have  founded  in
my  said  town,  with  provisión  for  the  interment  of  myself
and  my  successors.

II.  Item:  I direct  that  should  it  please  God  that  my  end
and  death  should  take  place  in  this  realm  of  Spain,  my  burial
shall  be  attended  to,  according  to  the  provisions  of  those

77

78

Letters  of  Cortes

gentlemen  whom  I have  named  my  executors,  or  of  any  one
of  them  who  may  be  present,  and  that  everything  suitable
thereto  be  decently  ordered.

III.  I direct,  furthermore,  that  the  beneficed  clergy  and
chaplains  of  the  parish  church  of  the  town  or  place  where  I
die  shall  carry  my  body,  and  that  all  the  monks  of  the  re-
ligious  Orders  shall  also  march  in  procession,  headed  by  the
cross,  and  assist  at  the  obsequies  which  shall  be  celebrated;
and  I direct  that  the  usual  alms  may  be  given  to  the  said
religious  orders  according  to  the  judgment  of  my  said
executors.

IV.  Item:  I direct  that,  on  the  day  of  my  death,  fifty
poor  men  be  provided  out  of  my  means  with  full  gowns  of
grey  cloth,  with  large  hoods  of  the  same,  and  shall  accompany
my  funeral  procession  bearing  lighted  torches,  after  which
each  shall  receive  one  real.

V.  Item:  I direct  that  on  the  same  day  of  my  funeral,
if  it  should  take  place  before  midday,  and  otherwise  on  the
day  following,  all  the  masses  possible  shall  be  said  in  all  the
churches  and  monasteries  of  the  said  city  or  town  or  place
of  my  death;  and  besides  these  masses,  five  thousand  more
shall  be  said  on  successive  days  in  the  following  manner:
one  thousand  for  the  souls  in  purgatory,  two  thousand
for  the  souls  of  those  who  lost  their  lives  serving  under
me  in  the  discoveries  and  conquests  which  I made  in  New
Spain,  and  the  two  remaining  thousand  for  the  souls  of  all
towards  whom  I have  obligations  of  which  I am  ignorant  or
f orgetful ; those  which  I do  know  and  remember  shall  be
discharged  as  I direct  in  this  my  testament.  My  executors
shall  recompense  the  said  five  thousand  masses  according  to
custom,  and  I beg  them  in  all  that  concems  my  funeral  to
suppress  the  worldly  pomps,  and  devote  money  rather  to  the

good  of  souls.

VI.  Item:  On  the  said  day  of  my  burial  my  executors
shall  fumish  all  my  own  servants  and  those  of  my  sons  with  a
suitable  mourning  dress,  as  they  shall  judge  proper,  and  during
six  succeeding  months,  my  servants  shall  continué  to  receive
their  usual  stipend  with  their  food  and  drink,  exactly  as
during  my  lifetime.  Those  who  do  not  remain  in  the  Service

Last  Will  and  Testament

79

of  my  son  and  successor  Don  Martin  shall  receive  their  pay-
ment  in  full  on  the  day  they  leave  his  Service.

VII.  Item:  I direct  that  when  my  bones  shall  be  trans-
ported  to  New  Spain  for  interment  in  the  monastery  church
of  Coyoacan,  which  I direct  to  be  built,  that  this  shall  be
done  by  order  of  the  Marquesa  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga,  my
wife,  and  in  such  wise  as  she  or  my  son  or  my  successor  at
that  time,  whichever  of  them  may  be  living  at  that  time,  shall
direct.

VIII.  Item:  I direct  that  the  bones  of  Doña  Catalina
Pizarro  my  lady  mother,  and  those  of  Don  Luis  my  son,
which  are  buried  in  the  monastery  church  of  St.  Francis  in
Texcoco,  and  those  of  Doña  Catalina  my  daughter  which  are
in  the  monastery  of  Cuahuanavac  (Cuernavaca),  be  brought,
and  buried  in  my  sepulchre  in  the  said  monastery  which  I
found  in  my  town  of  Coyoacan.

IX.  Item:  I direct  that  the  hospital  of  Our  Lady  of  the
Conception,  which  I directed  to  be  founded  in  the  city  of
México  in  New  Spain,  shall  be  finished  at  my  cost  according
to  the  plan  drawn.  The  principal  chapel  of  its  church  shall
be  completed  according  to  the  model  in  wood  made  by  Pedro
Vasquez  Jumetrico,  and  the  plan  described  in  the  letter  which
I sent  to  New  Spain,  in  this  present  year  1547.  For  these
costs  I set  apart  especially  the  rents  deriving  from  my  shops
and  houses  in  the  said  city,  situated  in  the  square  and  Street
of  Tacuba  and  San  Francisco,  and  in  the  Street  which  unites
them;  this  income  shall  be  given  exclusively  to  the  said  works
until  they  are  completed,  ñor  shall  my  successor  employ
them  for  any  other  pur poses.  But  it  is  my  wish  and  will
that  the  expenditure  be  made  by  my  successor  as  patrón  of
the  hospital,  and,  when  the  works  are  finished  according  to
the  said  plans,  that  the  same  rents  shall  be  devoted  to  pro-
viding  revenues  for  the  wants  of  the  administration,  and  the
direction  of  the  said  hospital,  following  in  this  institution
the  order  laid  down  by  me  before  a notary  public.  Failing
this,  I direct  that  the  same  system  of  administration  be
adopted  as  that  which  obtains  in  the  hospital  of  the  Five
Wounds,  founded  by  Doña  Catalina  de  Rivera  (may  she
have  glory),  for  maintaining  the  administrators,  chaplains,

8o

Letters  of  Cortes

and  other  officers  and  servants  attached  to  the  said
hospital.

X.  Item:  I direct  that  in  the  chapel  of  the  monastery
of  St.  Francis  in  Medellin,  where  my  father  Martin  Cortes  is
buried,  the  memorial  masses,  for  which  I leave  provisión,
shall  be  celebrated  yearly  in  perpetuity.  My  successor  or
successors  shall  for  all  time  see  to  this,  for  which  purpose  I
ñame,  as  patrón  of  the  said  chapel,  my  son  and  successor
Don  Martin  Cortes,  and  after  him  those  who  shall  follow  him
in  the  succession.  He,  holding  the  said  patronage  (or  those
who  succeed  him  by  right  of  primogeniture) , may  ñame  as
his  substitute  for  the  exercise  of  the  said  patronage  such
person  or  persons  as  may  be  desirable  for  such  time  as  may
please  him,  and  hold  full  power  to  revoke  such  appointment
whenever  he  may  so  desire,  substituting  any  other  who  is
deemed  suitable.  Such  person,  thus  appointed,  shall,  in  the
absence  of  the  head  of  my  house,  hold  the  same  power  and
faculties  as  the  said  patrón  himself,  for  such  time  as  his
appointment  may  last.

XI.  Item:  I declare  that  since  Almighty  God  Our  Lord
has  vouchsafed  to  advance  and  favour  me  in  the  discovery
and  conquest  of  New  Spain,  and  I have  always  received  from
His  merciful  hand  very  great  favours  and  mercies,  both  in
my  victories  over  the  enemies  of  His  Holy  Catholic  Faith,
and  in  the  pacification  and  settlement  of  those  kingdoms,
from  which  I hope  great  service  may  accrue  to  God  our  Lord,
I order  that  the  following  works  be  undertaken  in  grateful
recognition  of  those  said  favours  and  mercies,  and  also  to
discharge  and  satisfy  my  conscience  for  whatsoever  faults
or  burdens  may  lie  thereon,  but  of  which  my  memory  no
longer  takes  account  to  enable  me  to  specify  them :

XII.  I order  and  direct  that,  in  addition  to  the  aforesaid
hospital  which  I have  already  provided  shall  be  built  in  the
city  of  México,  a monastery  of  the  nuns  of  the  Conception,
belonging  to  the  Order  of  St.  Francis,  shall  be  built  in  my
town  of  Coyoacan,  in  such  place,  and  according  to  such  plan
as  I shall  indícate;  and  should  I not  leave  these  instructions,
then  I direct  that  my  successor  or  his  deputy  shall  found  and
build  it,  providing  a community  with  such  endowment  as

Last  Will  and  Testament

81

shall  be  required.  I desígnate  the  said  monastery  in  my
town  of  Coyoacan  as  my  place  of  sepulture,  which  I direct
shall  be  in  the  major  chapel  of  the  church  of  the  said  monas-
tery, where  no  other  persons  except  my  legitímate  descend-
ants  may  be  buried.

XIII.  Item:  I direct  that  a college  shall  be  built  in  my
said  town  of  Coyoacan  for  students  of  theology  and  canon
law;  that  there  may  be  learned  persons  to  officiate  in  the
churches,  and  to  train  and  instruct  the  natives  in  our  Holy
Catholic  Faith.  This  college  shall  be  provided  with  faculties,
and  receive  a number  of  students,  and  the  rules  and  consti-
tutions  which  I shall  establish  for  it  shall  be  observed.  It
shall  be  built  in  such  place,  and  after  a plan  suitable  to  the
said  institution,  and  with  such  regulations  and  ordinances
as  I shall  prescribe,  and,  if  perchance  I should  not  explain
these,  I direct  that  my  successor  or  his  deputy  shall  organise
and  build  it,  adopting  the  statutes,  constitutions,  and  or-
dinances goveming  the  college  of  Santa  María  de  Jesús  founded
in  this  city  of  Seville.  The  costs  and  expenses  of  the  said
college  shall  be  covered  and  supplied  from  the  rents  which
will  be  designated.

XIV.  Item:  I destine,  for  the  endowment  of  the  said
hospital  of  Our  Lady  of  the  Conception  which  I am  building
in  México,  two  front  ground  plots  of  the  houses  of  Jorge
Alvarado,  and  of  the  treasurer  Juan  Alonso  de  Sosa,  between
my  house  and  the  aqueduct  which  extends  to  the  houses  of
Don  Luis  Saavedra,  which  being  now  unoccupied,  I assume
the  obligation  to  construct  such  buildings  as  may  amply
suffice  for  the  said  endowment.  During  such  time  as  the
said  buildings  are  not  constructed,  the  said  hospital  shall
receive  support  from  my  estáte  to  the  amount  of  one  hundred
thousand  maravedís  of  good  money.  I direct  that  the  said
endowment  shall  be  furnished  as  is  provided,  and  with  the
conditions  I shall  hereafter  State,  and  I direct  that  my  suc-
cessor shall  be  free  at  any  time  to  allot  the  said  hospital
some  part  of  the  said  one  hundred  thousand  maravedís  in-
come, in  lieu  of  the  said  buildings,  should  he  so  desire,  affect-
ing  this  substitution  in  any  assured  manner  he  may  wish.

XV.  Item:  as,  likewise,  I have  stated  and  bound  myself

VOL.  I. — 6

82

Letters  of  Cortes

to  furnish  to  the  said  hospital  lands  near  the  city  of  México,
producing  three  hundred  thousand  fanegas  of  wheat,  as  is
set  forth  in  the  said  endowment  to  which  I refer,  I direct
that  this  obligation  be  fulfilled,  and  I assign  for  such  pur-
pose  a piece  of  land,  which  I own,  at  the  extremity  of  Coy-
oacan,  situated  between  that  town,  and  the  river  which
crosses  the  road  leading  to  Chapultepec.  Should  this  not
suffice,  the  amount  shall  be  completed,  at  the  option  of  my
successor,  from  other  lands  where  I have  had,  and  have,  my
plantations,  situated  beyond  the  said  river  in  the  direction  of
Chapultepec.  Should  my  successor  or  successors  at  any  time
wish  to  substitute  for  the  said  hospital,  as  required  by  the
endowment,  other  lands  producing  three  hundred  thousand
fanegas  of  wheat,  this  may  be  done,  on  condition  that
they  are  as  good  as  those  I have  designated.  As  I do
not  know  whether  some  part  of  the  lands,  indi^ated  and
named  by  me  for  the  said  hospital,  may  not  belong  to  me  as
Señor  (proprietary  lord)  of  that  place,  or  by  other  title,  I
direct  that  any  such  be  restored  to  their  owners,  who  shall  be
paid  the  full  valué  to  their  satisfaction.  As  I have  worked
such  lands,  profiting  by  them,  under  the  belief  that  I might
do  so  with  a clear  conscience,  I direct  that  the  rightful  owners
of  the  said  lands  be  repaid  the  amount  it  may  be  shown  I have
derived  from  them,  so  that  my  conscience  may  be  clean;  my
said  successor  shall  be  obliged,  should  these  lands  be  shown
not  to  belong  to  me,  to  make  good  the  amount  provided  in
the  act  of  endowment  to  the  said  hospital.

XVI.  Item:  I declare  and  say  that,  as  has  been  stated,
the  construction  of  the  said  hospital  in  México  shall  be  com-
pleted in  the  said  city  as  above  mentioned  out  of  the  rents  of
the  lands  and  buildings  I own  in  the  square  and  streets  of
Tacuba  and  San  Francisco;  and  this  construction  completed,
the  income  from  the  said  shops  and  buildings  shall  revert  to
my  successor  or  successors.  They  shall  henceforth  devote
this  entire  sum  annually  to  the  construction  of  the  monastery
of  nuns,  and  of  the  above  mentioned  college  which  I directed
to  be  founded  and  built  in  my  said  town  of  Coyoacan,  using
and  distributing  the  sums  necessary  to  put  them  in  possession.

XVII.  And,  that  the  works  of  the  said  hospital,  mon-

Last  Will  and  Testament

83

astery,  and  college  above  described  may  be  speedily  completed,
and  the  Service  of  God  our  Lord  thereby  promoted,  as  it  is
hoped,  I direct  that,  in  addition  to  the  four  thousand  ducats
derived  from  the  buildings  already  indicated  for  the  works  of
the  said  hospital  in  México,  and  the  said  college  and  monastery
in  Coyoacan,  six  thousand  ducats  more  shall  be  used  fiom
my  estáte  each  year  from  the  date  of  my  death,  so  that  in  all
there  will  thus  be  ten  thousand  ducats  devoted  to  this  pur-
pose ; four  thousand  from  the  income  of  the  shops  and  buildings
for  the  work  on  the  said  hospital  until  it  is  finished;  three
thousand  for  the  construction  of  the  said  monastery  of  nuns ;
and  the  remaining  three  thousand  for  the  building  of  the  said
college.  When  the  work  on  the  said  hospital  shall  be  ter-
minated,  the  four  thousand  ducats  set  apart  therefor  shall
be  divided  into  equal  parts,  and  devoted  to  the  works  on  the
said  monastery  and  college,  so  that  each  of  these  may  thus
dispose  of  five  thousand  ducats  yearly.  These  works  being
completed,  in  order  to  relieve  my  successor  of  the  obligation
of  continuing  from  thenceforth  forever  to  give  the  six  thousand
and  the  four  thousand  ducats  from  the  income  of  the  said
shops  and  buildings,  these  sums  shall  be  distributed  as  follows :
one  thousand  ducats  for  the  endowment  and  estates  of  the
said  monastery  of  nuns  which,  as  has  been  said,  I directed  to  be
founded  in  my  town  of  Coyoacan;  two  thousand  ducats  for
the  endowment  and  expenses  of  the  said  college  which  I
directed  to  be  founded  in  the  same  town ; and  another  thousand
ducats  do  I adjudge  to  the  said  hospital  of  the  Conception
which  I directed  to  be  founded  in  the  said  city  of  México.
This  last  shall  be  with  such  condition  that,  by  a yearly  pay-
ment  of  this  sum,  the  obligation  assumed  by  me  and  my
successor  and  successors  (to  build  for  the  endowment  of  the
said  hospital  certain  houses,  and  two  front  ground  plots  of
the  houses  of  Jorge  de  Alvarado  and  the  treasurer  Juan  de
Sosa)  may  be  acquitted,  as  well  our  obligation  to  provide  one
hundred  thousand  maravedís  of  annual  income  to  the  said
hospital  should  we  fail  to  construct  the  said  buildings.  This
is  also  that  I and  my  successor  and  successors  may  be  released
from  the  obligation,  which  I assumed  when  I endowed  the  said
hospital,  of  giving  it  certain  lands  near  the  city  of  México,

84

Letters  of  Cortes

yielding  three  hundred  fanegas  of  wheat ; for  it  is  my  wish  and
intention  that,  by  giving  the  said  hospital  an  annual  income  in
perpetuity  of  one  thousand  ducats,  I and  my  successor  and  suc-
cessors  may  be  released  from  all  claim  upon  the  said  houses,
or  in  lieu  of  them,  the  said  one  hundred  thousand  maravedís,
and  the  said  lands  producing  three  hundred  fanegas  of  wheat ;
all  of  which  both  in  whole  and  in  part  I direct  shall  return
to  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  my  successor  and  suc-
cessors.  Should  the  said  hospital  not  desist  from  such  claim,
I direct  that  this  provisión  and  endowment  of  one  thousand
ducats  yearly  income  shall  be  of  no  valué  or  effect,  but  this

sum  shall  revert  to  my  successor  or  successors.

XVIII.  Item:  I say  that,  inasmuch  as  it  is  seen  by  ex-
perience  that  the  revenues  from  lands  and  houses,  both
in  Spain  and  in  New  Spain,  increase  daily,  my  shops  and
buildings,  above  mentioned,  may  become  of  greater  valué,
and  yield  an  income  exceeding  the  amount  of  four  thousand
ducats  which  I devise  and  give  forevermore,  as  is  attested
by  the  endowments  of  the  said  monastery  of  nuns,  the  said
college,  and  the  said  hospital,  and  it  is  my  will  that  should
the  said  shops  and  buildings  become  more  valuable  and  yield
more  rent,  that  the  excess  of  valué  and  rent,  over  and  above
the  said  four  thousand  ducats,  shall  be  divided  as  follows:
two  parts  of  the  said  excess  to  go  to  the  said  college  and  of
the  remaining  two  parts  one  each  to  the  said  monastery  of

nuns  and  to  the  said  hospital.

XIX.  Item:  I say  and  direct  that,  by  virtue  of  the  grant
made  to  meby  the  Emperor  our  King,  and  Lord  of  the  towns
therein  mentioned,  his  rights  of  patronage  over  the  churches
of  the  said  towns  belong  to  me  in  conformity  with  a clause  of
the  said  grant,  in  which  it  is  declared  that  I possess  in  those
towns  all  the  rights,  contributions,  and  customs,  and  every-
thing  else  which  His  Majesty  has  or  may  have  in  the  other
towns  of  New  Spain,  which,  excepting  the  mines  and  salt,
remain  the  property  of  his  royal  crown.  Thus,  except  these
two  things  specified  in  the  grant,  the  nght  of  patronage
belonging  to  him,  belongs  for  the  same  reason  to  me^  In
addition  to  the  grant  made  me  by  His  Majesty,  I hold  the
said  rights  of  patronage  by  concession  of  His  Hohness,  the  bul

Last  Will  and  Testament

85

for  which  is  deposited  with  His  Majesty,  and  his  Council  for
the  Indies,  that  they  may  recognise  as  valid  the  said  concession.
I desire,  and  it  is  my  will,  that  xny  successor  or  successors,
may  have  and  preserve  forever  the  said  right  of  patron-
age.  As,  at  the  time  I solicited  the  concession  from  His
Holiness,  it  was  my  intention  that  the  natives  of  those  towns
should  be  better  instructed  in  the  doctrines  of  our  Holy  Catholic
Faith,  I direct  and  charge  Don  Martin,  my  son,  and  successor
and  successors,  to  have  very  special  care  of  this,  conferring  the
benefices  of  the  said  towns  upon  able  men  of  good  life  and
example,  with  the  obligation  to  daily  instruct  the  said  natives;
and  that  they  take  great  care  to  oversee  and  ascertain  very
particularly  how  this  is  done  and  fulfilled.  As  the  said  con-
cession from  His  Holiness  says  that  I and  my  heirs  and  suc-
cessors should  have  and  receive  the  tithes  and  first  fruits  from
the  said  towns,  comprised  in  the  right  of  patronage  for  the
endowment  of  the  churches,  I direct  that  dowries,  vestments,
and  other  things  necessary  for  the  cult,  and  the  wine  for  the
administration  of  the  Sacraments,  be  aU  provided  for  out  of
the  said  tithes  and  first  fruits.  During  such  time  as  this  is
not  complied  with,  through  no  fault  of  my  successor  or  suc-
cessors, the  said  tithes  and  first  fruits  may  not  be  employed
otherwise,  for,  from  this  time  forth  and  forever,  I destine  and
apply  these  to  provide  the  said  churches  with  all  whatsoever
belongs  to  or  concerns  them  in  so  far  as  may  be  necessary  for
the  purposes  above  expressed,  the  control  and  enjoyment  of
the  said  right  of  patronage  remaining  to  my  successors  the
same  as  it  has  been  conceded  to  me;  henee  it  is  my  will  that
whatever  may  remain  of  the  said  titles  and  first  fruits  of  these
churches,  over  and  above  the  expenses  above  set  forth,  being
properties  dedicated  to  God  Our  Lord,  and  to  His  holy  temples,
shall  be  used  and  distributed  in  works  of  His  Service,  and  for
no  other  purpose  I say  therefor  and  direct  that  such  surplus
of  tithes  and  first  fruits,  after  each  year’s  expenditure  for
the  above  mentioned  objeets,  shall  be  adjudged  perpetually
by  my  successor  or  successors  or  their  deputies  as  fol-
lows: — one  half  to  the  endowment  of  the  said  college,  and
the  remainder  divided  equally  between  the  said  monas -
tery,  and  the  said  hospital,  in  the  same  proportion  as  the

86

Letters  of  Cortes

división  which  is  made  of  the  rents  from  the  said  shops  and
buildings.

XX.  Item:  I direct  that  ten  thousand  ducats  be  paid  to
my  wife,  the  Marquesa  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga,  which  sum
I received  as  her  dowry ; forasmuch  as  I received  and  expended
them,  and  they  belong  to  her,  I direct  that  they  be  paid  with-
out  dispute  or  question  from  the  first  and  best  properties  of
my  estáte.

XXI.  Item:  I say  that,  since,  between  Don  Pedro  Alvarez
Osorio,  marques  de  Astorga,  and  myself,  it  has  been  arranged
and  concerted  that  his  eldest  son  and  heir,  Don  Alvaro  Perez
Osorio,  should  marry  Doña  María  Cortes,  legitimate  daughter
of  myself  and  the  Marquesa  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga,  my
wife,  and  the  conditions  of  this  marriage  have  been  set  forth
in  a contract,  it  is  my  will  that  it  should  be  fulfilled  according
to  the  stipulations ; and  as  I have  agreed  and  promised  one
hundred  thousand  ducats  as  a dower  for  the  said  Doña  María»
my  daughter,  of  which  the  marques  de  Astorga,  conformably
to  the  said  stipulations,  has  already  received  twenty  thousand
ducats,  I desire  that  before  everything  else  the  remaining
eighty  thousand  ducats  be  paid  from  the  estates  of  the  said
marquesa,  my  wife,  and  from  my  own  to  complete  the
said  dower,  at  the  time  and  in  the  manner  provided  in  the  said
contract.  These  sums  shall  be  charged  against  the  legitimate
share  of  our  estates  which  would  belong  to  my  daughter  Doña
María.

XXII.  As  I am  obliged  to  dower  Doña  Catalina  and  Doña
Juana,  the  legitimate  daughters  of  myself  and  my  wife,  the
said  marquesa,  I direct  that,  in  discharge  of  this  obligation
as  best  I can,  each  of  them  shall  receive  fifty  thousand  ducats,
making  one  hundred  thousand  for  both;  for  which  purpose  I
transfer  this  sum  irrevocably  during  my  lifetime  to  Melchor
de  Mojica,  my  administrator  and  secretary,  who  is  here  present
and  accepts  the  same  in  my  ñame.  These  hundred  thousand
ducats  may  be  taken  from  the  joint  estáte  of  the  marquesa
my  wife,  and  mine,  and  charged  against  the  share  hei  legiti-
mate daughters  would  have  of  our  estáte.  Failing  the  neces-
sary  sum,  at  the  time  of  my  death,  to  pay  these  hundred
thousand  ducats,  I desire  that  whatever  is  wanting  shall  be

Last  Will  and  Testament

87

paid  by  my  son  and  successor,  Don  Martin,  or  whatever  other
successor,  by  setting  apart  from  my  estáte  fifteen  thousand
ducats  yearly,  until  the  full  amount  of  one  hundred  thousand
ducats  be  made  up,  as  said  above.

I,  Melchor  de  Mojica  accept  and  receive  the  said  dower  of
one  hundred  thousand  ducats  in  the  ñame  of  the  said  ladies,
Doña  Catalina  and  Doña  Juana,  as  set  forth  in  this  article,
and,  in  witness  and  confirmation  of  the  same,  I here  sign
my  ñame.

Melchor  de  Mojica.

XXIII.  Item:  I direct,  and  place  as  a charge  on  my  suc-
cessor, and  on  the  income  of  my  estáte,  an  annual  pensión  of
one  thousand  ducats  in  gold  to  each  of  my  natural  sons,  Don
Martin  and  Don  Luis  Cortes,  for  their  lifetime,  or  until  each
of  them  may  have  an  income  of  over  five  thousand  maravedís.
I direct  that  these  sums  be  paid,  free  from  any  tax  of  any  sort,
annually;  and  from  this  time  forth  I establish  them  as  theirs,
from  the  best  share  of  my  rents.  I direct  that  my  sons,  Don
Martin  and  Don  Luis,  be  subject  and  obedient  to  my  successor
in  everything,  in  which  they  honestly  may,  as  to  the  chief  and
head  of  the  family  from  which  they  spring,  and  that  for  no
reason  shall  they  disobey  or  fail  in  their  respect  to  him,  but
shall  assist  and  serve  him  in  everything  not  contrary  to  God
Our  Lord,  or  His  holy  religión,  and  Catholic  Faith,  or  against
their  rightful  king ; and  I direct  that  should  either  show  notori-
ous  disobedience  or  disrespect,  such  as  may  be  proven  as  such,
they  shall  lose  the  benefits  and  substance  they  receive,  and
shall  be  considered  as  strangers  to  my  house  and  children.

XXIV.  Item:  I direct  that  marriages  for  my  daughters,
Doña  Catalina  and  Doña  Juana,  are  to  he  arranged  only  upon
the  counsel,  and  with  the  approval,  of  the  marquesa,  their
mother,  and  of  my  successor.  Should  either  of  them  marry
outside  this  condition,  my  successor  shall  not  be  obliged  to
pay  anything  of  the  dower  I have  provided.

XXV.  Item:  I direct  that  Doña  Catalina  Pizarro,  my
daughter  by  Leonor  Pizarro,  wife  of  Juan  de  Salcedo,  a citizen
of  México,  be  given  the  full  amount  of  the  income  and  increase
of  the  cows,  mares,  and  ewes  which  I gave  her  when  she  first

88

Letters  of  Cortes

carne  to  the  kingdom  of  México,  together  with  the  income
from  the  town  of  Chinantla,  and  all  else  that  I assigned  for  her
marriage  dower  and  delivered  to  the  said  Juan  de  Salcedo,
husband  of  Doña  Leonor  Pizarro,  her  mother.  And,  as  I
have  received  from  the  increase  on  the  said  ranches  a number
of  horses,  bulls,  rams,  and  monies,  I direct  that  this  amount
be  repaid  out  of  my  estáte,  to  my  daughter  Doña  Catalina,
according  to  the  account  presented  by  the  said  Juan  de
Salcedo,  at  the  price  they  were  worth  when  I received  them.

I confess,  now,  that  two  receipts,  made  to  me  by  Hernando
de  Saavedra,  and  Gil  Gonzale  de  Benevides,  for  a certain
amount  in  gold  for  some  cows  which  I sold  them  at  four  differ-
ent  times,  as  will  appear  from  the  said  receipts,  really  belong
to  the  estáte  and  increase  of  my  daughter  Doña  Catalina,
although  they  are  made  out  to  me;  and  I therefore  direct
that  they  be  paid  to  her  with  interest,  being  hers,  and  coming
from  her  estáte.  The  amounts  of  the  said  receipts  are  two
thousand  pesos  of  good  gold  for  the  one,  and  two  thousand
seven  hundred  and  fifty  for  the  other.

XXVI.  Item:  I acknowledge  another  receipt  from  Fran-
cisco de  Villegas,  Citizen  of  México,  given  me  for  two  thousand
pesos  in  gold  for  some  cows,  of  which,  according  to  Juan  de
Salcedo’s  statement,  he  only  owes  one  thousand,  as  he  did  not
receive  the  full  number  of  cows  sold  to  him,  which  coming
also  from  the  property  of  my  daughter,  Doña  Catalina,  I order
be  paid  to  her.

XXVII.  Item:  I also  acknowledge  another  receipt,  of
four  hundred  pesos,  made  me  by  Bemardino  del  Castillo,
for  mares,  likewise  coming  from  the  property  of  my  daughter,
Doña  Catalina ; I order  that  this  be  paid  to  her.

XXVIII.  Item:  I acknowledge  another  receipt,  for  two
thousand  four  hundred  pesos  in  gold,  given  me  by  Alonzo
Dávalos,  for  twelve  mares  and  six  fillies,  coming  from  the
property  of  my  daughter,  Doña  Catalina;  I order  that  this  be
paid  to  her.

XXIX.  Item:  I declare  that  all  the  cows  and  flocks  at
Matalango  belong  to  my  daughter,  Doña  Catalina,  and  to
the  said  Leonor  Pizarro,  besides  all  the  mares  and  colts  at
Taltizapan,  which  bear  her  brand  of  a large  E on  the  haunch.

Last  Will  and  Testament

89

XXX.  Item:  I declare  that,  of  the  receipt  made  by  Gil
Gonzale  de  Benevides  with  Hernando  de  Saavedra,  which,
as  above  said,  belongs  to  my  daughter,  Doña  Catalina,  three
hundred  and  fifty  castellanos  in  gold  have  been  paid,  which  I
received  in  four  horses  which  I possess;  I order  that  this  be

paid  to  the  said  Doña  Catalina.

XXXI.  Item:  I declare  that  I gave  a final  quittance  to
the  said  Juan  de  Salcedo,  citizen  of  México,  husband  of  the
said  Leonor  Pizarro,  stating  that  I gave  and  give  it  him  in  full
receipt  for  all  accounts  he  had  with  the  estáte  and  goods  of
Doña  Catalina  Pizarro,  my  daughter,  which  were  delivered  to
him.  I say  that  I gave  the  said  final  quittance,  notwith-
standing  I was  not  disposed  to  give  it  without  the  accounts
and  payments,  at  the  instance  and  entreaty  of  the  said  Juan
de  Salcedo,  to  save  him  the  necessity  of  rendering  the  said
accounts  during  my  absence;  for  which  he  promised,  under
oath,  that,  on  my  return  from  my  journey,  he  would  present
them  in  full,  without  fraud  ñor  taking  anything  from  the  said
Doña  Catalina;  and  this  he  did,  with  Andrés  de  Tapia  present
as  witness.

XXXII.  Item:  I direct  that,  when  it  may  please  Our
Lord  that  the  said  Doña  Catalina,  my  daughter,  should  marry,
she  shall  do  so  on  the  counsel,  and  with  the  consent  of  my
successor,  whom  I beg  to  take  special  care  to  provide  that  his
sister  Catalina  marries  as  becomes  the  honour  of  our  house
and  her  own.

XXXIII.  Item:  I direct  that  my  natural  daughters,
Doña  Leonor  and  Doña  Maria,  shall  receive  as  dowries,  each,
ten  thousand  ducats  from  my  estáte,  recommending  them  to
marry  with  the  counsel  and  consent  of  my  said  successor,  whom
I charge  as  in  the  former  article  touching  his  sister,  Doña
Catalina.  Should  either  or  both  die  before  marrying,  or
desire  to  enter  the  religious  life,  let  them  receive  for  their
support  and  expenses  sixty  thousand  maravedís  yearly;  the
remainder  reverting  to  my  son  and  successor  Don  Martin,
and  those  who  follow  him.

XXXIV.  Item:  I direct  that,  as  some  persons  have
served  on  my  farming  estates,  and  I do  not  know  whether
they  have  been  paid,  the  conditions  agreed  upon  with  me  or

9o

Letters  of  Cortes

my  administrators  at  the  time  of  their  engagement  shall  be
ascertained,  and  that  they  be  paid  as  the  books  of  the  ad-
ministration  show  to  be  just,  without  wearying  them  with
more  controversy  than  is  required  to  discover  the  truth.
This  to  be  done  on  the  conscience  of  my  successor  and  exe-
cutors,  without  their  being  obliged  to  give  any  other  account
than  that  they  have  paid  them.

XXXV.  Item:  I direct  that  all  debts  as  shall  appear  from
my  account  books,  owing  to  people  in  my  Service,  both  here
in  Spain  and  in  New  Spain,  shall  be  paid  in  accordance  with
the  conditions  established  when  they  entered  my  Service,
and  that  this  be  done  without  delay  or  dispute.  As  Bernar-
dino  del  Castillo  was  engaged  in  taking  account  of  all  that
the  licencíate  Don  Juan  Altamirano  has  furnished  and  sent
me,  I direct  that  the  statement  of  the  said  licencíate  be
accepted.

XXXVI.  Item:  I direct  that  all  my  debts  of  whatever
nature  public  and  prívate,  when  shewn  to  be  justly  mine,  be
paid  without  delay  or  process  of  law,  but  quickly  and  without
incurring  expense.  As  I may  have  debts  for  which  I have  no
written  proof,  I direct  that  all  such,  if  shewn  to  be  mine,  even
without  writing,  be  paid  without  process  of  law,  up  to  the
amount  of  one  hundred  pesos  in  good  money.

XXXVII.  Item:  I say  that  I have  spent  large  sums  of
money  in  New  Spain  and  its  provinces,  which  I conquered
and  brought  under  the  dominión  of  the  royal  crown  of  Castile,
both  in  the  conquest,  as  well  as  in  the  armadas  which  I sent
elsewhere,  such  as  those  I sent  to  Amaluco  (Molucca  Island),
under  the  captain  Alvaro  de  Saavedra,  and  one  sent  to  Hibu-
eras,  with  settlers  commanded  by  Gerónimo  Prima,  and
another  to  the  same  province  of  Hibueras,  of  which  Francisco
de  las  Casas  was  captain.  All  were  sent  by  order  of  our  lord
the  Emperor,  as  may  be  seen  from  his  royal  instructions  and
signature,  andas  His  Majesty,  to  discharge  his  royal  conscience,
and  as  a most  Christian  prince,  sent  me  his  royal  cédula,  which
is  among  the  papers  in  possession  of  the  licencíate  Juan  Alta-
mirano, and  an  order  of  his  royal  council,  authorised  an
account  to  be  made  with  me  of  all  I have  spent  in  the  said
conquests  and  armadas,  I direct  that  this  account  be  made

Last  Will  and  Testament

91

and  presented  to  His  Majesty,  since  he  was  pleased  to  order
payment  to  me.  This  sum  I wish  and  direct  to  go  to  my
heir,  the  said  Don  Martin  Cortes,  my  son  and  successor  in
my  house  and  estáte,  and  to  the  successors  who  shall  follow
him.

XXXVIII.  Item:  I direct  that  the  said  Don  Martin,  my
son,  (and  those  who  may  succeed),  shall  have  the  following
upon  his  conscience:  His  Majesty  granted  me  the  towns,
places,  and  lands  of  the  estáte  I have  and  own  in  New  Spain,
with  all  the  rents,  rights,  tributes,  and  contributions  belongmg
to  His  Majesty,  exactly  as  the  former  rulers  used  to  receive
them  before  the  conquest.  I have  used  all  diligence  to  verify
the  said  rents,  tributes,  rights,  and  contributions  which  those
rulers  enjoyed,  and  I was  careful  to  continué  the  former  masters
where  such  tributes  and  rents  are  usually  paid,  in  agreement
with  whom  I have  collected  the  said  rents  and  tributes  until
today.  I direct  that,  if  it  shall  at  any  time  appear  that  I was
badly  informed  as  to  the  above,  and  have  taken  anything  not
belonging  to  me,  of  which  I was  until  today  unaware,  thinking
I took  my  rights,  it  shall  be  rectified.

XXXIX.  Item:  as  there  have  been  many  doubts  and
opinions  as  to  whether  it  is  permitted  with  a good  conscience
to  hold  the  natives  as  slaves,  whether  captives  of  war  or  by
purchase,  and  up  till  now  this  has  not  been  determined,  I
direct  my  son  and  successor  Don  Martin,  and  those  who  may
follow  him,  to  use  all  diligence  to  settle  this  point  for  the
peace  of  my  conscience  and  their  own.

XL.  Item:  I direct  that,  as  in  some  places  on  my  estates
pieces  of  ground  have  been  taken  for  orchards,  vineyards,
cotton-fields'and  other  purpose,it  must  be  ascertained  whether
such  lands  belonged  to  the  natives  of  those  towns,  and,  if  so,  I
order  that  they  be  restored,  with  all  such  profits  their  owners
might  have  derived  from  them,  compensating,  and  receiving
in  total,  discharge  of  all  the  rents  and  tributes  which  they
were  obliged  to  pay  for  them;  and,  in  the  case  of  Bernardino
del  Castillo,  my  servant,  to  whom,  in  past  years,  I gave  a piece
of  land,  situated  on  the  outskirts  of  Coyoacan,  on  which  he
built  a sugar  mili,  I order  that  this  be  done  should  it  appear
that  the  land  belongs  to  third  parties.

92

Letters  of  Cortes

XLI.  Item:  I direct  that,  as  I have  received,  in  addition
to  the  tributes  paid  me  by  vassals,  other  Services  both  personal
and  real,  and  as  on  this  point  also  opinions  differ  as  to  whether
such  maybe  acceptedwith  a good  conscience.this  matter  shall
be  investigated,  and,  if  it  appears  that  I have  received  more
of  such  Services  than  belonged  to  me,  those  natives  shall  be
paid  and  fndemnified  in  all  that  it  shall  appear  they  may  justly
claim.

XLII.  Item:  I direct  that  all  my  account  books  be
examined,  especially  a large  one  in  possession  of  Francisco
de  Santa  Cruz,  which  my  secretary  and  scrivener  Juan  de
Rivera  began,  but  which  passed  to  the  said  Francisco  de  Santa
Cruz,  who  keeps  my  said  books.  I order  that  all  debts  found
therein,  due  to  all  persons  whatsoever  shall  be  paid,  and  like-
wise  that  all  debts  due  to  me  be  collected;  and,  I order  that
the  said  Francisco  de  Santa  Cruz  render  his  accounts  for
the  time  he  has  had  charge  of  my  business,  and  everything  be
settled  with  him,  and  that  all  on  our  side  and  the  other  be  paid.

XLIII.  Item:  I say  that,  inasmuch  as  I loaned  Bemar-
dino  del  Castillo  at  the  time  of  his  marriage  one  thousand
castellanos  in  gold  and  silver,  besides  six  hundred  more  in
furnishings  for  the  shop  next  to  the  dock  tower,  as  will  appear
from  a receipt  signed  with  his  ñame,  and  deposited  with  the
licenciate  Juan  Altamirano,  he  shall  be  credited  with  what  I
owe  him  for  the  time  of  his  Service  which  may  be  determined
by  a receipt  signed  by  me  when  I left  Coyoacan,  and  the
remainder  shall  go  to  my  successor.

XLIV.  Item:  I direct  that,  for  as  long  as  Doña  Elvira
de  Hermosa,  daughter  of  Luis  de  Hermosa,  Citizen  of  Avila,
who  is  now  maid  to  the  marquesa,  my  wife, shall  remain  inthe
Service  of  any  of  my  daughters  or  of  the  wife  of  Don  Martin,
she  shall  be  paid  twenty  thousand  maravedís  annually;  and
should  she  desire  to  become  a nun,  or  to  Uve  unmarried  in
this  city,  she  shall  be  paid  from  my  estáte  two  hundred
thousand  maravedís  besides  giving  her  the  twenty  thousand
maravedís  annually.

XLV.  Item:  I direct  that,  for  as  long  as  my  cousin  Cecilia
Vázquez  Altamirano  may  desire  to  remain  with  the  mar-
quesa, my  wife,  or  with  any  of  my  daughters,  or  the  wife  of

Last  Will  and  Testament

93

Don  Martin,  she  shall  enjoy  the  same  respect  I have  ever
shown  her;  and  I desire  that,  wherever  she  may  choose  to  live,
one  thousand  maravedís  shall  be  surely  and  regularly  paid
her  annually  from  my  estáte.

XLVI.  Item:  I direct  that  two  hundred  thousand  mara-
vedís be  paid  from  my  estáte  to  each  of  the  two  daughters  of
the  administrator,  Juan  Altamirano,  my  cousin,  for  their
dowry,  and  marriage  portion.

XLVII.  Item:  I direct  that,  for  as  long  as  the  said  Juan
Altamirano  may  wish  to  retain  the  charge  of  the  administra-
tion  in  my  household,  this  shall  be  allowed  him,  and,  with  the
profit  assigned  him  by  my  cédula,  shall  be  continued  to  him
for  as  long  as  he  may  wish.

XLVIII.  Item:  I direct  that  three  hundred  thousand
maravedís  be  paid  to  Doña  Beatriz,  and  Doña  Luisa,  her
sister,  daughters  of  the  marquesa  my  wife,  to  enable  them
to  marry,  two  hundred  thousand  to  the  said  Doña  Luisa  and
to  the  said  Doña  Beatriz  one  hundred  thousand  maravedís.

XLIX.  Item:  I direct  that,  if  María  de  Torres,  now
duenna  with  the  marquesa,  should  wish  to  remain  in  her
Service,  or  in  that  of  any  of  my  daughters,  or  the  wife  of
my  son  and  successor,  she  be  paid  annually  fifteen  thousand
maravedís,  and  should  she  want  something  for  herself,  she
shall  be  given  one  hundred  thousand  whenever  she  wishes,
in  recognition  of  her  past  Services,  without  subtracting  any
sums  she  may  have  received  in  that  time,  ñor  the  fifteen
thousand  which  I provide  for  the  time  she  shall  continué  in
Service.

L.  Item;  I say  that,  as  in  the  year  1542,  while  I was  in
Barcelona,  Gonzalo  Diaz  my  equerry  was  short  forty  ducats
of  my  money  which  was  placed  in  his  hands,  I ordered  this
amount  to  be  deducted  from  his  pay,  and,  although  he  sus-
tained  no  harm,  I now  pardon  him,  and  direct  that  no  deduc-
tion  of  this  sum  be  made  in  his  accounts,  and  if  any  has  already
been  made  to  cancel  it,  and  pay  him  in  full;  besides  which,
I leave  him  as  a mark  of  favour  one  hundred  ducats  in  gold,
to  be  paid  him  from  my  estáte.

LI.  Item:  I direct  that,  although  in  the  year  1544  my
groom  of  the  chambers  gave  me  his  note  for  forty-four

94

Letters  of  Cortes

thousand  five  hundred  and  twenty  maravedís  for  the  valué  of
certain  pieces  of  silver  for  which  he  could  not  account  when
he  was  my  plate-butler,  for  which  he  therefore  owed  me,
nevertheless  in  consideration  of  his  Service,  I forgive  him
that  obligation,  and  pardon  him,  and  he  shall  receive  back
his  note,  and  be  paid  twenty  ducats  in  gold  from  my  estáte.

LII.  Item:  I direct  that,  besides  paying  Gerónimo  de
Andrada  what  is  owing  on  his  account  he  be  given  from  my
estáte  thirty  ducats  in  gold,  which  I leave  him  in  recognition
of  his  Services.

Lili.  Item:  I say  inasmuch  as  there  is  a suit  with  the
wife  and  heirs  of  the  licenciate  Nuñez,  member  of  the  council,
who  was  my  solicitor,  concerning  certain  of  our  accounts,
which  showed  him  my  debtor  for  large  sums,  and  although  I
am  well  informed,  and  have  a clear  conscience,  ñor  on  my  side
has  this  suit  been  sustained  through  malice,  but  only  to  have
justice,  that,  nevertheless  I direct,  if  the  widow  and  heirs
of  the  licenciate  Nuñez  wish  to  settle  our  suit  amiably,  that
two  accountants  be  chosen  to  act  for  them  with  two  of  mine,
to  whom  all  necessary  papers  shall  be  given,  and  whose  de-
cisión shall  be  accepted  as  final  without  other  legal  action.
Should  they  not  so  agree,  let  the  suit  go  on  its  ordinary
course,  as  my  only  wish  is  to  know  the  truth,  and  have  justice
done.  Whatever  sums  may  result  from  the  suit,  shall  be
distributed  as  is  provided  in  a memorándum  in  the  hands
of  my  secretary,  Melchor  de  Mojica;  and  the  same  shall  be
done  with  the  sums  received  from  the  suit  now  pending  with
Francisco  de  Arteaga  Martinez.

LIV.  Item:  I direct  that  thirty  thousand  maravedís  be
given  as  a marriage  portion  to  a girl  who  is,  and  has  been
since  childhood,  a servant  in  my  household  and  who  is  said
to  be  a child  of  one  Francisco  Barco,  born  in  Tehuantepec.

LV.  Item:  I direct  that  a suit  of  mourning,  such  as  I
have  ordered  to  be  given  my  servants,  shall  be  furnished  to
Juan  de  Quintanilla,  who  carne  from  Valladolid  to  this  city
of  Seville  to  assist  and  treat  me  during  my  illness,  and  is
present  at  my  death.  In  addition,  I leave  him  in  recognition
of  his  Services  fifty  ducats  in  gold  from  my  estáte.

LVI.  Item:  I direct  that,  besides  paying  what  is  owing

Last  Will  and  Testament

95

to  my  page,  Pedro  de  Astorga,  he  shall  be  given  from  my
estáte  thirty  ducats  in  gold,  which  I leave  him  in  recognition
of  his  Services,  during  my  illness;  and,  in  consideration  of  this,

I charge  and  direct  my  son  and  successor,  the  said  Don  Martin,
to  retain  him  in  his  household  and  Service  in  the  position  I
now  have  him.

LVII.  Item:  I charge  and  direct  the  said  Don  Martin
my  son  and  successor,  to  retain  in  his  household  and  Service,
my  valet  Antonio  Galvarro,  as  I have  him,  feeling  confident
that  he  will  prove  a good  and  loyal  servant  to  him,  as  he  has
been  during  the  time  he  has  served  me.

LVIII.  Item:  I direct  that  Diego  González,  Citizen  of
Medellin,  at  present  living  in  Seville,  shall  receive  a robe  and
a cloak  of  black  cloth,  some  stockings,  a doublet,  and  a cap;
besides  this  twenty  ducats  in  gold,  all  of  which  I leave  him
because  of  the  devotion  he  has  shown,  and  does  show,  to  my
family.

LXIX.  Item:  I charge  and  direct  the  said  Don  Martin,
my  son  and  successor,  to  always  retain  my  accountant  Melchor
de  Mojica  in  his  Service,  for  as  he  has  so  well  and  faithfully
served  me  during  the  short  time  he  has  been  here  in  my  house-
hold, that  I am  confident  he  will  henceforward  give  good  Ser-
vice and  counsel  to  my  son  Don  Martin  in  the  affairs  and
matters  which  he  has  handled  with  me.  I charge  and  direct
the  said  Melchor  de  Mojica  to  do  this,  for  I place  this  con-
fidence  in  him,  and  I wish  and  direct  that  he  continué  to  hold
the  charge  and  position  he  does  at  present,  for  such  time  as  he
can,  and  the  marques  may  desire.

LX.  Item:  I direct  that  the  hospital  of  Amor  de  Dios
be  paid  the  alms  which  the  accounts  of  Don  Juan  Galiano
may  show  are  owing,  as  I have  done  each  month  since  I have
been  in  Seville;  besides  which  I order  one  hundred  ducats  in
gold  to  be  paid  from  my  estáte.

XLI.  Item:  I direct  that  the  accounts  of  Master  Vicente
(for  works  executed  in  my  house  and  room)  be  inspected,  and
paid,  after  deducting  such  sums  as  he  has  already  received.

LXII.  For  as  much  as  Don  Martin  Cortes,  my  son  and
my  wife’s,  the  said  Marquesa  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga,  who  is
my  successor,  is  less  than  twenty-five  years  oíd,  and  more

g6

Letters  of  Cortes

than  fifteen,  I desire,  and  it  is  my  will,  that  he  remain  under
control  of  the  guardianship  and  care  of  such  tutors  and  ad-
ministrators  as  I herein  ñame  for  my  children,  until  they  at-
tain  the  age  of  twenty-five  years  completed.  During  the
interim,  let  him  not  withdraw  from  or  evade  the  guardianship
and  control,  so  that,  until  he  complete  the  said  age,  as  I have
herein  established,  his  property  and  estáte  may  be  the  more
advantageously  increased,  and  administered,  and  all  that  I
direct  and  dispose  by  this  testament  may  be  the  better  and
more  quickly  complied  with.  Thus  from  the  direction  and
administration  of  the  properties  of  my  son,  the  said  Don
Martin,  as  well  as  for  the  control  and  care  of  the  persons  and
goods  of  my  legitímate  daughters,  Doña  María,  Doña  Catalina,
and  Doña  Juana,  I ñame  and  appoint  for  tutors  and  guardians,
the  most  illustrious  gentlemen,  Don  Juan  Alonso  de  Guzman,
Duke  of  Medina  Sidonia;  Don  Pedro  Alvare  Osorio,  Marques
de  Astorga;  and  Don  Pedro  de  Arellano,  Count  de  Aguilar.
I entreat  the  same  to  graciously  accept  the  said  tutelage  and
guardianship,  and,  in  accepting  and  receiving  it,  they  may
remember  and  respect  what  I beg  and  entreat  them,  for  these
my  said  children  are  of  their  blood  and  lineage,  by  protecting
whom  they  do  but  fufill  their  duty  as  gentlemen,  and  profit
their  own  lineage  and  quality.  In  recognition  of  their  Services
and  of  their  rights  conformably  to  the  law  to  be  recompensed
from  my  estáte  for  the  said  tutelage  and  guardianship,  I direct
that,  for  each  year  during  which  their  lordships  exercise  their
functions,  they  shall  receive  fifty  marks  of  silver,  which  I
entreat  them  to  agree  to,  and  to  accept  in  consideration  of  the
causes  and  reasons  above  mentioned.  I direct  that  my  son  and
successor,  the  said  Don  Martin,  shall,  until  he  has  completed
his  twenty-fifth  year,  receive  twelve  thousand  ducats  yearly
for  his  support,  and  that  of  his  servants.  The  remainder
of  my  income  may  thus  more  fully  and  quickly  provide  for
all  that  I have  ordered  and  directed  in  this  my  testament.
As  the  towns,  properties,  engineering  works,  mines,  and
other  works  belonging  to  my  estáte,  to  which,  after  my
death,  the  said  Don  Martin,  my  son,  will  succeed,  are  divided
and  scattered  through  different  provinces  of  New  Spain,  distant
one  from  another,  it  is  necessary  that  I,  as  one  who  knows

Last  Will  and  Testament

97

by  experience  what  is  necessary,  should  indícate  persons  capa-
ble  of  carrying  on  the  administration.  Henee  I beg  and  en-
treat  the  said  gentlemen,  tutors,  and  guardians  to  approve  the
appointments  and  selections  of  persons  which  I shall  leave,
drawn  up  and  signed  with  my  ñame;  for  I am  positive  that
the  said  haciendas  will  be  directed  and  administered  to  the
best  advantage,  and  their  lordships  relieved  of  the  labour  and
responsibility  of  selecting  persons  for  this  purpose.

LXIII.  Moreover,  I leave  and  parné  as  my  successor  over
my  household  and  estáte,  Don  Martin  Cortes,  my  son  by  the
Marquesa  Dona  Juaña  de  Zuñiga  my  wife,  and  after  him  his
descendants  and  other  persons  named  in  the  institution  of
my  entail,  which  I institute  by  the  authority  of  the  emperor
and  king  our  Lord,  according  to,  and  by  the  form,  and  with
the  conditions,  and  all  else  contained  in  the  said  act  of  institu-
tion. Further,  if  it  be  necessary,  I do  now  renew  the  insti-
tution of  the  said  entail  in  the  said  Don  Martin,  my  son,  in
the  manner  above  set  forth,  and  by  the  said  authority  and
licence  which  I possess,  and  I leave  as  my  universal  heir  the
said  Don  Martin,  my  son,  successor  to  all  my  properties,  goods,
landed  estates,  and  rights,  and  whatever  else  I may  possess
outside  the  said  entail;  and  I leave  as  my  heirs  the  above
mentioned  Doña  María,  Doña  Catalina,  and  Doña  Juana,  my
legitímate  daughters  by  the  said  marquesa  my  wife,  for
what  I leave  them  as  their  rightful  dowries,  ordering  that
they  content  themselves  therewith,  without  pretending  to
other  rights  or  claims  of  any  sort  against  my  estáte,  on  the
ground  of  their  legitimacy.

LXIV.  To  cover  all  expenses  of  this  my  testament,  and  to
fulfil  its  provisions,  I ñame  and  appoint  as  my  executors  in
Spain  the  most  illustrious  lords,  Duke  of  Medina  Sidonia,
Marques  de  Astorga,  and  Count  de  Aguilar,  to  all  three  of
whom  jointly,  and  to  each  singly,  I give  full  powers  to  use  by
their  authority  whatever  sums  from  my  estáte  are  required
to  provide  for,  and  carry  into  effect,  all  the  provisions  of  this
my  testament.  And,  for  all  that  touches  the  administration
in  New  Spain  and  those  provinces,  I ñame  and  appoint  as  my
executors,  the  Marquesa  Doña  Juana  de  Zuñiga,  my  wife,
and  the  lord  bishop  of  México,  Fray  Juan  de  Zumarraga,  and

VOL.  I.— 7

98

Letters  of  Cortes

Father  Domingo  de  Betanzos,  of  the  Order  of  St.  Dominic,
and  the  licenciate  Juan  de  Altamirano,  all  at  this  present  time
in  New  Spain.  And,  I revoke  every  and  all  other  testaments
which  I may  have  made  and  delivered,  and  I desire,  and  it  is
my  will,  that  none  be  executed  other  than  this  present  writing ;
likewise  I revoke  whatsoever  codicil  or  codicils  I may  have
made  and  delivered  either  in  writing  or  by  word  of  mouth  in
the  past.  And  this  being  seen  and  read  in  my  presence  with
all  that  it  contains,  I sign  it  with  my  ñame,  by  my  hand  on
each  of  its  pages  which  are  in  all  ten,  all  of  which  signatures  I
have  written  in  the  presence  of  the  licenciate  Infante.

Done  at  Seville  on  the  eleventh  day  of  the  month  of  Octo-
ber,  the  year  from  the  birth  of  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesús
Christ,  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  seven.

Item:  I say  that,  as,  in  one  article  of  this  my  will,  I have
disposed  and  ordered  that  the  four  thousand  ducats,  from
the  rent  of  the  shops  and  buildings  which  I have  in  México,
should,  after  the  works  on  the  said  hospital,  monastery,  and
college  I have  ordered  founded  be  entirely  devoted  to  the
endowment,  and  property  of  the  said  college,  monastery , and
hospital  to  which  I refer,  should  it  at  any  time  happen  that
the  said  shops  and  buildings  should  produce  less  than  this
sum  of  four  thousand  ducats,  and  my  will  and  intention  be
defeated,  I order  that  in  such  a year  of  shortage,  my  successor
shall  complete  the  amount  from  his  estáte,  so  that  the  said
four  thousand  ducats  may  be  paid  in  full  without  any  diminu-
tion.  This  page  is  added  to  the  other  ten,  done  and  signed
on  the  same  date.  The  Marques  del  Valle.  Witness  by  his
lordship’s  command,  the  licenciate  Infante.

By  his  lordship’s  command,

Melchor  Mojica.

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE

99

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE

ONCERNING  the  importance  of  the  Five  Letters  of

Relation  of  Hernando  Cortes,  which  are  now  published

altogether  in  an  English  translation  for  the  first  time,
it  may  be  permitted  to  quote  a passage  from  the  historian
Dr.  Robertson,  whose  part  in  the  discovery  of  the  first  and
fifth  letters,  here  presented,  was  such  as  to  give  singular  interest
and  valué  to  his  opinión.

“Our  knowledge  of  the  events  which  happened  in  the  con-
quest  of  New  Spain  is  derived  from  sources  of  information
more  original  and  more  authentic  than  that  of  any  transaction
in  the  history  of  America.

“The  letters  of  Cortes  to  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  are  an
historical  monument,  not  only  first  in  order  of  time,  but  of
the  greatest  authenticity  and  valué.”

Dr.  Robertson’s  appreciation  was  shared  by  his  contem-
poraries,  and  has  been  confirmed  by  subsequent  historians,
who  have  drawn  from  the  letters,  as  from  an  original  source,
many  of  their  important  facts,  have  appealed  to  them  for
confirmation  of  information  procured  from  other  sources,
and  have  used  them  as  a very  touchstone  of  truth,  in
accepting  or  rejecting  statements  made  by  other  early  writers,
even  when  these  latter  were  eye-witnesses  of  the  events  they
described.

From  the  beginning,  Cortes  adopted  the  plan  of  reporting
faithfully  and  minutely  to  the  Emperor,  each  incident,  its
causes  and  its  consequences,  and  of  recording  his  impressions
of  all  that  he  saw  in  his  strange  surroundings,  with  the  purpose
of  putting  before  his  sovereign  an  accurate  and  complete
picture  of  the  momentous  events  then  unrolling  in  the  New
World ; and  he  has  done  this  with  perfect  frankness  and  great
simplicity,  in  letters  which  are  minute  but  not  wearisome,

IOI

102

Letters  of  Cortes

ñor  wanting  in  a certain  literary  excellence.  His  corre-
spondence  was  voluminous,  but,  amongst  all  the  others,  both
for  the  importance  of  the  events  recorded,  as  well  as  for  their
volume,  the  five  letters  or  “relations”  ( Relaciones ) as  they  are
called,  in  which  he  recounts  all  that  happened  from  the  date
of  his  sailing  from  Cuba  in  1519,  till  his  return  from  the  ex-
pedition  into  Yucatán  in  1526,  are  those  which  the  English
historian  justly  described  as  “an  historical  monument  of  the
greatest  authenticity  and  valué.”

The  first  of  these  letters  has  never  been  found,  and  by  some  is
believed,  perhaps  to  have  been  either  the  one  suppressed  by
the  Council  for  the  Indies  at  the  instance  of  Panfilo  de  Nar-
vaez,  or  the  one  taken  by  Juan  de  Florez  from  Alonzo  de
Avila,  and  thus  prevented  from  reaching  the  Emperor.  It
bore  the  date  of  July  io,  1519,  and  left  Vera  Cruz  on  the
ióth  of  that  month  with  the  two  envoys,  Alonzo  Hernández
Puertocarrero  and  Francisco  de  Montejo.  This  letter  was  in
duplícate,  as  was  likewise  the  letter  of  the  magistrates  of  the
newly  founded  colony,  which  was  shown  to  Cortes  before  it
was  sent.  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castello,  who  was  one  of  the  signers
of  the  joint  letter,  says  that  Cortes  had  omitted  from  his  own
letter  the  account  of  the  expeditions  of  Francesco  Hernández
de  Córdoba,  and  of  Juan  de  Grijalba.  The  letter  of  Cortes  and
that  of  the  magistrates  confirmed  one  another,  as  they  were
intended  to  do,  and,  according  to  Bernal  Diaz,  that  of  the
magistrates  was  the  more  detailed  of  the  two;  henee  it  is,
historically,  the  more  valuable.  The  only  important  events
which  had  happened  up  to  that  date  were  the  change  in  the
character  and  objeets  of  the  expedition,  and  the  founding  of
Vera  Cruz,  and  on  these  points  Cortes  and  the  magistrates
were  in  perfect  accord.

The  search  for  this  missing  letter  having  been  given  up  in
despair,  it  remained  for  the  perspicacity  of  Dr.  Robertson  to
divine,  that,  as  the  Emperor  was  about  leaving  Spain  for
Germany  at  the  time  the  envoys  from  Vera  Cruz  arrived  with
the  letters,  they  might  still  be  found  in  some  of  the  Imperial
archives,  and  he  accordingly  undertook  a search,  for  which
all  necessary  facilities  were  obtained  by  the  British  Ambas-
sador  in  Vienna.  This  was  crowned  with  a dual  success,  in

Ribliographical  Note  103

that  a certified  copy  by  a notary  public  of  the  letter  of
the  magistrates  of  Vera  Cruz  was  discovered  and,  at  the
same  time,  the  Fifth  Letter  of  the  Relaciones  was  also
unearthed.

The  letter  of  the  magistrates  of  Vera  Cruz  supplies  the  place
of  the  still  missing  First  Letter  of  Cortes  and  serves  to  complete
the  series  of  five  Relaciones.  It  was  first  published  in  the
Colección  de  Documentos  Inéditos  para  la  Historia  de  España
of  Navarrete,  Salvá  y Baranda,  in  1844.  Señor  Alaman
reproduced  it  in  the  first  volume  of  his  Disertaciones  sobre  la
Historia  de  la  República  Mexicana.

The  Second  Letter  was  dated  from  Segura  de  la  Frontera,
October  30,  1520.  It  contained  the  first  account  ever  written
of  the  wonders  of  México  and  the  adventures  of  the  Spanish
conquerors  in  the  newly  discovered  countries,  and  awakened
the  liveliest  interest  in  Spain,  where  it  was  first  published  by
Juan  Cronberger,  a celebrated  Germán  printer  in  Seville,
November  8,  1522.  It  was  again  printed  the  following  year
by  another  Germán,  George  Cocí,  in  Saragossa.

TheThird  Letter  was  dated  from  Coyohuacan,  May  15,  1522,
and  was  likewise  first  printed  in  Seville  by  the  same  Juan
Cronberger,  March  30,  1523.

The  Fourth  Letter  was  dated  from  the  city  of  Temixtitan
(México),  October  15,  1524,  and  was  first  published  in  Toledo
by  Gaspar  de  Avila,  and  again  in  Saragossa,  July  8,
1526.

All  of  these  editions  are  folios  in  gothic  lettering  and  are
now  extremely  rare.

The  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Letters,  which  were  the  only
ones  known  until  Dr.  Robertson’s  fortúnate  discovery  com-
pleted  the  series,  have  been  translated  into  Latín,  French,
Italian,  English,  and  Germán,  at  various  times.

Of  the  Second  and  Third  Letters  a Latín  translation  made
by  Pietro  Savorgnani  of  Forli,  secretary  to  the  bishop  of
Vienne  (Dauphiné),  was  dedicated  to  Pope  Clement  VIL  and
first  published  in  Nuremberg  in  1524.  This  translation  was
reproduced  in  the  work  entitled:  De  Insulis  nuper  inventis,
which  first  appeared  at  Cologne  in  1532  and  was  afterwards
included  in  the  Novus  Orbis  of  Simón  Grineo,  of  which  one

io4

Letters  of  Cortes

edition  was  issued  at  Basle  in  1555  and  another  at  Rotterdam
in  1616.

Nicholas  Liburno  (or  Liburnio)  translated  the  Latín  text
of  Savorgnani  into  Italian,  publishing  his  work  in  Venice  in
1524.  This  Italian  translation  was  again  published  by
Ramusio  in  the  third  volume  of  his  work,  Delle  Navigationi
et  Viaggi,  in  Venice  (edition  of  1606).

A Germán  translation  of  two  of  the  letters  was  made  by
Xysto  Betuleio  and  Andrea  Diethero  and  published  in  Augs-
burg  in  1550.  (García  Icazbalceta,  Documentos,  vol.  i.,
p.  xxxvi.)

Another  Germán  edition  was  published  in  Heidelberg  in  1779.

The  first  Spanish  edition  of  the  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth
Letters  was  published  by  Andrés  González  de  Barcia  in  the
first  volume  of  his  work  entitled  Historiadores  Primitivos
de  las  Indias  Occidentales,  Madrid,  1749-

In  1770,  Archbishop  Lorenzana  of  México,  afterwards
Cardinal  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  published  the  Second,  Third,
and  Fourth  Letters,  together  with  other  documents  and  his
commentaries,  under  the  title  of  Historia  de  Nueva  España,
and  of  this  work  an  indifferent  second  edition  was  issued  in
New  York  by  Manuel  del  Mar  in  1828.

Mr.  George  Folsom,  secretary  of  the  New  York  Historical
Society,  translated  Archbishop  Lorenzana’s  text  into  English

in  1843-

The  Vicomte  de  Flavigni  dedicated  to  the  Marquise  de
Polignac  a very  free  translation  of  the  three  letters  then
known,  in  a book  published  in  París  about  1778  (there  is  no
date  given),  entitled  Correspondance  de  Fernand  Cortes  avec
VEmpereur  Charles  V.  sur  la  conquét  du  Mexique:  reprinted
in  Switzerland,  1779.  Such  liberties  were  taken  with  the
Spanish  text  that  Mr.  Folsom,  in  his  notice  of  this  work,
rightly  calis  it  rather  a paraphrase  than  a translation.

The  Fifth  Letter.which  was  discovered  in  Codex  CXX.  of  the
Imperial  Library  inVienna,  has  no  date,  but  a codex  ofthe
sixteenth  century  in  the  National  Library  in  the  City  of
México  bears  the  following:  De  la  cibdad  de  Temixtitan  desta
Nueva  España,  á 3 del  mes  de  Setiembre,  año  del  nascimiento  de
nuestro  Señor  é Salvador  Jesucristo  de  1526.

Bibliographical  Note  105

Three  editions  of  the  complete  series  of  five  Relaciones  have
been  published  in  Spanish:  one  is  found  in  the  first  volume
of  Historiadores  Primitivos  de  Indias  of  Don  Enrique  de  Ve-
dia,  which  is  contained  in  Rivadeneyra’s  Biblioteca  de  Autores
Españoles,  Madrid,  1877 ; another  appears  in  the  first  volume  of
the  Biblioteca  Histórica  de  la  Iberia,  and  the  third  is  the  ad-
mirable collection  of  the  learned  Don  Pascual  Gayangos  of
the  Spanish  Academy,  Cartas  y Relaciones  de  Hernán  Cortés
al  Emperador  Carlos  V.,  published  in  París  in  1866.  The
same  author  made  an  English  translation  of  the  Fifth  Letter,
which  appeared  in  a single  volume  of  the  Hakluyt  Society’s
publications  in  1868.

A French  translation  of  the  five  letters  was  published  by
Desiré  Charnay  in  París  in  1896  under  the  title  of  Lettres  de
Fernand  Cortes  á Charles  Quint.

In  preparing  this  present  edition,  a careful  comparison  has
been  made  of  the  various  texts  known,  and,  while  idiomatic
differences  have  imposed  certain  rearrangements  of  form,
particularly  in  the  matter  of  punctuation,  and  the  suppres-
sion  of  many  cumbersome  repetitions,  it  has  been  sought
to  leave  to  the  letters  their  unique  characteristics,  due  to
the  personality  of  their  author,  and  to  the  temper  of  their
times.

The  Spanish  language  was  not  yet  the  strong  and  stately
vehicle  of  thought  into  which  itwas  afterward  shaped  by  gen-
erations  of  scholars,  whose  writings  not  only  brought  the  Cas-
tilian  tongue  to  a superlative  degree  of  purity  and  perfection,
but  also  conspicuously  enriched  the  universal  patrimony  of
literature.  Fernando  Cortes  had  but  scanty  learning,  and
the  conditions  under  which  he  wrote  were  little  conducive  to
the  cultivation  of  literary  style,  but  the  absence  of  adorn-
ment,  the  precisión  of  fact,  and  forceful  terseness  of  expression
furnish  his  compositions  with  singular  merit.  The  restraint
and  self-control  of  which  he  was  master  appear  in  the  equal
and  passionless  style  of  his  writings;  for  he  seems  neither  ex-
alted  by  success  ñor  cast  down  by  misfortunes,  both  of  which
he  describes  with  calm  simplicity  in  language  which  is  both
natural  and  fluent.  Perhaps  nowhere  does  the  real  superiority
and  inherent  strength  of  his  character  more  plainly  appear

loó

Letters  of  Cortes

than  in  those  passages  where  he  writes  of  the  intrigues
and  detractions  of  his  enemies,  men  whose  ambitions  were
selfish  and  whose  characters  were  vulgar  and  unscrupulous.
Judged  by  his  letters  alone,  Cortes  must  be  ranked  high
amongst  the  Spanish-American  discoverers  and  conquerors.
His  rudely  honest  contemporary  and  faithful  follower  Bernal
Diaz  del  Castillo  resented — and  perhaps  not  unnaturally
— the  scanty  mention  of  the  other  officers  and  men  of  the
expedition,  and,  occasionally,  in  the  course  of  his  gossipy
chronicle,  he  breaks  into  acrimony  over  what  seems  to  him
a cheating  of  others  of  their  dues.

On  the  whole,  however,  Cortes  was  wise  to  eschew  per-
sonalities  in  his  reports,  for  no  distribution  of  praise  would
have  satisfied  his  followers,  and  he  would  have  merely  risked
wearying  the  Emperor  with  a useless  repetition  of  meaning-
less  ñames.  Cortes  cannot  be  fairly  reproached  with  self-
laudation;  he  evidently  knew  the  valué  also  of  occasional
self-effacement,  and  he  never  loses  sight  of  the  high  dual
mission  with  which  he  felt  himself  invested, — the  spreading
of  the  Faith  and  the  extensión  of  the  Spanish  sovereignty;
while  the  glory  of  victory  is  invariably  ascribed  to  divine  pro-
tection  or  the  intervention  of  the  saints,  rather  than  to  his
own  courage  or  ability,  and  the  fruits  of  his  victories  were
laid  at  the  feet  of  his  sovereign.

The  notes  with  which  the  present  edition  is  supplied  have
been  carefully  compiled  from  the  best  authorities,  ancient
and  modern.  Among  these  authorities,  the  soldier  chroniclers
contemporary  with  Cortes,  and  the  Spanish  priests  in  America
at  the  same  early  period,  take  the  first  rank,  and  some  brief
notice  of  the  character  of  these  men,  the  circumstances  under
which,  and  the  motives  for  which,  they  wrote  may  be  of
Service  in  enabling  the  reader  to  estimate  their  testimony  at
its  just  historical  worth.

It  should  always,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
letters  of  Cortes  have  the  unique  and  superlative  merit  of
having  been  composed  on  the  spot  from  day  to  day,  in  the
midst  of  the  events  in  which  their  writer  was  playing  the
chief  part,  and  that  they  were  destined  for  the  Emperor  alone,
henee  misstatements  of  fact  could  only  result  from  an  inten-

Bibliographical  Note  107

tion  to  deceive  the  Sovereign.  The  astuteness  of  Cortes  would
seem  to  exelude  the  adoption  of  a short-sighted  policy , which
would  have  foredoomed  hrm  to  exposure  and  failure,  and,
though  the  story  of  his  dealings  with  Diego  Velasquez,  Pan-
filo de  Narvaez,  and  the  other  Spanish  officials  with  whom  he
carne  in  conflict,  is  told  from  his  own  point  of  view,  the  versión
he  gives  cannot  be  essentially  untrue  in  any  important  par-
ticular. His  story  of  the  conquest  from  1519  till  1527  is  thus
told  almost  in  the  form  of  a diary,  written  at  different  times
and  places,  under  varying  circumstances  of  fortune,  and  as  it
was  written,  so  do  we  now  read  it.

The  other  conquerors,  and  the  priests,  wrote  or  supplied
material  to  others  several  years  after  the  events  they  chroni-
cled,  and  under  the  influence  of  different  motives,  either
avowed  or  dissembled.  These  latter  on  some  points  give
to  their  histories  the  bias  of  special  pleading,  besides  which,
in  many  instances,  their  manuscripts  reached  responsible
hands  only  after  many  vicissitudes,  and,  at  times,  only  in
copies  or  translations,  which  may  suggest  reasonable  doubts
of  their  entire  authenticity.  Whenever,  therefore,  a conflict
of  testimony  is  found  concerning  any  event  described  by
Cortes,  modern  historians  have  almost  invariably  decided
that  his  statements,  on  all  points  of  which  he  had  personal
knowledge,  should  be  held  to  outweigh  those  of  other  writers
unless  it  conclusively  appears  that  his  conscious  intention  was
to  mislead  the  Emperor.

The  death  of  Montezuma  is  one  of  the  few  cases  in  which
it  seems  the  decisión  should  be  against  Cortes.  With  great
and  perfect  frankness  he  admits  the  murder  of  Quauhpopoca,
the  torture  and  subsequent  murder  of  Quauhtemoczin,  and
he  owns  to  a somewhat  extensive  catalogue  of  indefensibie
crimes,  but  for  Montezuma’s  death  he  refuses  responsibility.
Yet,  whether  we  consider  the  unanimous  testimony  as  to  the
trifling  character  of  the  Emperor’s  wound,  the  useless  embar-
rassment  his  presence  had  become,  the  imprudence  of  leaving
him  freeinthe  capital,  or  the  impossibility  of  carrying  him  cap-
tive  out  of  it,  and  finally  the  contemporary  Mexican  versions
of  his  death,  all  the  circumstances  certainly  point  to  the  conclu-
sión that  the  royal  captive  died  by  the  will  of  his  conqueror.

io8

Letters  of  Cortes

(i)

FRANCISCO  LOPEZ  DE  GOMARA

The  Historia  General  de  las  Indias  and  the  Crónica  de  la
Conquista  de  Nueva-España,  which  were  published  in  Sara-
gossa,  1552,  were  at  first  received  with  the 'greatest  favour
by  the  public,  and  other  editions  as  well  as  translations  into
Italian  and  French  rapidly  followed.  This  success,  however,
was  short-lived,  as  Gomara’s  facts  and  appreciations  were
promptly  impugned,  first  by  Bernal  Díaz  del  Castillo,  who,
in  publishing  his  book,  called  it  The  True  History  of  the
Conquest,  in  contradistinction  to  Gomara’s  false  and  fanci-
ful  one.

In  1553  the  Spanish  Government  took  steps  to  suppress
the  work,  and  withdraw  it  from  circulation,  imposing  a fine
of  200,000  maravedís  upon  any  one  who  should  print  or  sell
it  in  the  future.  This  rigid  prohibition  was  not  revoked  until
1727.  Concerning  Gomara’s  birth  and  antecedents,  nothing
is  known,  and,  likewise,  neither  the  date  ñor  place  of  his  death
is  recorded:  “He  carne  like  water  and  like  wind  he  went.”
He  is  said  to  have  held  the  Chair  of  Rhetoric  at  the  University
of  Aléala,  and  afterwards  to  have  passed  several  years  in
Rome.  In  1540  he  entered  the  Service  of  Femando  Cortes,
then  Marques  del  Valle,  and  recently  returned  to  Spain.  Dr.
Robertson  surmises  that  he  then  began  his  historical  work,
under  the  inspiration,  if  not  at  the  dictation,  of  his  patrón,
and  this  would  seem  to  be  likely.  He  is  undoubtedly  the
apologist  of  Cortes,  and,  although  the  latter  was  dead  some
years  when  the  work  was  published,  the  first  part  is
dedicated  to  the  Emperor,  and  the  second  to  Don  Martin
Cortes,  second  Marques  del  Valle.

But,  all  reservations  admitted,  the  work  of  Gomara  il-
lustrates  a most  important  and  interesting  period  of  history,
and,  if  he  was  constrained  to  treat  his  hero  leniently,  he
nevertheless  had  access  to  a mass  of  original  information,
by  which  he  profited  with  excellent  results.  His  style  is
agreeable  and  scholarly,  revealing  a writer  of  wide  culture,
gifted  with  unusual  knowledge  of  astronomy,  geography,  and
history.  Although  he  never  was  in  America  (as  far  as  is

Bibliographical  Note  109

recorded),  he  has  known  how  to  lend  the  realism  to  his  de-
scriptions  which  usually  only  an  eyewitness  can  impart.  When
not  vindicating  Cortes,  Gomara  has  every  claim  to  be  ranked
amongst  the  most  trustworthy  of  the  early  wnters  on  Spanish-
American  events,  and  his  facts  and  descriptions  generally
stand  the  test  of  comparison  with  authentic  temporary  records.

(2)

BERNAL  DIAZ  DEL  CASTILLO

Bernal  Diaz  was  a perfect  type  of  the  military  adventurer
of  his  age,  and  first  went  as  a prívate  soldier  to  America  in
1514,  under  the  command  of  Pedrarias  de  Avila,  bound  for
Darien.  He  next  appeared  in  Cuba,  where  he  was  always
ready  to  join  any  expedition  of  adventure  which  might  be
organised,  and,  indeed,  he  went  on  most  of  them,  and  was
one  of  the  few  who  escaped  from  the  disastrous  exploration
conducted  by  Ponce  de  León  on  the  Florida  coast.  He  next
joined  Francisco  Hernández  de  Córdoba  on  his  joumey  to
Yucatán.  He  returned  again  thither  the  following  year  with
Juan  de  Grijalba,  from  whose  expedition  he  arrived  once  more
at  Cuba  just  in  time  to  take  Service  under  Fernando  Cortes.
Diaz  was  a brave  soldier,  popular  amongst  his  comrades,  and
esteemed  by  his  commander,  who  some  yeais  later  (in  1540),
recommended  him  to  the  notice  of  the  Emperor,  as  did  like-
wise  the  Viceroy  Don  Antonio  Mendoza.

After  the  conquest,  he  received  an  encomienda  in  Guate-
mala, where  he  held  the  office  of  regidor  of  Santiago  de  los
Caballeros,  where  presumably  he  died.  And  this  would  have
been  all  there  was  to  say  about  Bernal  Diaz,  had  Francisco
López  de  Gomara  not  published  his  history  of  the  conquest
in  1552.  His  exaltation  of  Cortes,  to  the  exclusión  of  other
members  of  the  expedition,  enraged  the  oíd  soldier,  living
in  peaceful  retirement  on  his  estáte  at  Chamula,  and  he  re-
solved that  he  and  his  fellows,  who  had  borne  the  burden  of
the  conquest,  should  likewise  make  good  their  just  claims  to
a share  of  the  credit.  It  was  a case  of  “mine  enemy  writing
a book,”  and  the  oíd  veteran  slashes  his  cultivated  rival’s
polished  prose  in  the  language  of  the  camp.  Thirty  years

IIO

Letters  of  Cortes

had  then  elapsed  since  the  fall  of  the  Aztec  Empire,  and  Bernal
Diaz  was  no  longer  a young  man;  nowhere  does  he  say  that
he  had  taken  notes  or  memoranda  of  what  happened  from
day  to  day,  and  yet,  were  his  chronicle  a journal,  its  details
could  hardly  be  more  minute,  ñor  its  statements  more  em-
phatic.  These  were  the  great  events  of  his  Ufe,  worthy  indeed
to  be  the  great  events  of  a greater  man’s  life,  and  doubtless  he
relived  and  rehearsed  them  constantly,  and,  being  a man  of
quick  and  careful  observation,  given  to  pondering  and  re-
flecting  upon  all  that  he  saw  and  heard,  gifted  moreover  with
a good  memory,  it  is  not  so  strange  that  in  the  quiet  of  his
last  years  the  retired  soldier  could  evoke  the  procession  of
events  in  their  perfect  order.

He  began  writing  in  1558,  and  his  declared  purpose  was
to  correct  the  mistakes  and  misstatements  of  Gomara,  and
to  show  that  not  only  had  those  under  Cortes ’s  control  shared
in  the  fighting,  but  had  likewise  been  called  into  the  counsels
of  their  chief.  His  indubitable  claim  upon  Mexico’s  per-
petual gratitude  is  in  his  introduction  of  the  orange-tree  as,
when  on  Grijalba’s  expedition,  he  landed  one  day,  and  planted
eight  orange  seeds,  which  he  brought  from  Cuba,  all  of  which
grew.  The  Indians,  seeing  the  strange  little  plants  coming
up,  carefully  protected  them  from  insects  and  other  penis,
and  from  this  casual  little  plantation  the  culture  of  the
orange-tree  spread  over  all  tierra  caliente.

The  father  of  Bernal  Diaz  was  Francisco  Diaz  del  Cas-
tillo y Gaban,  and  his  mother  was  Maria  Diez  Rejón;  as  the
former  held  the  post  of  regidor  of  the  important  town  of
Medina  del  Campo,  he  must  have  been  a man  of  some  family.

The  Verdedera  Historia,  as  we  have  it,  is  incomplete,  and
was  printed  not  from  the  original,  ñor  even  from  a certified
duplicate  of  it,  but  from  a copy  in  possession  of  the  councillor
Ramirez  de  Prado.  The  work  was  undertaken  by  F.  Remon,
who  died  before  its  conclusión,  so  that  it  was  passed  on  to
Fray  Gabriel  Adarzo  de  Santander,  afterwards  Bishop  of
Otranto.

As  literature,  the  work  of  Bernal  Diaz  ranks  far  below  the
letters  of  Cortes,  and  shows  the  wnter  to  be  without  instruc-
tion  or  culture.  The  narrative  is  involved,  the  mass  of  small

Bibliographical  Note  1 1 1

details  bewildering,  while  through  all  pierces  the  jealous
determination  of  a wounded  vanity  to  assert  its  claims  to
recognition.  The  stamp  of  perfect  sincerity  and  frankness,
however,  is  upon  the  whole  work,  and  its  valué  as  an  histoncal
document,  particularly  when  paralleled  with  the  letters  of
Cortes,  and  the  chronicles  of  Gomara,  is  superlative  and
unimpeachable.

Prescott  describes  Bemal  Diaz  as  of  “a  poor  and  humble
family,”  but  since  his  father  held  the  office  of  regidor  this  can
hardly  be  exact,  as  such  posts,  especially  in  a town  of  the
importance  of  Medina  del  Campo,  were  not  held  by  the  poor
and  humble.  He  himself  claimed  some  kinship  with  Don
Diego  Velasquez.

(3)

GONZALO  FERNANDEZ  DE  OVIEDO  Y VALDÉS

Gonzalo  Fernandez  de  Oviedo  was  born  of  an  illustrious
family  in  Asturias  in  1478,  and  passed  his  early  years  at  Court
as  page  to  the  Infante  Don  Juan,  only  son  of  the  Catholic
Sovereigns.  He  spent  some  years  in  Italy  in  the  Service  of
the  King  of  Naples,  but  retumed  to  Castile,  where  he  became
custodian  of  the  crown  jewels,  until  he  was  sent  as  royal
inspector  of  the  gold  smelting  in  the  Indies.  After  taking
part  in  Pedradas  de  Avila’s  colonising  expedition  to  Dañen,
he  returned  and  settled  permanently  in  San  Domingo.

Oviedo  kept  in  touch  with  the  Spanish  Court  and  retumed
several  times  to  Spain,  on  one  of  which  occasions,  in  1526,  he
published  his  Sumario , which  was  dedicated  to  the  Emperor,
and  dealt  with  the  geography,  climate,  vegetation,  animáis,
and  tribes  of  the  American  Colonies,  and  which  met  with  a
popular  reception  from  the  public.  The  first  volume  of  his
great  work,  however,  Historia  General  de  las  Indias,  in  nine-
teen  books,  to  which  he  had  given  years  of  careful  labour,  ap-
peared  in  1535.  The  entire  work  is  divided  into  three  parts,
consisting  in  all  of  fifty  books,  and  ineludes  everything  that
had  already  appeared  in  his  Sumario.  The  second  and
third  parts  are  occupied  with  the  conquest  of  México,  Perú,
and  other  South  American  countries.  Oviedo,  through  his

I 12

Letters  of  Cortes

relations  with  most  of  the  great  personages  of  his  day  and  his
personal  knowledge  of  the  countries  he  describes,  the  events
he  portrays,  and  the  men  who  fignred  in  them,  collected  an
enormous  mass  of  data,  which,  however,  he  never  properly
classified.  He  is,  therefore,  confused  and  confusing,  self-
contradictory  and  something  of  a plagiarist,  of  whom  it  was
said  that,  not  content  with  drawing  his  information  from  the
higher  and  more  trustworthy  sources,  he  did  not  scruple  to
collect  the  gossip  of  the  camp  from  common  soldiers,  and  the
cancans  of  great  mens’  ante-chambers.  Las  Casas  describes
his  work  as  “a  Wholesale  fabrication,  and  as  full  of  lies  as
pages.”  Oviedo  and  Las  Casas  were  poles  asunder,  and  the
good  bishop  was  so  averse  to  the  sentiments  and  opinions  of
his  contemporary  (so  contrary  to  his  own)  that  he  could  see
no  good  either  in  him  or  his  work.

Despite  the  blemishes  which  mar  his  work,  Oviedo  must  be
considered  an  astute  observer,  ñor  can  it  be  thought  that
he  consciously  or  intentionally  misstated  facts.  From  the
same  events,  two  different  observers  draw  opposite  conclusions,
and,  in  the  study  of  historical  records,  their  valué  may  be
more  accurately  estimated  by  considering  the  character  of
the  médium  through  which  they  reach  us.

Oviedo  died  at  Valladolid  in  1559,  while  on  a visit  to
Spain  to  prepare  for  the  publication  of  the  remainder  of  his
work.

(4)

BERNARDINO  DE  SAHAGUN

The  Historia  Universal  de  Nueva  España  of  Fray  Bernar-
dino  de  Sahagun  serves  as  a most  valuable  text-book  for  all
students  of  Mexican  antiquities.

The  author  was  born  at  Sahagun,  and  entered  the  Francis-
can  Order  in  Salamanca,  where  he  studied  at  the  University.
He  went  to  México  in  1529,  where  he  devoted  his  energies  to
the  conversión  of  the  Indians.  He  entered  upon  this  task
on  the  basis  that,  to  convert  the  natives  to  Christianity,  it
was  first  necessary  to  know  them,  to  understand  their  language,
beliefs,  and  traditions,  and,  most  of  all,  to  be  thoroughly  versed

Bibliographical  Note  n3

in  their  ancient  mythology,  theology,  and  ritual.  To  acquire
such  knowledge,  he  lived  among  the  natives  of  Texcoco  for
several  years,  and  mastered  their  language  and  their  hiero-
glyphic  writings  to  such  an  extent  that  his  own  work  was
originally  written  in  the  Mexican  tongue.

His  superiors  did  not  give  unqualified  approval  to  the
publication  of  his  MSS.,  the  tendency  being  rather  to  oblitérate
as  far  as  possible  all  knowledge  of  ancient  Aztec  beliefs,  with
a view  to  detaching  the  Indians  entirely  from  the  traditions
of  their  ancestors.  Starting  thus  with  a tabula  rasa  as  it  were,
it  was  thought  that  the  work  of  conversión  would  progress
more  rapidly.  Fortunately  this  mistaken  conception  did
not  lead  to  the  destruction  of  the  mass  of  unique  information
which  Fray  Bernardino  had  accumulated,  although  his
manuscripts  were  widely  scattered  through  various  convents
of  the  Order.

Sahagun  sent  a statement  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  his
labours  to  Spain,  where  it  attracted  the  attention  of  the
President  of  the  Royal  Council  for  the  Indies,  at  that  time
Don  Juan  de  Ovando,  who  fortunately  perceived  its  valué,
and  caused  the  scattered  manuscripts  to  be  collected  and
restored  to  their  owner,  at  the  same  time  directing  that  he
should  return  to  Spain,  and  forthwith  transíate  them  into
Spanish.  Sahagun  was  nearly  eighty  years  of  age  at  this
time,  but  he  set  diligently  to  work,  and  completed  the  trans-
lation,  which  was  placed  side  by  side  with  the  original,  and
the  whole  illustrated  with  an  Aztec  vocabulary.  The  entire
work,  contained  in  two  large  folio  volumes,  was  sent  to  Madrid,
from  which  time  it  completely  disappeared,  not  to  be  seen
again  for  more  than  two  hundred  years,  when  the  cosmo-
grapher  Don  Juan  Bautista  Muñoz  unearthed  it  in  the
Franciscan  Library  at  Tolosa  in  Navarre.

The  first  publication,  dedicated  to  Pope  Pius  VIII.  and
edited  by  Carlos  María  de  Bustamente,  deputy  for  the  State
of  Oaxaca,  appeared  in  México  at  the  cost  of  the  national
treasury.  One  year  later  Lord  Kingsborough  introduced  it
into  the  6th  volume  of  his  magnificent  work,  under  the
natural  impression  that  he  was  giving  it  for  the  first  time  to
the  public.

VOL.  I. — 8

Letters  of  Cortes

114

(5)

BARTOLOMÉ  DE  LAS  CASAS

Fray  Bartolomé  de  Las  Casas,  who  later  became  Bishop  of
Chiapa,  was  born  at  Seville  in  1474.  His  father  went  with
Columbus  onhissecondvoyagein  1493,  and  amassed  sufficient
means  to  provide  his  promising  son  with  a university  edu-
cation  at  Salamanca.  He  was  the  first  priest  ordained  in  the
new  world,  where  he  went  with  Ovando  in  1502.  The  suffer-
ings  of  the  natives  under  the  cruelties  of  the  first  colonists,
and  especially  the  System  of  ripartimientos  and  encomiendas,
so  aroused  the  sympathies  of  the  young  priest  that  he  dedi-
cated  his  life  to  their  defence,  and  was  the  first  to  bear  the
glorious  title  of  Protector-General  of  the  Indians,  which
Cardinal  Ximenez  de  Cisneros,  regent  in  the  absence  of  Charles
V.,  conferred  upon  him.  He  was  indefatigable  in  his  cmsade
and  not  always  discreet.  After  the  failure  of  the  native
colony  entrusted  to  him,  he  retired  to  a Dominican  con-
vent  (which  Order  he  entered)  and  devoted  himself  during
many  years  to  various  compositions  in  vindication  of  the
Indians  and  their  violated  rights.  He  enlisted  his  brethren
of  the  Order  in  his  apostolate,  and  never  during  his  long  and
eventful  life  flagged  in  his  zeal  for  the  noble  end  he  had  set
himself.  After  refusing  the  bishopric  of  Cuzco,  the  richest
perhaps  in  the  New  World,  he  later  accepted  the  poor  diocese
of  Chiapa.  He  died  in  July,  1566,  at  the  age  of  ninety-two,
in  the  monastery  of  Atocha,  at  Madrid.

Las  Casas  barely  tolerated  Cortes,  and,  having  known  him
as  an  obscure  young  man  of  no  importance,  courting  the
favour  of  Diego  Velasquez  in  Cuba,  he  could  never  refrain
in  later  years,  when  extraordinary  fortune  had  elevated  him
at  his  former  patrón ’s  expense,  from  recalling  the  humble
origin  and  many  doubtful  transactions  of  the  great  Con-
queror’s  youth.  Indeed  he  treats  Cortes  throughout  as  a
mere  lucky  adventurer.  Prescott  says  of  him  that  he  had
the  virtues  and  faults  of  a reformer,  being  inspired  by  a great
and  glorious  idea  which  “urged  him  to  lift  the  voice  of  rebuke
in  the  presence  of  princes,  to  brave  the  menaces  of  an
infuriated  populace,  to  cross  seas,  traverse  mountains  and

Bibliographical  Note  05

deserts,  to  incur  the  alienation  of  friends,  the  hostility  of
enemies,  to  endure  obloquy,  insult,  and  persecution.

His  great  work,  Historia  General  de  las  Indias,  to  which
he  devoted  himself  during  thirty  years,  while  still  in  manu-
script,  was  largely  drawn  upon  by  different  writers,  notably
by  Herrera,  who  incorporated  a large  amount  into  his  own
work  published  in  1601.  An  edition  of  his  works  was  pub-
lished  in  five  volumes  at  Madrid  in  1876.  His  Brevísima
Relación,  widely  read  and  translated  into  foreign  languages,
was  a terrible  indictment  of  his  countrymen  and  their  deal-
ings  with  the  natives.  The  integrity  of  his  character,  the
purity  of  his  motives,  and  his  apostolic  virtues  command
admiration,  and,  though  his  intemperate  zeal  in  the  cause  he
championed  troubled  the  serenity  of  his  appreciations  as  an
historian,  his  statement  of  facts  may  be  invariably  trusted,  and
his  record  of  contemporary  events  is  of  unquestionable  valué.

(6)

MOTOLINIA

Toribio  de  Benevente  is  best  known  by  his  Indian  ñame
(which  he  himself  adopted)  of  Motolinia,  meaning  the  “poor
man”  (equivalent  of  the  Poverello  which  was  St.  Francis’s
dearest  title).  He  was  one  of  twelve  Franciscans  who  first
carne  to  México  in  response  to  the  request  of  Cortes,  at  the
cióse  of  the  conquest  (1523).  He  travelled  from  México  to
Guatemala  and  Nicaragua  on  foot,  and  knew  the  country  and
its  peoples  as  did  few.  His  headquarters  were  at  a convent
at  Texcoco,  where  his  life  and  energies  were  devoted  with
success  to  teaching  and  converting  the  Mexicans.  His
Historia  de  los  Indias  de  Nueva  España  embraces  first  re-
ligión and  rites  of  the  Aztecs,  second  conversión,  third  their
character,  chronology,  astrology,  and  some  account  of  their
principal  cities,  etc.  His  MS.  was  printed  in  the  first  volume
of  Icazbalceta’s  Documentos  Inéditos.

(7)

PETER  MARTYR

Pietro  Martire  de  Angleria  of  Arona,  Italy,  carne  to  Spain

Letters  of  Cortes

1 16

in  1487.  He  wrote  in  Latín  De  Orbe  Novo,  printed  in  a com-
plete edition  by  Hakluyt,  París,  1587.  He  took  great  interest
in  the  discoveries  and  colonisation,  and  was  allowed  to  at-
tend  meetings  of  the  Royal  Council  for  the  Indies.  He  was
personally  acquainted  with  Columbus,  Cortes,  and  others,
and  their  correspondence  with  the  Court  was  open  to  him.
His  writings  are  those  of  a philosophical  observer  of  historical
events,  unencumbered  with  the  manifold  details  and  small
incidents  which  crowd  and  confuse  the  pages  of  the  soldier
chroniclers  such  as  Bernal  Diaz.  He  died  in  1525.

(8)

ANTONIO  DE  HERRERA

Antonio  de  Herrera  was  born  at  Cuellar  in  1549,  and  was
made  Historiographer  of  the  Indies  from  1492-1554.  His
Historia  General  de  las  Indias  Occidentales  is  divided  into  eight
decades,  of  which  the  first  four  were  published  in  1601,  the
others  in  1 6 1 5 , fiv e volumes  in  folio.  A very  free  English  trans-
lation,  with  omissions,  was  made  by  Stevens.  The  plan  of
this  work  is  confused  and  interrupted,  wanting  in  sequence,
and  filled  with  irrelevant  details.  He  had  access  to  all  the
Statepapers,  colonial  reports,  and  every  MS.  relating  to  the
discovery,  conquest,  and  colonisation  of  the  New  World,  and
he  quoted  very  freely  from  Las  Casas.  Dazzled  by  the
wonderful  events  of  the  times  and  the  equally  marvellous
achievements  of  his  countrymen,  he  was  blind  to  their  faults
and  excesses,  so  that,  while  not  exactly  a panegyric,  his  work
is  coloured  by  a strong  patriotism,  which  shows  in  his  op-
timistic  appreciation  of  the  character  and  deeds  of  the  con-
querors.  His  work  is,  however,  a compendium  of  authentic
information  which  cannot  be  too  highly  esteemed.  He  died
in  1625.

(9)

JUAN  DE  TORQUEMADA

Juan  de  Torquemada,  Provincial  of  the  Franciscans  in
México  from  1614—1617,  spent  more  than  fifty  years  of  his

i 1 7

Bibliographical  Note

life  in  the  country,  during  which  time  he  amassed  an  im-
mense  collection  of  ancient  pictures,  writings,  and  original
manuscripts,  be'fides  the  information,  often  legendary  and
contradictory,  which  he  obtained  from  the  Indians.  Of  his
Monarchia  Indiana  Clavigero  says  that  one  must  seek  jewels
among  the  rubbish.  It  was  first  published  in  Madrid  in  1614,
and  again  in  1724.

(10)

WILLIAM  H.  PRESCOTT

The  work  of  the  eminent  American  historian  William  H.
Prescott  is  too  well  known  to  require  extensive  notice
here.  His  diligence  in  research,  and  his  scholarly  familiarity
with  the  sources  of  Spanish- American  history,  contributed  to
make  his  Conquest  of  México  a masterpiece  of  historical  narra-
tive,  in  which  sober  facts  seem  almost  to  catch  the  glamour
of  romance  from  the  delightful  style  of  their  presentation,
and  this  work  will  doubtless  long  remain  the  most  complete,
as  it  is  the  most  fascinating,  account  in  our  language  of  the
stirring  events  it  describes.

(11)

MANUEL  OROZCO  Y BERRA

In  1880,  the  Historia  Antiqua  de  la  Conquista  de  México,
by  Don  Manuel  Orozco  y Berra,  Vice-President  of  the  Society
of  Geography  and  Statistics,  was  published  by  the  order  and
at  the  expense  of  the  Mexican  Government,  Don  Porfirio
Diaz  being  then  President,  and  Señor  Mariscal  Minister  of
Public  Instruction.  This  erudite  work,  the  fruit  of  a lifetime
of  discriminating  research  by  the  distinguished  author,  is
divided  into  four  parts:  I.  Civilisation,  II.  Prehistoric  Man
in  México,  III.  Ancient  History,  IV.  The  Conquest.

(12)

MANUEL  GARCIA  ICAZBALCETA

The  collection  of  documents,  for  the  most  part  inedited,
published  in  1858  by  Don  Joaquin  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  opens

1 18

Letters  of  Cortes

many  original  and  invaluable  historical  sources  to  all.  The
labours  of  this  leamed  Mexican  in  the  field  of  historical
research  are  beyond  all  praise.

Besides  the  writers  above  noticed,  the  following  are  the
principal  authorities  who  have  been  consulted:

.T'* " ” ' in  Icazbalceta’s

Ixthlxochitl,  Historia  Chichimeca.

P.  Diego  Duran,  Historia  de  las  Indias  de  Nueva  España.
Fernando  Tezozomoc,  Crónica  Mexicana,  1538.

Diego  Muñoz  Camargo  (Tlascalan),  Historia  Tlascala.
Carlos  Siguenza,  Imperio  Chichimeco,  Geneal.  Reyes  Mexi-
canos.

Pizarro:  Varones  I Ilustres.

Joseph  de  Acosta,  S.  J.,  Historia  Natural  y Moral  de  las
Indias.  Madrid,  1608.

Thomas  Gage,  Voyage  1626.

Archbishop  Lorenzana,  Historia  de  Nueva  España,

Salazar  y Olarte,  Historia  de  la  Conquista.

Francesco  Xaverio  Clavigero,  Storia  Antica  del  Messico.
Agostino  de  Vetancourt,  Teatro  Mexicano,  1698  (México).
Gemelli  Careri,  Giro  del  Mondo,  Venezia,  1728.

Antonio  de  Solis,  Historia  de  la  Conquista.

Andrés  Cavo,  S.  J.,  Los  Tres  Siglos  de  México  (Cario
Bustamente).

Archivo  Mexicano,  Residencia  de  Cortes.

Diego  de  Landa,  Relación  de  las  Cosas  de  Yucatán.

William  Robertson,  History  of  America;  History  of  Charles  V.
Washington  Irving,  Life  of  Columbus;  Companions  of
Columbus.

Lúea  Alaman,  Dissertazioni  sulla  Storia  del  Messico.  Ital-
ian  translation  by  E.  Pelaez,  1859.

Humboldt,  Es  sai  Politique;  Vues  des  Cordillieres.

México  a Travers  los  Siglos  (published  under  direction  of
D.  Vincente  Riva  Palacio).

Sir  Arthur  Helps,  Cortes.

Documentos
Inéditos,  volunte  i.

1770.

Bibliographical  Note  119

Stephens,  Incidents  of  Travel  in  Yucatán.

Hubert  Howe  Bancroft,  History  of  México  in  Vol.  X.

Abbé  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg.  Histoire  des  Nations  Civ-
ilisées  du  Mexique,  1839.

Ternaux-Compans,  Voyages,  Relations  et  Mémoires,  Origi-
naux.  París,  1883.

Andrés  González  de  Barcia,  Historiadoses  Primitiros  de  las
Indias  Occidentales.

Martin  Fernandez  de  Navarrete,  Documentos  inéditos  para
la  Historia  de  España.

Riradeneira’s  Biblioteca  de  Autores  Españoles.

Desiré  Charnay,  Ancient  Cities  of  the  New  World.  París,
1887.

FIRST  LETTER

121

FIRST  LETTER

Sent  to  the  Queen  Doña  Juana,  and  the  Emper or  Charles
V.,  her  son,  by  the  Judiciary  and  Municipal  Authorities
of  the  Villa  Rica  de  la  Vera  Cruz,  dated  the  io th  July  1519.

Very  High  and  Very  Powerful  and  Excellent  Princes,
Very  Catholic  and  Very  Great  Sovereigns  and  Rulers.
We  believe  that  Your  Majesties  by  a letter  from  Diego
Velasquez,1  Lieutenant  of  the  Admiral2  in  the  Island  of  Fer-
nandina, 3 will  have  been  informed  of  the  new  land,  which

» He  was  a native  of  Cuellar,  and  accompanied  Columbus  on  hi8
second  voyage  in  1493;  under  commission  of  Diego  Columbus,  then
viceroy,  he  effected  the  conquest  of  Cuba,  and  became  governor  of  the
island.  He  showed  himself  ungrateful  to  his  benefactor,  Diego
Columbus,  and  he  was  in  his  tum  betrayed,  and  finally  outgeneralled,
by  Cortes.  When  the  royal  appointment  of  the  latter,  as  Captain-
General  of  New  Spain,  was  proclaimed  in  Cuba  by  Rodrigo  de  Paz,
and  Francisco  de  las  Casas,  to  the  sound  of  trumpets  in  1522,  Diego
Velasquez  took  to  his  bed  from  sheer  mortification,  and  died  within  a
tew  months.  Fuller  notice  of  his  character,  and  his  dealings  with
Cortes,  are  given  in  the  preceding  Biographical  Note.

2 Diego  Columbus,  only  son  of  the  Admiral  Christopher  Columbus
and  his  wife  Felipa  Mogniz  Perestrello  of  Lisbon,  succeeded  Don
Nicolás  de  Ovando  as  governor,  and  bore  the  title  of  viceroy.

3 Cuba,  which  was  discovered  by  Columbus,  on  October  28,  1492,
and  named  by  him,  Juana,  in  honour  of  the  Royal  Infante,  Don  Juan.
He  was  convinced  that  he  had  reached  China,  or  Cipango,  of  which
he  had  read  in  Marco  Polo’s  narrative.  It  was  discovered  to  be  an
island  by  Ocampo,  who  first  circumnavigated  it  in  1508.  The
island  was  conquered  in  1511  by  Velasquez,  in  command  of  three  hun*
dred  men,  but  so  peaceable  and  indolent  were  the  natives,  that  the
conquest  was  effected  almost  without  a struggle;  for  only  one  chief,
Hatuey,  with  a few  folio wers,  attempted  to  dispute  the  landing  of  the
Spaniards.  Hatuey  was  captured,  and  sentenced  to  be  bumed.
When  this  cruel  sentence  was  about  to  be  carried  out,  a friar  exhorted
him  to  be  baptised,  and  thus  ensure  his  soul  going  to  paradise.  The
chief  asked  if  there  would  be  Spaniards  there,  and  when  the  friar

123

I 24

Letters  of  Cortes

was  discovered  in  these  parts  about  two  years  ago,  which
in  the  beginning  was  called  Cozumel,*  1 and  has  since  been
named  Yucatán,2  without  its  being  the  one  or  the  other.
This  your  Royal  Highnesses  will  be  able  to  perceive  from
our  narration  because,  until  now  the  accounts,  which
have  been  made  to  Your  Majesties  concerning  this  coun-
try,  both  of  its  customs  and  wealth,  as  well  as  concerning
the  manner  of  its  discovery,  and  other  things  which  have
been  stated  about  it,  are  not  and  could  not  have  been
exact,  for,  as  will  appear  from  this  account  which  we  send
to  Your  Highnesses,  up  till  now  no  one  has  known  them.

We  will  deal  with  it  here  from  the  beginning  of  its

answered  that  they  all  hoped  to  go  there,  he  replied  that  then  he  would
rather  not.  So  he  was  burned,  but  not  converted.  The  Indian  ñame
Cuba  has  persisted  and  survived  all  others.  (Oviedo,  Hist.  Gen.,  lib-
xxvii. , cap.  iii. ; Las  Casas,  Hist.  de  las  Indias,  lib.  iii.,  cap.  xxi.-xxv.)

1 Cozumel,  also  sometimes  called  Acuzamil  ( Ah-Cuzamil  meaning
the  “Swallows”),  was  discovered  by  Juan  de  Grijalba  on  the  feast
of  the  Invention  of  the  Holy  Cross,  and  henee  named  by  him  Santa
Cruz.  He  took  possession  in  the  ñame  of  the  Spanish  sovereigns,
and  of  Diego  Velasquez,  under  whose  commission  the  expedition  had
sailed.  There  was  a stone  building  on  the  island,  having  a square
tower  with  a door  in  each  of  its  four  sides.  Inside  this  there  were  idols,
palm  branches,  and  bones,  which  they  said  were  those  of  a great  chief
(Oviedo,  lib.  xvii.,  cap  ix.).  The  tower  was  surmounted  by  a smaller
square  turret  which  was  reached  by  an  outside  staircase.  Grijalba
hoisted  the  Spanish  flag  on  this  turret,  and  named  the  place  San  Juan
de  Puerta  Latina.  The  Chaplain  Fray  Juan  Diaz  said  mass.  Cristó-
bal de  Olid,  who  was  sent  by  Velasquez  in  search  of  Grijalba's  expedi-
tion, about  whose  safety  fears  were  felt,  also  landed  at  Cozumel,  and
took  formal  possession,  thinking  that  he  was  its  discoverer  (Orozco
y Berra,  tom.  iv.,  cap.  i.).  The  inhabitants  seemed  poor,  and  what
gold  they  produced  was  mostly  an  alloy  with  copper,  of  little  valué,
which  the  Indians  called  guanin,  and  prized  highly  (Las  Casas,  lib.
7,  cap.  lxvii.).

Cozumel  was  a place  of  pilgrimage,  and  in  one  of  the  great  temples
there  stood  a hollow  statue  called  Teel-Cuzam  (the  Swallows’  Feet),
made  of  terra-cotta,  in  which  a priest  placed  himself  to  give  oracular
answers  to  the  pilgrims  (Cogolludo,  Hist.  de  Yucatán,  lib.  iv.,  cap.
vii.) .

2 Yucatán,  “The  land  of  wounds  and  calamities,”  as  Bemal  Díaz
called  it.  This  coast  was  first  sighted  by  Columbus,  but  he  did  not
land.  In  1511,  a boat-load  of  men  from  the  wreckof  Valdivia’scaravel

First  Letter

125

discovery  up  to  its  present  state,  so  that  Your  Majesties
will  know  the  country  as  it  really  is,  the  people  who
possess  it,  and  the  manner  of  their  life,  and  the  rites
and  ceremonies,  the  sect  or  law  they  obey,  and  the

profit  which  Your  Royal  Highnesses  may  derive  from  it;
and  may  also  know  who  have  here  rendered  Services
to  Your  Majesties,  in  order  that  Your  Royal  Highnesses
may  act  as  best  suits  your  Service.  The  most  faithful
and  exact  account  is  as  follows:

It  may  be  two  years,  a little  more  or  less,  Most  En-
lightened  Princes,  that,  in  the  City  of  Santiago, *  1 which
is  in  the  Island  of  Fernandina,  of  whose  towns  Expedition
we  have  been  citizens,  three  inhabitants  of  0f  Fernan-
the  said  Island  united,  and  the  one  was  called  dez  de
Francisco  Fernandez  de  Córdoba, 2 another
Lope  Ochoa  de  Caicedo,  and  the  third  Cristóbal  Mor-

drifted  onto  the  coast,  and  the  men  were  sacrificed,  andeaten,  all  save
two,  who  escaped  as  will  be  explained  later.  The  coast  was  first  really
discovered  by  Francisco  Fernandez  de  Córdoba,  as  is  here  related,
and  the  ñame  of  Yucatán  was  the  word  tectetan,  meaning  “I  don’t
understand,”  caught  by  the  Spaniards  from  the  natives,  and  which
they  took  to  be  the  ñame  of  the  country  (Motolinia,  trat  iii.,  cap.
viii.).  The  Indian  ñame  was  Ulumil  Cuz,  and  Etel  Ceh,  meaning  the
land  of  birds  and  game;  they  also  called  it  Peten , an  island,  though
they  well  knew  that  it  was  not  one.  According  to  Ordoñez,  not  only
the  coast  province,  but  the  entire  country,  was  also  called  Maya
(a  waterless  land).  The  language  of  all  the  country  was  known  as
the  Maya  tongue.

The  subjoined  references  will  be  useful  to  students  of  the  history
of  this  most  interesting  country  and  its  stupendous  antiquities:
Cogolludo,  Hist.  de  Yucatán;  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,  Histoire  des
Nations  civilisées  du  Mexique;  Diego  de  Landa,  Relación  de  las  Cosas
de  Yucatán  (French  translation  by  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg) ; Stephens,
Incidents  of  Trovéis  in  Yucatán;  Bancroft,  Native  Races;  and  Carrillo,
Compendio  de  la  Hist.  Yucatán.

1 Santiago  was  the  seat  of  the  governor,  and  the  cathedral  city  of
the  ñrst  bishop.

2 This  expedition  was  organised  by  the  men  who  had  originally  come
from  Spain  with  Pedro  Arias  de  Avila,  commonly  called  Pedrarias
de  Avila,  when  he  was  sent  in  command  of  an  admirably  equipped
fieet  to  supersede  Balboa  as  governor  of  Darien.  Among  these  men
was  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo,  whose  copious  narrative  of  the  events

I 2 6

Letters  of  Cortes

ante ; and,  as  it  is  customary  in  these  Islands,  which
have  been  peopled  by  Spaniards  in  the  ñame  of  Your
Majesties,  to  bring  Indians  for  their  Service  from  the
other  Islands  which  have  not  been  peopled  by  Spaniards,
these  said  persons  sent  two  ships  and  a brigantine,  in
order  to  fetch  Indians  from  those  Islands *  1 to  Fernandina

in  the  islands,  and  in  México,  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  sources
of  American  history.

These  men,  on  their  retum  from  Darien,  were  cordially  received
in  Cuba  by  Diego  Velasquez,  who  encouraged  them  to  continué  ex-
plorations.  After  three  years  of  fruitless  delays  during  which  many
were  ill  and  some  had  died,  they  decided  to  organise  a venture  on  their
own  account,  and  they  secured  the  co-operation  of  Francisco  Fernandez
de  Córdoba,  a rich  colonist,  who  was  willing  to  put  his  money  into  the
undertaking.  He  was  chosen  as  captain,  three  vessels  were  bought,
one  of  which  Cortes  and  others  assert,  was  furnished  by  Velasquez,
on  condition  that  he  should  be  reimbursed  for  his  outlay  by  slaves,
who  should  be  brought  back  from  the  islands.  Bemal  Diaz  says
that  they  refused  this  condition,  but  that  Velasquez  furnished  the
ship  just  the  same;  this,  however,  does  not  accord  with  other  testi-
mony,  and  it  may  well  be  that  Bemal  Diaz,  who  was  simply  an  enlisted
soldier-adventurer,  knew  little  of  the  conditions  negotiated  amongst
the  owners  and  leaders.

The  little  flotilla  put  to  sea  from  Santiago  on  February  8,  1517,
stopping  first  at  Puerto  del  Principe  for  supplies,  and  continuing
thence  under  the  direction  of  the  pilot  Alaminos,  who  laid  the  course.
After  a voyage  not  free  from  dangers,  they  discovered  a small  island
off  the  peninsula  of  Yucatán,  which  they  called  Isla  de  las  Mugeres
(Women’s  Island),  because  they  found  there  statues  of  the  goddesses
Xchel  and  Ixchebeliax,  and  others.  From  this  island  an  important
looking  town  on  the  mainland  was  visible,  which  they  named  Grand
Cairo.  This  expedition,  as  will  be  seen  in  succeeding  notes,  ended
badly.

1 The  Spanish  settlements  in  the  New  World  were,  at  that  time,
limited  to  the  islands  of  Hispaniola  (Haití),  Cuba,  Puerto  Rico,  and
Jamaica,  which  were  called  the  Indies  by  the  discoverers  and  con-
querors,  because  they  were  firmly  persuaded  they  had  encircled  half
the  globe,  and  reached  the  Orient.  Besides  these  four  islands,  there
was  the  colony  of  Darien,  of  which  more  information  will  be  given
later.  Popular  imagination  in  Spain  was  inflamed  by  the  tales  of  vast
wealth  in  gold,  silver,  pearls,  precious  stones,  and  spices,  lying  in
the  virgin  lands  waiting  to  be  picked  up  by  the  first  comer.  Avaricious
adventurers  set  out  to  enrich  themselves  by  a lucky  venture,  and
return  with  their  easily  and  quickly  won  fortunes  to  Spain.  Serious
projects  for  colonisation  were  not  yet  conceived,  and,  what  settlements

First  Letter

127

to  make  slaves  of  them.  We  believe,  although  we  do
not  positively  know  it,  that  the  said  Diego  Velasquez,
Lieutenant  of  the  Admiral,  owned  a fourth  part  of  the
armada.  One  of  the  owners  of  the  said  armada,  called
Francisco  Fernandez  de  Córdoba,  went  as  its  Captain,
taking  as  pilot  a resident  of  the  town  of  Palos,* 1  one
Antón  de  Alaminos,2  whom  we  ha  ve  also  now  as  pilot,
and  whom  we  have  sent  to  Your  Roy  al  Highnesses  that
he  may  furnish  information  to  Your  Majesties.

Pursuing  their  voyage,  they  arrived  at  the  said
Island  of  Yucatán,  at  its  uttermost  point,  which  may
be  sixty  or  seventy  leagues  both  from  the  Discovery
said  Island  of  Fernandina,  and  from  this  coun-  of

try  of  the  rich  land  of  Vera  Cruz,  [thus  in  Yucatan
the  MS.  , where  we  now  are  in  the  ñame  of
Your  Royal  Highnesses.  At  this  point  they  disembarked
at  a town  called  Campoche, 3 whose  chief  they  named

there  were,  had  been  made  by  disillusioned  immigrants  who,  when  they
found  that  gold  and  pearls,  instead  of  lying  at  their  feet,  had  to  be
sought  as  elsewhere  with  labour,  enslaved  the  natives  for  the  exploita-
tion  of  the  natural  resources  of  the  islands.  Thus  the  slave  trade  sprang
up,  and  as  the  Indians,  unaccustomed  to  hard  work  and  harsh  treat-
ment,  died  off  in  such  numbers  as  to  rapidly  depopulate  the  neighbour-
hoods  of  the  Spanish  settlements,  expeditions  were  constantly
organised  to  the  neighbouring  islands  for  the  purpose,  as  Cortes  States,
of  capturing  the  natives.  The  system  of  repartimientos  and  en-
comiendas was  begun  under  the  sanction  of  Columbus,  and,  in  spite
of  the  denunciations  of  the  Church,  andrepeated  edicts  from  the  home
government,  the  slave  trade  flourished,  and  the  island  population
rapidly  dwindled.  This  subject  is  more  fully  noticed  in  Appendix  I.
to  the  Fourth  Letter.

1 Antón  de  Alaminos  had  served  under  Columbus  on  his  voyage
in  1502,  when  the  other  pilots  were  Comacho  de  Triana,  and  Juan
Alvarez;  there  was  also  the  inspector  of  the  royal  fifth  Bernardino  de
Iñiquez,  and  a Chaplain,  Alonzo  González  from  the  town  of  San
Cristóbal.

2 The  little  port  from  which  Columbus  originally  sailed  in  1492.

3 The  point  of  Catoche,  where  they  landed  on  March  5th,  is
the  extremity  of  the  península  nearest  to  Cuba.  A chief  and  many
people  carne  out  to  the  caravels  in  canoes,  and  having  no  interpreter
they  made  themselves  understood  as  best  they  could  by  signs,  inviting

128

Letters  of  Cortes

Lazaro,  and  gave  two  spindles  with  a piece  of  cloth  of
gold;  but,  as  the  natives  of  the  country  did  not  allow
them  to  remain  in  the  town,  or  on  land,  they  left,  and
went  about  ten  leagues  down  the  coast,  where  they  again
landed  at  a town  called  Machocobon,*  1 whose  chief  was
Champoto.  Here  they  were  well  received  by  the  natives,
though  they  were  not  allowed  to  come  into  the  towns;
and  that  night  they  slept  out  of  their  ships,  and  on  land.

The  natives,  seeing  this,  attacked  them2  on  the
moming  of  the  following  day,  in  such  a manner  that  26
Spaniards  perished,  and  all  the  rest  were  wounded,  and
at  last  the  Captain  Francisco  Fernandez  de  Córdoba,
seeing  this,  escaped  with  those  who  were  left  to  him  by
taking  refuge  in  the  ships.  The  said  Captain,  seeing
that  more  than  a quarter  of  his  people  had  been  killed,
and  that  he  himself  had  received  30  odd  wounds,  and
was  almost  dead,  and  despairing  of  escape,  returned  with
the  ships  and  people  to  the  said  Island  of  Fernandina. 3

the  Spaniards  to  land,  and  saying  Conex  Catoche,  which  means 1 ‘ come  to
our  houses,  ” but  was  thought  by  the  Spaniards  to  be  the  ñame  of  the
place.  They  called  it  Catoche  therefore  (Carrillo,  Compendio  de  la
Hist.  Yucatán  p.  105).  Cortes  here  confuses  Catoche  with  Cam-
peche (in  Maya,  Kimpech),  further  westward  on  the  bay  of  the  same
ñame,  where  the  caravels  arrived  on  Sunday,  the  feast  of  San  Lazaro
(March  2 2nd).  Oviedo  says  that  the  Spaniards  called  the  chief  of  the
place  Lazaro,  and  that  the  Indian  ñame  for  the  place  was  Campeche,
but  Orozco  y Berra  states  that,  in  ancient  letters,  the  place  is  called
llazaro,  and  the  river  Campeche  (tom.  iv.,  cap.  i.,  note).

1 There  is  much  confusión  amongst  the  early  writers  in  the
spelling  of  Indian  ñames,  and  in  assigning  them  correctly.  In  this
case  the  place  was  called  Poton-Chan,  and  the  bay  received  the  ñame
of  Mala  Pelea  from  the  Spanish  sailors,  on  account  of  the  disastrous
rout  they  suffered  there.  The  Cacique,  Machocobon,  according  to
Gomara,  was  a very  formidable  warrior.

2 See  Appendix  I.  at  cióse  of  Letter.

1 Alaminos,  after  Consulting  the  other  pilots,  decided  to  sail
for  Florida,  as  being  the  best  way  back  to  Cuba,  and  because  he  knew
that  coast  since  its  disco  very  by  Ponce  de  León.  They  reached
Florida  in  four  days,  and,  upon  landing  to  get  water,  they  were  again
attacked.  Both  Alaminos  and  Bernal  Diaz  were  wounded,  while
Berrio,  the  only  soldier  who  had  come  unscathed  out  of  the  Mala-

First  Letter

129

Here  they  made  known  to  Diego  Velasquez  that  they
had  found  a land  very  rich  in  gold,  because  they  had  seen
that  all  the  natives  wore  it,  some  in  their  noses,  some
in  their  ears,  and  some  in  other  parts,  and,  likewise,
that  there  were  in  that  country  edifices  Return
built  of  mortar  and  stone.  They  made  known  °f  the
to  him  also  many  other  facts,  which  they  pub-  ExPedltlon
lished  about  the  admirable  things  and  riches  of  the  said
land,  and  they  counselled  him  to  send  ships  to  barter  for
gold,  saying  that,  if  he  would  do  so,  a great  amount  of
it  could  be  obtained.* 1

Upon  learning  this,  the  said  Diego  Velasquez,  moved
more  by  cupidity  than  any  other  zeal,  sent  a Procurator
to  the  Island  of  Hispaniola,  with  a certain  account,  which
he  made  to  the  Reverend  Fathers  of  St.  J eróme, 2 who
resided  there  as  Govemors  of  the  Indies,  to  obtain  per-

Pelea  fight,  met  the  worse  fate  of  being  taken  alive.  After  many
mishaps,  they  finally  landed  at  Carenas  {Habana),  and,  ten  days  later»
Francisco  Fernandez  de  Córdoba  died  from  his  wounds,  and  thus  ended
this  disastrous  expedition  (Bemal  Diaz,  cap.  i-vi.;  Oviedo,  lib
xvii.,  cap.  iv.;  Gomara,  Iiist.  de  las  Indias,  cap.  lii.;  Herrera,  dec.  ii.
lib.  iii.,  cap.  xvii-xviii.;  Cogolludo,  Hist.  Yucatán,  lib.  i.,  cap.  i— ii. ;
Torquemada,  lib.  iv.,  cap.  iii.).

> Their  description  of  the  solidly  built  houses  and  temples,  the
spoils  of  gold  which  they  brought,  together  with  the  two  converted
captives,  aroused  the  greatest  excitement,  and  inflamed  Diego  Velas-
quez’s  cupidity.  Speculation  as  to  the  origin  of  the  natives  of  Yucatán
was  rife,  and  the  theory  was  advanced  that  they  descended  from  the
tribes  of  Jews  exiled  from  Jerusalem  under  Vespasian  and  Titus.

1 Fray  Bartolomé  Las  Casas  had  succeeded,  by  the  moving  picture
he  drew  of  the  oppression  and  injustice  practised  by  the  Spaniards  on
the  natives  of  the  islands,  in  interesting  the  Cardinal- Regent  Ximenez
deCisereros  in  their  behalf,  and  His  Eminence’s  ñrst  step  was  to  apply
to  the  General  of  the  Jeronymites  at  San  Bartolomé  de  Lupiano  to
furnish  some  men  of  that  order  for  Service  in  the  Indies.  A chapter
of  the  Priors  of  Castile,  which  the  General  assembled,  assented  to  the
Cardinal’s  wish,  and  furnished  three  friars  who  were  sent  out  with
instructions,  and  very  full  powers.  Las  Casas  says  that  they  did  not
go  as  governors,  as  some  supposed,  but  rather  to  see  that  the  laws  for
the  protection  of  the  Indians  were  observed,  and  to  report  abuses.
They  were  instructed  to  visit  each  island  personally,  to  ascertain  the
number  of  chiefs  and  tribes,  and  to  see  how  they  were  treated  by  the

VOL.  I.— 9

130

Letters  of  Cortes

mission  to  colonise  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Majesties,  by
virtue  of  the  authority  which  Your  Highnesses  had  given
t.hem.  He  told  them  that  they  would  do  a great  Service
to  Your  Majesties  if  they  would  give  him  permission  to
trade  with  the  natives,  for  gold  and  pearls  and  precious
stones  and  other  things,  all  of  which  would  become  his
property  by  paying  the  fifth  part  to  Your  Majesties.  All
this  was  granted  by  the  said  Reverend  Fathers  of  St.
Jerome,  the  Govemors,  inasmuch  as  he  said  in  his  ac-
count  that  he  had  discovered  the  land  at  his  own  cost,
and  moreover  knew  the  secrets  of  it,  and  that  he  would
provide  in  every  respect  as  should  best  advance  the
Service  of  Your  Royal  Highnesses.  On  the  other  hand,
without  communicating  it  to  the  said  Jeronymite  Fathers,
he  sent  to  Your  Royal  Highnesses  a certain  Gonzalo  de

holders  of  encomiendas,  as  well  as  by  the  governors,  judges,  and  other
officials.  Hispaniola  (Haití),  Cuba,  and  Jamaica,  were  particularly
designated  for  their  visitations,  and  they  were  enjoined  to  inspect  the
mines,  and  report  on  possible  ameliorations.  They  had  power  to
regúlate  the  amount  of  meat  to  be  allowed  each  labourer,  the  market
price  of  necessities,  the  housing  of  the  Indians,  the  education  of
children,  marriages  between  Spaniards  and  natives,  etc.

These  friars  were  selected  by  Cardinal  Ximenez  from  among  twelve
ñames  presented  to  him  by  four  Priors,  sent  by  the  Chapter  to  Madrid
for  that  purpose,  and  they  sailed  from  San  Lucar,  November  n,  1516,
landing  in  San  Domingo  thirteen  days  later  (Las  Casas).  Gayangos,
Cartas  de  Cortes,  p.  3,  mentions  the  Jeronymite  Fathers  asnumbering
but  two,  Fray  Luis  de  Figueroa,  a native  of  Seville,  who  was  Prior  of
Mejorada,  and  Fray  Alonso  de  Santo  Domingo,  Prior  of  San  Juan
de  Ortega.  The  third,  however,  was  Fray  Bemardino  de  Manzanedo.

The  islandof  Hispaniola,  wherethe  Jeronymites  resided,  was  discov-
ered on  December  6,  1492.  by  Christopher  Columbus  who  named  the
harbour  where  he  landed  San  Nicolás.  San  Domingo  became  the  prin-
cipal city  and  residence  of  the  viceroy.  In  consequence  of  the
dissensions  between  Don  Diego  Columbus,  who  held  that  office,  and
various  persons,  notably  the  royal  treasurer,  Miguel  Pasamonte,
who  headed  a faction  against  him,  the  Spanish  government  m ijio
established  the  Royal  Audiencia.  This  was  a court  of  appeal  for
all  causes  in  which  the  viceroy  had  pronounced  judgment.  Ihe
ñame  Hispaniola  (Española),  given  by  Columbus  to  the  island,  has
been  superseded  by  the  original  Indian  ñame  of  Haití.

First  Letter

131

Guzman,1  with  power  of  attomey,  and  the  same  account,
saying  that  he  had  discovered  the  country  at  his  own  cost,
thus  rendering  Service  to  Your  Majesties,  and  that  he
wjshed  to  conquer  it  at  his  own  cost,  and  he  prayed  Your
Royal  Iiighnesses  to  make  him  adelantado 2 and  governor
of  it,  with  certain  privileges  for  which  he  asked  further
on,  as  Your  Majesties  will  have  seen  by  his  account,  and
for  which  reason  we  do  not  express  them  here.

In  the  meantime,  as  the  permission  was  given  by  the
Reverend  Fathers  of  St.  Jerome,  the  Governors  in  the
nameof  Your  Majesties,  he  hastened  to  fit  out  Expedition
three  ships  and  a brigantine,  so  that,  if  Your  0f

Majesties  were  not  pleased  to  grant  Gonzalo  de  Grijalba
Guzman  what  he  had  asked,  the  ships  would  have
already  been  sent,  with  the  permission  given  by
the  said  Reverend  Jeronymite  Fathers,  the  Gover-
nors. He  sent  as  Captain  one  of  his  relatives,  called
Juan  de  Grijalba, 3 and  with  him  160  men  of  the

1 Gonzalo  de  Guzman  was  a royal  treasurer  in  the  islands.

2 Spanish  title  for  the  governor  of  a province.

3 A native  of  Cuellar,  who  carne  to  Cuba  when  a mere  lad.
Las  Casas  describes  him  as  a youth  of  great  promise,  and  Gomara
says  he  was  a nephew  of  Velasquez’s.  He  was  of  gentle  birth,  and,
as  a fellow-townsman,  he  was  treated  by  Velasquez  with  much  con-
sideraron, whether  he  was  a relative  or  not.  The  armada  furnished
him  consisted  of  four  caravels,  the  Santiago,  San  Sebastian,  La
Trinidad,  and  Santa  María  de  los  Remedios;  the  pilots  were  the  same
who  went  with  the  first  expedition,  with  the  addition  of  a fourth  one,
unnamed.  There  was  a treasurer,  Antón  de  Villasaña,  an  inspector’,
Francisco  de  Peñalosa,  and  a chaplain,  Fray  Juan  Diaz;  in  all  told
above  two  hundred  persons  composed  the  company.  After  several  false
starts,  they  finally  set  sail  on  May  ist.  This  date,  in  spite  of  divers  con-
tradictions,  is  established  by  the  Itinerario  de  l' armata  del  Re  Cattolico
verso  la  Isola  de  Yucatán,  MDXVII.,  which  is  given  in  the  Documentos
Inéditos  of  Joaquin  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  México,  1858.

Three  other  captains  were  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  Francisco  de  Montejo,
and  Alonso  Davila;  the  men  including  pilots  and  sailors  numbered
250.  They  discovered  the  Tabasco  River,  which  was  henceforth  named
Grijalba,  though  the  ñame  Tabasco  (Tabzcoob  was  the  Indian  ñame)
remained  to  the  province  between  Yucatán  and  Cuazocoalco.

After  Rio  Tabasco,  they  discovered  a river  (Xamapan,  now  called

132

Letters  of  Cortes

inhabitants  of  said  Island,  amongst  whom  some  of  us  carne
as  Captains  for  the  purpose  of  serving  Your  Majesties,  and
not  only  did  we  and  those  of  the  said  armada  come  risking
our  own  persons,  but  we  and  they  also  provided  almost  all
the  outfit  of  the  said  armada  from  our  own  resources,
in  which  we  and  they  spent  a very  great  part  of  our
fortunes.  And  there  went  again  as  pilot  of  this  armada
the  same  Antón  de  Alaminos,  who  first  discovered  the
said  country  when  he  went  with  Francisco  Fernandez
de  Córdoba.

In  making  this  voyage,  they  followed  in  his  former
track,  and,  before  they  reached  the  said  land,  they  dis-
covered a small  island,  called  Cozumel,  which  may  measure

J amapa),  which  they  called  Banderas,  because  Indians  carrying
white  flags  were  seen  along  the  coast.  They  received  them  with  great
civility  and  interest,  and  traded  to  the  amount  of  15,000  dollars
worth  of  gold  (Bernal  Diaz,  cap.  xiii.).  Here  the  ñame  of  Monte-
zuma  was  first  heard  by  the  Spaniards.  The  next  stopping  place
was  named  Isla  de  los  Sacrifios,  because  they  found  in  a temple  there
six  or  seven  bodies  of  men  with  their  breasts  cut  open,  and  their  hearts
gone.  The  Island  of  Ulua  was  so  named  from  the  Indian  wrord  Culua,
which  the  Spaniards  imperfectly  caught,  and,  to  distinguish  ít  from
San  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,  they  called  the  place  San  Juan  de  Ulua
(Bernal  Diaz,  cap.  xiv. ; Orozco  y Berra,  vol.  iv.,  cap.  ii.).

On  the  Island  of  Ulua  the  Spanish  govemment  afterwards  built
a fortress  said  to  have  cost  forty  millions  of  dollars,  and  which  was
the  last  stronghold  of  Spain  in  México.  On  November  23,  1825,
the  President  of  the  new  republic  announced  its  fall  by  a proclamation :
“The  standard  of  the  republic  floats  over  the  castle  of  Ulua!  I
announce  to  you,  fellow  citizens,  with  inexpresable  pleasure  that,
after  a lapse  of  three  hundred  and  four  years,  the  flag  of  Castile  has  now

disappeared  from  our  coasts.”  c

From  here  Pedro  de  Alvarado  with  one  of  the  four  ships,  the  ¿a»
Sebastian,  was  sent  to  report  to  Diego  Velasquez  what  had  been  dis-
covered He  took  also  the  gold  and  treasures,  and  was  to  ask  for
further  instructions  concerning  settlements,  which  Grijalba  had  no
power  to  make.  The  others  next  went  on  to  Panuco.  Velasquez
was  vexed  with  Grijalba  for  not  colonising,  though  the  latter  justified
himself  by  the  instructions  given  him,  which  expressly  forbade  this
(Bernal  Diaz,  cap.  xv. ; Oviedo,  lib.  xvii.,  cap.  xv.11. ; Gomara,  Crónica,
cap.  v.,  vi.;  Cogolludo,  lib.  i.,  cap.  iii.,  iv.;  Orozco  y Berra,  vol.  iv..

cap.  ii.— iü.)-

First  Letter

i33

about  thirty  leagues,  and  lies  off  the  Southern  part  of  the
said  land;  and  they  arrived  in  the  Island  at  a town,  to
which  they  gave  the  ñame  of  San  Juan  de  Puerta  Latina,  1
and  the  Island  they  named  Santa  Cruz. 2 The  same
day  on  which  they  arrived  there  about  150  Indians  of
the  town  carne  to  see  them,  and  as  it  appeared,  on  the
following  day  these  Indians  abandoned  the  town  and
fled  to  the  woods.

Being  in  need  of  water,  the  Captain  hoisted  sail  in
order  to  obtain  it  elsewhere  that  same  day,  and  while
pursuing  his  voyage,  it  was  agreed  to  return  to  the  said
port  and  Island  of  Santa  Cruz,  where  he  anchored  and
went  on  shore,  finding  the  town  without  people,  as
though  it  had  never  been  inhabited.  He  took  his  supply
of  water,  returning  to  his  ships  without  taking  soundings,
or  learning  anything  so  as  to  be  able  to  give  a true  account
to  Your  Royal  Highnesses  concerning  that  Island.

Setting  sail  he  left,  keeping  on  his  voyage  until  he
arrived  at  the  land  which  Francisco  Fernandez  de  Cór-
doba had  discovered,  where  they  coasted  about,  from
south  to  west,  until  they  carne  to  a bay,  which  the  said
Captain  Gonzalo  and  the  chief  pilot,  Antón  de  Alaminos,
named  Bay  of  Ascensión.  3 This,  according  to  the
opinión  of  the  pilots,  is  very  near  to  Punta  de  las  Velas,
discovered  by  Vicente  Yañez4  which  is  the  part  [ passage
in  the  MS.  not  intelligible ] of  the  Bay  which  is  very

1 The  town  thus  named  by  Grijalba,  as  described  in  Note  1 , page  124.

2 Cozumel.  Here  the  converted  Indians,  Melchor  and  Julián,
began  to  act  as  interpreters.

3 Bay  of  Ascensión.  This  was  on  Thursday  the  i3th,  feast  of  the
Ascensión,  and  they  remained  there  reconnoitring  until  Sunday.

* Vincente  Yañez  Pinzón,  who  landed  [here  about  January  26,
IS°°.  was  one  of  the  three  Pinzón  brothers  who  first  sailed  with
Columbus  from  Palos  in  1492.  He  afterwards  commanded  an  expedi-
tion  composed  of  four  small  ships  which  sailed  from  Palos  in  1499,
making  the  first  discovery  of  land  at  the  present  Cape  St.  Augustine,
on  the  coast  of  Brazil,  in  1506.  He  again  sailed  with  Juan  de  Solis,
on  a voyage  to  find  the  strait  which  it  was  thought  joined  the  Atlantic
and  Pacific  oceans,  and,  in  1508,  he  repeated  this  fruitless  experiment.

*34

Letters  of  Cortes

large,  and  it  is  thought  that  it  reaches  to  the  Sea  of  the
North.

Thence  they  returned  along  the  same  coast  by  which
they  had  gone,  until  they  rounded  the  point  of  the  said
land,  and,  continuing  in  a northerly  direction,  they  sailed
until  they  arrived  at  the  said  Point  Campoche,  whose
chief  was  named  Lazaro,  where  Francisco  Fernandez
de  Córdoba  had  stopped  to  trade,  and,  as  ordered  by
Diego  Velasquez,  as  well  as  to  take  the  water  he  greatly
needed,  landed  there.

As  soon  as  the  natives  saw  them  coming,  they  placed
themselves  near  their  town,  in  array  of  battle,  so  as  to
defend  its  entrance.  The  Captain  called  to  them,  through
the  interpreters  who  accompanied  him,  and  certain  In-
dians  carne,  whom  he  made  to  understand  that  he  carne
merely  for  the  purpose  of  trading  with  them  for  such
things  as  they  might  have,  and  to  get  water;  and  thus
he  went  with  them  until  they  arrived  at  a place,  very
near  their  town,  where  there  was  a spring.  While  taking
the  water  he  asked  them  through  the  said  interpreter  for
gold,  saying  he  would  give  them  in  exchange  the  valu-
ables  which  he  brought,  and,  as  soon  as  the  Indians  saw
this,  having  no  gold  to  give  him,  they  told  him  to  go
Grijalba’s  awaY  ¡ but  he  begged  them  to  allow  him  to
Encounters  finish  taking  water,  saying  that  he  would
with  the  immediately  leave.  In  spite  of  this,  however,
indians  was  unable  to  save  himself  from  being

obliged  the  next  day,  at  the  hour  of  mass,  to  fight  the
Indians,  armed  with  their  bows  and  arrows,  their  lances,
and  rodelas , 1 so  that  they  killed  a Spaniard,  and  wound-
ed  the  said  Captain  Grijalba  and  many  others.  That
same  afternoon  they  re-embarked  in  their  caravels  with
all  their  people,  without  having  gone  into  the  town  of  the

. These  were  round  shields  for  defence,  which  were  adorned
with  different  coloured  feathers  of  herons,  parrots,  and  other  birds,
according  to  the  category  of  the  troops,  or  the  heraldic  emblem  of  the
chief.

First  Letter

i35

said  Indians,  and  without  having  learned  anything  which
they  could  truly  relate  to  Your  Majesties.

From  there  they  went  along  the  said  coast  until  they
carne  to  a river,  which  they  named  Grijalba,  and  which
they  ascended  about  the  hour  of  vespers.  Early  the
following  morning,  they  found  on  botn  sides  of  the  river
a great  number  of  Indians  and  warriors,  with  their  bows
and  arrows,  and  lances,  and  rodelas,  to  defend  the  en-
trance to  their  country;  and  to  some,  it  seemed  there
were  about  five  thousand  Indians.

The  Captain  seeing  this,  no  one  landed,  but  he  spoke
to  them  from  the  ship  through  his  interpreters,  praying
them  to  approach  nearer  so  that  he  might  explain  to  them
the  motives  of  his  coming,  and  twenty  Indians  entered
a canoe,  and  cautiously  approached  the  ships.  The
Captain  Grijalba  then  told  them,  and  made  them  under-
stand  through  his  interpreter,  that  he  had  come  only  to
barter,  and  that  he  wished  to  be  their  friend,  and  that
they  should  bring  their  gold  for  which  he  would  give  them
many  valuables  which  he  carried;  and  thus  they  did.

The  next  day,  they  brought  certain  jewels  of  thin
gold,  for  which  the  said  Captain  gave  them  in  return  such
valuables  as  he  thought  proper,  and  they  returned  to  their
town;  and  the  said  Captain  remained  there  that  day.

The  next  day  he  set  sail,  without  learning  anything
else  about  the  country,  and  continued  until  he  arrived
at  the  Bay,  to  which  they  gave  the  ñame  of  San  Juan.

The  Captain  went  ashore  there  with  some  of  his  people
to  some  desoíate  sand-hills,  and  as,  when  the  natives  had
seen  the  ships  coming  along  the  coast,  they  had  assembled,
he  spoke  to  them,  through  his  interpreter,  and  had  a
table  brought  on  which  he  spread  out  some  of  his  valu-
ables, making  them  understand  that  he  had  come  to
trade  with  them  and  to  be  their  friend.  When  the  In-
dians  saw  and  understood  this,  they  brought  some  stuffs,
and  ornaments  of  gold,  which  they  traded  with  the  Cap-

Letters  of  Cortes

136

tain;  and  from  there  the  said  Captain  Gri jaiba  dispatched
one  of  the  cara  veis  to  Diego  Velasquez,  with  all  that  they
had  up  till  then  obtained.

The  caravel  having  departed  for  the  Island  of  Fer-
nandina  where  Diego  Velasquez  was,  the  Captain  Gri-
jalba  went  down  the  coast  with  the  remaining  cara  veis,
cruising  for  a distance  of  about  forty-five  leagues  without
landing,  or  seeing  anything  except  what  could  be  seen
from  the  sea.  He  then  set  out  to  return  towards  the
Island  of  Femandina,  and  never  more  did  he  see  any-
thing of  the  country  worth  mentioning,  from  which  your
Royal  Highnesses  may  believe  that  all  the  accounts
which  have  been  made  about  this  country  cannot  have
been  exact,  because  they  knew  nothing  more  of  the
secrets  of  it  than  what  it  has  suited  their  purpose  to
write.

As  soon  as  the  said  caravel,  which  the  Captain  Juan
de  Grijalba  had  dispatched  from  the  Bay  of  San  Juan,
arrived,  and  Diego  Velasquez  saw  the  gold  which  it
carried,  and  learned  from  Grijalba’s  letters  about  the
stuffs  and  valuables  which  had  been  given  in  exchange,
it  seemed  to  him,  according  to  information  given  him
by  those  who  arrived  in  the  said  caravel,  that  he  had
obtained  little  in  proportion  to  what  he  expected.  He
declared  that  he  had  not  even  covered  the  cost  he  had
incurred  in  the  said  armada,  and  he  was  vexed,  and  showed
dissatisfaction  at  the  little  which  Captain  Grijalba  had
accomplished  in  this  country.

In  truth,  Diego  Velasquez  had  no  reason  to  complain,
because  his  outlays  in  the  said  armada  were  covered  from
certain  casks,  and  tuns  of  wine,  and  other  merchandise,
and  boxes  of  laced  shirts,  and  beads,  which  he  had  sent
with  it.  The  wine  was  sold  there  to  us  at  four  dollars
in  gold,  which  are  two  thousand  maravedís  1 the  aroba,

>A  small  Spanish  coin:  Bancroft  (Hist.  Mex.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  376)
gives  the  valué  of  the  ducat  as  equal  to  375  maravedís,  and  peso  de

First  Letter

i37

and  each  shirt  at  two  dollars  in  gold,  and  the  string  of
green  beads  at  two  dollars,  so  that  he  thus  covered  his
outlay  in  the  armada,  and  even  made  money.  W e make
special  mention  of  tliis  to  Your  Majesties  that  it  may  be
known  that  the  armadas,  which  until  now  have  been
fitted  out  by  Diego  Velasquez,  have  been  intended  as
much  for  trading  merchandise  as  for  privateers,  and  this
with  our  persons  and  with  our  property;  and  although
we  have  suffered  infinite  hardships  we  have  served,  and
we  shall  serve,  Your  Royal  Highnesses  as  long  as  life
lasts.

Diego  Velasquez  being  vexed  by  the  small  amount  of
gold  that  liad  been  brought  him,  and  wishing  to  obtain
more,  determined,  without  making  it  known  to  the  Gov-
ernors,  the  Jeronymite  Fathers,  to  equipa  swift  armada,
and  to  send  it  in  search  of  his  relative,  the  said  Captain
Juan  de  Grijalba.  To  do  this  at  less  cost  to  himself,  he
spoke  to  Fernando  Cortes,  a resident  and  alcalde  for
Your  Majesties  in  the  city  of  Santiago,  proposing  to  him
that  they  should  fit  out  between  them  eight  or  ten  ships,
because  at  that  time  Fernando  Cortes  had  more  resources
than  any  other  person  in  the  said  Island,  and  because
it  was  believed  that  more  people  would  enlist  with  him
than  with  any  other.

The  said  Fernando  Cortes,  considering  what  Diego
Velasquez  had  proposed,  and  moved  by  zeal  to  serve

minas  as  450  maravedís,  which  he  computes  as  equal  to  $9.75 ; he  refers
to  Clemencin,  secretary  of  the  Spanish  Royal  Academy  as  his  authority.
Prescott  ( Conquest  of  Mex.)  computes  the  ducal  at  $8.75,  and  gives  the
■peso  de  oro,  and  the  castellano  as  identical,  and  worth  $11.67.  Mr.
George  Folsom,  in  his  English  translation  of  three  Letters  of  Cortes,
gives  the  valué  of  the  castellano  as  only  $2.75.  According  to  these
calculations,  the  peso  de  minas,  and  the  peso  de  oro,  were  diíferent  coins.
The  valué  of  these  monies  is  difficult  to  estimate.  Their  purchasing
power  was  far  greater  than  their  exact  equivalent  would  be  to-
day,  and  the  valué  of  articles  of  European  manufacture,  of  horses,
iron,  and  other  imported  necessities  was  variable,  according  to  their
scarcity,  and  to  the  needs  of  the  buyer.  Nails,  horseshoes,  and  like
objects,  sometimes  cost  their  weight  in  gold,  or  double  in  silver.

133

Letters  of  Cortes

Your  Royal  Highnesses,  was  ready  to  spend  all  he  had,
and  to  equip  almost  two  parts  of  this  armada  at  his  own
cost,  not  only  in  ships,  but  also  in  stores,  and  moreover
to  distribute  his  moneys  amongst  those  who  were  going
in  the  armada,  and  who  needed  to  provide  things
necessary  for  the  voy  age.

The  armada  having  been  fitted  and  equipped,  Diego
Velasquez  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Majesties,  named  the
Cortes  said  Fernando  Cortes  Captain  of  it,  that  he
GivenCom-  should  come  to  this  land  to  trade,  and  accom-
mand  of  the  phsh  what  Gri jaiba  had  failed  to  do.  The
Armada  agreement  respecting  the  said  armada,  although
he  did  not  invest  or  spend  more  than  one-third  part
of  it,  was  made  entirely  according  to  Diego  Velas-
quez’s wishes  as  Your  Royal  Highnesses  may  command
to  be  verified  from  the  instructions  and  faculty  which
the  said  Fernando  Cortes  received  from  him  in  the  ñame
of  Your  Majesties.  These  we  now  send  with  these  our
procurators  to  Your  Royal  Highnesses.

Let  it  be  known  to  Your  Majesties  that  the  larger
part  of  the  third,  which  Diego  Velasquez  spent  in  fitting
out  the  said  armada,  consisted  in  investing  his  money
in  wines,  and  clothing,  and  in  other  things  of  little  valué,
in  order  to  sell  them  to  us  here  at  a much  higher  price
than  they  had  cost  him,  so  that  we  may  say  that  Diego
Velasquez  has  made  his  bargains,  and  the  profits  on  his
money,  amongst  us  Spaniards,  vassals  of  your  Royal
Highnesses,  doing  a very  good  business.

Having  finished  fitting  out  the  said  armada,  Your
Royal  Highnesses’  Captain,  Fernando  Cortes,  sailed
upon  his  voyage  from  the  Island  of  Femandina,  having
ten  caravels,  and  four  hundred  men  at  arms,  amongst
whom  were  manv  knights  and  other  noblemen,  and  six-
teen  horses.  Pursuing  their  voyage,  the  first  land  where
they  arrived  was  the  Island  of  Cozumel  (now  called
Santa  Cruz,  as  has  been  said),  in  the  port  of  San  Juan

Fir^t  Letter

i39

de  Puerta  Latina.  Upon  landing,  the  town  which  ex-
isted  there  was  found  to  be  deserted,  as  though  it  had
never  been  inhabited,  and  the  Captain  Fernando  Cortes,
wishing  to  know  the  cause  of  that  place  being  deserted,
brought  the  people  on  land,  and  quartered  them  in  that
town.  While  there  with  his  people  he  leamed  from  three
Indians,  who  had  been  taken  in  a canoe  1 at  sea  while
going  to  Yucatán,  that  the  caciques  of  that  Island,  seeing
the  Spaniards  were  approaching,  had,  out  of  fear  of  them
(not  knowing  with  what  purpose,  and  in  what  disposition
they  carne),  abandoned  their  town,  and  gone  with  all
their  Indians  into  the  woods.

Femando  Cortes,  speaking  to  them  through  the
médium  of  an  interpreter  who  accompanied  him,  told
them  we  were  not  going  to  do  them  any  evil  Negotia_

or  injury,  but  only  to  instruct  them,  and  win  tions  at

them  to  the  knowledge  of  our  Holy  Catholic  Cozumel
Faith,  so  that  they  might  become  vassals  of  Your
Majesties,  serving  and  obeying  them,  as  had  all  the
Indians  of  these  parts  which  the  Spaniards  have
settled,  who  are  likewise  vassals  of  Your  Royal  High-
nesses.  The  said  Captain,  having  thus  reassured  them
they  put  aside  their  fears,  in  great  part,  and  said  that
they  wrould  go  and  cali  the  caciques  who  had  gone  into
the  woods;  and  the  Captain  immediately  gave  them  a
letter,  so  that  the  said  caciques  might  come  in  all  con-
fidence,  and,  the  Captain  having  given  them  a term  of  five
days  in  which  to  retum,  they  went  off  thus.

But  while  the  Captain  was  waiting  for  the  reply  the
Indians  were  to  bring,  and  as  already  three  or  four  days
beyond  the  five  which  he  had  stipulated  had  elapsed,
and  he  saw  that  they  did  not  come,  he  determined,  in
order  that  the  Island  might  not  remain  deserted,  to  send

■ Their  canoes  were  made  of  tree-trunks,  hollowed,  and  were
sometimes  large  enough  to  hold  forty  or  fifty  men  (Bernal  Diaz,
cap.  ii.).

140

Letters  of  Cortes

along  the  coast  to  the  other  side.  He  despatched  two  cap-
tains,  therefore,  each  with  one  hundred  men,  directing  that
one  should  go  to  the  extremity  of  the  island  from
one  side,  and  the  other  from  the  other,  and  that  they
should  speak  to  the  caciques  whom  they  might  encounter,
telling  them  that  he  was  waiting  for  them  in  that  town
and  port  of  San  Juan  de  Puerta  Latina  to  speak  to  them
on  behalf  of  Your  Majesties.  He  also  directed  that  they
should  invite  and  attract  them  as  best  they  could,  so
as  to  induce  them  to  come  to  the  said  port  of  San
Juan,  and  that  they  should  do  them  no  harm,  either
in  their  persons,  or  houses,  or  property,  so  as  not  to
alarm  them,  ñor  drive  them  further  away  than  they
already  were.

The  two  captains  went  as  the  Captain  Fernando
Cortes  had  ordered  them,  and  three  or  four  days  after-
wards  they  returned,  saying  that  all  the  towns  they  had
found  were  empty  and  bringing  with  them  ten  or  twelve
persons  whom  they  had  captured.  Amongst  these  was  a
principal  Indian  to  whom  the  said  Fernando  Cortes
spoke  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Highnesses,  through  his  inter-
preter,  telling  him  to  go  and  cali  the  caciques,  as  he  would
on  no  account  leave  the  Island  without  having  seen  and
spoken  with  them.  The  Indian  answered  that  he  would
do  this,  and  thus  he  left  with  a letter  to  the  said  caciques,
returning  two  days  later  with  the  principal  cacique,  who
said  that  he  was  Lord  of  the  Island,  and  had  come  to  see
for  what  he  was  wanted.

The  Captain  spoke  to  him  through  the  interpreter,
and  told  him  that  he  did  not  wish,  ñor  had  he  come  to  do
them  any  harm,  but  in  order  to  bring  them  to  a knowledge
of  our  Holy  Faith,  and  to  let  them  know  that  our  rulers
were  the  greatest  Princes  in  the  world,  and  that  they
obeyed  a Greater  Prince.  And  what  the  said  Captain
Fernando  Cortes  told  them  he  wanted  of  them  was  that
the  caciques  and  Indians  of  the  said  Island  should  also

First  Letter

I4I

obey  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  and  that  in  so  doing  they
would  be  much  favoured,  and  no  one  would  ever  molest
them.  The  Cacique  answered  that  he  would  be  glad  to
do  this,  and  he  immediately  sent  to  cali  all  the  principal
people  of  the  Island,  who  carne  and  were  much  pleased
with  all  that  the  said  Captain  Fernando  Cortes  had  told
the  chief  cacique  of  the  Island.  Thus  he  ordered  them
to  come  back,  which  they  joyfully  did,  becoming  reas-
sured  to  such  an  extent  that,  within  a few  days,  the  towns
were  as  full  of  people  as  before,  and  all  the  Indians  went
about  amongst  us  with  as  little  fear  as  if  they  had  already
had  a long  period  of  intercourse  with  us.

In  the  meantime,  the  Captain  learned  that  there
were  in  the  power  of  certain  caciques  in  Yucatán,
some  Spaniards  who  had  been  made  captives  Spanish
as  long  since  as  seven  years,  when,  having  Prisoners  in
been  lost  in  a certain  caravel  1 which  was  Yucatán
wrecked  on  the  reefs  of  Jamaica, 2 while  coming  from
Tierra  Firma,  they  had  escaped  in  one  of  the  boats  of  the
caravel,  and  reached  that  coast.  From  that  time  they
had  been  held  captives  and  prisoners  by  the  Indians.
Since  the  said  Captain  Fernando  Cortes  had  left  the
Island  of  Femandina  to  seek  for  these  Spaniards,  and  as
he  here  received  Information  about  them,  and  about  the
country  where  they  were,  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  was

‘The  caravel  of  Valdivia,  sent  from  Darien  and  wrecked  (1511)
on  the  reefs  called  las  Víboras , situated  fifteen  leagues  to  the  south  of
Jamaica,  and  which  extend  for  a distance  of  forty-five  leagues,
from  27o  10'  longitude,  and  17o  north  latitude  (Alcedo,  Diccionario
Geogr.  Hist.  de  las  Indias  Occid.).  Twenty  were  saved  in  an  open  boat
without  sails,  food,  or  water,  and,  after  thirteen  days’  drifting,  reached
the  Maya  coast.  Seven  or  eight  had  died  in  the  meantime  from
exhaustion,  and  Valdivia  and  five  others  were  fattened  and  sacrificed
by  the  Mayas,  who  captured  them  on  their  landing,  and  were  after-
wards  eaten.  Notice  of  those  who  escaped  is  given  in  a later  note.

2 Discovered  by  Columbus  on  his  second  voyage,  in  1494,  and
named  Santiago.  His  son  Diego  effected  its  conquest,  and  govemed  it
from  San  Domingo,  through  his  captains,  of  whom  the  best  known  was
Francisco  de  Garay.

142

Letters  of  Cortes

rendering  a great  Service  to  God  and  to  Your  Majesty
in  striving  to  libérate  them  from  their  imprisonment
and  captivity.  He  himself  with  the  whole  fleet  would
have  gone  immediately  to  rescue  them,  had  not  the  pilots
told  him  on  no  account  to  do  this,  as  it  would  be  the
cause  of  the  loss  of  the  fleet  and  all  the  people  of  it,  be-
cause  the  coast  was  very  rough,  as  it  really  is,  and  has  no
port  or  any  place  where  the  ships  could  anchor.  For
this  reason  he  abandoned  the  idea,  and  ordered  that
certain  Indians,  who  had  told  him  they  knew  that
cacique  with  whom  those  Spaniards  were,  should  go
in  a canoe;  and  he  wrote  to  the  Spaniards  that  the  only
reason  why  he  gave  up  coming  himself  with  his  armada  to
libérate  them  was  because  the  coast  was  very  bad  and
rough  for  anchoring,  but  that  he  prayed  them  to  strive
for  their  liberation,  and  to  escape  in  canoes,  and  that  he
should  wait  for  them  in  the  Island  of  Santa  Cruz.

Three  days  after  the  said  Captain  had  sent  those
Indians  with  his  letters,  as  it  appeared  to  him  that  he  had
not  acted  satisfactorily,  and  believing  that  those  Indians
would  not  know  how  to  carry  out  his  wishes,  he  de-
termined  to  send  forty  Spaniards  to  the  said  coast  with
two  brigantines,  and  a boat  from  his  armada,  so  that  they
might  recover  those  captive  Spaniards  if  they  could
find  them.  With  them  he  sent  three  other  Indians,  who
should  go  ashore  with  another  letter  1 of  his  to  seek  the
Spanish  prisoners.  When  those  two  brigantines  and  the

i Noble  Sirs,— I left  Cuba  with  a fleet  of  eleven  ships,  and  five
hundred  Spaniards,  and  have  arrived  at  Cozumel,  whence  I write  you
this  letter.

The  people  of  this  island  assure  me  that  there  are  five  or  six  bearded
white  men  in  this  country,  who  greatly  resemble  us,  and,  I conjec-
ture,  though  they  can  give  me  no  other  indications,  that  you  are
Spaniards.  I,  and  the  gentlemen,  who  have  come  with  me  to
explore  and  take  possession  of  these  countries,  eamestly  beg  you
to  come  to  us  within  five  or  six  days  after  you  receive  this,  without
further  delay  or  excuse.

If  you  will  come,  all  of  us  will  recognise,  and  thank  you,  for  the

First  Letter

i43

boat  reached  the  coast,  they  landed  the  three  Indians,
and  sent  them  to  seek  for  the  Spaniards,  as  theCaptain
had  ordered ; and  they  remained  six  days  along  the  coast
with  much  difficulty,  always  waiting  for  them,  though
they  were  almost  lost  and  nearly  foundered  as  the  sea
along  the  said  coast  was  very  rough,  just  as  the  pilots  had
said.  Seeing  then  that  neither  the  Spanish  captives,  ñor
the  Indians  who  had  gone  to  look  for  them,  retumed,  they
determined  to  go  back  to  the  Island  of  Santa  Cruz  where
the  Captain  Femando  Cortes  was  waiting  for  them.

When  they  reached  the  Island,  and  the  Captain  learned
their  bad  news  he  was  much  grieved,  and  immediately
proposed  to  embark  the  next  day,  firmly  resolved  to  visit
that  country,  even  if  the  whole  flotilla  should  be  lost,
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  there  was  any
truth  in  the  report  which  Captain  Juan  de  Gri jaiba  had
sent  to  the  Island  of  Femandina,  to  the  effect  that  it  was
all  an  invention,  and  that  no  such  Spaniards  as  were
said  to  be  captives  had  ever  arrived  on  that  coast.

Having  taken  this  decisión,  he  had  all  the  people  em-
barked,  except  himself,  and  some  other  twenty  Spaniards,
who  remained  with  him  on  shore.  The  weather  had
been  most  favourable  to  his  intention  to  leave  the  port,
but  there  suddenly  sprang  up  a contrary  wind,  with
squalls  of  rain,  so  that  the  pilots  advised  theCaptain
not  to  set  sail  while  the  weather  was  unfavourable  for
getting  to  sea ; so,  in  view  of  this,  the  Captain  commanded
all  on  board  the  armada  to  disembark  once  more.

The  next  day  at  noon,  a canoe  with  sails  was  seen
coming  in  the  direction  of  the  Island,  in
which.  upon  its  approach,  we  saw  one  of  Jerónimo
the  Spanish  captives,  whose  ñame  was  Jerónimo  de  Aguiiar

assistance  this  armada  shall  receive  from  you.  I send  a brigantine
to  bring  you,  with  two  ships  as  escort.

The  Indian  took  this  letter  tied  in  his  hair.

Hernán  Cortes.

144

Letters  of  Cortes

de  Aguilar,  1 who  told  us  all  about  how  he  carne  to  be
lost,  and  the  length  of  time  he  had  been  in  captivity,
which  is  as  we  have  already  related  to  Your  Royal

Highnesses.

Of  a truth,  this  adverse  weather  coming  upon  us  so
unexpectedly  seemed  a great  mystery  and  miracle  of
God,  and  led  us  to  believe  that  no  enterprise  undertaken
in  Your  Majesties’  Service,  be  it  what  it  may,  could  end
in  anything  but  good.

We  learned  from  Jerónimo  de  Aguilar,  that  the  other
Spaniards,  who  were  lost  with  him  in  the  shipwrecked
caravel,  were  scattered  over  all  the  land,  which  he  told
us  was  very  extensive,  and  that  it  would  be  quite  impos-
sible  to  gather  them  without  staying  and  losing  much
time  over  it.  So,  as  the  Captain  Femando  Cortes  saw
that  the  provisions  of  the  armada  were  giving  out,  and
that  the  people  would  be  exposed  to  suffer  great  want
from  hunger  if  they  delayed  longer,  and  that  this  would
not  contribute  to  the  object  of  their  voyage,  he  deter-
mined,  with  the  approval  of  the  others  to  depart.  They
immediately  set  sail,  therefore,  leaving  that  Island  of
Cozumel,  which  is  now  called  Santa  Cruz,  entirely  pacified,
so  that  had  it  been  their  intention  to  colonise,  the  Indians

i jje  was  a native  of  Encija,  and  had  taken  holy  orders.  Seeing
the  dreadful  fate  of  their  companions,  Aguilar  and  Gonzalo  Guerrero
managed  to  escape  from  the  cages,  in  which  they  were  being  fattened
for  the  sacrificial  feasts,  and  to  lose  themselves  in  the  forests.  Here
they  were  finally  captured  by  the  cacique  of  another  tribe,  who  was
less  bloodthirsty,  and  held  them  as  slaves  instead  of  killing  them.
\guilar’s  virtues  and  abilities  soon  attracted  attention,  and  won  the
respect  of  his  captor,  and  he  rose  to  a position  of  influence  in  the  country .

When  the  news  carne  of  the  arrival  of  the  ships  with  more  white  men,
and  Corte "’s  letter  was  delivered  to  Aguilar,  he  procured  permission
to  go  to  hiS  countrymen;  but  his  companion  Guerrero,  who  had  mar
ried  and  had  a family,  refused  to  go,  for  he  was  ashamed  to  show  hun-
self  naked  and  tattooed,  and  with  his  nose  and  l.ps  pierced  in  Ind.an
fashion.  Jerónimo  de  Aguilar  was  not  distmguishable  from  the
Indians,  as  he  was  burned  nearly  black,  and  wore  the  same  omament^
He  remained  with  Cortes  as  his  interpreter,  rendering  invaluable
Services  throughout  the  conquest.

First  Letter

H5

would  have  served  them  to  the  best  of  their  ability;
and  the  caciques  were  very  pleased  and  contented  both
with  what  the  said  captain  had  told  them  on  the  part
of  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  and  with  the  many  ornaments
he  had  given  them;  and  I am  confident  that  any  Span-
iards  who  from  henceforward  shall  arrive  at  Cozumel
will  be  as  well  received  there  as  in  any  of  those  Islands
which  have  been  long  since  settled.  The  said  Island
is  small,  and  there  is  no  creek  or  river  in  it,  and  all
the  water  which  the  Indians  drink  is  from  wells,  and  there
are  only  rocks,  and  stones,  and  mountains.  The  only
trade  which  the  Indians  have  is  in  bee-hives,  and  our
Procurators  will  bear  to  Your  Highnesses  specimens  of
the  honey  and  the  bee-hives  that  you  may  command
them  to  be  examined. 1

Be  it  known  to  Your  Majesties,  that  the  Captain
exhorted  the  caciques  of  the  said  Island,  admonishing
them  to  renounce  the  heathen  sect  in  which  they  were
living,  and,  when  they  asked  him  to  give  them  a law  ac-
cording  to  which  they  might  henceforth  live,  the  said
Captain  instructed  them  as  best  he  could  in  the  Catholic
Faith.  He  left  them  also  a cross  of  wood  in  a lofty  house,
and  an  image  of  Our  Lady,  the  Virgin  Mary,  making  them
understand  perfectly  well  what  they  were  obliged  to  do
to  become  good  Christians;  and  they  showed  that  they
received  everything  with  the  best  will,  and  thus  they
were  left  contented  and  happy.

After  leaving  the  Island,  we  went  to  Yucatán,  and,
continuing  towards  the  north,  we  kept  in  sight  of  land,
until  we  arrived  at  the  great  river  called  Grijalba  (Rio

‘ Clavigero  notices  six  different  varieties  of  bees  in  México,  some
like  those  common  in  Europe,  and  others  without  stings,  which  make
the  honey  “ Estabentun,”  the  clearest,  sweetest,  and  most  aromatic
known.  These  bees  are  found  in  Yucatán,  and  Chiapa,  and  it  is
doubtless  their  honey  which  is  here  mentioned.  It  was  collected  every
two  months,  but  the  November  honey  was  the  best,  because  it  was
made  from  a very  sweet  flower  called  “ Estabentun,”  which  bloomsin
September.

VOL.  I. IO

146

Letters  of  Cortes

de  Tabasco),  which,  according  to  the  account  given  to
Your  Royal  Highnesses,  is  where  Captain  de  Grijalba,
reía  ti  ve  to  Diego  Velasquez,  had  been.  The  mouth  of
that  river  is  so  shallow,  that  none  of  the  larger  ships
could  enter,  but,  as  the  said  Captain  Fernando  Cortes  is  so
devoted  to  the  Service  of  Your  Majesties,  and  has  the  best
intention  to  relate  truthfully  everything  about  that  coun-
try,  he  determined  not  to  go  further  until  he  had  leamed
the  mystery  of  that  river,  and  because  of  their  great  repu-
tation  for  wealth,  of  the  towns  which  people  its  banks.

He  therefore  embarked  all  the  people  of  his  armada
in  his  small  brigantines  and  boats,  and  ascended  the
Cortes  at  sa^  river,  observing  the  country  and  the

Rio  de  towns  along  it ; and  when  we  carne  to  the

Tabasco  first  town  we  found  the  Indians  drawn  up
on  the  banks,  to  whom  the  said  Captain  spoke  through
the  interpreter,  and  through  the  said  Gerónimo  de
Aguilar,  who  having,  as  we  have  heretofore  stated,
been  a captive  in  Yucatán,  understood  and  spoke  the
language  of  that  country  very  well.  He  made  them  under-
stand  how  he  had  not  come  to  do  them  any  harm  or
evil,  but  only  to  speak  to  them  on  the  part  of  Your
Majesties;  and  that  he,  therefore,  prayed  that  they  would
allow  and  approve  of  his  landing,  because  we  had  no  place
to  sleep  that  night  in  the  brigantines  and  barques,  in
which  we  could  not  even  stand  on  our  feet;  and  as  for
retuming  to  our  ships,  it  was  already  very  late  and  they
were  on  the  high  sea.  The  Indians  answered  to  this
that  he  could  say  all  he  wished  from  where  he  was,  but
that  he  should  not  talk  of  landing,  neither  he  ñor  his
people,  for  they  would  dispute  his  entrance;  and,  saying
this,  they  menaced  us  with  their  arrows,  bidding  us  to
go  away  from  there.  So  as  it  was  late  in  the  after-
noon  (it  being  already  the  hour  of  sundown),  the  Captain
ordered  us  to  go  to  some  sand-hills  which  were  opposite
the  town,  and  there  we  slept  that  night.

First  Letter

147

On  the  moming  of  the  folio wing  day  some  Indians
carne  in  a canoe  and  brought  us  a certain  number  of
chickens  and  a little  maize,  which  might  be  sufficient  for
[text  missing ] number  of  men  for  one  meal.  They  told
us  to  take  that,  and  to  depart  from  their  country,  and
the  captain  spoke  to  them  through  the  interprete:'  whom
we  had,  and  made  them  understand  that  he  would  in  no
wise  go  away  until  he  knew  the  secret  of  it,  so  that  he
might  write  a true  account  of  it  to  Your  Majesties.
He  again  begged  them  that,  as  they  would  suffer  no
harm  from  him,  they  would  not  obstruct  his  entrance  to
the  said  town,  because  they  were  vassals  of  Your  Royal
Highnesses.  But  still  they  answered,  that  we  should
not  venture  into  the  said  town  but  must  depart  from
their  country.

When  they  were  gone  the  Captain  determined  to  go
there,  so  he  ordered  one  of  his  captains  to  start  with  two
hundred  men  by  a road  which  he  had  discovered  during
the  night  we  slept  on  land,  while  he,  himself,  embarked
with  about  eighty  men  in  the  barques  and  brigán  tiñes,
stationing  himself  in  front  of  the  town,  ready  to  dis-
embark  whenever  they  would  allow  him.

When  he  carne  there  he  found  the  Indians  ready  for
battle,  armed  with  their  bows  and  arrows  and  lances
and  rodelas,  and  they  told  him  to  depart  from  pighting

their  country,  but  if  he  would  not  go,  and  at

wanted  war,  to  begin  at  once,  for  they  were  Tabasco
men  to  defend  their  town.  After  the  Captain  had
required  1 them  three  times  and  asked  Your  High-
nesses’ notary,  whom  he  carried  with  him,  to  bear
witness  to  the  fact,  he  told  them  that  he  did  not
want  war.  Seeing,  however,  that  it  was  the  deter-
mination  of  the  said  Indians  to  resist  his  landing,  and
that  they  began  to  discharge  arrows  at  us,  he  ordered
the  charges  of  artillery  to  be  fired,  and  that  we  should

1 See  Appendix  II.  at  cióse  of  Letter.

148

Letters  of  Cortes

charge  them.  When  the  shots  were  being  fired  and  while
landing  they  wounded  some  of  us,  but  finally,  in  con-
sequence  of  our  rapid  charges,  and  of  the  attack  in  the
rear  by  those  who  had  gone  by  the  road,  they  fled,  leaving
us  the  town,  and  we  took  possession  of  that  part  of  it
which  seemed  to  us  the  stronger.

The  next  day  following,  at  the  hour  of  vespers,  two
Indians, 1 on  the  part  of  the  caciques,  carne  to  us,  bring-

1 The  appearance  of  the  ships  of  de  Córdoba  and  Grijalba,  and  the
fighting  in  Yucatán,  were  quickly  reported  to  Montezuma,  whose
superstitious  mind  was  so  affected  by  events,  in  which  he  saw  the
disasters  to  himself  and  his  people  foretold  by  Quetzalcoatl,  that  his
first  impulse  was  to  save  himself  by  some  enchantment  or  incantation,
which  should  transíate  him  to  the  abode,  or  Walhalla,  of  the  famous
kings  and  demi-gods  of  antiquity.  The  simultaneous  apparition  of  a
great  comet  in  the  sky  confirmed  these  forebodings,  and  he  gave
himself  entirely  into  the  hands  of  his  diviners  and  necromancers,
who  exercised  all  their  resources  of  interpreting  dreams,  reading  signs
in  natural  phenomena,  and  studying  the  heavens,  to  obtain  direction
for  their  sovereign  in  his  perplexity.  Many,  whose  dreams  presaged
evil,  were  starved  to  death  or  put  to  tortures;  a reign  of  terror  set  in,
and  none  dared  to  speak  in  the  sovereign’s  presence,  while  the  prisons
were  full  of  luckless  magicians,  and  death  penalties  were  inflicted  even
upon  their  families  in  the  provinces  (Duran,  cap.  lviii.,  and  Tezozo-
moc.  apud  Orozco  y Berra,  tom.  iv.,  cap.  ii.).  As  the  proofs  of  the
presence  of  the  white  strangers  in  their  floating  houses  accumulated,
despite  Montezuma’s  reluctance  to  believe  the  reports  which  were
repeatedly  brought  to  him,  the  sovereign  fell  into  a state  of  profound
depression,  and  despairing  of  warding  off  the  ominous  presence,  he
ordered  costly  gifts  to  be  especially  made,  and  he  sentthe  two  envoys,
Teutlamacazqui  and  Cuitlalpitoc,  to  Pinotl,  govemor  of  Cuetlachtla,
commanding  him  to  provide  in  every  way  for  the  reception  and  enter-
tainment  of  the  celestial  guests.  After  the  departure  of  Grijalba’s
men,  the  fears  of  Montezuma  somewhat  subsided,  and  he  persuaded
himself  that  he  had  staved  off  the  impending  disaster.  The  govemor
of  the  coast  provinces,  however,  had  strict  orders  to  keep  watch,  and
immediately  report  any  further  appearance  of  the  fearsome  strangers.
Henee  the  arrival  of  Cortes,  nine  months  later,  was  at  once  an-
nounced,  by  fleet  messengers,  to  the  Emperor,  who  decided  in  council
to  send  ambassadors  to  welcome  him,  and  bring  exact  information
conceming  all  they  could  see  and  leam.  Thus,  on  Easter  Day,  the
twenty-fourth  of  April,  Teuhtlilli,  govemor  of  Cuetlachtla  and  Cuitlal-
pitoc, who  had  been  before  sent  to  Grijalba,  appeared  before  Cortes.
While  extending  the  welcome  his  superstitious  fears  forbade  him  to

First  Letter

149

ing  certain  jewels  of  very  thin  gold  of  little  valué.  They
told  the  Captain  that  they  brought  him  those  ornaments
to  induce  him  to  go  away,  and,  without  doing  them  any
harm  or  injury,  to  leave  them  their  land  where  they  had
always  been.  The  said  Captain  answered,  saying,  that,  as
to  doing  them  any  harm  or  injury,  he  had  no  such  wish,
and  as  to  leaving  them  the  land,  they  must  understand
that  from  henceforward  they  were  to  have  for  their  Lords,
the  greatest  Princes  of  the  earth,  whose  vassals  they
would  be,  and  that  they  would  have  to  serve  them,  and
that,  in  acting  thus,  Your  Majesties  would  grant  them
many  mercies,  and  favours  would  grow  upon  them,  and
that  they  should  be  protected  and  defended  from  their
enemies.  They  answered  that  they  would  be  satisfied
to  do  this,  but  still  they  required  that  their  country
should  be  left  to  them.  Thus  we  all  became  friends,
and,  our  friendship  being  established,  the  Captain  told
them  that  the  Spaniards  there  with  him  had  nothing
to  eat,  as  nothing  had  been  brought  from  the  ships,
and  he  prayed  them  to  bring  us  food  during  the  time
we  remained  on  the  Island  ; they  answered  that  the
next  day  they  would,  and  thus  they  went  away,  and  re-
mained away  that  day  and  the  next,  ñor  did  they  bring
us  any  food.

As  all  of  us  were,  on  this  account,  in  great  need  of
supplies,  on  the  third  day  some  Spaniards  asked  per-
mission  of  the  Captain  to  go  to  some  farms  in  the

withhold,  the  Emperor  secretly  charged  his  magicians,  whom  he  as-
sembled  from  far  and  wide,  to  rid  the  country  of  the  strangers  by
the  power  of  magic.  The  allied  kings  and  nobles  were  in  constant
council  from  which  no  decisión  issued,  the  greater  number  being  of
Cacamatzin’s  Opinión,  that,  if  the  strangers  were  gods,  it  was  useless
to  resist  them,  if  they  were  envoys  of  a distant  monarch,  they  should
be  received  as  such,  while  if  they  were  men  who  carne  with  hostile
intent,  they  could  easily  be  crushed.  Only  Cuitlahuac,  lord  of  Itzta-
palapan,  opposed  this  view  (Ixtlilxochitl,  Hist.  Chichimeca,  cap.  lxxx.)
This  prince  with  patriotic  foresight  was  for  crushing  the  strangers
nstantly,  and  before  they  could  work  the  nation  any  evil.

Letters  of  Cortes

150

neighbourhood  to  look  for  something  to  eat;  and  the
Captain,  seeing  that  the  Indians  did  not  return  as  they
had  promised,  sent  four  captains  with  more  than  two
hundred  men  to  hunt  round  about  the  town,  and  see
if  they  could  find  anything  to  eat.  While  these  were
engaged  in  searching,  they  met  many  Indians  who
immediately  shot  arrows  at  them,  wounding  twenty
Spaniards,  and  had  not  the  Captain  been  immediately
advised  of  this,  so  as  to  go,  as  he  did,  to  their
assistance,  they  would  probably  have  killed  more  than
half  the  Christians.  So  we  all  retreated  to  cur  camp,
where  the  wounded  were  cared  for,  and  those  who  had
fought  obtained  some  rest.

The  Captain,  seeing  how  wrongly  the  Indians  had
acted,  in  that,  instead  of  bringing  us  food  as  they  had
agreed,  they  had  wounded  us  with  their  arrows,  and  made
war  upon  us,  ordered  ten  of  the  horses  and  mares  we
had  on  board  to  be  brought,  and  all  the  people  to  be  pre-
pared, because  he  thought  that  those  Indians,  encouraged
by  the  advantage  they  had  obtained  the  day  before,
would  fall  upon  us  hoping  to  injure  us.  On  the  next
day  when  all  was  thus  prepared,  he  sent  certain  captains
with  three  hundred  men,  to  the  place  where  the  battle
had  been  fought  the  day  before,  to  learn  if  the  Indians
were  still  there  or  what  had  become  of  them.  A little
later,  he  sent  two  other  captains,  with  a rear-guard  and
another  hundred  men,  and  the  said  Captain  Femando
Cortes  went  secretly  to  one  side  with  ten  men  on  horse-
back.  Proceeding  in  this  order,  those  who  went  ahead
met  a great  number  of  warriors  coming  to  attack  us  in
our  camp,  and,  if  we  had  not  gone  out  that  day  to  en-
counter  them  on  the  road,  we  should  probably  have  found
ourselves  in  great  distress.

When  the  captain  of  artillery,  who  went  ahead,  made
certain  requirements  before  the  notary,  of  the  warriors
whom  he  met,  giving  them  to  understand  through  the

First  Letter

*5*

interpreters  that  we  desired  no  war,  but  peace  and  lo  ve
with  them,  they  did  not  bother  to  answer  us  with  words,
but  let  fly  a thick  volley  of  arrows  at  us.  While  those  in
the  fore  were  fighting  with  the  Indians,  two  captains
of  the  rear-guard  carne  up,  and,  after  two  hours  of  fighting,
the  Captain  Femando  Cortes  arrived  with  the  horsemen,
coming  out  from  the  woods  at  the  point  where  the  In-
dians  were  surrounding  the  Spaniards  on  all  sides,  and
so  he  kept  up  the  fight  with  the  Indians  for  an  hour,  and
such  was  their  multitude  that  neither  those  who  were
fighting  the  Spanish  foot-soldiers  could  see  the  horsemen,
ñor  know  where  they  were,  ñor  could  the  horsemen,  ad-
vancing  and  retreating  amongst  the  Indians,  see  each
other.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  Spaniards  realised  that
the  horsemen  liad  come  up,  they  charged  quickly  upon
the  Indians,  who  immediately  began  to  fly,  and  pursued
them  for  half  a league.  The  Captain,  seeing  that  the
Indians  were  in  full  flight,  and  that  nothing  remained
to  be  done,  and  that  his  troops  were  very  fatigued,  gave
the  order  that  all  should  collect  in  some  farmhouses  near
by;  and,  when  they  were  assembled,  twentv  were  found
to  be  wounded,  of  whom  no  one  died,  ñor  did  anyone
who  had  been  wounded  the  day  before.  Thus  assembled,
and  the  wounded  cared  for,  we  retumed  to  our  camp,
carrying  with  us  two  Indians  whom  we  had  captured,
whom  the  Captain  ordered  to  be  liberated,?and  sent  letters
by  them  to  the  caciques,  telling  them  that,  if  they  would
come  to  him,  he  would  pardon  them  the  offence  which
they  had  committed,  and  they  would  be  his  friends.

That  same  afternoon  two  who  seemed  to  be  principal  In-
dians 1 carne,  saying  that  they  were  very  sorry  Results  o{
for  the  past,  and  that  those  caciques  besought  the  Hos-
him  to  pardon  them,  and  not  to  do  any  further  tilities  at
injury  ñor  kill  any  more  of  their  people,  for  Tabasco

1 The  first  messengers  seemed  from  their  dress  to  be  slaves,
and  though  their  gifts  of  chickens,  smoked  fish,  and  maize-cakes,  were

152

Letters  of  Cortes

there  were  as  many  as  two  hundred  and  twenty  men  slain.
They  also  said  that  the  past  should  be  the  past,  and  hence-
forward  they  wished  to  be  vassals  of  those  Princes  of
whom.  fie  had  told  them,  giving  and  holding  themselves
as  such,  and  that  they  would  acknowledge  and  bind
themselves  to  serve  them  whenever  they  should  be  com-
manded  to  do  so  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Majesties.  Thus
peace  was  made  and  agreed  upon,  and  theCaptain  asked
the  said  Indians,  through  the  interpreter  whom  we  had
with  us,  who  were  the  people  who  had  taken  part  in  the
battle,  and  they  answered  that  they  carne  from  eight
provinces,  and  according  to  their  counting  they  were  in
all  forty  thousand  men, 1 and  that  they  knew  perfectly
well  how  to  count  up  to  that  number.  Your  Royal

accepted,  and  they  were  given  some  glass  beads  in  retum,  they  were
sent  back  to  say  that  if  their  people  wanted  peace  the  chiefs  must
come  themselves,  as  the  Spaniards  could  not  treat  with  slaves.  Some
thirty  head-men  appeared  the  next  day,  bringing  the  usual  present  of
provisions,  and  aslcing  permission  to  bury  and  cremate  their  dead,
offering  to  conclude  peace  the  following  day.  This  was  agreed  to,
and  the  dead  were  buried,  or  burned  according  to  the  usage  of  each
tribe.  At  noon  the  next  day,  the  chiefs  appeared,  and  in  the  conversa-
tion  Jerónimo  de  Aguilar  acted  as  interpreter.  Cortes  adroitly  ar-
ranged  a show  of  gun  firing  and  horsemanship  to  impress  them,  and  he
threw  all  the  blame  for  the  fighting  upon  them,  but  declared  that,  if
they  were  ready  for  peace  his  sovereigns  would  regard  them  as  friends,
and  favour  and  help  them.  Negotiations  terminated  the  next  day,
when  an  assembly  of  all  the  neighbouring  chiefs  acknowledged  them-
selves vassals  of  the  Spanish  king,  giving  Cortes  presents  of  gold  and
slaves.  Amongst  these  latter  was  Marina,  of  whom  further  notice
will  appear.

■Andrés  de  Tapia  fixes  the  number  at  48,000,  but  these  figures
seem  hardly  possible,  and  Orozco  y Berra  observes  that  they  must  be
taken  as  representing  the  idea  of  multitude,  rather  than  an  actual
counting.  This  decisive  battle,  which  took  place  on  March  2 5th,
became  known  as  the  battle  of  Ceutla,  and  in  Gomara’s  chronicle,
as  well  as  in  Tapia’s  narrative,  and  that  of  others,  the  victory  was
attributed  to  the  miraculous  intervention  of  St.  James,  the  patrón
of  Spain,  or  of  St.  Peter  the  patrón  of  Cortes.  Bernal  Diaz  says  that
it  may  be  as  Gomara  describes,  and  that  “los  glorios  apostólos  Señor
Santiago  and  Señor  San  Pedro  " did  appear,  but  he,  miserable  sinner,
was  not  worthy  to  behold  the  apparition.

First  Letter

1 53

Highnesses  may  believe  for  certain,  that  this  battle  was
won,  rather  by  the  will  of  God,  than  by  our  foices,  be-
cause  weak  was  the  defence  of  our  four  hundred  against
forty  thousand  warriors.

After  we  had  become  good  friends,  they  gave  us,  during
the  four  or  five  days  we  still  remained  there,  some  one
hundred  and  forty  dollars  of  gold  in  pieces  of  all  kinds,  and
very  thin,  and  so  much  esteemed  by  them  that  it  seemed
their  country  was  very  poor  in  gold,  because  it  appeared
certain  that  the  little  they  possessed  had  come  from  other
parts  in  trading.  The  land  is  very  good  and  provisions  are
abundant,  both  in  maize,  as  well  as  fruits,  fish,  and  other
things  which  they  eat.  This  town  is  situated  on  the
banks  of  the  afore-named  river,  about  which  extends  a
plain,  where  there  are  many  farms  and  cultivated  fields,
such  as  they  have.  He  [Cortes]  reproved  them  for  the
evil  they  did  in  adoring  their  idols  and  gods,  and  he
made  them  understand  that  they  should  come  to  the
knowledge  of  our  Very  Holy  Faith,  and  he  left  them  a
large  wooden  cross  set  up  on  an  elevation,  and  they
remained  very  satisfied,  saying  they  would  hold  it
in  great  veneration,  and  would  adore  it ; thus  these  In-
dians  became  our  friends  and  vassals  of  Your  Royal
Highnesses.

The  said  Captain  Fernando  Cortes  left  there,  continuing
his  voyage,  and  we  arrived  at  the  port,  and  bay,  which
is  called  San  Juan,  where  the  above-named  Captain
Grijalba  traded,  of  which  extensive  relation  has  hereto-
fore  been  made  to  Your  Majesty.  Immediately  upon
our  arrival,  the  natives  carne  to  inquire  what  caravels
were  those  which  had  arrived,  and  as  it  was  ver}'-  late
that  day,  almost  night,  the  Captain  remained  quietly
in  the  caravel,  and  ordered  that  no  one  should  go  on
shore.  Early  the  next  day  the  Captain  landed  with  a
great  part  of  the  people  of  his  armada,  and  found  two
of  the  principal  Indians  there,  to  whom  he  presented

154

Letters  of  Cortes

certain  of  his  own  valuable  garments,  and,  speaking  to
them  through  the  interpreters,  he  g ave  them  to  understand
that  he  had  come  to  these  parts,  by  command  of  Your
Royal  Highnesses,  to  speak  to  them,  and  to  tell  them
what  they  should  do  to  advance  your  Service.  For  this
he  besought  them  that  they  should  immediately  go  to
their  town,  and  cali  the  cacique,  or  caciques  who  might
be  there,  to  come  and  speak  to  him;  and,  to  ensure  their
coming,  he  gave  them  two  shirts  for  those  caciques,  and
two  jackets,  one  of  silk  and  one  of  velvet,  also  various
caps,  and  some  hawk’s  bells;  so  they  went  with  these
valuables  to  the  said  caciques.  The  next  day  a little  before
noon  one  of  the  caciques  of  that  town  carne,  to  whom  the
saidCaptain  spoke,  and  made  him  understand,  through
the  interpreter,  that  he  had  not  come  to  do  them  any
hurt  ñor  injury,  but  to  inform  them  that  they  were
to  be  vassals  of  Your  Majesties,  and  how  they  were  to
serve  them  and  to  pay  tribute  of  what  they  had  in  their
country,  as  did  all  who  are  such.  And  the  cacique  an
swered  that  he  was  very  satisfied  to  be  such,  and  to  obey,
and  that  he  would  be  much  pleased  to  serve  them,  and
to  have  such  high  Princes  for  lords  as  the  Captain  had
made  them  understand  Your  Royal  Majesties  were.  Im-
mediately  afterwards,  the  Captain  told  him  that,  since
he  was  so  well  disposed  towards  his  King  and  Lord,  he
would  see  what  great  favours  Your  Majesties  would
grant  him  in  the  future;  and,  saying  this,  he  made  him
put  on  a shirt  of  holland,  and  a robe  of  velvet,  and  a
girdle  of  gold,  with  which  the  said  cacique  was  much
pleased  and  happy.  He  told  the  Captain  then,  that  he
wanted  to  go  to  his  country,  and  asked  him  to  wait  for
him  there,  for  the  next  day  he  would  come  back,  and
bring  him  such  things  as  he  had,  so  that  we  might  more
fully  understand  his  good  will  towards  the  Service  of  Your
Royal  Highnesses.  Thus  he  took  his  leave,  and  de-
parted ; and,  the  next  day,  the  said  cacique  returned,  as

First  Letter

*55

he  had  agreed,  and  spreading  a white  cloth  before  the
Captain,  he  offered  him  certain  precious  jewels  of  gold,
which  he  placed  upon  it;  of  these,  and  the  others  which
we  afterwards  obtained,  we  make  relation  to  Your
Majesties  in  a memorial  which  our  procurators  take
with  them.

After  the  said  cacique  had  taken  leave  of  us,  and
retumed  satisfied  to  his  house,  some  of  those  noble
persons  1 who  carne  in  this  armada,  gentle-  Decisión
men,  and  sons  of  gentlemen,  zealous  in  the  to

Service  of  our  Lord,  and  of  Your  Royal  High-  Coionise
nesses,  and  desirous  for  the  exaltation  of  your  royal
crown,  and  the  extensión  of  your  dominions,  and  the  in-
crease of  your  revenues,  assembled  and  spoke  with  the  Cap-
tain Fernando  Cortes,  saying  that  this  land  was  good  and
that,  judging  by  the  sample  of  gold  which  that  cacique  had
brought,  it  was  reasonable  to  believe  that  it  must  be
very  rich,  and  that  he  and  all  his  Indians  were  well  dis-
posed  towards  us.  For  these  reasons,  it  seemed  to  us
that  it  was  not  advantageous  for  Your  Majesties’  Service
to  do  as  Diego  Velasquez  had  ordered  the  said  Captain
Femando  Cortes  to  do  (which  was  to  trade  for  all  the
gold  we  could,  and,  having  obtained  it,  to  return  to  the
island  of  Fernandina,  in  order  that  the  said  Diego  Velas-
quez, and  the  said  Captain  mightpr  ofit  exclusively  by  it,

■The  armada  was  composed  of  eleven  vessels,  of  which  the
largest,  on  which  Cortes  sailed,  was  of  100  tonels,  the  tonel  being  some-
what  more  than  one  ton.  The  number  of  men  is  variously  given  by
different  authorities,  but,  in  the  memorándum  of  Cortes  at  the  time
of  his  residencia  in  1534,  it  is  stated  that  there  were  530  men.  The
persons  of  nobility  must  be  sought  among  the  leaders  and  captains
who  were  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  Gonzalo  de  Sandoval,  Francisco  de
Orozco,  Alonso  Hernández  Puertocarrero,  Diego  de  Ordaz,  Alonzo
de  Avila,  Juan  de  Escalante,  Francisco  de  Montejo,  Francisco  de
Moría,  Francisco  de  Saucedo,  Juan  Velasquez  de  León,  and  Cristóbal
de  Olid.  Pedro  de  Alvarado  had  two  brothers,  Jorge  and  Gómez,
and  a natural  brother,  called  Juan,  and  there  may  have  been  some  other
adventurers  of  good  origin  amongst  the  company  (Orozco  y Berra;
tom,  iv.,  cap.  iii.).

Letters  of  Cortes

156

and  that  it  seemed  better  to  all  of  us  that  a town  should
be  founded  and  peopled  there  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Roy  al
Highnesses.  In  this,  there  should  be  a court  of  justice,
so  that  you  would  have  your  jurisdiction  in  this  country
just  as  in  your  kingdoms  and  dominions,  since  possibly
this  country,  being  peopled  by  Spaniards,  in  addition
to  the  increase  of  the  kingdoms  and  dependencies,  and
the  in  comes  of  Your  Majesties,  you  might  show  some
favours  to  us,  and  to  the  colonists  who  would  come  there
hereafter.

Having  decided  this,  we  all  agreed  with  one  accord
and  mind,  and  we  made  a requirement  to  the  said  Captain,
in  which  we  told  him  that,  as  he  saw  how  agreeable  it
would  be  to  the  Service  of  God,  Our  Lord,  and  of  Your
Majesties,  that  this  country  should  be  peopled  (giving
the  reasons  which  we  have  heretofore  recounted  to  Your
Highnesses),  we  required  him  to  cease  trading,  as  he
was  doing,  inasmuch  as  it  was  equivalent  to  destroying
the  country  to  a great  extent,  and  that  Your  Majesties
would  thus  be  but  poorly  served;  and  that,  for  the  same
reason,  we  asked  and  required  him  to  ñame  alcaldes,  and
municipal  authorities,  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Royal  High-
nesses, for  the  town  which  was  to  be  founded  and  built
by  us.  This  was  accompanied  by  intimations  in  legal
form  that  we  would  protest  against  him  if  he  acted  other-
wise.  This  requirement  having  been  made  to  the  said
Captain,  he  replied  that  he  would  give  his  answer  the
next  day;  and  the  said  Captain,  having  seen  how  all  that
we  had  asked  him  to  do  would  be  profitable  to  the  Service
of  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  answered  us  the  next  day,
saying  that  he  was  exclusively  devoted  to  the  Service  of
Your  Majesties,  and  that,  without  considering  the  profit
which  might  result  to  him  from  carrying  on  the  trading
as  planned,  so  as  to  recover  the  great  expenses  which
had  been  sustained  out  of  his  property  in  fitting  out  that
armada  with  the  said  Diego  Velasquez,  but  rather  putting

First  Letter

i57

aside  everything  else,  he  was  glad  and  satisfied  to  do
whatever  we  had  asked  him  to  do,  inasmuch  as  it  was
advantageous  to  the  service  of  Your  Royal  Highnesses.
Immediately,  therefore,  he  began  with  great  pOUndatíon
diligence  tó  found  and  people  a town,  to  which  of
the  ñame  was  given  of  Rica  Villa  de  la  Vera  ^era  ^ruz
Cruz.  1 He  named  ;those  of  us  who  will  sign  at  the
endas  alcaldes  and  municipal  officers  of  the  said  town

‘ The  legal  formalities  so  scrupulously  observed,  were  a trifle
farcical  in  this  particular  instance,  and  Cortes  doubtless  listened  to  the
reading  of  the  “ requirements  ” with  a solemn  exterior,  but  with  his
“tongue  in  his  cheek.”  The  narrative  here  is  clear.  He  resigned  the
authority  he  had  received  from  Velasquez,  the  royal  govemor  of  Cuba,
into  the  hands  of  the  municipal  authorities  he  had  himself  appointed
in  response  to  the  popular  demand,  and  who  thereby  likewise  became
royal  officials.  They  in  their  turn  exercised  their  powers  to  appoint
him  Captain-General,  and  Chief  Justice,  of  the  new  colony,  and  thus,
by  due  form  of  law,  Cortes  found  himself,  within  twenty-four  hours  after
his  abdication,  installed  as  the  recognised  dispenser  of  civil  justice,
and  as  military  commander.  He  showed  a becoming  reluctance  to
accept  the  nomination,  and  finally  had  all  the  appearance  of  yielding
to  an  irresistible  expression  of  the  popular  will.  Bernal  Diaz  quotes
to  the  point  an  oíd  Spanish  proverb : Tu  mi  lo  ruegas  y yo  mi  lo

quiero.  The  partisans  of  Cortes,  led  by  the  Alvarados,  Olid,  Avila,
Escalante,  and  Puertocarrero,  secretly  formed  a party  among  the
men  and  propounded  the  new  plan  of  colonisation  for  the  crown,  in
substitution  for  that  of  merely  trading  in  the  interest  of  Diego  Velas-
quez, arguing  that  he,  Velasquez  would  get  the  lion’s  share  of  the
profits,  on  their  retum  to  Cuba,  while  they  would  be  about  as  poor  as
when  they  started.  This  idea  won  adherents,  but  was  not  slow  in
reaching  the  knowledge  of  the  friends  of  Velasquez,  who  protested
vigorously  against  such  a betrayal  of  confidence,  and  insisted  that
they  should  retum  to  Cuba  with  the  treasure,  and  make  their  report
to  the  governor.  Cortes  feigned  to  accede  to  their  view,  and  perplexed
them  greatly  by  giving  immediate  orders  to  embark  the  next  day.
No  sooner  were  these  orders  given,  than  the  “ imperialist  ” group,
to  describe  them  by  a modera  term,  held  a second  meeting,  in
which  it  was  resolved  that  their  allegiance  and  duty  were  to  the  crown,
that  being  already  in  practical  possession  of  a rich  strip  of  coast,  and
well  received  by  the  Indians,  since  they  had  proved  their  superiority,
they  should  rather  consider  the  conversión  of  the  natives,  and  the
extensión  of  His  Majesty’s  dominions,  than  the  mere  trading  profits
of  the  govemor  of  Cuba,  and  henee  that  they  should  found  there  a port
and  city  in  the  ñame  of  the  sovereigns,  who  would  certainly  approve

153

Letters  of  Cortes

receiving  from  us  the  oath  in  the  ñame  of  Your
Royal  Highnesses,  with  the  solemnity  customary  in  such
cases;  after  which  we  assembled  the  next  day  in  our
council  and  assembly  chamber,  and,  being  thus  assembled,
we  sent  to  summon  the  Captain  Femando  Cortes,  and
we  asked  him  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Royal  Highnesses
to  show  us  the  powers  and  instructions,  which  the  said
Diego  Velasquez  had  given  him  for  coming  to  these
parts.  He  immediately  sent  for  these,  and  showed  them
to  us,  and,  having  been  seen  and  read  by  us,  and  well
examined  according  to  the  best  of  our  understanding,
it  seemed  to  us  that,  by  those  powers  and  instructions,
the  said  Captain  Fernando  Cortes,  had  no  longer  any
authority,  and  that,  they  having  expired,  he  could  no
longer  exercise  the  office  of  justice,  or  of  captain.

It  seemed  to  us,  Very  Excellent  Princes,  that,  for  the
sake  of  peace  and  concord  amongst  us,  and  in  order  to
govem  us  well,  it  was  necessary  to  install  a person  for

when  they  carne  to  understand  the  circumstances.  The  Velasquez
party  seems  to  have  offered  no  open  resistance.

The  elabórate  ñame  of  Villa  Rica  de  la  Vera  Cruz  was  given  to  the
new  settlement,  the  “rica”  being  suggested  by  the  rich  character  of  the
soil,  and  the  “Vera  Cruz”  by  the  date  of  their  landing,  which  was  a
Good  Friday,  the  day  when  the  Cross  is  especially  venerated.

The  transformation  scene  was  very  complete.  Cortes,  from  being  the
semi-rebellious  captain  of  a trading  fleet  became  the  recognised  repre-
sentativo of  the  King  of  Spain  in  México ; the  volunteer  soldiers  of  the
expedition  became  a militia;  municipal  officers,  and  royal  officials
sprang  into  existence,  who  acknowledged  no  superior  but  the  King,
while  Diego  Velasquez  was  eliminated  from  the  scheme  of  things
entirely.

The  partisans  of  Velasquez,  though  in  a minority,  still  argued  that
Cortes’s  election  was  irregular,  because  they  had  not  taken  part  in  it,
ñor  had  it  been  confirmed,  either  by  the  Jeronymite  Fathers,  or  the
govemor  of  Cuba.  This  incipient  sedition  was  characteristically
met,  by  Cortes  offering  as  many  as  were  dissatisfied  permission  to
re-embark,  and  return  to  Cuba,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  demónstrate
the  reality  of  the  new  State  of  things,  he  ordered  the  Alguacil  Mayor
to  arrest  Juan  Velasquez,  Diego  de  Ordaz,  Pedro  Escudero,  and  others
of  the  more  active  agitators,  and  to  imprison  them  on  the  captain’s
ship.  This  drastic  move  had  the  desired  effect  upon  the  waverers.

First  Letter

i59

Your  Royal  Service  to  act  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Majesties
in  the  said  town,  and  in  these  parts  as  Chief  Justice,
and  Captain,  and  head,  whom  we  cernid  all  respect  and
obey  un  til  we  might  give  account  of  everything  to  Youi
Royal  Highnesses,  so  that  you  could  provide  as  best
suited  your  Service.  Recognising  that  to  no  one  could
we  better  give  such  a charge  than  to  the  said  Fernando
Cortes,  because,  besides  being  a most  suitable  person,  he
is  moreover  very  zealous  in  the  Service  of  Your  Majesties,
as  well  as  being  very  experienced  in  these  parts  and
islands,  of  which  he  has  always  given  good  proofs,  for
having  spent  all  that  he  possessed  to  serve  Your  Majesties
in  this  armada,  and  heeded  so  little  (as  we  have  already
related)  his  possible  gains  and  profits  from  continuing  to
trade,  we  therefore  elected  him,  in  the  ñame  of  -Your
Royal  Highnesses,  to  the  office  of  Justice  and  Superior
Alcalde,  receiving  from  him  the  oath  which  is  required  in
such  cases.  And,  having  done  this  as  profitable  to  the  Ser-
vice of  Your  Majesty,  we  received  him  in  Your  Royal  ñame
in  our  Council  and  Assembly  Chamber,  as  Chief  Justice
and  Governor  of  Your  Royal  arms,  and  thus  he  is,  and
will  continué,  until  Your  Majesties  provide  what  is  best
for  your  Service.

We  have  wished  to  fully  relate  all  this  to  Your  Royal
Highnesses,  that  you  may  know  what  has  been  done
here,  and  in  what  condition  we  are  living  here.

Having  done  as  stated,  and,  being  all  assembled  in
our  Council  Chamber,  we  agreed  to  write  to  Your  Ma-
jesties, and  to  send  you,  in  addition  to  the  one-fifth  part
which  belongs  to  your  rents,  according  to  Your  Royal
prescriptions,  all  the  gold,  and  sil  ver,  and  valuables  which
we  have  obtained  in  this  country,  on  account  of  its  being
the  first,  and  above  which  we  keep  nothing  for  ourselves.
We  place  this  at  the  disposition  of  Your  Royal  Highnesses,
as  a proof  of  our  very  good  will  for  your  Service,  as  we
have  heretofore  done  with  our  persons  and  property,

ióo  Letters  of  Cortes

and,  having  agreed  upon  this  amongst  ourselves,  we
selected  as  our  procurators1  Alonso  Hernández  Porto-
carrero,  and  Francisco  de  Montejo,  whom  we  send  to
Your  Majesties  with  all  this,  that  they  may  kiss  Your
Royal  hands  on  our  behalf,  and  that,  in  our  ñames,  and
in  that  of  this  town,  and  its  Council,  they  may  pray  Your
Royal  Highnesses  to  favour  us  as  may  be  agreeable  to
God,  and  to  Your  Majesties,  and  for  the  coming  good  of
this  town,  as  will  appear  at  greater  length  from  the  in-
structions  which  we  have  given  them.  We  humbly  beg
Your  Majesties,  with  all  the  respect  which  is  becoming,
to  receive  them,  to  give  them  Your  Royal  hands  to  kiss
on  our  behalf,  and  to  grant  them  all  the  favours  they
may  ask  and  supplicate  on  behalf  of  this  Council,  and
ourselves,  because,  in  doing  this  Your  Majesties,  besides
rendering  Service  to  Our  Lord,  and  this  town  and  Council,
will  bestow  on  us  the  special  favour  which  we  daily  hope
that  Your  Royal  Highnesses  will  grant  us.

In  one  chapter  of  this  letter,  we  have  already  said
that  we  would  send  an  account  to  Your  Royal  High-
Description  nesses,  by  which  Your  Majesties  might  be
of  the  perfectly  informed  of  everything  about  this

Country  country,  its  condition,  riches,  the  people  who

possess  it,  and  of  the  law  and  sect,  rites  and  cere-
monies  which  they  observe.  This  country,  Most  Potent
Princes,  where  we  now  are  in  the  ñame  of  Your
Majesties,  has  fifty  leagues  of  coast  on  the  one  side
and  the  other  of  this  town,  the  seacoast  being  low
with  many  sand-hills,  some  of  which  are  two  leagues
or  more  in  length.  The  country  beyond  these  sand-hills
is  level,  with  many  fertile  plains,  in  which  are  such  beauti-
ful  river  banks,  that  in  all  Spain  there  can  be  found  no
better;  these  are  as  grateful  to  the  sight  as  they  arepro-
ductive  in  everything  sown  in  them,  and  very  orderly  and
well  kept  with  walks,  and  facilities  for  grazing  all  kinds

> See  Appendix  III.  at  cióse  of  Letter.

First  Letter

161

of  animáis.  There  is  every  kind  of  game  in  this  country,
and  animáis,  and  birds  such  as  are  familiar  to  us,— deer,
fallow  deer,  wolves,  foxes,  quails,  doves,  and  pigeons,
and  two  or  three  kinds  of  hares  and  rabbits,  so  that
there  is  no  difference  between  this  country  and  Spain,
as  regards  birds  and  animáis ; there  are  lions  and  tigers 1
about  five  leagues  from  the  sea,  in  some  places,  and  others
are  very  beautiful  [word  mis  sin  g].  There  is,  moreover,
a great  range  of  very  beautiful  mountains,  some  of  them
very  high,  amongst  which  one  2 very  greatly  exceeds  all
the  others,  and  from  it  can  be  discovered  and  seen  a great
part  of  the  sea  and  land;  and  it  is  so  high  that  if  the  day
is  not  very  clear  you  cannot  see  or  distinguish  the  summit
of  it,  because  one  half  of  it  is  all  covered  with  clouds;
and  sometimes  when  the  day  is  very  clear  the  peak  of  it
can  be  seen  above  the  said  clouds,  and  it  is  so  white  that
we  judge  it  to  be  snow,  and  the  natives  even  tell  us  that
it  is  snow,  but  as  we  have  not  seen  it  well,  although  we
have  been  very  near  to  it,  and  because  this  región  is  so
hot,  we  do  not  affirm  it  to  be  snow.  We  will  endeavour
to  know  and  see  it,  as  well  as  many  other  things  about
which  we  have  information,  so  as  to  send  a true  account
to  Your  Royal  Highnesses  of  the  wealth  of  gold  and
silver  and  stones,  and  we  judge  that  Your  Majesties
may  order  it  to  be  examined  according  to  the  samples
of  all  which  we  remit  to  Your  Royal  Highnesses.  Ac-
cording to  our  judgment,  it  is  credible  that  there  is
everything  in  this  country  which  existed  in  that  from
whence  Solomon  is  said  to  have  brought  the  gold  for  the

1 The  largest  beasts  of  prey  in  México  were  the  puma,  the  jaguar,
and  the  ocelot ; lions  and  tigers  there  were  none.

2 Orizaba ; the  usual  Indian  ñame  for  the  volcano  was  Citlalte-
petl,  meaning  star-mountain,  though  they  also  called  it  Zenctepatl,  and
PojauhteGa.il.  According  to  Humboldt,  its  known  period  of  greatest
activity  was  from  1545  to  1566 ; he  also  notes  that  both  this  cráter,  and
that  of  Popocatepetl,  incline  towards  the  south-east.  His  measure-
ment  of  Orizaba  is  5395  metres  ( Essai  Politique,  vol.  i.).  Ferrer’s
measurement  is  5450  metres.

VOL.  I.— II

IÓ2

Letters  of  Cortes

Temple,  but,  as  we  have  been  here  so  short  a time,  we
have  not  been  able  to  see  more  than  the  distance  of  five
leagues  inland,  and  about  ten  or  twelve  leagues  of  the
coast  length  on  each  side,  which  we  have  explored  since
we  landed;  although  from  the  sea  it  must  be  more,  and
we  saw  much  more  while  sailing.

The  people  who  inhabit  this  country,  from  the  Island
of  Cozumel,  and  the  Cape  of  Yucatán  to  the  place  where
Description we  now  are»  are  a people  of  middle  size,  with
of  the  bodies  and  features  well  proportioned,  except
indians  that  in  each  province  their  customs  differ,
some  piercing  the  ears,  and  putting  large  and  ugly  ob-
jects  in  them,  and  others  piercing  the  nostrils  down
to  the  mouth,  and  putting  in  large  round  stones  like
mirrors,  and  others  piercing  their  under  lips  down  as
far  as  their  gums,  and  hanging  from  them  large  round
stones,  or  pieces  of  gold,  so  weighty  that  they  pulí
down  the  nether  lip,  and  make  it  appear  very  deformed.
The  clothing  which  they  wear  is  like  long  veils,  very
curiously  worked.  The  men  wear  breech-cloths  about
their  bodies,  and  large  mantles,  very  thin,  and  painted
in  the  style  of  Moorish  draperies.  The  women  of  the
ordinary  people  wear,  from  their  waists  to  their  feet,
clothes  also  very  much  painted,  some  covering  their
breasts  and  leaving  the  rest  of  the  body  uncovered.
The  superior  women,  however,  wear  very  thin  shirts  of
cotton,  worked  and  made  in  the  style  of  rochets.  Their
food  is  maize  and  grain,  as  in  the  other  Islands,  and
potuyuca,  as  they  eat  it  in  the  Island  of  Cuba,  and  they
eat  it  broiled,  since  they  do  not  make  bread  of  it;  and
they  have  their  fishing,  and  hunting,  and  they  roast
many  chickens,  like  those  of  the  Tierra  Firma,  which  are
as  large  as  peacocks. 1

There  are  some  large  towns  well  laid  out,  the  houses
being  of  stone,  and  mortar  when  they  have  it.  The

i These  were  turkeys,  which  were  unknown  in  Europe

First  Letter

163

apartments  are  small,  low,  and  in  the  Moorish  style,
and,  when  they  cannot  find  stone,  they  make  them  of
adobes,  whitewashing  them,  and  the  roof  is  of  straw.
Some  of  the  houses  of  the  principal  people  are  very  cool,
and  have  many  apartments,  for  we  have  seen  more  than
five  courts  in  one  house,  and  the  apartments  very  well
distributed,  each  principal  department  of  Service  being
sepárate.  Within  them  they  have  their  wells  and  reser-
voirs  for  water,  and  rooms  for  the  slaves  and  dependents,
of  whom  they  have  many.  Each  of  these  chiefs  has
at  the  entrance  of  his  house,  but  outside  of  it,  a large
court-yard,  and  in  some  there  are  two  and  three  and  four
very  high  buildings,  with  steps  leading  up  to  them,  and
they  are  very  well  built;  and  in  them  they  have  their
mosques  and  prayer  places,  and  very  broad  galleries  on
all  sides,  and  there  they  keep  the  idols  which  they  worship,
some  being  of  stone,  some  of  gold,  and  some  of  wood,  and
they  honour  and  serve  them  in  such  wise,  and  with  so
many  ceremonies,  that  much  paper  would  be  required
to  give  Your  Royal  Highnesses  an  en  tire  and  exact  de_
scription  of  all  of  them.  These  houses  and  mosques,
wherever  they  exist,  are  the  largest  and  best  built  in  the
town,  and  they  keep  them  very  well  adorned,  decorated
with  feather-work  and  well-woven  stuffs,  and  with  all
manner  of  omaments.  Every  day,  before  they  under-
take  any  work,  they  burn  incense  in  the  said  mosques,
and  sometimes  they  sacrifice  their  own  persons,  some
cutting  their  tongues  and  others  their  ears,  and  some
hacking  the  body  with  knives ; and  they  offer  up  to  their
idols  all  the  blood  which  flows,  sprinkling  it  on  all  sides
of  those  mosques,  at  other  times  throwing  it  up  towards
the  heavens,  and  practising  many  other  kinds  of  cere-
monies, so  that  they  undertake  nothing  without  first
offering  sacrifice  there.

They  have  another  custom,  horrible,  and  abominable,
and  deserving  punishment,  and  which  we  have  never  be-

Letters  of  Cortes

164

fore  seen  in  any  other  place,  and  it  is  this,  that,  as
Human  often  as  they  have  anything  to  ask  of  their

Sacrifices  idols,  in  order  that  their  petition  may  be
more  acceptable,  they  take  many  boys  or  girls,  and
even  grown  men  and  women,  and  in  the  presence
of  those  idols  they  open  their  breasts,  while  they
are  alive,  and  take  out  the  hearts  and  entrails,  and
bum  the  said  entrails  and  hearts  before  the  idols,  offer-
ing  that  smoke  in  sacrifice  to  them. 1 Some  of  us  who
have  seen  this  say  that  [it  is  the  most  terrible  and
frightful  thing  to  behold  that  has  ever  been  seen.  So
frequently,  and  so  often  do  these  Indians  do  this,  ac-
cording  to  our  information,  and  partly  by  what  we  have
seen  in  the  short  time  we  are  in  this  country,  that  no
year  passes  in  which  they  do  not  kill  and  sacrifice  fifty
souls  in  each  mosque;  and  this  is  practised,  and  held
as  customary,  from  the  Isle  of  Cozumel  to  the  country
in  which  we  are  now  settled.  Your  Majesties  may  rest
assured  that,  according  to  the  size  of  the  land,  which  to
us  seems  very  considerable,  and  the  many  mosques  which
they  have,  there  is  no  year,  as  far  as  we  have  until  now
discovered  and  seen,  when  they  do  not  kill  and  sacrifice
in  this  manner  some  three  or  four  thousand  souls.  Now
let  Your  Roy  al  Highnesses  consider  if  they  ought  not  to
prevent  so  great  an  evil  and  crime,  and  certainly  God,
Our  Lord,  will  be  well  pleased,  if,  through  the  command
of  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  these  peoples  should  be  initi-
ated  and  instructed  in  our  Very  Holy  Catholic  Faith,
and  the  devotion,  faith,  and  hope,  which  they  have  in
their  idols,  be  transferred  to  the  Divine  Omnipotence  of
God;  becaúse  it  is  certain,  that,  if  they  served  God  with
the  same  faith,  and  fervour,  and  diligence,  they  would
surely  work  miracles.

It  should  be  believed,  that  it  is  not  without  cause
that  God,  Our  Lord,  has  permitted  that  these  parts

> See  Appendix  IV.  at  cióse  of  Letter.

First  Letter

i65

should  be  discovered  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Royal  High-
nesses,  so  that  this  fruit  and  merit  before  God  should
be  enjoyed  by  Your  Majesties,  of  having  instructed  these
barbarían  people,  and  brought  them  through  your  com-
mands  to  the  True  Faith.  As  far  as  we  are  able  to  know
them,  we  believe  that,  if  there  were  interpreters  and
persons  who  could  make  them  understand  the  truth  of
the  Faith,  and  their  error,  many,  and  perhaps  all,  would
shortly  quit  the  errors  which  they  hold,  and  come  to  the
true  knowledge;  because  they  live  civilly  and  reasonably,
better  than  any  of  the  other  peoples  found  in  these  parts.

To  endeavour  to  give  to  Your  Majesties  all  the  par-
ticulars  about  this  country  and  its  people,  might  oc-
casion  some  errors  in  the  account,  because  much  of  it  we
have  not  seen,  and  only  know  it  through  information
givren  us  by  the  natives ; thereforewe  do  not  undertake  to
give  more  than  what  may  be  accepted  by  Your  Highnesses
as  true.  Your  Majesties  may,  if  you  deem  proper,  give
this  account  as  true  to  Our  Very  Holy  Father,  in  order
that  diligence  and  good  system  may  be  used  in  effecting
the  conversión  of  these  people,  because  it  is  hoped  that
great  fruit  and  much  good  may  be  obtained ; also  that  His
Holiness  may  approve  and  allow  that  the  wicked  and
rebellious,  being  first.  admonished,  may  be  punished  and
chastised  as  enemies  of  Our  Holy  Catholic  Faith,  which
will  be  an  occasion  of  punishment  and  fear  to  those  who
may  be  reluctant  in  receiving  knowledge  of  the  Truth;
thereby,  that  the  great  evils  and  injuries  they  practise
in  the  Service  of  the  Devil,  will  be  forsaken.  Because,
besides  what  we  have  just  related  to  Your  Majesties
about  the  men,  and  women,  and  children,  whom  they
kill  and  offer  in  their  sacrifices,  we  have  learned,  and
been  positively  informed,  that  they  are  all  sodomites,
and  given  to  that  abominable  sin. 1 In  all  this,  we

1 Clavigero  denounces  the  blameworthy  facility  with  which  this
vice  was  imputed  to  the  Mexicans  in  general,  by  some  of  the  early  writers

i66

Letters  of  Cortes

beseech  Your  Majesties  to  order  such  measures  taken
as  are  most  profitable  to  the  Service  of  God,  and  to  that
of  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  and  so  that  we  who  are  here
in  your  Service  may  also  be  favoured  and  recompensed.

Amongst  other  things  which  are  contained  in  our
y r ..  instructions  to  our  procurators,  whom  we  send
Against  to  Your  Highnesses,  one  is  to  pray  Your

Diego  Majesties  on  our  own  behalf,  that  you  should

Veiasquez  -n  no  way  giVe(  or  make  concession  in  these
parts,  to  Diego  Velasquez  Lieutenant  Admiral  in  the
Island  of  Fernandina  of  the  adelantamiento,  ñor  the
perpetual  govemorship,  ñor  any  other,  ñor  the  charge
of  justice;  and  if  any  such  has  been  given  to  him,  to
order  it  to  be  revoked,  because  it  is  not  profitable  to
the  Service  of  Your  Royal  Crown  that  the  said  Diego
Velasquez,  ñor  any  other  person,  should  have  authority,
or  any  other  perpetual  concession  of  any  sort,  save  as  may
be  the  will  of  Your  Majesties,  in  this  country  of  Your
Royal  Highnesses,  inasmuch  as  it  is,  as  far  as  we  can
foresee  and  hope,  very  rich.  Moreover,  far  from  profiting
Your  Majesties’  Service,  should  the  said  Diego  Velasquez
be  provided  with  some  office,  we  foresee  that  we,  the
vassals  of  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  who  have  begun  to
colonise,  and  to  live  in  this  country,  will  be  ill-treated
by  him,  because  we  are  convinced  that,  what  has  already

añd7  in  accord  with  other  authorities,  asserts  that  while  it  existed
amongst  the  Panuchesi,  the  only  evidence  of  it  elsewhere  was  the  severe
laws  enacted  for  its  punishment.  He  does  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  the
accusation  was  made  by  some  of  the  Spaniards  to  palliate  their  own
excesses, — a peculiarly  heinous  tactic.  The  friars,  who  were  later
in  the  best  position  to  know  the  moráis  and  customs  of  the  Indians,
unanimously  repudíate  the  charge.  Amongst  modera  authorities,
Orozco  y Berra  combats  the  imputation  as  unfounded.  Beraal  Diaz
records  that  obscene  images  were  found  in  the  temples  at  Cozumel,  and
the  Anonymous  Conqueror  describes  in  language  which  I do  not  trans-
íate, the  debauchery  common  amongst  the  Indians  of  Panuco,  and  gives
some  singular  details  of  their  different  ways  of  intoxicating  themselves,
similar  to  nothing  I have  ever  heard  of  amongst  any  people,  ancient
or  modera  (Apud  Icazbalceta,  Doc.  Ined.  II  Modo  di  Sacrificare,  etc.).

First  Letter

167

been  done  in  Your  Majesties’  Service,  in  sending  this
gift  of  gold  and  silver,  and  valuables,  which  we  have
obtained  here  in  this  country,  and  now  send,  would
not  have  been  approved  by  him.  This  clearly  appears
through  four  of  his  servants  who  have  come  here,  and
who,  when  they  perceived  our  wish  to  send  all  to  Your
Royal  Highnesses,  as  we  do,  declared  that  it  would  be
better  to  send  it  to  Diego  Velasquez,  and  otherwise  op-
posed  their  being  sent  to  Your  Majesties.  For  this  we
ordered  them  to  be  imprisoned,  and  they  will  remain
prisoners  until  justice  decides,  after  which  we  shall  relate
to  Your  Majesties  what  we  have  done  with  them. 1 So,
because  we  have  seen  what  the  said  Diego  Velasquez  has
done,  and  our  experience  of  it,  we  fear  that,  if  he  should
come  to  this  country  with  any  commission,  he  would
treat  us  ill,  as  he  has  done  in  the  Island  of  Femandina,
during  the  time  that  he  had  charge  of  its  government,
doing  justice  to  none  except  as  he  pleased,  and  punishing
those  whom  he  chose,  from  anger  or  passion,  but  not
from  justice  or  reason.  He  has  thus  destroyed  many
good  subjects  by  reducing  them  to  great  poverty,  in  re-
fusing  to  give  them  any  Indians,  and  taking  them  all

1 Bemaldino  de  Coria,  one  of  the  conspirators,  weakened  at  the  last
moment,  and  betrayed  the  plot  to  seize  a boat,  •with  provisions,  and
to  put  off  to  Cuba,  for  the  purpose  of  warning  Diego  Velasquez  of  the
sailing  of  the  envoys,  so  that  he  might  intercept  them.  Cortes  did  not
minee  matters;  he  promptly  hanged  Diego  Cermeño,  and  Juan  Escu-
dero. The  latter  was  the  same  alguacil  who  had  captured  him  before
thechurch  in  Santiago,  where  he  had  taken  sanctuary  during  his  quar-
rel  with  Velasquez,  and  had  imprisoned  him  on  the  ship  in  the  harbour.
Gonzalo  de  Umbria  had  his  feet  cut  off,  and  two  hundred  lashes  were
administered  to  each  of  the  others,  except  the  priest,  Juan  Diaz,  whose
cloth  protected  him.  Gomara  suppresses  the  amputation  of  Umbría’  s
feet,  and  says  he  was  whipped  with  the  others.  Bernal  Diaz  reports
that  Cortes  exclaimed,  when  he  signed  the  warrant  for  these
punishments,  “who  would  not  rather  be  unable  to  write,  than  to
have  to  sign  away  the  lives  of  men  !”  but  the  oíd  soldier  shrewdly
adds,  that  he  believes  most  judges  from  the  days  of  Ñero  down  have
expressed  the  same  sentiment  (Orozco  y Berra,  vol.  iv.,  cap.  viii.).

i68

Letters  of  Cortes

for  himself,  and  in  taking  all  the  gold  which  they  had
obtained  without  giving  them  any  share  of  it.  He  also
has  interests  with  dishonest  men,  for  his  own  advantage,
and  by  the  mere  fact  of  his  having  the  Govemorship,
and  power  of  distribution,  nobody  dares  to  oppose  him,
knowing  and  fearing  that  he  can  ruin  them.  Your
Majesties  have  no  information  about  this,  ñor  has  there
ever  been  any  account  made  of  it,  because  the  procurators,
who  have  gone  heretofore  from  the  said  Island,  are
creatures  and  servants  of  his  hands,  whom  he  holds  by
giving  them  Indians  at  their  pleasure;  and  the  procura-
tors, who  come  from  the  smaller  towns  to  attend  to  the
affairs  of  the  communities,  have  to  do  as  he  wishes,  be-
cause  he  buys  them  up  with  Indians.  When  such  pro-
curators retum  to  their  towns,  and  are  asked  to  give  an
account  of  what  they  have  done,  the  people  declare  that
poor  men  should  not  be  sent  as  procurators,  because,
for  one  cacique  whom  Diego  Velasquez  gives  them,  they
will  do  everything  he  wants.  The  municipal  ofñcers  and
alcaldes  who  have  Indians  daré  not  speak  to,  or  reprove,
the  procurators,  who  have  done  what  they  ought  not
to  have  done  out  of  compliance  to  Diego  Velasquez,  for
fear  that  the  said  Diego  Velasquez  might  take  away  their
Indians.  In  this,  and  other  things,  it  is  very  good  [word
missing  in  MS .]  from  which  Your  Royal  Highnesses
may  see,  that  all  the  accounts  which  the  Island  of  Fer-
nandina  has  made  of  what  Diego  Velasquez  has  done,
and  the  favours  which  they  asked  for  him,  are  on  account
of  the  Indians  he  has  given  to  the  procurators,  and  not
because  the  communities  are  satisfied  or  wish  such  things ;
rather  would  they  desire  that  those  procurators  were
punished.  The  above  being  notorious  to  all  the  inhabi-
tants  and  householders  of  this  town  of  Vera  Cruz,  they
assembled  with  the  procurator  of  this  council,  and  have
asked  and  required  us,  by  their  requirements,  signed
with  their  ñames,  that,  in  the  ñame  of  all,  we  should  beg

First  Letter

169

Your  Majesties  not  to  provide  the  said  Diego  Velasquez
with  the  said,  or  any  other,  commission,  but  rather  to
order  him  to  give  his  residencia , 1 and  to  deprive
him  of  the  charge  of  the  Island  of  Femandina.  By
taking  his  residencia,  the  above  statements  would  be
shown  to  be  true,  for  which  we  beseech  Your  Majesties
to  ñame  a judge  and  inquisitor,  in  order  to  make  an  in-
vestigaron of  all  which  we  have  related  to  Your  Royal
Highnesses,  not  only  about  the  Island  of  Cuba,  but  also
elsewhere;  for  our  intention  is  to  prove  things  from  which
Your  Majesties  may  judge  if  it  be  justice  or  conscience
that  he  should  have  royal  charges  in  these  parts,  or  in  the
others  where  he  at  present  resides.

In  the  same  manner,  the  procurator,  and  the  inhabi-
tants  and  householders  of  this  town,  have  asked  us  in  the
said  petition  that  we  should  supplicate  Your  Majesty  in
their  ñame  to  provide  a warrant  and  Royal  Provisión  to
be  given  in  favour  of  Fernando  Cortes,  Captain,  and  Su-
perior Justice  of  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  in  order  that
he  may  govern  us  with  justice,  until  this  country  shall
be  conquered  and  pacified,  and  for  such  time  as  may  ap-
pear  best  to  Your  Majesties,  and  be  best  for  your  Service;
for  they  recognise  in  him  such  a person  as  is  fit  for  it.
Which  petition  and  requirement  we  send  with  these,  our
procurators,  to  Your  Majesties,  and  we  all  humbly  sup-
plicate Your  Royal  Highnesses,  that  you  will  grant  not
only  this,  but  all  the  other  favours,  which  in  the  ñame
of  this  council  and  town  may  be  petitioned  by  the  said
procurators,  and  that  you  will  regar d us  as  your  most

1 This  was  done  by  means  of  a commission,  with  full  powers
to  inquire  into  all  administrative  acts  of  a govemor,  and  to  receive
and  decide  upon  all  complaints  against  him.  Upon  the  arrival  of  the
commissioners,  the  govemor  and  his  officials  resigned  their  authority
and  badges  of  office  into  their  hands,  pending  the  outcome  of  the
investigation.  The  residencia  was  not  of  itself  an  indignity,  ñor  did  it
necessarily  imply  a want  of  confidence  in  the  govemor,  but  it  was  the
most  effective  check  the  home  govemment  had  upon  the  colonial
officials.

Letters  of  Cortes

1 70

loyal  vassals,  such  as  we  have  been  and  always  will  be.
The  gold,  and  sil  ver,  and  jewels,  and  valuables,  and  the
rodelas,  and  the  wearing  apparel,  which  we  send  by  the
procurators  to  Your  Royal  Highnesses,  and  which,  over
and  above  the  one-fifth  which  belongs  to  Your  Majesty,
Captain  Femando  Cortes,  and  this  council,  pray  you  to
accept,  go  with  this  memorial,  signed  by  them  and  by
the  said  procurators,  as  Your  Royal  Highnesses  may  see
from  it.1

1 The  first  treasure  sent  to  Spain  contained  the  following  curious
objects:

A gold  necklace  composed  of  seven  pieces,  with  185  small  emeralds
set  in  it,  and  232  gems,  like  rubíes,  from  which  hung  27  small  bells  of
gold,  and  some  pearls.

Another  necklace  of  four  pieces  of  gold,  with  102  red  gems,  like
rubíes,  172  emeralds,  10  fine  pearls,  set  in  it,  and  26  little  golden  bells
pendant.

Two  wheels,  one  of  gold  representing  the  sun,  the  other  of  silver
bearing  the  image  of  the  moon,  28  hands  in  circumference,  and  bearing
various  figures  of  animáis,  and  other  devices,  beautifully  worked  in
relief.

A head-dress  of  wood,  decorated  with  gold  and  gems,  with  2 5 golden
bells  pendant;  instead  of  a plume  it  had  a green  bird,  whose  eyes,  beak,
and  feet,  were  of  gold.

A gold  bracelet;  a small  sceptre  with  two  rings  of  gold,  set  with
pearls  at  the  ends.

Four  tridents,  tied  with  feathers  of  different  colours,  and  pearl
points  tied  with  gold  thread.

Several  deerskin  shoes,  sewn  with  gold  thread,  and  having  soles  of
brilliant  blue  and  white  stones.

A shield  of  wood  and  leather,  decorated  with  hanging  bells  of  gold,
and  having  gold  plates  in  the  centre,  carved  with  the  figure  of  the  god  of
war,  surrounded  by  four  heads  of  a lion,  a tiger,  an  eagle,  and  an  owl,
represented  with  their  hair  and  feathers.

Several  skins,  tanned  with  the  hair  and  feathers  on  them.

Twenty-four  curious  and  beautiful  golden  shields,  decorated  with
feathers  and  small  pearls,  four  others  of  feathers  and  silver.

Four  fish,  two  ducks,  and  other  birds,  made  of  gold.

Two  sea-shells,  imitated  in  gold,  and  a large  crocodile,  girt  with
golden  threads.

A large  mirror,  and  several  small  ones,  of  gold.

Several  head-dresses,  and  crowns  of  feathers  and  gold,  omamented
with  pearls  and  gems.

First  Letter  171

From  the  Rica  Villa  de  la  Vera  Cruz,  on  the  tenth

July,  1519-

Several  large  plumes  of  beautiful  feathers,  of  various  colours,
spangled  with  gold  and  small  pearls.

Several  fans;  some  of  gold  and  feathers,  others  of  feathers  alone,
but  all  very  rich.

A variety  of  cotton  robes;  some  all  white,  others  chequered  white
and  black,  or  red,  green,  yellow,  and  blue,  the  outsidebeing  shaggy,
and  the  inside  smooth,  without  colour.

A number  of  coats,  handkerchiefs,  bedcovers,  tapestries,  and  carpets
of  cotton  stuffs.

There  were  several  Mexican  books,  written  in  hieroglyphics,
on  their  paper,  which  was  about  the  consistency  of  light  pasteboard.
Peter  Martyr  describes  them  as  folding  tablets,  and  says  of  the  writing,
“ Sunt  characteres  a nosíris  valde  dissimilis,  Egypteas  fere  formas  cemu-
lantur"  ( De  Insulis  nuper  inventis).

Gomara  says  the  paper  was  made  of  cotton,  and  a kind  of  gum,  or
paste ; sometimes  also  of  aloe  leaves ; Peter  Martyr  describes  it  as  made
of  fine  crushed  bark,  kneaded  together  with  a gum.

APPENDICES

173

APPENDIX  I.

The  first  attack,  of  which  Cortes  makes  no  mention  was  made
at  Catoche,  just  before  dawn,  March  6th.  The  Indians  fought  with
great  fury,  in  spite  of  the  fire-arms  which  they  heard  for  the  first  time,
and  were  repulsed  only  with  difficulty,  after  they  had  wounded  fifteen
Spaniards.  Bemal  Diaz  relates  that  fifteen  Indians  were  killed,  and
two  were  captured,  who  were  afterwards  baptised  Christians,  under
the  ñame  of  Melchor,  and  Julián,  by  the  chaplain  Fray  Alonzo  Gon-
zález. The  Spaniards  looted  the  temples  and  houses  of  their  idols
and  golden  omaments.  The  Indians  at  Champoton  repeated  in-
quiringly  the  words  “Castelan?  Castelan?"  and,  by  gestures,  asked
if  the  strangers  carne  from  the  East.  Orozco  y Berra  (vol.  iv.,  cap.
i.,)  says  that  they  connected  the  arrival  of  the  unknown  guests  with
the  prophecy  of  Kukulcan  (Quetzalcoatl) , foretelling  the  coming  of
bearded  white  men  from  the  land  of  the  rising  sun,  and  also  that  they
had  knowledge  of  Spaniards,  from  the  time  of  the  wreck  of  Valdivia’s
men,  whom  they  had  probably  helped  to  sacrifice  and  eat.

The  Spaniards  passed  an  anxious  night,  listening  to  the  noisy
preparations  of  the  Indians  for  battle,  and  in  Consulting  vainly  to
disco  ver  some  escape.  At  dawn,  a hand-to-hand  fight  was  fiercely
waged,  the  Indians  showing  no  fear  of  fire-arms,  and  driving  the
retreating  Spaniards  into  the  sea.  Fifty  Spaniards  were  killed,
and  one,  Alonzo  Bote,  and  a Portuguese,  were  captured  alive.  Bemal
Diaz  says  that  every  soldier  but  one  had  from  one  to  four
wounds,  for  which  the  only  dressing  was  fat  taken  from  the  dead
Indians;  he  himself  had  three  and  Francisco  Hernández  de  Córdoba
had  twelve  wounds.  The  ñame  of  Mala  Pelea  was  given  the  place  to
commemorate  this  disaster.

The  Spaniards  found  here  the  crosses  which  excited  such  interest
and  speculation  that  later  a whole  literature  grew  up  to  explain  them.
Francisco  Hernández  de  Córdoba  had  also  seen  crosses  in  Cozumel
(Bemal  Diaz,  cap.  iii.,  Oviedo,  lib.  xvii.,  cap.  viii.;  Gomara,  Hisí.
de  las  Indias , cap.  Iii.,  Las  Casas,  Hist.  Apolog.,  cap.  cxxv.).

The  crosses  found  in  various  parts  of  México  were  of  several  kinds.
Those  discovered  in  the  western  coast  provinces,  show  a Buddhistic
type,  while  those  in  the  eastem  parts  are  like  either  the  simple  Latin  or
Greek  shapes.  The  cross  at  Metztitlan  had  the  Tau  form,  while  the
famous  one  at  Palenque  presents  no  features  by  which  it  may  be
accurately  classified,  and  has  been  thought  to  be  an  astronomical

175

176

Letters  of  Cortes

sign,  or  an  emblem  of  the  four  winds.  That  the  cross  was  an  object
of  cult  amongst  the  Indians  is  certain,  though  there  is  much  disagree-
ment  amongst  authorities  as  to  its  origin,  age,  and  significance.  Bemal
Diaz  says  that  if  it  was  of  Christian  origin  and  meaning,  the  natives
had  forgotten  them,  and  Oviedo,  who  even  regarded  the  existence  of
these  crosses  as  afable,  maintainedthat  if  they  did  exist,  and  the  Indians
ever  had  known  why  they  venerated  them,  they  had  long  since  lost,
their  knowledge.  (Oviedo,  lib.  xvii.,  cap.  viii.).  Gomara  described
the  cross  seen  at  Cozumel  as  the  rain-god,  and  said  that  quails  were
sacrificed  before  it  (Gomara,  Hist.  de  las  Indias,  cap.  liv.).

The  cross  was  an  instrument  of  punishment  among  the  Egyptians,
Persians,  Macedonians,  Greeks,  and  Romans,  as  also  among  Buddhist
peoples.  Hardly  an  ancient  religión  is  found  in  which  some  form  of
cross  does  not  appear  as  a symbol . Among  the  Aryan  races,  two
crossed  sticks  were  the  emblem  of  the  sacred  fire,  produced  by  friction
called  pramatha,  from  which  comes  the  ñame  Prometheus,  of  Vedic  ori-
gin. The  Tau  borne  by  Isis,  symbolised  the  rainy  season  (henee  fertility)
in  Abyssinia,  and,  in  the  Egyptian  cult,  was  the  emblem  of  fecundation,
(phallus  of  Osiris).  Among  the  Jews,  the  cross  had  no  sacred  char-
acter,  but  was  on  the  contrary,  the  vilest  instrument  of  capital
punishment.

APPENDIX  II.

This  “making  a requirement was  at  once  a naive  and  arrogant
formality  by  which  the  Spaniards  sought  to  give  legal  sanction  to  their
high-handed  invasión  and  claims  on  the  Indians’  submission.  By  a
bull  dated  May  4,  1493,  Alexander  VI.  gavein  donationto  the  Spanish
sovereigns  all  lands  which  might  be  discovered  in  the  new  world,
defined  by  a line  drawn  one  hundred  leagues  west  of  the  Azores  and
Cape  Verde  Islands.  A convention  was  afterwards  signed  between
Spain  and  Portugal  at  Tordesillas,  removing  the  line  seventy  leagues
further  westward.

Martin  V.  had  made  a similar  grant  to  the  Portuguese  in  the  East
Indies  in  1420,  which  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  Nicholas  V.  and
Calixtus  III.  Orozco  y Berra  observes  that,  whatever  may  be  thought
to-day  of  such  a concession,  it  is  certain  that  it  gave  an  undoubted
right  to  the  sovereigns  thus  favoured,  which  nobody,  whether  nation,
king,  or  philosopher,  disputed  at  that  time.  Pope  Alexander’s  bull
had  the  condition  attached,  that  the  natives  of  the  countries  discovered
should  be  Christianised.

Such,  therefore,  was  the  high  authority  on  which  the  “require-
ment” was  based.  The  form  of  this  document  was  invented,  and
drawn  up,  by  Dr.  Palacios  Rubios,  a jurisconsul,  and  member  of  the
Royal  Council,  for  the  use  of  Pedrarias  de  Avila,  Corning  afterwards
to'serve  in  the  other  colonies.

The  requirement  began  thus:  “On  the  part  of  the  King  Fernando,

and  of  the  Queen  Doña  Juana,  his  daughter,  Queen  of  Castile,  León,
etc.,  rulers  of  the  barbarous  natives : we  their  servants  notify  and
make  it  known,  to  you,  as  best  we  can,  that  the  living  and  eternal  God,
our  Lord,  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  a man  and  a woman,
of  whom  you,  and  we,  and  all  men  in  the  world  are  descendants,  as  well
as  all  who  shall  come  after  us.  However,  because  of  the  multitude
of  generations  issuing  from  these,  in  the  five  thousand  years  since  the
creation  of  the  world,  it  was  necessary  that  some  should  go  one  way,
and  some  another,  and  that  they  should  be  divided  into  many  king-
doms  and  provinces,  as  they  could  not  maintain  themselves  in  one.
God,  our  Lord  gave  the  charge  of  all  these  poeple  to  one  called  St.
Peter,  that  he  should  be  lord  and  superior  over  all  men  in  the  world,
and  that  all  should  obey  him,  and  that  he  should  be  the  head  of  all  the
human  race,  and  should  love  all  men  of  whatsoever  land,  religión,  and
belief ; and  He  gave  him  the  world  for  his  kingdom  ordering  his  seat  to  be
vol.  1. — 12  177

178

Letters  of  Cortes

placed  in  Rome,  as  the  place  best  suited  for  ruling  tbe  world ; but  he
was  permitted  also  to  establish  his  seat  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,
and  to  judge  and  govem  all  peoples,  Christians,  Moors,  Jews,  Gentiles,
and  of  whatsoever  other  sect  or  creed  theymight  bel’  etc.  (Orozco  y
Berra,  vol.  iv.,  p.  86.).

The  provisions  of  the  bull  giving  the  dominión  over  America  to
the  Spanish  sovereigns  then  followed.

The  notary  or  clerk  who  accompanied  the  expedition  read  this
unique  document,  indifferent  to  the  fact  that  the  Indians  could  not
comprehend  a word,  even  were  they  near  enough  to  hear,  and  some-
times  the  reading  would  take  place  with  no  Indians  at  all  present.
All  scruples  were  satisfied  by  this  formality,  and,  if  submission  did  not
follow,  the  commander  dealt  with  the  natives  as  with  obdurate  rebels
against  the  royal  authority.

The  way  for  the  conquest  was  already  prepared,  and  the  Aztec
historians,  as  well  as  the  earliest  Spanish  authorities,  record  that,  for
a number  of  years,  the  belief  that  the  hour  of  the  Empire’s  dissolution
was  at  hand  had  been  steadily  gaining  ground,  promoted  by  severai
events  which  were  regarded  as  supematural  wamings  of  the  approach-
ing  downfall.  The  lake  of  Texcoco  had  in  1510  risen  suddenly,  and
inundated  the  city,  without  any  visible  cause  or  accompanying  earth-
quake  or  tempest ; one  of  the  towers  of  the  great  teocalli  was  destroyed
in  1511  by  a mysterious  conflagration,  which  resisted  all  efforts  to
extinguish  it ; comets,  strange  lights  in  the  skies,  accompanied  by  shoot-
ing  stars,  and  weird  noises,  were  all  interpreted  by  the  astrologers
as  portents  of  gloomy  presage.  The  miraculous  resurrection,  three
days  after  her  death  of  Montezuma’s  sister,  the  Princess  Papantzin
who  brought  him  a prophetic  waming  from  her  tomb,  is  reported  at
length  by  Clavigero  (vol.  i.,  p.  289).  Legal  proofs  of  this  event,
which  occurred  in  1509,  were  afterwards  forwarded  to  the  Spanish
court.  The  princess  is  said  to  have  lived  many  years,  and  to  have
been  the  first  person  to  receive  Christian  baptism  which  she  did  in
Tlatelolco,  in  1524,  being  henceforth  known  as  Doña  Ana  Papantzin,
Her  life  became  a model  of  Christian  virtue.  Whatever  may  have
been  the  exact  nature  of  this  occuiTence,  the  reported  miracle  doubt-
less  rests  upon  some  fact  which  was  interpreted  by  the  Mexicans  as
supernatural.

APPENDIX  III.

The  messengers  carried  also  the  first  letter  of  Cortes,  which  has
never  since  been  found.  It  could  not  have  differed  essentially  from
the  letter  of  the  magistrates  of  Vera  Cruz,  as  the  one  was  intended
to  confirm  the  other.  Bemal  Diaz  says  that  Cortes’s  letter  made  no
mention  of  the  discoveries  of  Córdoba,  and  Grijalba,  and  that  he
wished  all  such  to  be  suppressed  in  the  collective  letter,  though  he  was
satisfied  with  its  references  to  himself.  After  assistíng  at  a mass,  said
by  Fray  Bartolomé  de  Olmedo,  the  two  envoys  sailed  on  July  16,
1519,  and  they  took  with  them  the  royal  fifth  of  all  the  gold,  besides
the  other  treasures  which  Cortes  had  induced  the  men  to  surrender,
in  order  to  make  up  an  imposing  gift  to  the  Emperor.  By  Bemal
Diaz,  the  sailing  date  is  once  given  as  the  ióth  of  July,  and  in  another
place  as  the  6th;  Gomara  gives  the  2Óth.  They  were  enjoined  to  sail  by
the  channel  of  the  Bahamas,  and  to  avoid  Cuba,  but  they  disobeyed
this  waming,  and  stopped  several  days  at  Marien,  where  Montejo
had  a property  near  by.  They  renewed  their  supplies  at  this  place,
and  showed  some  of  the  treasure  to  a servant,  besides  which,  Montejo
also  wrote  to  a former  overseer  of  his,  Juan  de  Reja,  who  had  mean-
while  passed  into  Diego  Velasquez’s  Service,  and  as  through  him  the
govemor  leamed  of  what  was  happening,  he  promptly  dispatched
a vessel  to  overhaul  the  messengers,  and  bring  them  back;  but  he  was
too  late.  The  envoys  landed,  early  in  October,  1512,  but  Benito  Mar-
tin, a friend  and  agent  of  Velasquez’s,  was  already  advised  of  their
coming,  and  lodged  a complaint  with  the  Casa  de  Con  trac  tac  ion  in
Seville,  in  which  he  described  Cortes  as  a rebel  against  his  superior’s
authority , and  asked  for  the  arrest  of  the  envoys,  and  the  sequestration
of  the  letters,  and  the  treasure.  He  found  a ready  ally  in  Rodríguez
de  Fonseca,  Bishop  of  Burgos,  who  was  omnipotent  as  President  of
the  Royal  Council  for  the  Indies,  a warm  friend  and  supporter  of
Velasquez’s,  with  whose  family  his  own  was  about  to  be  connected
by  a marriage.

Peter  Martyr,  who  was  then  at  Court,  and  noted  every  circum-
stance  of  interest,  mentions  the  arrival  of  the  two  envoys  in  December
as  recent,”  which  might  mean  that  he  had  only  recently  heard  of  it.
All  authorities  agree  that  they  got  a rough  reception  from  the  Bishop
of  Burgos,  and  saw  the  Emperor  only  in  March,  1520,  after  many
difficulties.  This  audience  was  at  Tordesillas,  where  His  Majesty
was  then  paying  a visit  to  his  mother,  Doña  Juana,  before  proceeding

179

1 8o

Letters  of  Cortes

to  Santiago  de  Compostella.  Bernal  Diaz  would  seem  to  be  the
original  authority  for  the  erroneous  statement  that  Charles  V.  was  in
Flanders  at  this  time,  which  has  been  repeated  by  many  later  histo-
rians.  Charles  had  arrived  in  Spain  in  Nov.  1517.  Peter  Martyr,
however,  says  that  the  Emperor  had  then  already  seen  the  gold  and
presents  from  México,  which  confirms  another  authority,  who  States
that  while  they  were  stopped  by  the  Bishop  in  Seville,  Martin  Cortes,
the  father  of  Femando,  and  an  official  of  the  Royal  Council,  who  was
friendly,  one  Nuñez  contrived  to  forward  duplicates  of  the  despatches
to  the  Emperor,  and  a memorial  describing  the  Bishop  of  Burgos’s
behaviour,  and  the  sequestration  of  the  treasures.  The  Emperor  was
well  impressed  by  the  letters,  and  ordered  the  gifts  to  be  sent  on  to
him.  He  was,  however,  so  absorbed  with  business  of  importance,
prior  to  quitting  the  country  for  Germany  to  assume  the  imperial
crown,  that  he  left  without  giving  a decisión.  The  envoys  followed
him  to  La  Coruña  and  there  exists,  in  the  archives  of  Simancas,  the
deposition  given  under  oath  before  Dr.  Carbajal,  member  of  the  Royal
Council  for  the  Indies,  by  Francisco  Fernandez 'Puertocarrero,  dated,
Coruña,  April  30,  1320,  copied  by  Prescott,  Appendix  VII.  The
memorial  of  Benito  Martin  is  found,  according  to  Prescott,  in  the  collec-
tion  of  MSS.,  made  by  Don  Vargas  Ponce,  sometime  president  of  the
Academy  of  History.

APPENDIX  IV.

Human  sacrifices  were  very  general  among  all  the  Mexican  tribes,
at  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  and  the  description  here
given  of  the  horrible  temple  rites  is  in  no  way  exaggerated,  but  is  in-
deed  rather  meagre.  The  practice  is  traced,  by  some  historians,  to
the  tribe  of  the  Mexi,  which  descended  from  Tenoch,  son  of  Iztacmix-
coatl,  the  progenitor  of  the  Nahoa  family,  but,  with  what  justice,
does  not  clearly  appear,  as  this  people  may  have  received  it  from  some
tribe  or  race  preceding,  or  allied,  to  them.  Prisoners  taken  in  war
were  the  most  highly  prized  victims,  but  failing  these,  or  for  the  cele-
bration  of  minor  festivals,  slaves  were  easily  bought,  or  were  offered  by
their  owners  for  the  purpose.  Small  infants  were  also  commonly  sold
by  their  mothers,  and  instances  of  free-born  men  offering  them-
selves  as  victims,  for  one  motive  or  another,  were  not  unknown.
The  victims  were  frequently  drugged,  in  such  wise  that  they  went  un-
consciously,  or  even  willingly  to  the  altar.  If  a great  festival,  requir-
ing  many,  and  choice,  victims,  fell  in  a time  of  peace,  war  would  be
undertaken  upon  any  frivolous  pretext,  in  order  to  procure  the  desired
offerings.

The  rites  were  carefully  prescribed,  and  were  of  the  most  solemn
description.  DiíTerent  kinds  of  sacrificial  stones  were  used  for  difíerent
classes  of  victims;  the  usual  one  called  techcatl  is  described  by  Veladés
( Rhetorica  Christianá)  as  “ Mensa  quadrata  magna  non  et  splendida
habent  singula  latera  longitudinem  trium  ulnarum  non  absimilis  lapidéis
illis  quce  Ínter  Romana  monumento  ad  huno  seruantur."

This  table-shaped  stone  was  about  waist  high,  and  stood  as  an  in-
verted pyramid.  Six  priests  officiated,  five  of  whom  held  the  arms,
legs,  and  head,  of  the  victim,  who  was  stretched  upon  the  stone  in  such
wise  as  to  throw  his  chest  well  forward.  These  five  had  their  faces
and  bodies  painted  black,  with  a white  line  around  the  mouth ; their
hair  was  bound  up  with  a leather  band,  and  omamented  with  tufts  of
coloured  papers;  their  vestment  was  a white  dalmatic,  striped  with
black.

The  sixth  priest  Vas  the  celebrant  whose  vestment  varied  according
to  the  feast,  or  the  deity,  to  be  propitiated.  His  head  was  adorned  with
coloured  plumes,  and  in  his  ears  were  goldenjornaments,  set  with  green
stones,  while  a blue  stone  was  set  in  his  under  lip.  Pronouncing  the
words  of  the  ritual,  he  plunged  a sharp  knife,  made]  of  silex,  into  the
victim’s  breast,  and,  quickly  thrusting  his  hand  into  the  opening,

181

182

Letters  of  Cortes

tore  out  the  beating  heart,  which  he  first  elevated,  and  then  deposited
at  the  feet  of  the  image  of  the  god.  Sometimes  the  heart  was  placed
in  a vase,  and  left  standing  on  the  altar,  or  it  might  be  buried,  or  pre-
served  with  divers  ceremonies,  as  a relie,  or  it  might  be  eaten  by  the
priests;  the  fresh  blood  was  smeared  on  the  lips  of  the  idols.  If  the
victim  were  a prisoner  taken  in  battle,  his  head  was  given  to  the  priests,
to  be  kept  as  a trophy,  the  entrails  were  fed  to  the  dogs,  and  the  other
parts  of  the  body  were  cooked  with  maize,  and  offered  in  small  pieces
to  the  guests  invited  to  partake  by  the  giver  of  the  sacrificial  feast.

The  warrior  who  had  captured  the  victim  in  battle  could  not  eat  of
the  latter’s  flesh,  as  a sort  of  spiritual  relationship  was  held  to  exist
between  them,  not  dissimilar  to  that  of  a sponsor  and  his  god-child  in
Christian  baptism,  or  even  closer,  for  the  flesh  of  the  victim  was  con-
sidered  also  as  the  very  flesh  of  the  captor.  The  eating  of  this  human
body  was  not  an  act  of  gluttonous  cannibalism  alone,  but  was  believed
to  have  mystic  significance,  the  flesh  having  undergone  some  mysterious
transmutation,  by  virtue  of  the  sacrificial  rite,  and  to  be  really  conse-
crated;  it  was  spoken  of  also,  as  the  true  body  of  the  deity,  to  whom
it  was  offered,  and,  also,  as  the  “food  of  soul.”  None  but  chiefs,  and
distinguished  persons,  specially  designated,  were  permitted  to  partake
of  the  sacramental  feast,  which  was  celebrated  with  much  ceremony
and  gravity.  If  the  victim  were  a slave,  the  rites  were  similar,  but
simpler.  Orozco  y Berra,  in  the  first,  and  the  third  volumes  of  his
authoritative  work,  gives  the  fullest,  and  most  interesting  information
on  human  sacrifices  amongst  the  Mexicans.

SECOND  LETTER

183

SECON D LETTER

Sent  to  his  Sacred  Majesty,  the  Emperor  of  Our  Realm,
by  the  Captain- General  of  New  Spain,  called  Don  Fer-
nando Cortes,  in  which  he  gives  an  account  of  the  countries
and  innumerable  provinces  which  hechas  discovered  in
Yucatán,  from  the  year  1519  to  the  present  time,  and  has
subjected  to  the  Crown  of  His  Royal  Majesty.  He  makes
special  relation  of  a very  great,  and  very  rich,  province
called  Culua,  in  which  there  are  many  great  cities,  and
marvellous  edifices,  having  much  commerce  and  wealth.
Amongst  these  there  is  eme  more  marvellous  and  richer
than  all  the  others,  called  Temixtitan,  which  by  marvellous
art  has  been  built  on  a great  lake;  of  which  city  and  pro-
vince, a very  great  lord,  called  Montezuma,  is  king;  in  which,
things,  frightful  to  be  heard,  were  suffered  by  the  Captain,
and  the  Spaniards.  He  describes  at  length  the  vast  do-
minión of  the  said  Montezuma,  and  its  customs  and  cere-
monies,  and  how  he  is  served.

Very  Great  and  Powerful,  and  Very  Catholic  Prince,
Most  Invincible  Emperor,  Our  Lord.  In  a ship,  which  I
despatched  from  this  Your  Sacred  Majesty’s  New  Spain,
on  the  sixteenth  of  July  1519,  I sent  to  Your  Royal  High-
ness  a very  long  and  particular  account  of  everything
which  had  happened  from  the  time  of  my  arrival  here
until  that  time;  this  said  account  was  taken  by  Alonzo
Hernández  Puertocarrero,  and  Francisco  de  Montejo,
procurators  of  the  Rica  Villa  de  la  Vera  Cruz,  which
I had  founded  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Royal  Highness.

185

i86

Letters  of  Cortes

Having  had  no  opportunity  since  then,  not  only  for  the
want  of  ships,  and  being  myself  occupied  in  the  con-
quest  and  pacification  of  this  country,  but  also  because
nothing  has  been  heard  of  the  said  ships  and  the  pro-
curators,  I have  related  nothing  more  to  Your  Majesty
conceming  what  has  since  been  done.  God  knows  the
pain  which  this  has  caused  me,  for  I have  wished  that
Your  Highness  should  understand  the  affairs  of  this
country,  which  is  so  great  and  important,  since,  as  I have
already  said  in  my  other  account,  it  is  no  less  worthy
to  warrant  your  assuming  anew  the  title  of  Emperor,  than
is  Germany,  of  which,  by  the  grace  of  God,  Your  Sacred
Majesty  already  possesses  the  title.

It  would  entail  going  on  indefinitely,  were  I to  at-
tempt  to  tell  Your  Highness  all  the  particulars,  and  every-
thing  relating  to  these  parts  and  new  kingdoms,  and
everything  in  them  worthy  to  be  told;  I beg  Your  Sacred
Majesty  to  hold  me  pardoned,  if  I do  not  give  so  full  an
account  to  Your  Highness  as  I ought,  because  neither
my  ability,  ñor  my  opportunity  at  this  time,  favour  my
doing  so.  I shall,  nevertheless,  endea vour  to  tell  Your
Highness  the  truth  in  the  best  manner  possible,  and  what,
for  the  present,  is  necessary  that  Your  Majesty  should
know;  and  I must  likewise  crave  Your  Highness’s  pardon
if  I do  not  recount  all  that  is  necessary,  the  precise  when
and  how,  and  if  I should  not  specify  some  ñames,  not
only  of  cities  and  towns,  but  also  of  provinces  which,
giving  themselves  for  your  subjects  and  vassals,  have
ofíered  their  allegiance  to  Your  Majesty.  This  I beg,
because,  in  a certain  recent  misfortune,  of  which  I will
hereafter  in  this  writing  give  a full  account  to  Your
Highness,  I have  lost  all  my  papers,  and  the  official
agreements,  which  I had  made  with  the  natives  of  this
country,  besides  many  other  things.

In  my  other  account,  Most  Excellent  Prince,  I told
Your  Majesty  of  all  the  cities  and  towns  which  until  then

Second  Letter

187

had  oflered  themselves  to  your  royal  service,  and  which
I held  subjugated  and  conquered  for  you.  I also  men-
tioned  that  I had  information  of  a great  lord  called
Montezuma,1  of  whom  the  natives  of  this  country  had
told  me,  and  who  lived,  according  to  their  computation
of  distances,  about  ninety  or  a hundred  leagues  from
the  coast  and  port  where  I had  disembarked;  and  that,

• Muteczuma,  Motezuma,  Motecuhzoma  are  some  of  the  various
forms  used,  but,  amongst  the  several  spellings  of  the  Aztec  sovereign  s
ñame,  it  seems  simpler  to  adopt  the  one  sanctioned  by  the  best  English
and  American  usage — Montezuma.

Montezuma  Xocoyotzin  was  one  of  the  six  sons  of  the  King  Axay-
acatl  (a.d.  1469-81),  and  was  unanimously  chosen  by  the  electors  to
succeed  his  únele,  Ahuitzotl,  from  amongst  the  eligible  princes,  who,
in  that  instance,  were  his  own  five  brothers,  and  the  seven  sons  of  the
deceased  emperor.  Montezuma  II  assumed  the  appellation  of  Xoco -
yotzin ” upon  his  accession,  signifying  “younger,  to  distinguish  him
from  the  eider  Montezuma,  Ilhuicamina.  Prescott  gives  his  age  as
twenty-three  at  the  time  of  election,  but  I prefer  to  follow  the  authority
of  the  Tezozomoc  MS.,  given  in  Orozco  y Berra,  which  States  that  he
was  bom  in  1486  and  was  henee  thirty-four  years  oíd.

His  early  career  was  that  of  a successful  soldier,  from  which  he
passed  into  the  priesthood,  rising  to  the  grade  of  a pontiff.  At  that
time  he  was  held  in  great  veneration  by  the  people,  as  one  who  received
revelations  from  the  gods,  and  his  strict  life  was  a model  to  his  fellows.
It  is  related  that,  when  the  news  of  his  election  to  the  imperial  throne
was  brought  to  him,  he  was  found  sweeping  the  steps  of  the  temple
whose  altars  he  served.  His  temperament  was  theocratic;  he  ruled
sternly,  and  ill-brooked  opposition,  or  even  counsel,  but  he  was  princely
in  recompensing  faithful  Service.  He  had  embellished  his  capital,
but  the  liberality  which  built  an  aqueduct,  a hospital,  and  new  temples
in  the  city,  cost  the  subject  provinces  dear,  and  Montezuma  being  both
despotic  and  a heavy  tax-levier,  was  more  feared  than  loved  by  his
people  and  allies.  Loving  order,  he  understood  the  Science  of  govern-
ment,  but  his  finer  qualities  were  marred  by  his  inordinate  pride,  and
most  of  all  by  the  ferocious  superstition  which  finally  lost  him  his  throne
and  his  life.  The  policy  he  adopted  with  Cortes  was  fatal,  and  shows  us
the  pitiful  figure  of  the  monarch  struggling,  not  against  the  power
of  an  invading  forcé,  but  taken  in  the  coils  of  his  own  superstition,  and
reduced  to  a humble  suppliant,  offering  rich  bribes  to  the  man  he
could  have  annihilated.  The  treasures  he  thus  incautiously  exposed,
argued  the  existence  of  still  greater  in  reserve,  and  whetted  the  Span-
iard’s  craving  for  more.

An  account  of  Montezuma’s  death  will  be  found  in  a later  note.

i88

Letters  of  Cortes

confiding  in  the  greatness  of  God,  and  relying  on  the
power  of  Your  Highness’s  Royal  ñame,  I had  decided
to  go  and  see  him,  wherever  he  might  be.  I even  re-
member  that  I offered,  so  far  as  this  lord  was  concerned,
to  accomplish  the  impossible,  for  I vowed  to  Your  Royal
Highness,  that  I would  have  him  prisoner,  or  dead,  or
subject  to  the  Royal  Crown  of  Your  Majesty.

With  this  purpose  and  determination,  I left  the  city
of  Cempoal, 1 which  I had  named  Seville,  on  the  sixteenth
Cortes  Be-  August,  with  fifteen  horsemen,  and  three
gins  his  hundred  foot  soldiers,  all  equipped  for  war,  as
March  to  best  I was  able,  and  as  time  permitted.  I left
in  the  town  of  Vera  Cruz,  two  horsemen,  and
one  hundred  and  fifty  men,  engaged  in  building  a fort,
which  I have  now  almost  finished,  and  I left  all  that
province  of  Cempoal,  and  all  the  neighbouring  mountain
regions  near  the  said  town,  which  contained  some  fifty
thousand  warriors,  and  fifty  towns  and  forts,  all  well
pacified,  and  secure,  and  very  devoted  as  loyal  vassals
of  Your  Majesty,  such  as  they  have  been,  and  are,
until  now.  According  to  my  information,  they  were
subjects  of  that  lord,  Montezuma,  by  forcé,  and  since  a
short  time  only,  and,  when  they  learned  from  me  of  Your
Highness’s  great  and  royal  power,  they  declared  they
wished  to  become  vassals  of  Your  Royal  Majesty,  and  my
friends,  and  they  prayed  me  to  protect  them  against  that
great  lord,  who  held  them  subject  by  forcé  and  tyranny,
and  took  away  their  sons,  to  kill  and  sacrifice  them  to  their
idols;  and  making  many  other  complaints  against  him.
Thus,  they  are,  and  have  continued,  very  firm  and  loyal
in  the  Service  of  Your  Highness,  and  I believe  they  will

a Cempoal.  Found  with  many  variations  of  spelling  such  as
Cenipoal,  Cempoalla,  Zempoala,  etc.  The  town  was  situated  between
the  two  rivers  Chatcalacac  and  Actopan,  a little  more  than  a league
from  the  sea.  It  was  a well  built  town  in  the  midst  of  a fertile  coun-
try,  four  leagues  from  Vera  Cruz;  and  still  preserves  its  Indian  ñame.
A.  Spanish  lad  of  twelve  was  left  at  Cempoal  to  learn  the  language.

ezuma's  palace.
ale  of  Tezcatlipoca.

ry*  ,

:e  of  Axayacatl  (Spanish  quarters).
t temple.

:e  of  Montezuma  I..  Ilhuicamina.

:e  of  Tlilancolqui.
sreat  square.
igerie.

et-place  of  México.

utlalamacoyan  (teocalli),  present  site  of

S.  Cathenne,  Martyr.

snahuac  (teocalli).

ing-place  of  Montezuma  and  Cortes.

ale  of  Atzacualco.

e of  Xacaculco  (Quauhtemotztn’s  residence
during  the  siege).
et-place  of  Tlatelolco.

¡ale  of  Tlatelolco.
ale  of  Xoluco.

;e  of  Techautzinco.

e of  Tolteacalli  (site  of  the  Church  of  the
Martyrs).

e of  Toltecaacaplan  (Alvarado’s  leap).
mee  hall  (present  church  of  banta  Ana).

>le  of  Cihuatecpan  or  Xochotilla  (present  S.
Francisco).

>le  of  Coyon acazco  also  called  Amaxac.
antitech  : final  stand  of  the  Mexicans,  where
the  present  Church  of  the  Conception  stands.
le  of  Apahuaztlan.
le  of  Nomoxco.
le  of  Petlacalli.

’ss  of  Xoloc.
huaico.

PLAN  OF  MEXICO  TENOCHTITLAN
h rom  Conquista  de  AI  exico,  vol.  iv. , by  Orozco  y Berra

PSSPftSn

coico  (teocalli}.

Second  Letter

189

always  remain  so,  not  only  to  escape  from  his  tyranny,
but  also  because  they  have  always  been  well  treated  and
favoured  by  me.  For  the  greater  security  of  those
who  remained  at  Vera  Cruz  I brought  some  of  their
principal  men,  and  some  of  their  people  with  me,  who
have  been  not  a little  useful  to  me  on  the  road.

I believe  I have  already  written  to  Your  Majesty,  in
my  first  account,  that  some  of  my  company,  who  had
been  servants  and  friends  of  Diego  Velasquez,  were  vexed
by  what  I had  accomplished  in  the  Service  of  Your  High-
ness,  and  some  of  them  even  wanted  to  rebel,  and  desert
me  in  the  country;  especially  four  Spaniards  who  were
called  Juan  Escudero,  Diego  Cermeño,  a pilot,  Gonzalo
de  Ungria,  also  a pilot,  and  Alonzo  Peñate.  These,  as  they
voluntarily  confessed,  had  determined  to  seize  a brigan-
tine,  then  in  the  port,  with  a certain  quantity  of  bread
and  meat,  to  kill  the  master  of  it,  and  return  to  the  island
of  Femandina,  that  they  might  report  to  Diego  Velasquez
that  I was  sending  to  Your  Royal  Highness  the  ship,  which
I sent  with  what  it  contained,  and  the  course  it  would
take.  This  was  to  enable  the  said  Diego  Velasquez  to
put  ships  on  guard,  for  the  purpose  of  capturing  it,  as
he  did  when  he  afterwards  carne  to  know  it,  for,  as  I
was  informed,  he  sent  a caravel  after  the  said  ship,  which
would  have  been  captured,  if  it  had  not  already  passed.
And  they  likewise  confessed,  that  other  persons  shared
the  same  wish  to  wam  the  said  Diego  Velasquez.  Having
seen  the  confessions  of  these  delinquents,  I punished  them
according  to  justice,  and  as  it  seemed  to  me  the  needs
of  the  times,  and  the  interests  of  Your  Royal  Highness’ s
Service  demanded.

Besides  those,  who  acted  thus  because  they  were
servants  and  friends  of  Diego  Velasquez,  there  Destruction
were  others  who  wanted  to  leave  on  see-  of  the
ing  how  large  and  populous  the  country  Fleet
was,  while  the  Spaniards  were  so  few.  Believing

190

Letters  of  Cortes

that,  if  I left  the  ships  there,  they  would  revolt  with
them,  and,  all  those  of  like  mind  deserting,  I would  be
left  almost  alone,  by  which  the  great  Service  which  I had
rendered  to  God  and  Your  Highness  in  this  country  would
be  undone,  I determined,  on  the  pretext  that  they  were
unseaworthy,  to  have  the  said  ships  beached. 1 Thus,
everybody  lost  hope  of  ever  leaving  the  country,  and  I
set  out  on  my  march,  securely,  without  fear  that,  when
I tumed  my  back,  the  people  whom  I had  left  in  the
town  would  fail  me.

Eight  or  ten  days  after  having  beached  the  ships,  and
when  I had  gone  to  the  city  of  Cempoal,  which  is  about
four  leagues  distant,  whence  to  continué  my  march,  they
brought  me  news  in  that  town,  that  four  ships  were
running  along  the  coast,  and  that  the  captain,  whom  I
had  left  there,  had  gone  out  to  them  in  a boat.  I had

1 The  destruction  of  the  ships  is  one  of  the  most  dramatic  epi-
sodes  in  the  eventful  history  of  the  conquest,  and  Cortes,  in  reporting
it  to  the  Emperor,  assumes  exclusively  the  credit  of  the  heroic  decisión
and  its  execution,  but  throughout  his  narrative  he  is  chary  of  ever
mentioning  anybody  but  himself.  Gomara  naturally  gives  the  same
account  and  Prescott  accepts  his  versión,  as  do  other  reputable  his-
torians.  Bemal  Diaz,  who  figures  always  as  the  great  objector  and
corrector,  contradicts  this  account  very  positively,  and  says  that  the
destruction  of  the  ships  was  decided  upon  after  a general  discussion,
and  that  Cortes  was  unwilling  to  accept  any  responsibility  either  for
their  demolition  or  for  their  cost  if  there  should  later  arise  a necessity  to
pay  for  them  to  their  rightful  owners.  He  refutes  with  emphatic  scom
Gomara’s  assertion  that  Cortes  feared  to  tell  the  soldiers  of  his  inten-
tion  to  push  into  the  interior  in  search  of  the  great  Montezuma,  ex-
claiming:  “ What  sort  of  Spaniards  are  we,  not  to  want  to  push  ahead,
but  to  stop  where  we  had  no  hardships  or  fighting!”  The  Relación
of  Andrés  de  Tapia  (who  was  also  an  eye-witness)  agrees  with  Bernal
Diaz.  Puertocarrero  replied  in  La  Coruña  in  the  same  sense  as  his
companion  Montejo  (April  29,  1520),  stating  that  the  proposal  to  de-
stroy  all  but  three  of  the  ships  carne  from  the  captains  of  them,  who
declared  them  to  be  unseaworthy,  and  even  the  three  to  be  of  doubtful
valué.  Puertocarrero  and  Montejo  sailed,  as  has  been  said,  on  July
ióth,  with  the  treasure  and  the  letters  which  were  dated  July  ioth,  so
that  the  discovery  of  the  conspiracy,  and  the  punishment  of  its  authors,
and  the  destruction  of  the  ships,  all  took  place  in  those  six  days.

Second  Letter

191

been  told  that  they  belonged  to  Francisco  de  Garay, 1
Lieutenant,  and  Govemor  of  the  Island  of  Jamaica,  and
had  come  to  make  discoveries.  My  captain  had  told
them,  that  I had  already  settled  the  country  in  the  ñame
of  Your  Highness,  and  had  laid  out  a town  about  a league
from  where  the  said  ships  were,  where  they  could  go  and
make  their  arrival  known  to  me,  and  there  make  any
repairs  they  might  need.  He  said  he  would  conduct
them  in  his  barque  to  the  port,  pointing  out  to  them
where  it  was.  They  had  answered  him,  that  they  had
already  seen  the  port,  having  passed  in  front  of  it,  and
that  they  would  do  as  he  said,  so  he  had  retumed  with
the  barque,  but  the  ships  had  not  followed  him  ñor  come
to  the  port.  They  had  still  sailed  along  the  coast,  and,  as
they  had  not  entered  the  port,  he  did  not  know  what  object

Clavigero  believes  that  Cortes  induced  some  of  the  pilots  to  scuttle
one  or  two  of  the  ships,  and  to  then  come  to  him  representing  the  others
as  unseaworthy  from  being  three  months  in  port.

Señor  Orozco  y Berra  is  doubtless  right  in  believing  that  the  idea
of  destroying  the  ships  originated  with  Cortes,  who  adroitly  suggested
it  in  such  wise,  and  with  such  arguments,  that  it  carne  back  to  him  as  a
spontaneous  proposal  from  the  others,  prompted,  or  at  least  supported
by  the  opinions  of  the  pilots  and  ship-captains  that  the  vessels  were
unsound.  Such  artífice  was  not  alien  to  his  diplomacy,  for  he  usually
contrived  that  he  should  appear  to  interpret  the  popular  will  as  well
as  to  serve  the  royal  interests  in  all  his  undertakings.

1 Francisco  de  Garay  sailed  with  Columbus  on  his  second  voyage.
Las  Casas  speaks  of  his  great  wealth,  and  says  that  he  had  five  thousand
Indians  solely  to  look  after  his  pigs.  He  went  to  Spain  as  procurator  for
San  Domingo,  and  retumed  as  Lieut-Governor  of  Jamaica.  When  the
newsof  the  Córdoba  and  Grijalba  expeditions  became  the  excitement
of  the  day,  Garay  sent  out  an  exploring  party  under  command  of  Diego
de  Camargo.  This  discovered  the  Panuco  región,  and,  continuing
thence  about  one  hundred  leagues  towards  Florida,  finally  retumed
to  Jamaica.  The  Emperor  Charles  V.  granted  him  faculties  for  further
enterprises,  and  the  title  of  adelantado  of  the  new  countries  he  dis-
covered. Garay  was  one  of  the  most  cruel  oppressors  of  the  Indians
and  it  was  said  of  him  that  he  carne,  not  to  popúlate,  but  to  depopulate ,
Jamaica.  This  expedition,  of  which  Cortes  writes,  was  composed  of
four  ships  carrying  two  hundred  and  seventy  men,  with  horses  and
cannon,  and  had  sailed  from  Jamaica  towards  the  cióse  of  1518,  under
command  of  Alonzo  Alvarez  de  Piñeda.

192

Letters  of  Cortes

they  had  in  view.  Within  an  hour  after  hearing  what
the  said  captain  made  known  to  me,  I left  for  Vera  Cruz,
where  I leamed  that  the  ships  were  anchored  about  three
leagues  down  the  coast,  and  that  no  one  had  landed.  I
then  went  along  the  coast  with  some  people,  to  recon-
noitre,  and,  when  I was  about  one  league  from  the  ships,
I met  three  men  from  them,  amongst  whom  there  was
one  who  called  himself  a notary  public,  who  told  me  he
had  brought  the  other  two  as  witnesses  to  a certain  noti-
fication  and  requirement  with  which  he  said  their  captain
had  ordered  him  to  serve  me  on  his  behalf,  and  which
he  had  brought  with  him.  They  desired  to  make  it
known  to  me,  that  he  had  discovered  that  country,  and
wished  to  settle  in  it,  for  which  reason  he  required  me
to  define  the  boundaries  with  him,  as  he  wished  to  make
his  settlement  down  the  coast  five  leagues  below  Nautical, 1
which  is  a city  now  called  Almería,  twelve  leagues  from
Vera  Cruz.  I answered  that  their  captain  should  come
with  his  ships  to  the  port  of  Vera  Cruz,  where  we  could
talk,  and  I would  learn  his  intentions,  and,  if  his  ships
and  people  needed  anything,  I would  help  them  with
what  I could.  Inasmuch  as  he  said  that  he  had  come  in
the  Service  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  I only  desired  that
occasion  should  be  given  me  to  serve  Your  Highness,
and,  in  helping  him,  I believed  that  I would  do  this.
They  replied,  that  neither  the  captain,  ñor  any  of  his
people,  would  on  any  account  land  anywhere  that  I
might  be.

Believing  that  they  must  have  done  some  harm  in
the  country,  inasmuch  as  they  were  afraid  to  come  before
me,  when  night  carne  on  I hid  myself  near  the  coast,  op-
posite  to  where  the  said  ships  were  anchored.  There
I remained  concealed  until  the  next  day  about  noon,
expecting  the  captain  or  his  pilot  to  come  on  shore,  from

1 The  present  Nautla  in  the  State  of  Vera  Cruz;  Piñeda  named  it
Almeria.

Second  Letter

T93

whom  I would  learn  what  they  had  been  doing,  and  where
they  had  been,  intending,  that  if  they  had  done  any  harm
in  the  country,  to  send  them  to  Your  Sacred  Majesty ; but
neither  they  ñor  anyone  else  ever  landed.  Seeing  that
they  did  not  come,  I made  some  of  my  Spaniards  put
on  the  clothes  of  those  who  had  come  to  make  me  the
requirements,  and  directed  them  to  go  to  the  beach,  and
signal  to  those  on  board  the  ships.  As  soon  as  these
were  observed  by  those  on  board,  a barque,  carrying  some
ten  or  twelve  men,  armed  with  arquebuses  and  muskets,
carne  towards  the  land.  The  Spaniards  who  were  calling
from  the  shore  retired  from  the  beach  to  some  bushes
near  by,  as  if  to  take  shelter  in  their  shade,  and  thus  four
landed,  two  men  with  arquebuses,  and  two  with  muskets.
These  were  surrounded,  and  taken  prisoners  by  the  people
whom  I had  placed  on  the  beach.  One  of  the  captives,
the  master  of  the  ship,  tried  to  fire  his  weapon,  and  would
have  killed  my  captain  of  Vera  Cruz,  but  that,  by  Our
Lord’s  will,  the  fuse  did  not  bum.  Those  who  had  re-
mained  in  the  boat,  put  to  sea,  but  before  they  could
reach  their  ships,  sail  had  been  set,  without  waiting,  or
troubling  to  hear  anything  about  them.

1 leamed  from  my  prisoners,  how  they  had  arrived  at
a river, 1 which  is  some  thirty  leagues  down  the  coast,  after
passing  Almería,  and  had  had  a good  reception  there
from  the  natives,  and  had  traded  for  some  provisions,
and  seen  some  gold  which  the  Indians  wore,  although  it
was  scarce,  that  they  had  obtained  by  trading,  as  much
as  [three  thousand  castellanos 1 worth  of  gold,  and  that
they  had  not  landed,  but  had  seen  certain  towns  on  the
banks  of  the  river  so  near,  that  they  could  distinguish
them  well  from  the  ships,  and  that  there  were  no  buildings
of  stone,  the  houses  being  of  thatch,  but  very  high  and
well  built.  All  this  I knew  more  fully  afterwards,  through

> The  Panuco.

2 The  castellano  was  equivalent  to  $1.167.

VOL.  I.— 13

194

Letters  of  Cortes

that  great  lord  Montezuma,  and  from  certain  interpreters
from  that  country  whom  he  had  about  him.

I took  these  men,  and  an  Indian  whom  they  had
brought  in  their  ships  from  the  said  river,  and  sent
Negotiations  them,  with  other  messengers  of  the  said  Monte-
with  the  zuma,  to  the  lord  of  that  river,  called  Panuco,
Cacique  of  to  win  him  to  Your  Sacred  Majesty’s  Service.
Panuco  With  them,  he  sent  me  back  a chief  who,  it
was  said,  was  chief  of  a town,  who  brought  me  on  behalf
of  his  lord  certain  stuffs,  and  stones,  and  feathers,
telling  me  that  he  and  all  his  people  would  be  very  happy
to  become  vassals  of  Your  Majesty,  and  my  friends.  I in
tura  presented  them  with  some  things  from  Spain,  which
so  satisfied  him,  that,  when  some  other  ships  of  the  said
Francisco  de  Garay  arrived  (of  which  I will  make  relation
to  Your  Highness  hereafter),  the  said  Panuco  sent  me
word  that  those  ships  were  in  another  river,  some  five
or  six  days’  journey  from  that  place,  asking  that  I should
tell  him  whether  those  who  had  come  in  them  belonged  to
me,  so  that  he  might  give  them  whatever  they  needed,
and  that  he  already  had  sent  some  women  and  chickens
and  other  provisions.  I marched,  Very  Powerful  Lord,
three  days  through  the  country  and  lordship  of  Cempoal,
where  I was  well  received,  and  entertained  by  the  natives,
and,  on  the  fourth  day,  I arrived  in  the  province  called
Sienchimalen, 1 where  there  is  a very  strong  town  ably

fortified.  It  is  situated  on  the  side  of  a steep  mountain
slope,  and  is  approached  by  a single  pass  of  steps,  by
which  it  is  impossible  to  enter  except  on  foot,  and
even  thus  with  great  difficulty,  if  the  natives  wished  to
defend  it.

In  the  plains,  there  are  many  hamlets  and  villages,
with  five,  three,  and  two  hundred  families,  which  will
fumish  altogether  some  five  or  six  thousand  warriors , and
they  are  subject  to  the  rule  of  Montezuma.  Here,  they

1 Xochimilco  was  the  correct  ñame ; it  is  now  called  Xico.

Second  Letter

I9S

received  me  very  well,  and  courteously  gave  me  the
necessary  provisions  for  my  march,  saying  that  they  knew
very  well  I was  going  to  see  Montezuma  their  lord,  and
that  I might  rest  assured  he  was  my  friend,  for  he  had
ordered  them,  in  every  case,  to  give  me  a good  reception,
as  by  so  doing  they  would  render  him  a Service.  I
thanked  them  for  their  courtesy,  saying  that  Your
Majesty  already  knew  of  Montezuma,  and  had  ordered
me  to  visit  him.

I next  crossed  a pass,  which  is  at  the  end  of  this
province,  and  to  which  we  gave  the  ñame  of  Puerto  del
Nombre  de  Dios,1  on  account  of  its  being  the  first  we
llave  traversed  in  this  country.  So  steep,  and  so  high,  is
it,  that  in  all  Spain  there  is  none  so  difficult.  I passed
with  entire  safety,  and  without  any  opposition,  and,  on  the
descent  of  the  said  pass,  there  are  other  hamlets  belong-
ing  to  a town  and  fort,  called  Ceycocnacan,2  which  also
belongs  to  Montezuma.  Here  we  were  as  well  received
as  we  had  been  at  Sienchimalen,  and  the  people  repeated
what  the  others  had  told  us  of  Montezuma’s  good  will,
and  I satisfied  them  in  the  same  manner.

Thence  I travelled  three  days  through  a desert,  which,
on  account  of  its  sterility,  and  want  of  water,  and  the
very  great  coid  which  prevails,  is  uninhabitable ; where
God  knows  all  the  trouble  which  the  men  suffered  from
hunger  and  thirst,  especially  from  tempests  of  hail  and
rain  which  overtook  us,  making  me  fear  that  many  people
would  die  of  coid;  and  certain  Indians  from  the  Island  of
Fernandina  did  die,  because  they  were  ill-clad.  At  the
end  of  these  three  days,  we  traversed  another  pass, 3
although  not  so  steep  as  the  first  one,  on  the  top  of  which
was  a small  tower  like  an  oratory,  where  were  kept  certain

1 Now  called  Paso  del  Obispo.

2 Another  ñame  which  is  spelled  according  to  the  caprice  of  each
writer;  its  proper  ñame  was  Ixhuacan,  now  spelled  Ishuacan,  and
the  tower  is  some  ten  leagues  from  Xalapa.

3 Identified,  with  probability,  as  the  Sierra  del  Agua.

196

Letters  of  Cortes

idols,  and  around  the  tower  were  more  than  a thousand
loads  of  cut  wood,  very  well  piled  up,  so  we  named  it
the  Paso  de  la  Leña.  On  the  descent  of  the  said  pass,
between  some  very  rough  mountain  chains,  there  is  a
very  populous  valley,  the  people  of  which  seem  to  be

poor.

After  having  marched  about  three  leagues  through  the
settlement  without  seeing  anything  of  them,  I arrived  at
a somewhat  more  level  place,  where  it  seemed  the  chief
of  that  valley  lived,  and  which  had  the  largest  and  best
built  houses  we  had  till  then  seen  in  this  countrv,  for
they  were  of  hewn  stone,  quite  new,  and  had  very  large
and  beautiful  rooms,  and  many  well-arranged  apartments.
This  valley  and  its  people  are  called  Caltanmi.1  I was
very  well  received,  and  lodged  by  the  chief  and  his
people.  After  having  spoken  to  him  on  the  part  of  Your
Majesty,  and  told  him  the  cause  of  my  coming  to  these
parts,  I asked  him  if  he  also  was  a vassal  of  Montezuma  s,
or  if  he  belonged  to  some  other  dominión.  He,  wondering
at  what  I asked  him,  answered  me,  “And  who  is  not  a
vassal  of  Montezuma’s?”  as  much  as  to  say  that  he  was
the  sovereign  of  the  world.  I then  replied,  and  told  him
about  the  vast  power  and  jurisdiction  of  Your  Majesty,
and  of  all  the  many  and  greater  lords  than  Montezuma
who  were  vassals  of  Your  Highness,  even  considering  it  as
no  small  privilege  to  be  so,  as  would  Montezuma,  and  all
the  natives  of  these  parts,  likewise  have  to  be;  and  thus
I required  him  to  be  because  he  would  then  be  much
honoured  and  favoured,  while  on  the  contrary  if  he  were
unwilling  to  obey  he  would  be  punished.  In  recognition
of  his  vassalage,  I asked  him  to  give  me  some  gold  to  be
sent  to  Your  Majesty,  when  he  answered  that  he  had

» The  ñame  of  the  valley  was  Caltanmic,  and  that  of  the  town,
Xocotla;  its  chief,  Olintetl,  was  so  enormous  that  he : had  to  be M*up-
ported  when  he  walked.  The  Spamards  named  him  the  trembler  ,
There  was  a strong  Mexican  garrison  at  Xocotla,  as  it  was  a fortified
place  on  the  frontiers  of  hostile  Tlascala.

Second  Letter

197

gold,  but  would  not  give  it  unless  Montezuma  commanded
him  to  do  so,  but  that,  if  the  latter  did  so  order,  then  he
would  give  the  gold,  and  his  person,  and  all  that  he
possessed.  In  order  not  to  scandalise  him,  ñor  to  hinder
my  designs  and  progress,  I dissembled  with  him  the
best  I could,  saying  that  very  soon  Montezuma  would
order  him  to  give  the  gold  and  everything  he  had.

The  two  other  chiefs  who  had  lands  in  this  valley  carne
to  see  me  here,  one  of  whom  lived  four  leagues  below,  and
the  other  two  leagues  above,  and  they  gave  me  certain
collars  of  gold  of  little  weight  or  valué,  and  seven  or
eight  female  slaves.

After  stopping  four  or  five  days  there,  I left  them  very
contented,  and  went  to  the  city  of  the  other  chief,  two
leagues,  as  I said,  up  the  valley  which  place  is  called
Y ztacmastitan. 1 This  lordship  has  an  extensión  of
three  or  four  leagues,  one  house  after  another  along  the
valley,  and  on  the  banks  of  a small  river  which  flows
through  it.  The  house  of  the  chief  stands  on  a very  high
hill,  protected  by  a better  fort  than  can  be  found  in  half
Spain,  well  surrounded  with  walls,  and  barbicans,  and
moats,  and,  on  the  top  of  this  hill,  there  is  a town  of  about
five  or  six  thousand  inhabitants,  with  very  large  houses,
whose  people  are  somewhat  richer  than  those  of  the  lower
valley.  Here  I was  also  very  well  received,  and  its  chief
told  me  that  he  likewise  was  a vassal  of  Montezuma.  I
stayed  in  his  house  three  days,  not  only  for  the  purpose
of  resting  the  people  from  the  hardship  they  had  endured
in  the  desert,  but  also  to  wait  for  four  messengers,  natives
of  Cempoal,  wrho  had  come  with  me,  and  whom  I had  sent
from  Caltanmi  to  a very  large  province  called  Tascalteca,2

1 Ixtacmaxtitlan,  in  the  present  State  of  Puebla.  For  convenience’
sake  the  town  was  removed  from  the  hill-top  in  1601  and  built  on
its  present  site  lower  down.

2 Tlascala  was  a republic  composed  of  four  federated  States,  each
ruled  by  its  chief,  while  federal  affairs  and  legislation  were  undertaken
by  the  Senate,  which  was  composed  of  the  nobles  of  all  four  States,

198

Letters  of  Curtes

which  they  told  me  was  very  near  there,  as  in  truth  it
was.  They  had  also  told  me,  that  the  natives  of  this
province  were  their  friends,  and  very  deadly  enemies  of
Montezuma,  and  that  they  wished  me  to  confedérate
with  them,  as  they  were  a large  and  powerful  people
(whose  country  was  bounded  on  all  sides  by  that  of  the  said
Montezuma,  with  whom  they  were  in  continual  warfare) ,
and  would  be  glad  to  help  me  if  the  said  Montezuma
should  oppose  me.  These  messengers  did  not  retum
during  all  the  time  that  I remained  in  that  valley,  which
was  in  all  eight  days.  I asked  the  others,  who  had  come
with  me  from  Cempoal,  how  it  was  that  the  messengers
did  not  return,  and  they  answered  that  it  was  a great
distance,  and  that  they  could  not  get  back  so  quickly.
Seeing  that  their  retum  was  delayed,  and  that  the
chiefs  of  Cempoal  were  so  positive  about  the  friend-
ship  and  fidelity  of  the  people  of  that  province,  I set
out  for  it.

and  their  over-lords.  The  city  was  likewise  divided  into  four  districts,
in  which  people  of  the  sepárate  tribes  lived,  each  under  its  own  chief .
As  the  country  was  hemxned  in  on  all  sides  by  the  Aztec  Empire,  there
was  no  commerce,  and  the  chief  pursuit  was  agriculture.  The  Tlas-
calans  were  a brave,  hardy,  and  war-like  people,  well  advanced  in  mili-
tary  Science,  and  having  something  very  like  a feudal  system  of  chiv-
alry,  in  that  the  different  chiefs  or  lords  had  each  his  own  standard
and  crest,  and  the  soldiers  were  uniformed  in  their  leaders’  colours
and  owed  him  allegiance;  Xicotencatl’s.  device  was  a white  heron  on  a
rock.  There  were  also  orders  of  knighthood  conferred  for  bravery.
Their  important  part  in  the  conquest  is  noticed  elsewhere,  and  will
also  appear  in  the  course  of  Cortes’s  own  narration.  One  of  his  first
desires  was  to  forcé  Christianity  upon  them,  but  Fray  Bartolomé  de
Olmedo  wisely  restrained  his  untimely  zeal,  and,  beyond  explaimng
the  Christian  doctrines,  no  constraint  was  attempted.  The  Tlascalans
conceded  that  the  Christian  God  must  very  likely  be  a good  one,  and
they  were  ready  to  admit  him  to  a place  in  their  own  pantheon,  some-
thing after  the  manner  of  the  Emperor  Hadrian  and  other  Romans.
The  four  chiefs  ruling  the  confederation  at  that  time  were  Xicotencatl,
lord  of  Titzatlan,  Maxixcatzin,  lord  of  Ocotelolco,  Tlehuexolotzin,  lord
of  Tepeticpac,  and  Citlalpopocatzin,  lord  of  Quiahuitztlan.  (Clavigero,
Storia  Antica,  lib.  viii.)  {Vide,  Camarga,  Hist.  Tlascala;  and  Torque-
mada,  lib.  3-16.)

Second  Letter

199

At  the  exit  of  the  said  valley,  I found  a great  wall
of  dry  stones,  about  nine  feet  high,  which  crossed  the
whole  valley  from  one  mountain  to  the  other;  The  Wall  of
it  was  twenty  feet  thick,  and  had  a stone  Tiascaia
parapet,  a foot  and  a half  broad  on  the  top  so  that
one  could  fight  from  above.  The  single  entrance  was
about  ten  paces  broad,  and  in  this  entrance  one  wall
doubled  over  the  other,  in  the  form  of  a ravelin , narrowlv
contracted  within  about  forty  paces,  in  such  wise  that
the  entrance  was  curved  instead  of  being  straight. 1
Having  inquired  the  object  of  that  wall  they  told  me
that  it  was  built  because  they  were  on  the  frontier  of  that
province  of  Tascalteca,  whose  people  were  Montezuma’s
enemies,  and  constantly  at  war  with  him.

The  natives  of  this  valley  besought  me,  that,  inasmuch
as  I was  going  to  see  Montezuma  their  lord,  not  to  pass
through  the  country  of  these  his  enemies,  who  per-
chance  might  be  ill-disposed  towards  me,  and  do  me
some  mischief,  whereas  they  would  guide  me  always
through  the  land  of  the  said  Montezuma  without  going
out  of  it,  and  that  in  it  I would  always  be  well  received.
The  Cempoalans,  however,  advised  me  not  to  do  this,
but  to  go  through  Tascalteca,  for  what  these  people  were
telling  me,  was  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  me  off  from
the  amity  of  that  province;  they  told  me  that  all  Monte-
zuma’s people  were  bad  and  treacherous,  and  would  en-
snare  me  in  places  whence  I could  never  escape.  As  I
had  more  confidence  in  the  Cempoalans  than  in  the

1 Bemal  Díaz  contradicts  Cortes’s  statement  that  this  wall  was
built  of  dry  stones,  and  states  that  the  stones  were  so  firmly  United
by  such  strong  bitumen  that  it  required  pick  axes  to  sepárate  them.
Clavigero,  in  his  notice  on  the  remains  of  military  architecture  in
México  (üb.  vii.  Sec.  xxvi.),  gives  faith  to  Bemal  Diaz  who  professed
to  have  carefully  studied  the  construction,  though  he  brusquely  char-
acterises  the  oíd  soldier  as  an  idiot  ( sic ) for  not  distinguishing  between
bitumen  and  the  mortar  used  by  the  Mexicans.  Lest  the  ingenious  con-
struction of  the  aperture  be  not  clearly  enough  explained  by  Cortes,
the  accompanying  drawing  will  show  its  character.

200

Letters  of  Cortes

others,  I took  their  advice,  and  chose  the  road  to  Tas-
calteca,  conducting  my  people  with  the  best  caution  I
could.

Accompanied  by  about  six  horsemen,  I rodé  ahead
about  half  a league  or  more,  little  thinking  of  what  after-
wards  happened,  but  to  reconnoitre  the  country,  so  that
if  anything  should  befall  I might  perceive  it  in  time  to
take  measures,  and  prepare  my  people.  After  having
gone  four  leagues,  and  while  ascending  the  hill,  two
horsemen  who  went  ahead  saw  certain  Indians,  wearíng
the  feathers  they  are  accustomed  to  in  war,  armed  with
their  swords,  and  lances,  and  rodelas,  who  took  to  flight
when  they  perceived  the  horsemen.  At  the  same  time  I
carne  up,  and  had  them  called  to  to  return  without  fear.

I advanced  to  where  there  were  about  fifteen  Indians,  who,
massing  themselves,  began  to  attack  us  with  their  swords,
calling  to  their  other  people  who  were  in  the  valley,  and
fighting  with  us  in  such  wise  that  they  killed  two  horses,
and  wounded  three  others  and  two  horsemen.  In  the
midst  of  this,  others  carne  up,  numbering  about  four  to
five  thousand.  Meantime,  eight  other  horsemen,  besides
those  whose  horses  were  killed,  joined  me,  charging  on
them  until  the  other  Spaniards,  to  whom  I had  sent
a summons  by  a horseman,  arrived.  We  did  them  some
harm,  in  the  charges  we  made,  killing  fifty  or  sixty  of
them,  without  suffering  any  hurt  ourselves,  although
they  fought  with  great  courage  and  daring;  but,  as  we
were  all  on  horseback,  we  could  charge  them,  and  fall
back  in  safety.  When  they  saw  our  reinforcements
approaching,  they  retreated,  because  they  were  so  few,
and  left  us  the  field.

After  they  were  gone  certain  messengers  carne,  who
said  they  were  the  lords  of  the  said  province,  and  with
them  carne  two  of  the  messengers  whom  I had  sent.
These  explained  that  the  said  chiefs  did  not  know  any-
thing of  what  those  others  had  done,  as  they  belonged  to

Second  Letter

201

independent  communities,  and  had  acted  without  their
consent,  and  they  were  very  sorry  for  it,  and  would  pay
for  the  horses  they  had  killed,  and  they  wished  to  be  my
friends,  and  that  I could  go  on  freely,  for  I would  be  well
received  by  them  \iw  hoTa  bueiici,  viz.,  in  3 §oo
I answered  that  I was  very  thankful  to  them,  and  that
I would  consider  them  as  my  friends,  and  would  advance
as  they  advised.

That  night,  one  league  beyond  where  this  happened,

I was  obliged  to  sleep  in  a dry  river  bed  [baranca],  not
only  because  it  was  late,  but  also  because  my  Hostilities
people  were  tired.  I stayed  there  as  well  in  Tlascala
guarded  as  possible,  stationing  my  sentinels  and  scouts,
both  on  horseback  and  on  foot,  and  at  daybreak  I left,
carrying  my  van-guard  and  rear-guard  well  organised,
and  my  scouts  on  ahead.

Arriving  at  a very  small  village  just  at  sunrise,  the  two
other  messengers  carne  with  lamentations  saying  that
they  had  been  bound,  and  would  have  been  killed,  but
that  they  had  escaped  in  the  night.  At  not  two  stone  s-
throws  distance  a great  number  of  Indians  appeared  well
armed,  and  with  much  shouting  began  to  attack  us,  dis-
charging  many  darts  and  arrows  at  us.  When  I under-
took  to  make  my  requirements  in  due  form,  through  the
interpreters  whom  I had  brought  with  me,  and  before  a
notary  public,  the  more  diligent  I was  to  admonish  and
require  them  to  keep  the  peace,  just  so  much  the  more
diligent  were  they  in  committing  hostilities  upon  us,  and,
seeing  that  neither  requirements  ñor  protests  were  of  any
avail,  we  began  to  defend  ourselves  as  best  we  could,  and
thus  they  kept  us  fighting,  until  we  found  ourselves  in  the
midst  of  an  hundred  thousand  warriors,  who  surrounded
us  on  all  sides.  This  went  on  all  day  long,  until  about
an  hour  before  sunset,  when  they  retired.  In  this  fight  I
did  them  a good  deal  of  harm  with  about  half  a dozen
cannon,  and  five  or  six  muskets,  forty  archers,  and  thirteen

202

Letters  of  Cortes

horsemen,  who  had  been  left  to  me,  without  our  receiving
any  hurt  from  them,  except  the  labour  and  fatigue  of
fighting  and  hunger.  And  it  truly  appeared  that  it  was
God  who  battled  for  us,  because  amongst  such  a multi-
tude  of  people,  so  courageous,  and  skilled  in  fighting,  and
with  so  many  kinds  of  ofíensive  amas, 1 we  carne  out
unhurt.

That  night  I fortified  myself  in  a small  tower  of  their
idols,  which  stood  on  a small  hill,  and  afterwards,  at
daybreak,  I left  two  hundred  men  and  all  the  artillery
in  the  camp.  As  I was  the  attacking  party  I went  out
towards  evening  with  the  horsemen,  and  a hundred
foot  soldiers,  and  four  hundred  Indians  whom  I had
brought  from  Cempoal,  and  three  hundred  from  Yztac-
mastitan.  Before  the  enemy  had  time  to  assemble,  I set
fire  to  five  or  six  small  places  of  about  a hundred  houses
each,  and  brought  away  about  four  hundred  prisoners,
both  men  and  women,  fighting  my  way  back  to  my  camp
without  their  doing  me  any  harm.  At  daybreak  the
following  morning,  more  than  a hundred  and  fortv-nine
thousand  men,  covering  all  the  country,  attacked  our
camp  so  determinedly  that  some  of  them  penetrated

1 One  of  their  most  formidable  weapons  was  the  maquahuitl,
commonly  referred  to  by  the  Spaniards  as  a sword.  It  was  a stout
stick  or  club,  about  three  and  a half  feet  long,  set  with  a double  row
of  blades  made  of  the  stone  called  itztli,  as  sharp  as  razors.  The  war-
rior  carried  this  terrible  weapon  attached  to  his  wrist  by  a thong,  and
instances  of  a horse  being  disembowelled,  or  even  decapitated  at  a
single  blow,  are  given  by  many  early  writers.  The  blades  or  itztli
were  quickly  dulled,  but,  even  then,  such  a weapon  wielded  by  a strong
man  was  a fearsome  thing.

Their  darts,  which  are  so  frequently  mentioned,  were  short  lances,
whose  points  were  tipped  with  bone  or  copper,  or  simply  hardened  in
the  fire.  Clavigero  identifies  them  with  the  Román  Jaculum  or
Telum  Amentatum,  and  says  they  were  the  weapons  most  feared  by
the  Spaniards.  As  marksmen,  the  Mexican  bowmen  were  marvel-
lously  quick  and  accurate ; their  arrows  were  also  pointed  with  bone,  but,
singularly  enough,  there  is  no  mention  throughout  the  conquest  of
poison  being  used  on  them.

Second  Letter

203

into  it,  rushing  about,  and  thrusting  with  their  swords
at  the  Spaniards.  We  mustered  against  them,  and  Our
Lord  was  pleased  so  to  aid  us,  that,  in  about  four  hours,
we  managed  that  they  should  no  more  molest  us  in  oui
camp,  although  they  still  kept  up  some  attacks;  thus  we
kept  fighting  until  it  grew  to  be  late,  when  they  retired.

The  next  day  I again  went  out  before  daybreak,  in
another  direction,  without  having  been  observed  by  the
enemy,  taking  with  me  the  horsemen,  a hundred  foot-
soldiers,  and  the  friendly  Indians.  I burned  more  than  a
hundred  villages,  one  of  which  had  more  than  three  thou-
sand  houses,  where  the  vülagers  fought  with  me,  though
there  were  no  other  people  there.  As  we  carried  the
banner  of  the  Holy  Cross,1  and  were  fighting  for  our
Faith,  and  in  the  service  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  to  Your
Roval  good  fortune  God  gave  us  such  a victory  that  we
slew  many  people  without  our  own  sustaining  any  injury.
A little  after  mid-day  when  the  strong  forcé  of  the  people
was  gathered  from  all  parts,  we  had  retumed  victorious
to  our  camp.

Messengers  carne  from  the  chiefs  the  next  day,  saying
that  they  wished  to  become  vassals  of  Your  Highness  and
my  friends,  beseeching  me  to  pardon  their  past  fault;
and  they  brought  me  provisions,  and  certain  feather-
work  which  they  use,  and  esteem  and  prize.  I answered
that  they  had  behaved  badly,  but  that  I was  satisfied  to
be  their  friend,  and  pardon  them  for  all  they  had  done.

The  next  day  there  carne  about  fifty  Indians,  who,
it  seemed,  were  men  of  some  consequence  amongst
them,  saying  that  they  had  brought  us  food,  Fate  of  the
and  they  went  about  inspecting  the  entrances  Tlascaian
and  exits  of  our  camp,  and  some  huts  in  Spies

which  we  were  living.  The  Cempoalans  carne  and

1 The  banner  was  of  black  silk  bearing  the  amas  of  Charles  V.,
and  on  both  sides  a red  cross  surrounded  by  blue  and  white  rays.  The
legend  was  as  follows:  Amici  sequamur  Crucem  et  si  nos  fidem  habemus

vere  in  hoc  signo  viceremus.

204

Letters  of  Cortes

told  me  to  watch  them,  because  they  were  bad  men
who  had  come  to  spy  and  see  what  damage  they
could  do  us,  and  that  I might  rest  assured  they  had  come
for  no  other  purpose.  With  some  dissimulation,  I had
one  of  them  taken,  without  being  observed  by  the  others,
and  leading  him  and  the  interpreters  apart,  frightened
him  so  that  he  should  tell  me  the  truth.  He  confessed
to  me  that  Sintengal, 1 the  captain-general  of  this
province,  was  behind  one  of  the  hills  opposite  the  camp,
with  a great  number  of  people,  ready  to  fall  upon  us
that  night,  for  they  said  that  they  had  tried  by  day
against  us,  and  had  gained  no  advantage,  and  now  they
wished  to  try  by  night,  when  their  people  would  fear
neither  our  horses,  our  cannon,  ñor  our  swords ; and  they
had  been  sent  in  order  to  examine  our  camp,  and  those
points  where  they  could  attack  us,  and  how  they  could
burn  the  straw  huts.  I at  once  had  another  of  the  said
Indians  taken,  and  also  asked  him,  and  he  confessed  the
same  as  the  other  in  the  same  words,  so  I took  another
five  or  six,  and  they  all  agreed  in  their  statements.  See-
ing  this  I had  all  the  fifty  taken,  and  cut  off  their  hands,
and  returned  them  to  their  chief,  ordering  them  to  say
to  him,  that,  by  day  or  night  or  at  any  or  all  times  he
might  come,  he  would  see  who  we  were.  I then  had  my
camp  fortified  as  best  I could,  and  posted  the  people  as
seemed  most  suitable,  and  we  rested  thus  on  our  guard
until  sunset.

When  it  was  growing  late,  our  opponents  began  to
descend  into  two  valleys,  thinking  they  were  surrounding
us  secretly,  and  to  get  nearer  to  us  for  carrying  out  their

■ Xicotencatl,  son  of  the  lord  of  Titzatlan,  was  a brave  and  able
commander.  He  bore  the  same  ñame  as  his  father,  which  has  led
some  writers  to  merge  the  two  into  one  person,  and  others  to  confuse
their  deeds.  The  father  was  a very  oíd  man,  thougb  he  was  pro-
bably  not  one  hundred  and  forty  years  oíd,  as  some  have  stated,
when  he  met  Cortes  he  asked  to  be  allowed  to  feel  his  face,  for  he
was  blind.

Second  Letter

205

intentions.  As  I was  on  my  guard,  however,  I saw  them,
and  it  seemed  to  me  that  it  would  be  very  dangerous  to
allow  them  to  approach  near  the  camp,  because  at  night
they  could  not  see  the  damage  I should  do  them  fiom  my
side,  and  they  would  approach  fearlessly,  and  also  because
in  not  seeing  them  some  of  the  Spaniards  might  be  some-
what  negligent  in  fighting.  I also  feared  that  they  might
set  fire  to  my  camp,  which  should  it  happen  would  be
most  disastrous,  and  none  of  us  could  escape,  henee  I
determined  to  go  out  and  meet  them  with  all  the  horsemen
and  cut  them  to  pieces,  thus  preventing  their  ap-
proach. And  so  it  happened,  that  when  they  discovered
we  were  coming  with  horses  to  attack  them,  without  stop-
ping  or  shouting,  they  fled  into  some  fields  of  maize,  with
which  the  country  was  almost  covered,  and  lightened
themselves  of  some  provisions  which  they  were  carrying
with  them,  for  the  feast  they  intended  to  celébrate,  if
this  time  they  destroyed  us  entirely.  They  left  us  in
security  that  night.  After  this  occurrence,  I remained
several  days  without  leaving  camp,  except  in  the  neigh-
bourhood,  to  repel  the  approach  of  some  Indians  who
gathered  to  jeer  at  us,  and  provoke  some  skirmishes.

When  we  had  somewhat  rested,  I made  a sally  one
night,  after  having  inspected  the  first  watch  of  the  guard,
taking  a hundred  foot,  the  friendly  Indians,  and  the
horsemen ; and  about  a league  from  our  camp  five  horses
and  mares  fell,  unable  to  go  on,  so  I sent  them  back.
Although  those  who  accompanied  me,  said  that  I ought
to  return,  as  this  was  an  evil  ornen,  I still  pushed  ahead,
confiding  in  God’s  supremacy  above  everything.  Before
daybreak  I fell  upon  two  towns,  in  which  I slaughtered
many  people,  but  I did  not  want  to  burn  the  houses,  so  as
to  avoid  attracting  the  attention  of  other  people  who
were  very  near.  When  day  dawned  I fell  upon  another
large  town,  which  contained  according  to  a count,  which
I ordered  to  be  taken,  more  than  twenty  thousand  houses,

2 00

Letters  of  Cortes

and,  as  I had  surprised  them,  I found  them  unarmed,
and  the  women,  and  children,  running  naked  through
the  streets;  and  we  did  them  some  harm.  Seeing  they
could  offer  no  resistance,  a certain  number  of  the  in-
habitants  carne  to  beseech  me  not  to  do  them  further
injury,  for  they  desired  to  become  vassals  of  Your  High-
ness,  and  my  friends,  and  they  recognised  that  they  were
at  fault  in  not  having  trusted  me,  but  that  henceforth  I
would  see  that  they  would  always  do  what  I commanded
them  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Royal  Highness,  as  your  very
trae  vassals.  Immediately  there  carne  to  me  more  than
four  thousand  of  them,  suing  for  peace,  and  they  took  us
out  to  a fountain  where  they  gave  us  good  food .

Thus  I left  them  pacified,  and  returned  to  our  camp,
where  I found  the  people  who  had  remained  there  much
frightened,  believing  I might  have  been  in  some  danger,
as  they  had  seen  the  horses  and  mares  retuming  the  night
before.  When  they  heard  afterwards  of  the  victory
which  God  had  been  pleased  to  give  us,  and  how  I had
left  those  towns  at  peace,  they  were  very  glad,  for  I
certify  to  Your  Majesty,  that  there  was  no  one  amongst
us  who  was  not  very  fearful  at  penetrating  so  far  into  this
country,  and  amongst  so  many  people,  where  we  were  so
entirely  without  hope  of  help  from  anywhere.

Indeed  I had  already  heard  with  my  own  ears,  pri-
vately,  as  well  as  publicly,  that  I was  a Pedro  Carbonero, 1
who  had  got  them  into  this  difficulty  from  which  they
could  never  get  out.  And  even  more,  I heard  it  said  in
one  of  the  huts  of  certain  companions  (I  being  in  a place
where  they  could  not  see  me),  that  if  I had  gone  mad,  and
was  going  whence  I could  never  escape,  they  need  not
do  the  same,  but  should  rather  retum  to  the  sea-coast,
and  that  if  I wished  to  return  with  them,  very  well,  but  if

i An  oíd  proverb  which  said:  “Pierre  le  Charbonnier  savait  bien
ou  il  était,  mais  il  ignorait  le  moyen  d’en  sortir” ; pointing  at  foolish
people  who  were  always  plunging  into  difficulties  from  which  they  never
knew  how  to  emerge.

Second  Letter

207

not,  to  leave  me.  This  was  often  required  of  me,  but  I
would  encourage  them,  telling  them  to  look  to  it  that
they  were  the  vassals  of  Your  Highness,  and  that  Span-
iards  were  never  found  lacking  anywhere,  and  that  we
were  in  a position  to  win  the  greatest  kingdoms  and
dominions  in  the  world  for  Your  Majesty.  I told  them,
moreover,  that  we  were  only  doing  what  we  were  obliged
to  do  as  Christians,  by  fighting  against  the  enemies  of  our
faith,  and  that  we  would  gain  the  glory  of  the  other  world,
while  in  this  we  would  obtain  the  highest  praise  and
honour,  such  as  till  our  time  no  generation  had  won ; and
that  they  must  perceive  that  we  had  God  on  our  side,  for
Whom  nothing  was  impossible,  as  they  might  recognise
in  the  victories  which  we  had  obtained,  where  so  man  y
of  our  enemy  had  been  slaughtered,  but  none  of  us.  I
told  them  other  things  of  the  same  kind  which  seemed
fitting,  and  with  these,  and  the  royal  favour  of  Your
Highness,  they  recovered  their  spirits,  and  I won  them
to  my  purpose,  and  to  do  as  I wished,  which  was  to
complete  the  undertaking  I had  begun.

The  following  day,  Sicutengal,  Captain  General  of
this  province,  carne  to  see  me  at  ten  o’ dock,  with
about  fifty  of  its  chiefs,  praying  me  on  his  peaceCon-
part,  and  on  that  of  Magiscatzin, 1 who  was  ciuded  at
the  principal  person  in  all  this  province,  and  Tlascala
on  behalf  of  many  other  lords,  that  I would  admit
them  to  the  royal  Service  of  Your  Majesty  and  to  my
friendship,  and  would  pardon  them  the  past  errors,
because  they  had  not  understood  who  we  were.  He  said
that  they  had  exerted  all  their  forces,  not  only  by  day,
but  also  by  night,  to  escape  being  subjected  to  anyone,
since  at  no  time  had  this  province  ever  been  so,  ñor  had
they  ever  had,  ñor  did  they  have,  any  master;  on  the
contrary,  they  had  always  lived  free  and  independent,

1 Maxixcatzin,  lord  of  the  State  of  Ocotelolco,  in  the  republic  of
Tlascala,  and  commander  in  chief  of  the  United  armies.

208

Letters  of  Cortes

since  immemorial  times,  and  had  always  defended  them-
selves  against  the  great  power  of  Montezuma,  of  his
father,  and  grandfather,  who  held  that  country  subjected,
but  had  never  been  able  to  hold  them  in  subjection,
though  they  had  them  surrounded  on  all  sides,  so  that
no  one  could  go  out  of  the  country.  He  said  also  that
they  ate  no  salt, 1 since  there  was  none  in  their  country,
ñor  were  they  allowed  to  go  to  buy  it  anywhere  else,  ñor
did  they  wear  any  cotton  clothing,  because  their  country,
on  account  of  its  coid,  did  not  produce  cotton,  and  they
were  deprived  of  many  other  things  on  account  of  being
so  shut  off.  They  had  endured  it,  and  held  it  as  better
thus  to  be  free,  rather  than  be  subjected  to  anyone;  and
they  had  wanted  to  do  the  same  with  me,  for  which  rea-
son,  as  several  had  already  stated,  they  had  tested  their
forces,  and  seeing  clearly  that  neither  these,  ñor  their
artífices,  could  avail  them  anything,  had  decided  that,
rather  than  die,  and  have  their  houses,  and  women,  and
children  destroyed,  they  would  become  vassals  of  Your
Highness.

I satisfied  them,  saying  that  they  must  recognise  that
they  were  to  blame  for  the  injury  they  had  sustained,
for  I had  come  to  their  country,  thinking  that  I carne  to
the  country  of  my  friends,  for  the  Cempoalans  had  as-
sured  me  that  they  were,  and  wished  to  be  so ; and  that  I
had  sent  my  messengers  ahead  of  me  to  let  them  know
that  I was  coming  and  wished  their  friendship,  and  that
without  replying  to  me  (coming  in  all  security) , they  had
attacked  me  on  the  road,  killed  my  two  horses,  and

i Called  by  the  Indians  “tequesquit.”  It  is  made  from  the
saltpetre,  which  was  largely  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ixtapala-
pan  and  Ixtapaluca  (Ixtabl  meaning  saltpetre),  and  fonned  an  import-
ant  article  of  commerce,  which  however  did  not  reach  the  Tlascalans
on  account  of  the  permanent  State  of  hostilities.  As  they  were  also
cut  off  from  the  sea,  salt  had  been  for  fifty  years  an  almost  unknown
luxury  amongst  them;  cotton  which  was  a product  of  the  tierra  caliente
was  for  the  same  reason  denied  them.

Second  Letter

209

wounded  others.  Moreover,  after  having  fought  with
me,  they  had  sent  their  messengers,  saying  that  what
had  happened  had  been  without  their  license  or  consent,
and  that  certain  communities  had  set  themselves  to  do
it  without  their  participation,  and  that  they  had  re-
proved  them  for  it,  and  desired  my  friendship.  Be-
lieving  this  to  be  true,  I had  told  them  that  I was  pleased,
and  that  they  would  surely  see  me  next  day  in  their
homes  as  in  the  houses  of  friends;  and  that  likewise  they
had  again  attacked  me  on  the  road,  and  fought  with  me
all  day  until  night  overtook  us,  notwithstanding  that
they  had  been  required  by  me  to  keep  the  peace.  I re-
minded  them  of  all  the  other  things  they  had  done  to
oppose  me,  and  many  others  which  I shall  leave  un-
mentioned,  so  as  not  to  weary  Your  Highness.  Finally
they  submitted  and  acknowledged  themselves  as  sub-
jects  and  vassals  of  Your  Majesty,  offering  their  persons
and  property  for  your  royal  Service;  and  such  they  did,
and  have  done  until  to-day,  and  will  always  do,  as  Your
Majesty  will  hereafter  see.

I remained  six  or  seven  days  without  leaving  that
place  and  camp,  because  I did  not  daré  to  trust  them.
They  besought  me  to  come  to  a large  city,  Description
where  all  the  chiefs  of  the  province  lived,  of  the  City
and  even  the  chiefs  themselves  carne  to  be-  ofTlascala
seech  me  to  come  into  the  city,  as  I would  be  well
received  there,  and  better  provided  with  everything
necessary  than  in  the  camp.  For  they  were  ashamed  that
I should  be  so  ill-lodged,  as  they  considered  me  their
friend,  and  they  and  I were  vassals  of  Your  Highness.
In  response  to  their  prayers,  I carne  to  the  city,  which  is
about  six  leagues  distant  from  the  dwelling  place  and
camp  I had  occupied,  and  is  so  large  and  admirable  that,
although  much  of  what  I might  say  I shall  omit,  the  little
which  I shall  say  is  almost  incredible ; for  it  is  much  larger
than  Granada,  and  very  much  stronger,  having  very

VOL.  I. 14

210

Letters  of  Cortes

good  buildings,  and  it  contains  a great  many  more  people
than  Granada  did  when  it  was  taken,  and  is  much  better
supplied  with  provisions,  such  as  bread,  birds,  game,  and
river-fish,  and  other  good  eatables  and  vegetables.  There
is  a market  in  this  city,  in  which  every  day,  above  thirty
thousand  souls  sell  and  buy,  without  counting  many
other  small  markets  in  different  parts  of  the  city.  Every-
thing  is  to  be  found  in  this  market  in  which  they  trade,
and  could  need,  not  only  provisions,  but  also  clothing
and  shoes.  There  are  jewellery  shops,  for  gold,  and
silver,  and  stones,  and  other  valuables  of  feather-work,  as
well  arranged  as  can  be  found  in  any  of  the  squares  or
market-places  of  the  world ; there  is  also  as  good  earthen-
ware  and  crockery  as  the  best  in  Spain.  They  also  sell
wood  and  coals,  and  herbs  to  eat,  and  for  medicinal
purposes.  There  are  houses  like  barbers’  shops,  where
they  wash  their  heads  and  shave  themselves;  there
are  also  baths.  Finally  there  prevail  good  order  and
politeness,  for  they  are  a people  full  of  intelligence  and
understanding,  and  such  that  the  best  in  Africa  does
not  equal  them.  This  province  contains  many  extensive
and  beautiful  valleys,  well  tilled  and  sown,  and  none
are  uncultivated.  The  province  is  ninety  leagues  in
circumference,  and,  as  far  as  I have  been  able  to  judge
about  the  form  of  government,  it  is  almost  like  that  of
Venice,  or  Genoa,  or  Pisa,  because  there  is  no  one  supreme
ruler.  There  are  many  lords  all  living  in  this  city,  and
the  people  who  are  tillers  of  the  soil  are  their  vassals,
though  each  one  has  his  lands  to  himself,  some  more
than  others.  In  undertaking  wars,  they  all  gather
together,  and  thus  assembled  they  decide  and  plan  them.
IHs  believed  that  they  must  have  some  system  of  justice
for  punishing  the  wicked,  because  one  of  the  natives  of
this  province  stole  some  gold  from  a Spaniard,  and  I told
this  to  that  Magiscatzin,  the  greatest  lord  among  them.
After  making  their  investigation,  they  pursued  him  to

Second  Letter

2 1 1

a city  which  is  near  there,  called  Churultecal,  whence
they  brought  him  prisoner,  and  delivered  him  to  me  with
the  gold,  telling  me  that  I might  chastise  him.  I thanked
them  for  the  dihgence  they  took  in  this,  but  told  them
that,  inasmuch  as  I was  in  their  country,  they  might
chastise  him  according  to  their  custom,  and  that  I did  not
wish  to  meddle  with  the  punishment  of  their  people
while  I was  in  their  country.  They  thanked  me  for  this,
and  took  him  with  a public  crier,  who  proclaimed  his
offence,  leading  him  through  the  great  market  place,
where  they  put  him  at  the  foot  of  a sort  of  theatre,  and
with  a loud  voice  again  published  his  offence.  And  all
having  seen  him,  they  beat  him  on  the  head  with  sticks
until  they  lálled  him.  We  have  seen  many  others  in  the
prisons,  who,  it  is  said,  were  confined  there  for  thefts,
and  other  off enees  they  had  committed.  According  to  the
visitation  which  I ordered  to  be  made,  this  province  has
five  hundred  thousand  householders,  besides  those  of
another  small  province,  called  Guazincango,  which  joins
it,  whose  people  live  as  these  do,  without  a rightful
sovereign,  and  are  no  less  vassals  of  Your  Highness  than
these  Tascaltecas.

Being,  Most  Catholic  Lord,  in  our  camp  in  the  country
while  I was  at  warfare  with  this  province,  there  carne
to  me  six  lords  from  amongst  the  principal  Embassy
vassals  of  Montezuma,  accompanied  by  about  andPres-
two  hundred  retainers,  telling  me  that  they  ents  from
carne  on  the  part  of  Montezuma  to  say  that Montezuma
he  wished  to  be  a vassal  of  Your  Highness,  and
my  friend.  He  sent  word  that  I should  say  what  I
wanted  him  to  give  to  Your  Highness  as  an  annual  trib-
ute, of  gold,  silver,  stones,  slaves,  cotton,  and  wearing
apparel,  and  other  possessions,  and  that  he  would  give  it
all,  if  only  I would  not  come  to  his  country,  because  it
was  very  sterile,  and  destitute  of  provisions,  and  he  would
be  sorry  if  I or  my  people  suffered  want.  He  sent  me  by

212

Letters  of  Cortes

them  about  a thousand  dollars  of  gold,  and  many  pieces
of  cotton  clothing,  such  as  they  wear.  They  remained
with  me  during  the  war  and  until  the  end  of  it,  and  well
saw  what  the  Spaniards  were  able  to  do.  They  knew  of
the  treaties  which  were  made  with  this  province,  and  the
allegiance  given  by  the  chiefs  of  all  the  country  to  the
Service  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty.  At  which,  as  it  ap-
peared,  they  showed  themselves  not  much  pleased,  for  they
worked  in  many  ways  to  embroil  me  with  this  people,
saying  that  nothing  they  had  told  me  was  trae,  ñor  was
the  friendship  they  had  swom  sincere,  and  that  they
formed  it  to  secure  me,  in  order  to  commit  treason  when
they  could  with  safety.  The  inhabitants  of  this  province
on  the  other  hand,  many  times  advised  me  not  to  trust
those  vassals  of  Montezuma,  because  they  were  traitors
who  carried  on  all  their  affairs  with  treacheries  and
tricks,  and  it  was  thus  they  had  subjected  all  the  country;
and  that  they  as  my  sincere  friends  and  persons  who  had
known  them  for  a long  time,  wamed  me  against  them.  I
was  not  a little  pleased  to  see  this  discord  and  want  of
conformity  between  the  two  parties,  because  it  appeared
to  me  to  strengthen  my  design,  and  later  I would  find
means  to  subjugate  them;  that  common  saying  “ De
monte ” etc.,  might  be  repeated,  and  I was  even  reminded
of  a scriptural  authority  which  says  “ Omne  regnum  in
seipsum  divisum  desolabitur.  ” So  I treated  with  the
one,  and  the  other,  and  privately  I thanked  both  for  the
advice  they  gave  me,  giving  to  each  the  credit  for  more
friendship,  than  to  the  other.

I had  been  in  the  city  twenty  days  or  more,  when  those
lords,  Montezuma’s  messengers,  who  had  always  re-
mained with  me,  told  me  that  I ought  to  go  to  a city  about
six  leagues  from  this  Tascaltecal,  called  Churultecal, 1

j Cholula,  sixty  leagues  distant  from  the  city  of  México,  was
the  sacred  city  of  Anahuac,  the  Jerusalem.  or  Mecca,  of  the  nations,
where  stood  (and  stands)  the  greatest  pyramid  in  México,  of  whose  con-

Second  Letter

213

as  its  natives  were  friends  of  Montezuma’s,  their  sovereign.
They  said  that  we  might  there  leam  his  pleasure,  whether
it  was  that  I should  go  to  his  country,  and  that  some  of
them  would  go  to  speak  with  him,  and  tell  him  what  I
had  told  them  and  retum  with  his  answer.

Although  they  knew  that  I had  there  some  of  his
messengers,  who  had  come  to  speak  with  me,  I told  them
that  I would  go,  and  would  leave  on  a certain  day  which
I made  known  to  them.  When  it  became  known  to  the
Tascaltecas  what  they  and  I had  agreed  upon,  and  how
I consented  to  go  with  them  to  that  city,  the  rulers  carne
to  me,  greatly  afflicted,  and  told  me  that  I must  not  go
on  any  account,  because  it  had  been  plotted  to  kill  me
and  my  men  in  that  city.  For  this  purpose,  they  said,
Montezuma  had  sent  fifty  thousand  men  from  his  country
(some  part  of  which  joins  with  that  city),  whom  they
kept  in  garrison,  two  leagues  from  the  city,  and  that  they
had  blocked  up  the  customary  high  road,  and  had  pre-
pared a new  one  with  many  pits,  in  which  sharp  stakes
and  wood  were  placed,  covered  over  in  such  a manner  that
the  horses  would  fall,  and  be  lamed;  many  streets  were
barricaded,  and  quantities  of  stones  were  collected  on
the  housetops,  so  that,  when  we  entered  the  city  they
might  attack  us  with  safety,  and  accomplish  their  pur-
pose. They  told  me,  that,  if  I wanted  to  confirm  all  they

struction  there  is  no  authentic  record.  The  form  of  govemment
there  was  theocratic,  and  the  priests  chose  a captain-general  to  com-
mand  the  army,  while  the  civil  affairs  were  administered  by  a council
composed  of  six  nobles.

The  Cholula  pyramid,  now  so  covered  with  earth,  and  overgrown
with  shrubs  and  trees,  that  its  artificial  character  and  architectural
lines  are  no  longer  discemible,  measures  at  the  length  of  its  base  1423
feet,  or  twice  the  length  of  Cheops;  the  square  of  the  base  covers  about
forty-four  acres,  and  the  fíat  area  on  the  summit  a little  more  than  one
acre.  The  chief  deity  worshipped  at  Cholula  was  the  mysterious
"fair  god”  Quetzalcoatl  (see  Appendix  III.,  at  the  cióse  of  this
Letter).  Bemal  Díaz  declared  that  Cholula  reminded  him  of  Valladolid
because  of  its  many  lofty  towers.

214

Letters  of  Cortes

said,  I might  judge  from  the  fact  that  the  chiefs  of  that
city  had  never  come  to  see  me,  ñor  to  speak  with  me,
though  they  were  so  near  to  this  city,  while  those  of
Guazincango  who  lived  farther  off  had  come,  and  if  I
sent  for  them  I would  see  they  would  not  come.  I
thanked  them  for  their  advice,  and  begged  them  to
fumish  me  persons  who  would  go  on  my  part  and  cali
the  chiefs.  They  did  so,  and  I sent  to  invite  them  to  come
and  see  me,  because  I wished  to  tell  them  certain  things
on  the  part  of  Your  Highness,  and  to  explain  to  them  the
cause  of  my  coming  to  this  country.

These  messengers  went,  and  delivered  my  message  to
the  chiefs  of  Churultecal,  and  two  or  three  persons  of
inferior  rank  returned  with  them,  and  told  me  that  they
had  come  on  the  part  of  those  chiefs  who  were  ill  and
could  not  come,  but  that  I might  tell  them  what  I de-
sired.  The  people  of  this  city  told  me  that  all  this  was  a
mockery,  and  that  those  messengers  were  of  mean  con-
dition,  and  in  no  wise  should  I leave  without  the  chiefs
of  that  city  first  coming  hither.  I told  those  messengers
that  an  embassy  from  such  a high  Prince  as  Your  Sacred
Majesty  could  not  be  given  to  such  persons  as  they  were,
and  that  even  their  chiefs  were  unworthy  to  hear  it.
They  should,  nevertheless,  appear  within  three  days
before  me  to  give  their  obedience  to  Your  Highness,  and
to  offer  themselves  as  your  vassals,  with  the  understanding
that,  if  they  did  not  come  within  the  time  fixed,  I should
fall  upon  them,  and  destroy  them,  and  proceed  against
them  as  against  rebels  who  refused  to  submit  to  Your
Majesty’ s authority.  I sent  them  an  order,  signed  with
my  ñame  and  that  of  a notary  public,  with  a full  ex-
planation  of  the  Royal  Person  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty,
and  of  my  arrival,  telling  them  how  all  these  parts,  and
many  other  greater  countries,  and  dominions,  belonged
to  Your  Highness,  and  how  those  who  desired  to  be  your
vassals  would  be  honoured  and  favoured,  and  how  on  the

Second  Letter

215

contrary  those  who  rebelled  would  be  punished,  accoi  ding
to  justice. 1

The  next  day,  almost  all  of  the  chiefs  of  that  City
carne,  and  told  me  that,  if  they  had  not  come  before,
it  was  because  the  people  of  this  province  Embassy
were  their  enemies,  and  that  they  did  not  from  Cho-
dare  to  enter  their  country  because  they  did  lulac^“*
not  consider  themselves  safe;  and  that  they
were  sure  that  they  had  told  me  some  things  respecting
them,  but  I must  not  give  any  credence  to  them,  because
they  spoke  as  enemies,  and  not  according  to  facts.  They
said  also  that  I should  go  to  their  city,  where  I would
discover  the  falsehoods  their  enemies  had  been  telling,
and  the  truth  of  what  they  themselves  assured  me;  and
that  from  thenceforth  they  gave  and  acknowledged
themselves  as  vassals  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  and  that
they  would  always  remain  such,  serving  and  contributing
in  everything  as  they  were  commanded  on  the  part  of

• Cortes’s  unfaltering  conviction  was  that  he  was  an  instrument
of  divine  justice,  and  he  acted  the  part  consistently,  determined
that  others  should  so  regard  him.  He  started  from  the  dogmatic
assumption  that  the  new  world  belonged  to  Spain  by  right  of  Pope
Alexander’s  bull  of  donation;  that  its  inhabitants  were  therefore  just
as  much  the  lawful  subjects  of  the  Crown  as  were  the  natives  of  Castile,
or  Granada,  and  that  for  them  to  refuse  obedience  was  rebellion.  The
native  chiefs  in  resisting  his  pretentions,  and  defending  their  countries,
became,  according  to  his  reasoning,  instigators  of  revolt  and  must  be
dealt  with  as  such.  Most  of  all,  the  people  were  practisers  of  idolatry,
in  peril  of  eternal  damnation,  whom  it  was  a chief  part  of  his  mission
to  rescue,  and  bring  into  the  knowledge  of  the  Faith.  He  held  him-
self  to  be  merciful,  in  that  he  invariably  invited  their  obedience,
by  explaining  what  a privilege  it  was  to  be  ruled  by  such  a mighty
sovereign  as  the  Emperor,  and  sought  to  effect  their  conversión  by
expounding  the  doctrines  of  the  Catholic  religión.  Once  this  choice
was  put  plainly  before  them,  and  they  had  refused  to  accept  the  dual
blcssings  of  vassalage  and  conversión,  they  became  in  his  eyes  con-
tumacious  rebels,  and  conscious  heretics.  He  had  the  Spanish  XVI.  cen-
tury  standards  as  to  how  all  such  were  to  be  treated.  He  followed,
in  this  case,  the  usual  solemn  formality  of  causing  a letter  to  be
drawn  up  by  a notary ; that  the  Cholulan  priests  could  not  understand
a word  of  it  did  not  detract  from  the  validity  of  the  proceeding.

2IÓ

Letters  of  Cortes

Your  Highness.  It  was  thus  set  down  by  a notary
public,  through  the  interpreters  whom  I had.

I still  determined  to  go  with  them,  not  only  to  avoid
showing  any  weakness,  but  also  because  from  there  I
thought  to  treat  affairs  with  Montezuma,  as  they  bounded
upon  his  country,  as  I ha  ve  already  said,  and  there
was  unimpeded  intercourse  between  the  two  countries.

When  the  Tascaltecas  saw  my  determination,  they
were  much  grieved,  and  told  me  repeatedly  that  I erred,
but  inasmuch  as  they  had  given  themselves  as  vassals
to  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  and  my  friends,  they  wished
to  go  with  me,  and  help  me  in  any  emergency. 1 Al-
though  I forbade  them,  and  prayed  them  not  to  go
inasmuch  as  there  was  no  necessity  for  it,  still  as  many
as  about  a hundred  thousand  men,  well  furnished  for
warfare,  accompanied  me  to  within  about  two  leagues
from  the  city,  when  after  many  importunities,  they  re-
turned,  though  some  five  or  six  thousand  of  them  still
remained  with  me.

I slept  in  a dry  river  bed  about  two  leagues  distant,
to  disperse  the  people,  fearing  they  might  cause  some
scandal  in  the  city,  and  also  because  it  was  already  late,
and  I did  not  wish  to  enter  the  city  at  a late  hour.  The
next  moming,  the  citizens  carne  out  to  receive  me  on  the
road,  with  many  trumpets,2  and  drums,  and  also  many
priests  from  their  mosques,  clothed  in  their  vestments,
and  chanting  in  the  fashion  they  are  accustomed  to  do
in  the  said  mosques.3  With  this  solemnity  they  brought
us  into  the  city,  where  they  housed  us  in  a very  good
dwelling  place,  where  all  the  people  of  my  company

1 The  real  purpose  of  the  Tlascalans  was  to  embroil  Cortes
with  the  Cholulans,  and,  with  the  help  of  the  invincible  Spaniards,
to  crush  their  ancient  enemy.

2 xhese  trumpets  were  made  of  wood  and  canes,  and  were  well
played,  giving  forth  very  sonorous  notes.

J The  Spaniards  commonly  used  the  word  “mosque”  to  desíg-
nate any  non-Christian  place  of  worship.

Second  Letter

217

dwelt  to  their  satisf action ; and  they  brought  us  some
food,  though  not  very  generously.  Along  the  road  we
encountered  many  signs,  such  as  the  natives.  of  this
province  had  foretold  us,  for  we  found  the  high  road
blocked  up,  and  another  opened,  and  some  pits,  although
not  many,  and  some  of  the  city  streets  were  closed,  and
many  stones  were  piled  on  the  house  tops.  They  thus
obliged  us  to  be  cautious,  and  on  our  guard.

I found  there  certain  messengers  from  Montezuma,
who  carne  to  speak  with  those  others  who  were  with  me,
but  to  me  they  said  nothing,  because,  in  order  to  inform
their  master,  they  had  come  to  leam  what  those  who
were  with  me  had  done  and  agreed  with  me.  .These
latter  messengers  departed,  therefore,  as  soon  as  they
had  spolcen  with  the  first,  and  even  the  chief  of  those  who
had  formerly  been  with  me  also  left.

During  the  three  days  which  I remained  there  I was
ill  provided  for,  and  every  day  was  worse,  and  the  lords
and  chief s of  the  city  carne  rarely  to  see  and  The  Mas-
speak  to  me.  I was  somewhat  perplexed  by  sacre  at
this,  but  the  interpreter  whom  I have,  an
Indian  woman 1 of  this  country  whom  I obtained  in
Putunchan,  the  great  river  I have  already  mentioned
in  the  first  letter  to  Your  Majesty,  was  told  by  another
woman  native  of  this  city,  that  many  of  Montezuma’ s
people  had  gathered  cióse  by,  and  that  those  of  the
city  had  sent  away  their  wives,  and  children,  and  all
their  goods,  intending  to  fall  upon  us  and  kill  us  all;
and  that,  if  she  wished  to  escape,  she  should  go  with
her,  as  she  would  hide  her.  The  female  interpreter  told
it  to  that  Gerónimo  de  Aguilar,  the  interpreter  whom  I
obtained  in  Yucatán,  and  of  whom  I have  written  to  Your
Highness,  who  reported  it  to  me.  I captured  one  of  the
natives  of  the  said  city,  who  was  walking  about  there,
and  took  him  secretly  apart  so  that  no  one  saw  it,  and
1 See  Appendix  I.,  cióse  of  Letter.

2l8

Letters  of  Cortes

questioned  him;  and  he  confirmed  all  that  the  Indian
woman  and  the  natives  of  Tascaltecal  had  told  me.  As
well  on  account  of  this  information  as  from  the  signs  I
had  observed,  I determined  to  anticípate  them,  rather
than  be  surprised,  so  I had  some  of  the  lords  of  the  city
called,  saying  that  I wished  to  speak  with  them,  and  I
shut  them  in  a chamber  by  themselves.  In  the  meantime
I had  our  people  prepared,  so  that,  at  the  firing  of  a
musket,  they  should  fall  on  a crowd  of  Indians  who  were
near  to  our  quarters,  and  manv  others  who  were  inside
them.  It  was  done  in  this  wise,  that,  after  I had  taken
these  lords,  and  left  them  bound  in  the  chamber,  I
mounted  a horse,  and  ordered  the  musket  to  be  fired,  and
we  did  such  execution  that,  in  two  hours,  more  than
three  thousand  persons  had  perished.

In  order  that  Your  Majesty  may  see  how  well  prepared
they  were,  before  I went  out  of  our  quarters,  they  had
occupied  all  the  streets,  and  stationed  all  their  men,  but,
as  we  took  them  by  surprise,  they  were  easily  overeóme,
especially  as  the  chiefs  were  wanting,  for  I had  already
taken  them  prisoners.  I ordered  fire  to  be  set  to  some
towers  and  strong  houses,  where  they  defended  them-
selves, and  assaulted  us;  and  thus  I scoured  the  city
fighting  during  five  hours,  leaving  our  dwelling  place
which  was  very  strong,  well  guarded,  until  I had  forced
all  the  people  out  of  the  city  at  various  points,  in  which
those  five  thousand  natives  of  Tascaltecal  and  the  four
hundred  of  Cempoal  gave  me  good  assistance. 1

1 This  massacre  is  one  of  the  bloodiest  in  Mexican  history,  and
concerning  it  the  greatest  controversy  has  raged.  Las  Casas  leads
in  judging  Cortes  most  severely,  and  says  that  it  was  a part  of
his  policy,  as  indeed  it  was  of  the  Spaniards  everywhere,  to  strike
terror  into  the  natives  by  a Wholesale  slaughter.  Bernal  Diaz  defends
Cortes  and  says  his  course  was  justified  later,  when,  in  the  investigation
made  by  the  friars  who  carne  for  that  purpose  to  Cholula,  they  learned
from  the  chiefs  and  other  Cholulans  that  there  had  really  been  a con-
certed  plot  to  destroy  the  Spaniards  in  their  city.  A contrary  theory
is,  that  the  Tlascalans  invented  the  fiction  of  a plot  expressly  to

Second  Letter

219

On  my  return  to  our  quarters,  I spoke  with  those
captive  lords,  and  asked  them  why  they  wished  to  kdl
me  treacherously.  They  answered  that  it  was  not  their
fault,  as  those  of  Culua,  who  were  vassals  of  Montezuma
had  put  them  up  to  it,  and  that  Montezuma  had  stationed
in  such  and  such  a place,  (which  as  we  learned  afterwards
was  a league  and  a half  distant) , a garrison  of  fifty  thousand
men  to  accomplish  it.  But  they  now  had  learned  how
they  had  been  deceived,  and  if  I would  set  one  or  two
of  them  at  Liberty,  they  would  gather  the  people  of  the
city,  and  return  to  it  with  all  the  women,  and  children,
and  chattels ; and  they  prayed  me  to  pardon  them  the
error  they  had  committed,  assuring  me  that,  from  hence-
forth,  no  one  should  deceive  them,  and  that  they  would
be  faithful  and  loyal  vassals  of  Your  Highness  and  my
friends.  After  having  spoken  at  length  to  them  about
their  error,  I liberated  two  of  them,  and  the  next  day
the  whole  city  was  filled  with  men,  women,  and  children,
and  as  safe  as  if  nothing  of  what  had  passed  had  e\er
happened.  Immediately  afterwards  I liberated  all  the
other  chiefs  and  lords  whom  I had  made  prisoners,  they
promising  that  they  would  serve  Your  Majesty  very
loyally.

During  the  fifteen  or  twenty  days  I remained  there,
the  city  and  country  were  completely  pacified  and  re-

provoke  a massacre  of  their  Cholulan  enemies;  if  this  be  true,  Doña
Marina  was  the  only  instrument  for  accomplishing  their  purpose.  She
told  Cortes  that  a Cholulan  woman  of  position,  whose  friendship  she
had  cultivated,  had  warned  her  of  the  Spaniards  doom,  and  urged  her
to  take  shelter  in  her  own  house,  and  thus  save  herself.  Granted
that  Cortes  was,  with  reason,  fearful  of  treachery,  his  only  safety  lay
in  forestalling  the  plotters,  but  this  it  seems  might  have  been  done  by
securing  the  chiefs,  and  Montezuma’s  envoys,  who  were  the  suspected
instigators,  and  even  making  an  example  of  them.  Nothing  can  ex-
cuse the  Wholesale  massacre  of  a defenceless  population  taken  in  a
trap;  such  excessive  measures  overstepped  by  far  the  needs  of  tha
situation.  If  the  commander’s  intention  was  as  Las  Casas  describes,
he  succeeded,  for  the  news  of  the  tragedy  quickly  spread,  and  threw
Montezuma  into  a panic  of  helpless  fear.

220

Letters  of  Cortes

peopled,  so  that  it  seemed  nobody  was  lacking;  and  their
market  place  and  the  affairs  of  the  city  were  as  they
ordinarily  were ; and  I made  those  of  this  city  of  Churul-
tecal  friends  with  those  of  Tascaltecal,  for  they  used  to
be  so  formerly, 1 and  it  was  but  a short  time  since  that
Montezuma  had  won  them  o ver  to  his  allegiance,  and
made  them  enemies  of  the  others.

This  city  of  Churultecal  is  situated  in  a plain,  and
has  up  to  twenty  thousand  houses  in  the  body  of
Description  the  city,  and  as  many  more  in  the  outskirts.
of  Choluia  It  is  an  independent  State,  and  has  its  recog-
nised  boundaries,  and  they  do  not  obey  any  chiefs,
but  govern  themselves  like  the  Tascaltecas.  The  people
are  better  clothed  in  some  ways  than  the  Tascaltecas,
because  their  honoured  citizens  all  wear  albornoces 2
above  their  other  clothing,  though  they  differ  from
those  of  Africa  in  having  pockets,  but  in  the  making,
and  stuff  and  borders,  they  are  very  similar.  They
have  all  been,  and  are  since  the  recent  occurrence,
very  faithful  vassals  to  Your  Majesty,  and  very  obedient
in  all  that  I required  and  commanded  of  them  in  Your
Royal  ñame;  and  I believe  that  henceforth  they  will
remáin  so.  This  city  has  very  fertile  fields,  for  they
have  much  land,  and  the  greater  part  is  irrigated;  and
the  city  seen  from  the  outside  is  more  beautiful  than  the
cities  of  Spain,  because  it  is  very  level,  and  contains  many
towers,  for  I certify  to  Your  Highness  that  I counted
from  a mosque  four  hundred  and  odd  towers  in  the  city,

' Tlascala  and  Cholula  had  fought  as  allies  against  the  triple
alliance  of  México,  Texcoco,  and  Tlacopan,  but  Montezuma  had  profited
by  a subsequent  dissension  between  them  to  aggravate  the  quarrel
which  thus  led  to  a war,  the  Mexicans  aiding  the  Cholulans.  This
cost  the  latter  their  independence,  as  Montezuma  estabüshed  his  sway
over  them.  They  were  reputed  to  be  false,  and  their  very  ñame
had  come  to  be  synonymous  with  treachery.  (Orozco  y Berra,  Tom.
iv.,  p.  239.)

2 The  Moorish  burnous.

Second  Letter  221

and  all  belonged  to  mosques.  It  is  the  best  adapted  for
Spaniards  to  live  in  of  any  I have  seen  smce  leavmg  the
port,  as  it  has  some  uncultivated  lands  and  water  for  e
purpose  of  raising  cattle,  such  as  have  no  others  we  have
seen  so  far.  For,  such  is  the  multitude  of  people  who
live  in  these  parts,  that  there  is  not  a palm  of  land  which
is  not  cultivated,  and  even  then  there  are  many  places  m
which  they  suffer  for  want  of  bread,  and  there  are  many
poor  who  beg  amongst  the  rich  in  the  streets,  and  at  the
market  places,  just  as  the  poor  do  in  Spain,  and  other
civilised  countries.

I spoke,  to  those  messengers  of  Montezuma  who  re-
mained  with  me,  about  the  treachery  which  had  been
plotted  against  me  in  the  city,  and  how  the  concerning
lords  of  it  affirmed  that  it  had  been  done  the  Piot  of
by  the  counsel  of  Montezuma.  I said  that
it  did  not  seem  to  me  that  it  was  a deed  for
such  a great  lord  as  he  was,  who  had  sent  me  such
honourable  persons  as  his  messengers,  saying  he  was
my  friend,  while  on  the  other  hand  he  devised  plans  for
injuring  me  by  means  of  strangers,  so  that  he  might  cast
off  the  responsibility  if  things  did  not  turn  out  as  he
thought.  But  since  it  was  thus,  and  he  did  not  keep
his  word,  ñor  did  he  speak  the  truth  to  me,  I now  intended
to  alter  my  plans ; for  until  now  I had  come  with  the  in-
tention  of  seeing  and  speaking  with  him,  and  of  having
him  for  a friend,  and  holding  many  conversations,  and
in  the  hope  of  peace.  Now,  however,  I would  go  to  his
country  with  war,  doing  him  all  the  harm  I could  as
an  enemy,  though  this  I regretted  very  much,  as  I had
always  wanted  him  for  a friend  that  I might  counsel
with  him  respecting  what  I was  to  do  in  this  country.

They  answered  me,  that  as  they  had  been  with  me  many
days,  they  knew  nothing  concerning  that  plot,  except
what  they  had  heard  in  the  city  after  the  occurrence,  and
they  could  not  believe  that  it  was  done  by  the  order  and

222

Letters  of  Curtes

counsel  of  Montezuma;  and  they  besought  me,  before  I
determined  to  abandon  his  friendship  and  to  make  war
as  I said,  that  I should  inform  myself  of  the  truth,  and
permit  one  of  them,  who  would  promptly  return,  to  go
and  speak  with  Montezuma,  as  from  this  city  to  the  place
where  he  resides  is  twenty  leagues.  I told  them  I agreed
to  this,  and  let  one  of  them  go,  who  after  six  days  re-
turned,  together  with  the  first  who  had  gone,  and  they
brought  me  ten  plates  of  gold,  and  fifteen  hundred  pieces
of  stuff,  and  many  provisions  of  chickens  and  panicap, 1
which  is  a beverage  they  drink;  and  they  told  me  that
Montezuma  was  much  grieved  over  the  disturbance  that
had  happened,  and  which  had  been  arranged  in  Churul-
tecal.  They  said  that  I must  believe  that  it  had  not  been
by  his  counsel  and  order,  for  he  assured  me  it  was  not  so,
and  that,  though  the  people  who  were  there  in  garrison
were  of  a truth  his,  they  had  moved  without  his  com-
mands,  induced  by  the  natives  of  Churultecal,  who  bor-
dered  on  two  of  his  provinces,  one  of  which  was  called
Acancigo,  and  the  other  Izzucan. 2 They  said  that  there
existed  a certain  alliance  of  neighbourhood  between
them,  for  helping  each  other,  and  it  was  thus  they  had
come  there,  and  not  by  his  orders;  but  in  the  future
I should  learn  from  his  deeds,  that  what  he  had  told  me
was  trae,  though  he  still  besought  me  not  to  seek  to  come
to  his  country,  because  it  was  sterile,  and  we  would
suffer  privations,  and  that  from  wherever  I might  be,  I
could  send  to  ask  him  for  whatever  I wanted,  and  he
would  send  it  very  promptly.  I answered  that  my  visit
to  his  country  could  not  be  renounced,  because  I would
ha  ve  to  send  a full  account  of  him  and  of  it  to  Your
Majesty,  and  that  I was  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  what

1 There  is  no  such  word  or  drink,  and  this  ñame  may  be  here
due  to  an  error  in  writing  or  copying;  it  has  been  taken  by  some
commentators  to  mean  pan  y cacao  (bread  and  cocoa).  Gayangos
suggests  that  it  may  be  the  sugared  drink  called  Atole.

2 Two  towns  in  the  present  state  of  Puebla.

Second  Letter

223

he  had  sent  to  tell  me;  that  inasmuch  as  I could  not  forego
seeing  him,  I hoped  he  would  approve  of  it,  and  not  plan
any  opposition,  because  it  would  be  greatly  to  his  injury,

and  would  grieve  me  very  much.

From  the  time  he  saw  it  was  my  determination  to  visit
him  and  his  country,  he  sent  me  word  to  say  that  I might
come,  and  very  welcome;  that  he  would  await  me  in  that
great  city  where  he  was,  and  he  sent  me  many  of  his
people  tó  accompany  me,  as  I was  already  near  his
country.  These  persons  sought  to  induce  me  to  go  by
a certain  road,  where  they  must  have  prepaied  some
attack  upon  me,  as  it  afterwards  appeared,  and  as  was  seen
by  many  Spaniards  whom  I afterwards  sent  to  recon-
noitre  the  country.  There  were  so  many  bridges,  and
difficult  passes  on  that  road,  that,  if  I had  gone  by  it,  they
might  very  easily  have  accomplished  their  intentions,  but
as  God  has  always  taken  care  to  guide,  even  from  your
childhood,  the  royal  affairs  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  and
as  I and  those  of  my  company  went  in  your  royal  Service,
He  showed  us  another  road,  which,  although  somewhat
steep,  was  not  as  dangerous  as  that  by  which  they  wished
to  take  us.

About  eight  leagues  from  this  city  of  Churultecal,
there  are  two  very  high  and  marvellous  mountains, 1
for  at  the  end  of  August  they  were  so  covered  Ascent  of
with  snow  that  we  could  distinguish  nothing  Popoca-
else  on  their  tops  but  what  seemed  snow,  and  tapetl

1 Popocatapetl.  Signifying  in  the  Mexican  language  “smoking
mountain.”  Humboldt  gives  its  height  as  5400  metres.  Together
with  Ixtaccihuatl  (the  white  woman)  this  volcano  was  venerated  as
a god,  the  Indians  considering  them  as  man  and  wife;  their  feast
days  were  celebrated  both  in  the  city  and  in  grottoes  in  the  mountains.
The  cráter  of  Popocatapetl  was  thought  to  be  an  abode  of  the  tormented
spirits  of  wicked  kings.  The  greatest  eruption  of  which  there  is  any
record  took  place  in  1353;  the  mountain  was  in  a period  of  activity
in  1519  which  lasted  till  1528.  Another  eruption  occurred  in  1533,
but  the  one  which  caused  the  most  serious  apprehension  was  on  Feb.
24,  1664,  when  ahuge  piece  of  the  cráter  fell  in  and  showers  of  ashes

224

Letters  of  Cortes

from  the  highest  one,  a great  volume  of  smoke,  as  thick
as  a house,  continuallv  comes  forth,  not  only  by  day,
but  also  by  night,  rising  to  the  clouds  as  straight  as
a pillar,  and  it  appears  to  come  out  with  such  forcé,
that  although  on  the  top  of  the  mountain  a strong
wind  prevails,  it  does  not  tum  it.  As  I have  always
wished  to  give  a very  detailed  account  of  this  country  to
Your  Highness,  I wanted  to  know  about  this  mystery,
which  seemed  somewhat  marvellous,  so  I sent  ten  of  my
companions,  who  seemed  adapted  for  such  an  enterprise,
accompanied  by  some  natives  of  the  country  to  guide
them,  charging  them  to  climb  the  said  mountains,  and
leam  the  secret  of  that  smoke,  whence  and  how  it  carne.
They  went,  and  strove,  and  did  all  that  was  possible
to  scale  it,  but  never  were  able  to  do  so  on  account  of
the  quantity  of  snow  which  lay  on  the  mountain,  and
the  clouds  of  ashes  which  are  blown  about  on  it,  and  also
because  they  could  not  endure  the  great  coid  which  pre-
vails there.  They  nearly  reached  the  top,  however,  and
so  high  was  it,  that,  when  they  were  up  there,  the  smoke
began  to  come  out,  and  they  say  it  carne  with  such  an
Ímpetus  and  noise  as  if  the  entire  mountain  was  about  to
sink ; so  they  descended,  and  brought  with  them  a con-
siderable quantity  of  snow  and  icicles,  which  seemed
a strange  thing  to  see  in  these  parts,  for  according  to
the  opinión  of  the  pilots,  they  belong  to  the  tropics.
They  say  especially  that  this  country  is  situated  in
the  twentieth  degree,  which  is  parallel  to  the  island  of
Hispaniola,  where  the  heat  is  continually  very  great.

rained  in  the  streets  of  Puebla,  where  the  Windows  were  broken,  and
roofs  of  houses  collapsed.  I visited  the  cráter  in  1884,  when  it  resem-
bled  the  basin  of  a dried-up  lake,  from  which  carne  puffs  of  whitish
smoke-like  steam,  rising  from  small  fissures  here  and  there,  while  over
all  there  was  a strong  smell  of  sulphur.  Diego  de  Ordaz,  who  led  the
Spaniards  in  making  the  first  known  ascent  of  the  mountain,  had  con-
ceded to  him  on  his  return  to  Spain,  the  privilege  of  quartering  a smok-
ing volcano  in  his  arms.

Second  Letter

225

While  going  to  see  this  mountain,  they  carne  upon  a
road,  and  asked  the  natives  who  went  with  them  whither
it  lead ; and  these  answered  to  Culua, 1 and  that  it  was
a good  road,  and  that  the  other  by  which  the  Culuans
wished  to  take  us  was  not  good.  The  Spaniards  folio wed
it  until  they  reached  the  top  of  the  Sierras,  between  which
the  road  passes,  and  from  there  they  beheld  the  plains  of
Culua,  and  the  city  of  Temixtitan,2  and  the  lakes  which
are  in  the  said  province,  of  which  I will  hereafter  make
relation  to  Your  Highness.  They  carne  back  very  glad
at  having  discovered  so  good  a road,  and  God  knows  how
happy  I was  about  it.

After  these  Spaniards,  who  had  gone  to  visit  the  moun-
tains,  returned,  and  I had  informed  myself  accurately,
not  only  from  them,  but  also  from  the  natives,  respecting
the  road  which  they  had  discovered,  I spoke  to  those
messengers  of  Montezuma  who  were  to  guide  me  to  his
country,  and  told  them,  as  it  was  shorter  that  I wished  to
go  by  that  road,  instead  of  the  one  they  had  proposed.
They  answered  that  I said  truly  that  it  was  shorter,  and
more  level,  and  the  reason  they  had  not  suggested  it,
was  because  by  it  we  should  have  to  pass  one  or  two
days’  journey  through  the  country  of  Guasucingo,  whose
people  were  their  enemies,  and  therefore  we  would  not
find  all  the  necessaries,  as  when  going  through  the  land
of  Montezuma;  but,  if  I wished  to  go  that  way,  they
would  arrange  that  provisions  should  be  brought  up  to
the  road  from  the  other  side.

So  we  started,  with  some  fears  that  those  people
might  persist  in  playing  some  trick  upon  us,  but  as
we  had  already  announced  that  we  would  Departure
take  that  road,  it  did  not  seem  well  to  from
me  to  leave  it,  and  to  change,  lest  they  Choluia

might  suspect  a want  of  courage  had  caused  it.  The

1 Colhua,  another  ñame  for  México,  also  spelled  Culua.

2 See  Appendix  II.,  cióse  of  Letter.

VOL.  I— 15.

22Ó

Letters  of  Cortes

day  I left  the  city  of  Churultecal,  I marched  four  leagues
to  some  hamlets  of  the  city  of  Guasucingo, 1 where  I
was  well  received  by  the  natives,  who  gave  me  some
female  slaves,  and  wearing  apparel,  and  certain  small
pieces  of  gold.  This  last  in  all  was  but  little,  because
these  people  did  not  have  much,  as  they  belong  to  the
league  and  alliance  of  the  Tascaltecas,  and  they  are  shut
in  by  Montezuma,  and  surrounded  by  his  country  in  such
a manner  that  they  can  have  no  commerce  with  any
other  province  except  their  own,  and  therefore,  they  live
very  poorly.

The  following  day  I mounted  the  pass  between  the  two
mountains  of  which  I have  spoken,  and,  descending  it,
we  beheld  one  of  the  provinces,  of  the  country  of  the
said  Montezuma,  called  Chalco,2  where,  about  two
leagues  before  we  reached  the  town,  I found  a very  good
dwelling  place,  which  had  been  recently  built,  and  was
so  large  that  all  my  company  and  myself  were  very
commodiously  lodged  in  it;  this  although  I had  with  me
more  than  four  thousand  Indians,  of  these  provinces  of
Tascaltecal,  Guasucingo,  Churultecal,  and  Cempoal,  for
whom  there  were  ampie  provisions  of  food.  Here  great
fires  of  plenty  of  wood  were  burned  in  all  the  rooms,  for
the  coid  was  very  bitter,  as  we  were  surrounded  by  two
mountains  both  covered  with  snow.

Certain  persons  carne  to  speak  to  me  here  who  seemed
to  be  chiefs,  amongst  whom  was  one  who,  I was
told,  was  brother  to  Montezuma.  He  brought  me  about
three  thousand  dollars  of  gold,  and  told  me  in  Monte-

> Spelled  in  various  ways.  Guajocingo,  or  Huejocingo,  in  the  State

of  Puebla.  .

a The  province  of  Chalco  had  been  conquered  by  the  Mexicans

only  after  much  bloodshed,  and  was  held  in  subjection  by  forcé;  henee
its  people  were  not  loyal  subjeets  to  be  counted  upon  in  time  of  need.
They  were  the  first  to  profit  by  the  Spaniards’  arrival  in  the  valley  to
throw  off  their  allegiance.  Cortes  promised  them  relief,  and  assured
them  that  he  had  come  to  redress  their  wrongs  and  establish  justice.

Second  Letter

227

zuma’s  ñame  that  the  latter  sent  that  to  me,  and  prayed
me  to  go  back,  and  not  insist  on  coming  to  his  city,  as
the  country  was  scarce  of  food,  and  the  roads  leading
there  were  bad;  and,  as  it  was  all  on  the  water,  I could
enter  it  only  in  canoes.  He  also  enumerated  many  other
inconveniences  to  prevent  me  going.  They  said  I had
only  to  say  what  I wanted,  for  Montezuma  their  sovereign
would  order  it  to  be  given  to  me,  and  would  likewise
agree  to  give  me  annually  certum  quid,  which  would
be  taken  to  the  coast,  or  wherever  I wished.  I received
them  very  well  and  gave  them  some  Spanish  articles,
such  as  they  esteem  very  much,  especially  to  him  who
was  said  to  be  a brother  of  Montezuma’s.  I replied  to
his  embassy,  that,  if  it  was  in  my  hands  to  return,  I would
do  so  in  order  to  please  Montezuma,  but  that  I had  come
to  this  country  by  order  of  Your  Majesty,  and  that  the
principal  thing,  of  which  you  had  ordered  me  to  give  an
account,  was  Montezuma,  and  his  great  city,  of  whom,
and  of  which,  Your  Majesty  had  possessed  information
since  a long  time.  I said  also  that  they  should  tell  him
from  me,  that  I prayed  him  to  approve  my  going  to  see
him,  because  no  injury  would  result  from  it  to  his  person
and  country,  but  rather  that  he  should  receive  good;
and  if  after  I had  seen  him  he  did  not  wish  to  have  me
in  his  company,  then  I would  return;  and  that  we  could
better  decide  between  ourselves,  how  he  should  serve
Your  Highness,  than  through  third  persons,  even  were
they  those  in  whom  we  had  full  confidence.  With  this
answer  they  departed.

Judging  from  appearances  which  we  observed,  and  the
preparation  which  had  been  made  in  this  dwelling  place
of  which  I have  spoken,  the  Indians  expected  to  attack
us  that  night,  and  perceiving  this,  I took  such  precaution
that  they,  noting  it,  changed  their  plan,  and  secretly
sent  away  that  night  a number  of  people  who  had  gathered
in  the  woods,  as  was  seen  by  our  watchmen  and  scouts.

228

Letters  of  Cortes

At  daybreak  I set  out  for  a town,  called  Amaqueruca,1
which  is  two  leagues  from  here,  in  the  province  of
Chalco,  which  in  its  principal  town,  and  the
Descends  villages  within  two  leagues  of  it,  has  some
into  the  Val  - twenty  thousand  inhabitants.  We  were  lodged
ley  of  in  some  very  good  houses,  belonging  to  the  chief
México  0£  sai¿  town,  and  many  persons  who  seemed
to  be  of  high  rank  carne  to  speak  to  me,  telling  me  that
Montezuma,  their  sovereign  lord,  had  sent  them  to  await
me  here,  and  to  see  that  I was  provided  with  every-
thing  necessary.  The  lord  of  this  place  gave  me  some
forty  female  slaves,  and  three  thousand  castellanos.
During  the  two  days  I was  there,  they  provided  us  amply
with  all  necessary  food.

The  next  day,  accompanied  by  those  chiefs  who  had
come  on  the  part  of  Montezuma  to  wait  for  me,  I left,
and  slept  four  leagues  farther  on,  in  a small  town,  almost
half  of  it  on  the  water  of  a great  lake,  where  they  lodged
us  very  well¡  and  on  the  land  side  there  is  a cham  of  \ eiy
rugged  and  stony  mountams.  Here  likewise  they  would
have  been  very  willing  to  try  their  forces  with  us,  except,
as  it  appeared,  they  wanted  to  do  so  with  safety,  and  by
surprising  us  in  the  night.  But,  as  I was  so  well  informed,
I anticipated  their  intention,  and  kept  such  a guard  that
night,  that  of  their  spies  who  carne,  some  in  canoes  by
water,  and  others  by  descending  from  the  mountams,
to  see  if  there  was  any  possibility  of  carrying  out  their
wishes,  some  fifteen  or  twenty  were  taken  by  our  men,
and  kiíled.  Thus,  few  returned  to  give  the  information
they  had  come  to  secure;  and  finding  us  always  so  well
prepared  they  decided  to  change  their  tactics,  and  treat

us  well.  , j . ,,

The  next  morning,  just  as  I was  ready  to  leave  the

town,  there  arrived  some  ten  or  twelve  chiefs,  as  I leamed

i Amecamecan,  now  called  Amecameca;  it  lies  at  the  foot  of
Popocatapetl,  some  two  leagues  from  Tlalmanalco.

Second  Letter

229

afterwards,  and  among  them  a great  lord,  a youth  of
about  five  and  twenty  years,  to  whom  all  showed  great
attention,  so  much  so,  that,  after  he  had  descended  from
a litter  in  which  he  had  come,  all  the  others  began  clearing
the  road  of  the  stones  and  straw  before  him.  Approach-
ing,  he  told  me  he  carne  on  the  part  of  Montezuma,  his
sovereign  lord,  and  that  the  latter  besought  me  to  pardon
him  if  he  did  not  come  in  person  to  see  me,  and  receive
me,  as  he  was  indisposed,  but  that  his  city  was  already
near,  and,  inasmuch  as  I was  still  determined  to  go  to
him,  we  would  meet  there,  when  I should  leam  from
him  his  disposition  towards  Your  Highness’s  Service.  It
was  added  that  he  still  besought  me,  if  it  were  pos-
sible,  not  to  go  thither,  as  I would  have  much  trouble
and  privation  to  endure,  and  that  he  was  much  ashamed
not  to  be  able  to  provide  there  as  he  desired.  With
this,  they  fell  on  their  knees,  protesting  so  much,  that
it  only  remained  to  say  that  they  would  defend  the  road
by  forcé  if  I still  insisted  in  going  on.  I satisfied,  and
calmed  them  with  the  best  words  possible,  saying  that
my  going  thither  would  do  them  no  harm,  but  bring  them
many  advantages;  and  so,  after  giving  them  some  presents,
they  took  their  leave.

I departed  immediately  after  them,  accompanied  by
many  people  who  seemed  to  be  of  much  importance,  as
it  afterwards  appeared,  and  I continued  along  the  road
by  the  shore  of  that  great  lake.  A league  from  my  last
stopping  place,  I saw  in  this  lake,  two  musket-shots
distant  from  the  shore,  a small  city  which  rnight  have  had
one  or  two  thousand  inhabitants,  and  which  was  all
afioat  on  the  water ; having  many  towers  as  it  seemed  but
no  en  trance.  About  a league  from  there,  we  reached  a
great  causeway,  as  broad  as  a horseman’s  lance,  extending
within  the  lake  about  two-thirds  of  a league.  This  led
to  the  city, 1 which  though  small,  was  the  most  beautiful

1 The  town  of  Cuitlahuac,  now  called  Tlahua,  on  the  lake  of

230

Letters  of  Cortes

we  had  yet  seen,  not  only  on  account  of  the  well  decorated
houses  and  towers,  but  also  because  of  the  excellent
construction  of  its  foundations  in  the  water.

In  this  city,  which  has  about  two  thousand  inhabitants,
we  were  very  well  received,  and  they  gave  us  excellent
food.  The  lord  and  chiefs  of  it  carne  to  speak  with  me,
and  prayed  me  to  remain,  and  sleep  there;  however,
Montezuma’s  messengers  who  were  with  me  told  me  not
to  stop,  but  to  go  on  to  another  city,  called  Iztapalapan, 1
about  three  leagues  distant,  belonging  to  a brother  of
Montezuma;  so  I did  this.  The  exit  from  the  said  city
where  we  dined,  whose  ñame  at  present  does  not  occur
to  my  memory,  is  by  another  causeway,  a long  league  in
length,  which  extends  to  the  mainland.

Having  arrived  at  this  city  of  Iztapalapan,  the  chief
of  it  carne  out  to  receive  me,  as  well  as  one  from
Descrip  another  great  city,  called  Calnaalcan, 2 which
tion  of  is  near,  being  perhaps  three  leagues  distant,
iztapalapan  an¿  these  were  accompanied  by  many  other
chiefs  who  were  waiting  for  me;  and  they  gave  me
three  or  four  thousand  castellanos,  some  female  slaves,
and  wearing  apparel,  receiving  me  very  well.  This  city  of

Texcoco.  The  Spaniards  called  it  Venezuela  (little  Venice).  Clavigero
insists  that,  after  leaving  Cuitlahuac  for  Iztapalapan,  the  two  discon-
tented  brothers  of  the  King  of  Texcoco,  Ixtlilochitl  and  Coanacochtzin,
met  Cortes,  and  offered  their  alliance,  explaining  their  grievances  against
their  brother  Cacamatzin,  the  reigning  King,  and  Montezuma  their
únele ; and  that  Cortes  went  on  their  invitation  to  Texcoco.  As  neither
Cortes  ñor  Bernal  Diaz  mentions  what  would  have  been  an  important
and  interesting  divergence  from  their  route,  and  both  account  for
almost  every  hour  of  the  time,  by  recording  their  daily  moyements,
the  visit  to  Texcoco  seems  more  than  doubtful.  The  interview  with
the  two  princes  might  easily  have  taken  place  on  the  road.

* Iztapalapan,  seven  miles  from  México,  preserves  its  ancient
ñame,  though  the  lake  has  long  since  receded,  leaving  it  high  and  dry.
The  city  had  between  12,000  and  15,000  houses,  and  was  ruled  by
Cuitlahuatzin,  a brother  of  Montezuma.  The  chief  glory  of  Iztapalapan
was  its  botanical  and  zoólogical  garden,  with  reservoirs  full  of  allkinds
of  fish,  such  as  no  town  in  Europe  possessed  at  that  time.

2 Coyohuacan.

Second  Letter

231

Iztapalapan  has  some  twelve  or  fifteen  thousand  house-
holds,  and  stands  on  the  shore  of  a great  salt  lake,  half
of  it  in  the  water,  and  the  other  half  on  land.  Its  chief
has  some  new  houses,  which,  though  still  unfinished,
are  as  good  as  the  best  in  Spain;  I say  as  large  and  well
constructed,  not  only  in  the  stone  work,  but  also  in  the
wood  work,  and  all  arrangements  for  every  kind  of  house-
hold  Service,  all  except  the  relief  work,  and  other  rich  de-
tails,  which  are  used  in  Spanish  houses,  but  are  not  found
here.  There  are  both  upper  and  lower  rooms,  and  very
refreshing  gardens,  with  many  trees  and  sweet  scented
flowers,  bathing  places  of  fresh  water,  well  constructed,
with  steps  leading  down  to  the  bottom.  He  has  also  a
large  garden  round  his  house,  in  which  there  is  a terrace
with  many  beautiful  corridors  and  rooms,  and,  within
the  garden,  is  a great  pool  of  fresh  water,  very  well  built
with  sides  of  handsome  masonry,  around  which  runs
an  open  walk  with  well  laid  tile  pavements,  so  broad
that  four  persons  can  walk  abreast  on  it,  and  four  hundred
paces  square,  making,  in  all,  sixteen  hundred  paces.
On  the  other  side  of  this  promenade,  towards  the  wall
of  the  garden,  it  is  all  surrounded  by  a lattice  work
of  canes,  behind  which  are  arbours,  planted  with
fragrant  shrubs.  The  pool  contains  many  fish,  and
water  fowl,  such  as  ducks,  cranes,  and  other  kinds  of
water  birds,  in  such  numbers  that  the  water  is  covered
with  them.

The  next  day  after  I had  arrived  in  this  city,  I left,  and
having  gone  half  a league,  I reached  another  causeway,
leading  out  into  the  lake  a distance  of  two  leagues  to  the
great  city  of  Temixtitan,  which  stands  in  the  midst  of
the  said  lake.  This  causeway  is  two  lances  broad,  and
so  well  built  that  eight  horsemen  can  ride  abreast;  and,
within  these  two  leagues,  there  are  three  cities,  on  one
and  the  other  side  of  the  said  highway,  one  called  Mesical-
singo,  founded  for  the  greater  part  within  the  said  lake,

232

Letters  of  Cortes

and  the  other  two,  called  Niciaca,  and  Huchilohuchico,1
on  the  other  shore  of  it,  with  many  of  their  houses  on
the  water.

The  first  of  these  cities  may  have  three  thousand
families,  the  second  more  than  six  thousand,  and  the
third  four  or  five  thousand.  In  all  of  them,  there  are  very
good  edifices,  of  houses  and  towers,  especially  the  resi-
dences  of  the  lords  and  chief  persons,  and  the  mosques
or  oratories,  where  they  keep  their  idols.  These  cities
have  a great  trade  in  salt,  which  they  make  from  the
water  of  the  lake,  and  from  the  crust  of  the  land  which  is
bathed  by  the  lake,  and  which  they  boil  in  a certain
manner,  making  loaves  of  salt,  which  they  sell  to  the
inhabitants  in  the  neighbourhood.

I followed  the  said  causeway  for  about  half  a league
before  I carne  to  the  city  proper  of  Temixtitan.  I
Cortes  found  at  the  junction  of  another  causeway,
Enters  the  which  joins  this  one  from  the  mainland,
City  of  another  strong  fortification,  with  two  towers,
México  surrounded  by  walls,  twelve  feet  high  with
castellated  tops.  This  commands  the  two  roads,  and
has  only  two  gates,  by  one  of  which  they  enter,  and  from
the  other  they  come  out.  About  one  thousand  of  the
principal  citizens  carne  out  to  meet  me,  and  speak  to  me,
all  richly  dressed  alike  according  to  their  fashion;  and
when  they  had  come,  each  one  in  approaching  me,  and
before  speaking,  would  use  a ceremony  which  is  very
common  amongst  them,  putting  his  hand  on  the  ground,
and  afterwards  kissing  it,  so  tliat  I was  kept  waiting
almost  an  hour,  until  each  had  performed  his  ceremony.
There  is  a wooden  bridge,  ten  paces  broad,  in  the  very
outskirts  of  the  city,  across  an  opening  in  the  causeway,
where  the  water  may  flow  in  and  out  as  it  rises  and  falls.
This  bridge  is  also  for  defence,  for  they  remove  and  replace
the  long  broad  wooden  beams,  of  which  the  bridge  is

i Huithilohuchico — Huitzilopocho— is  the  present  Cherubusco.

Second  Letter

233

made,  whenever  they  wish;  and  there  are  many  of  these
bridges  in  the  city,  as  Your  Highness  will  see  in  the
account  which  I shall  make  of  its  affairs.

Having  passed  this  bridge,  we  were  received  by  that
lord,  Montezuma,  with  about  two  hundred  chiefs,  . all
barefooted,  and  dressed  in  a kind  of  livery,  veiy  rich,
according  to  their  custom,  and  some  more  so  than  others.
They  approached  in  two  processions  near  the  walls  of
the  Street,  which  is  very  broad,  and  straight,  and  beautiful,
and  very  uniform  from  one  end  to  the  other,  being  about
two  thirds  of  a league  long,  and  having,  on  both  sides,  very
large  houses,  both  dwelling  places,  and  mosques.  Monte-
zuma  carne  in  the  middle  of  the  Street,  with  two  lords,
one  on  the  right  side,  and  the  other  on  the  left,  one  of
whom  was  the  same  great  lord,  who,  as  I said,  carne  in
that  litter  to  speak  with  me,  and  the  other  was  the  brother
of  Montezuma,  lord  of  that  city  Iztapalapan,  whence  I
had  come  that  day.  All  were  dressed  in  the  same  manner,
except  that  Montezuma  was  shod,  and  the  other  lords
were  barefooted.  Each  supported  him  below  his  arms,
and  as  we  approached  each  other,  I descended  from  my
horse,  and  was  about  to  embrace  him,  but  the  two  lords
in  attendance  prevented  me,  with  their  hands,  that  I
might  not  touch  him,  and  they,  and  he  also,  made  the
ceremony  of  kissing  the  ground.  This  done,  he  ordered
his  brother  who  carne  with  him,  to  remain  with  me,  and
take  me  by  the  arm,  and  the  other  attendant  walked  a
little  ahead  of  us.  After  he  had  spoken  to  me,  all  the
other  lords,  who  formed  the  two  processions,  also  saluted
me,  one  after  the  other,  and  then  returned  to  the  pro-
cession.  When  I approached  to  speak  to  Montezuma,
I took  off  a collar  of  pearls  and  glass  diamonds,  that  I
wore,  and  put  it  on  his  neck,  and,  after  we  had  gone
through  some  of  the  streets,  one  of  his  servants  carne
with  two  collars,  wrapped  in  a cloth,  which  were  made
of  coloured  shells.  These  they  esteem  very  much;

234

Letters  of  Cortes

and  from  each  of  the  collars  hung  eight  golden  shrimps
executed  with  great  perfection  and  a span  long.  When
he  received  them,  he  turned  towards  me,  and  put  them
on  my  neck,  and  again  went  on  through  the  streets,  as
I have  already  indicated,  until  we  carne  to  a large  and
handsome  house,  which  he  had  prepared  for  our  reception.
There  he  took  me  by  the  hand,  and  led  me  into  a spacious
room,  in  front  of  the  court  where  we  had  entered,  where
he  made  me  sit  on  a very  rich  platform,  which  had  been
ordered  to  be  made  for  him,  and  told  me  to  wait  there;
and  then  he  went  away.

After  a little  while,  when  all  the  people  of  my  company
were  distributed  to  their  quarters,  he  retumed  with  many
valuables  of  gold  and  silver  work,  and  five  or  six  thousand
pieces  of  rich  cotton  stuffs,  woven,  and  embroidered  in
divers  ways.  After  he  had  given  them  to  me,  he  sat  down
on  another  platform,  which  they  immediately  prepared
near  the  one  where  I was  seated,  and  being  seated  he
spoke  in  the  following  manner:

“ We  have  known  for  a long  time,  from  the  chroni-
cles  of  our  forefathers,  that  neither  I,  ñor  those  who
Monte  inhabit  this  country,  are  descendants  from
zuma’s  First  the  aborigines  of  it, 1 but  from  strangers  who
Discourse  carne  to  it  from  very  distant  parts;  and  we
to  Cortes  aiso  ^old,  that  our  race  was  brought  to
these  parts  by  a lord,  whose  vassals  they  all  were,  and
who  retumed  to  his  native  country.  After  a long  time
he  carne  back,  but  it  was  so  long,  that  those  who  remained
here  were  married  with  the  native  women  of  the  country,
and  had  many  descendants,  and  had  built  towns  where
they  were  living ; when,  therefore,  he  wished  to  take  them
away  with  him,  they  would  not  go,  ñor  still  less  receive
him  as  their  ruler,  so  he  departed.2  And  we  have  al-
ways  held  that  those  who  descended  from  him  would

'[See  Appendix  III.  at  cióse  of  Letter

2 See  Appendix  IV.  at  cióse  of  Letter.

Second  Letter

235

come  to  subjugate  this  country  and  us,  as  his  vassals;
and  according  to  the  direction  from  which  you  say  yon
come,  which  is  where  the  sun  rises,  and  from  what  you
tell  us  of  your  great  lord,  or  king,  who  has  sent  you  heie,
we  believe,  and  hold  for  certain,  that  he  is  our  rightful
sovereign,  especially  as  you  tell  us  that  since  many  days
he  has  liad  news  of  us.  Henee  you  may  be  sure,  that
we  shall  obey  you,  and  hold  you  as  the  representative  of
this  great  lord  of  whom  you  speak,  and  that  in  this  theie
will  be  no  lack  or  deception;  and  throughout  the  whole
country  you  may  command  at  your  will  (I  speak  of  what
I possess  in  my  dominions),  because  you  will  be  obeyed,
and  recognised,  and  all  we  possess  is  at  your  disposal.

“ Since  you  are  in  your  rightful  place,  and  in  your  own
homes,  rejoice  and  rest,  free  from  all  the  trouble  of  the
journey,  and  wars  which  you  have  had,  for  I am  well  aware
of  all  that  has  happened  to  you,  between  Puntunchan
and  here,  and  I know  very  well,  that  the  people  of  Cem-
poal,  and  Tascaltecal,  have  told  you  many  evil  things  re-
specting  me.  Do  not  believe  more  than  you  see  with
your  own  eyes,  especially  from  those  who  are  my  enemies,
and  were  my  vassals,  yet  rebelled  against  me  on  your
coming  (as  they  say),  in  order  to  help  you.  I know  they
have  told  you  also  that  I have  houses,  with  walls  of  gold,
and  that  the  furniture  of  my  halls,  and  other  things  of  my
Service,  were  also  of  gold,  and  that  I am,  or  make  myself,
a god,  and  many  other  things.  The  houses  you  have
seen  are  of  lime  and  stone  and  earth.”  And  then  he
held  up  his  robes,  and  showing  me  his  body  he  said  to  me,
“ Look  at  me,  and  see  that  I am  flesh  and  bones,  the  same
as  you,  and  everybody,  and  that  I am  mortal,  and  tangi-
ble. ” And  touching  his  arms  and  body  with  his  hands,
“ Look  how  they  have  lied  to  you!  It  is  true  indeed  that
I have  some  things  of  gold,  which  have  been  left  to  me
by  my  forefathers.  All  that  I possess,  you  may  have
whenever  you  wish.

236

Letters  of  Cortes

“I  shall  now  go  to  other  houses  where  I live;  but  you
will  be  provided  here  with  everything  necessary  for  you
and  your  people,  and  you  shall  suffer  no  annoyance,  for
you  are  in  your  own  house  and  country.  ”

I answered  to  all  he  said,  certifying  that  which  seemed
to  be  suitable,  especially  in  confirming  his  belief  that  it
was  Your  Majesty  whom  they  were  expecting.  After
this,  he  took  his  leave,  and,  when  he  had  gone,  we  were
well  provided  with  chickens,  and  bread,  and  fruits,  and
other  necessities,  especially  such  as  were  required  for  the
Service  of  our  quarters.  Thus  I passed  six  days  well
provided  with  everything  necessary,  and  visited  by
many  of  the  lords.

I have  already  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  Most
Catholic  Lord,  that  when  I started  from  the  city  of  Vera
Cruz,  in  search  of  this  lord,  Montezuma,  I left  there  a
hundred  and  fifty  men,  to  build  that  fort  which  I had
begun,  and  I likewise  stated,  that  I had  left  many  villages
and  forts  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  town,  under  the
royal  dominión  of  Your  Highness,  and  the  natives  as
very  loyal  vassals  of  Your  Majesty.

While  I was  in  the  city  of  Churultecal,  I received
letters  from  the  captain,  whom  I had  left  in  my
Treachery  place  at  Vera  Cruz,  informing  me  that  Quauh-
of  Quauh-  popoca, 1 lord  of  the  city  called  Almería,
popoca  had  sent  messengers  to  him,  saying,  that  if
he  had  not  yet  offered  to  become  a vassal  of  Your

1 Quauhpopoca  commanded  the  garrisons  at  Nauhtla  (named
Almería  by  the  Spaniards)  and  Tochpan,  which  is  the  present  town  of
Tuxpan.

If  Quauhpopoca  acted  by  his  sovereign’s  orders,  he  merely  did  his
duty,  and  merited  no  punishment  from  Cortes,  but  if,  on  the  other
hand,  he  acted  on  his  own  initiative,  then  Montezuma  was  free  from
blame  and  should  not  have  been  degraded  by  the  imposition  of  chains.
Cortes’s  action  is  indefensibie;  his  intention  doubtless  was  to  convince
the  emperor  that  there  was  no  depth  of  humiliation  to  which  he  might
not  be  brought,  and  to  prove  to  the  people  that  to  kill  a Spaniard  was
the  greatest  of  crimes,  sure  to  be  followed  by  the  direst  punishment.

Second  Letter

237

Highness,  ñor  had  appeared  to  give  his  obedience,  with
all  his  lands,  as  he  was  obliged  to  do,  it  was  because
he  had  to  cross  an  enemy’s  country,  and  that,  fearing
to  be  molested  by  them,  he  had  deferred  coming,  but
to  send  hitn  four  Spaniards  to  accompany  him,  because,
they,  through  whose  country  he  had  to  pass,  knowing
for  what  purpose  he  was  coming,  would  not  then  daie
molest  him,  and  he  would  immediately  come.  The  cap-
tain,  believing  that  what  the  said  Qualpopoca  had  sent
to  say  was  true,  as  many  others  had  done  the  same,  had
despatched  him  the  four  Spaniards,  but,  after  he  got  them
in  his  power,  he  tried  to  kill  them,  in  such  a way  as  would
make  it  appear  that  he  had  not  done  it.  After  he  had  killed
two  of  them,  however,  the  other  two,  wounded,  escaped
to  the  forests.  The  captain  had  then  attacked  the  city
of  Almería,  with  fifty  Spaniards,  two  horsemen,  two
field  pieces,  and  about  eight  thousand  friendly  Indians.
He  fought  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  city,  and
slaughtered  many  of  them,  driving  out  the  rest,  and  burnt,
and  destroyed  it,  because  the  Indians  accompanying
him  were  their  enemies,  and  had  put  much  diligence  into
it.  Qualpopoca,  the  lord  of  the  city,  together  with  the
other  chiefs,  who  had  come  thither  to  assist  him,  escaped
by  taking  flight.

The  captain  was  informed  by  some  of  the  prisoners,
taken  amongst  the  defenders  of  the  city,  that  Qualpopoca
had  killed  the  said  Spaniards,  whom  we  had  sent,  because
Montezuma  had  ordered  him,  and  his  other  vassals,  that,
as  soon  as  I left  the  town  of  Vera  Cruz,  they  should  attack
those  vassals  who  had  rebelled  against  him,  and  offered
themselves  to  the  Service  of  Your  Highness;  and  that
he  should  use  every  means  he  could  to  kill  the  Spaniards
I had  left  there,  so  that  they  could  not  aid  ñor  favour
them.  This  was  the  reason  they  had  done  what  they
had.

Six  days  having  passed,  Most  Invincible  Prince,  after

238

Letters  of  Cortes

I had  arrived  in  the  city  of  Temixtitan,  and,  having  seen
something  of  it,  although  little  in  proportion  to  the
amount  there  is  to  be  seen  and  noted,  it  appeared  to  me,
even  from  what  I had  seen  of  it  and  the  country,  that  it
would  be  conducive  to  Your  Royal  Highness’s  Service,
and  to  our  security,  that  Montezuma  should  be  in  my
power,  and  not  at  his  entire  liberty,  so  that  he  might
not  relax  his  intention  and  disposition  to  serve  Your
Highness.  I thought  this,  especiaUy  because  we  Span-
iards  are  somewhat  touchy  and  importúnate,  and,  if  he
should  happen  to  become  angry,  he  could  do  us  such
injury  with  his  great  power,  that  there  would  remain  no
recollection  of  us;  and  also  because,  having  him  in  my
power,  all  the  other  countries  who  were  subject  to  him,
would  come  to  the  knowledge  and  Service  of  Your
Majesty,  as  afterwards  happened.

I determined  to  seize  him,  and  confine  him  in  my
quarters,  which  are  very  strong;  and,  thinking  over
all  the  forms  and  ways  in  which  I could
“ns  accomplish  this,  without  provoking  any  scan-
Montezuma  dal  or  commotion  upon  his  arrest,  I remem-
bered  what  my  captain  at  Vera  Cruz  had
written  about  the  occurrence  in  the  city  of  Almería,  as  I
ha  ve  related,  and  how  it  had  become  known,  that  all  that
had  happened  there  had  taken  place  by  Montezuma’s
command.  I stationed  sufficient  guards  in  the  cross
streets,  and  went  to  the  palace  of  Montezuma,  as  I had
at  other  times  gone  to  see  him;  and,  after  conversing
with  him  lightly  on  pleasant  subjects,  and  after  he  had
given  me  some  valuables  in  gold,  and  one  of  his  daughters,
and  some  daughters  of  other  lords  to  some  of  my  com-
panions,  I told  him  that  I had  learned  what  had  happened
in  the  city  of  Nautecal,  or  Almería,  and  about  the  Span-
iards  whom  they  had  killed  there,  and  that  Qualpopoca
gave  as  his  excuse,  that  all  he  had  done  had  been  by
Montezuma’s  order,  and  that,  as  his  vassal,  he  could  not

Second  Letter

239

have  done  otherwise.  I said  that,  because  I did  not
believe  Qualpopoca’s  excuse  of  his  fault,  it  seemed  to
me  that  he  ought  to  send  for  him,  and  the  other  chiefs
who  had  helped  him  in  the  murder  of  the  Spaniards,  so
that  the  truth  might  be  known,  and  they  be  punished,
and  Your  Majesty  might  clearly  perceive  his  good  dis-
position.  Otherwise  the  reports  of  those  wicked  men
might  provoke  Your  Highness  to  anger  against  him,
from  which,  instead  of  the  favours  Your  Highness  would
now  grant  him,  evil  would  result;  for  I was  convinced
that  the  truth  was  contrary  to  what  they  declared.  He
immediately  sent  for  certain  of  his  people,  to  whom  he
gave  a small  stone  figure,  like  a seal,  which  he  wore  tied
to  his  arm,  ordering  them  to  go  to  the  city  of  Almería,
which  is  about  sixty  or  seventy  leagues  from  that  of
Muxtitan  [México],  and  bring  the  said  Qualpopoca;  to
ascertain  what  others  had  taken  part  in  the  murder  of
the  Spaniards,  and  to  bring  them  likewise;  and,  if  they
resisted,  to  bring  them  as  prisoners,  and,  if  they  should
resist  imprisonment,  to  cali  upon  certain  tribes  in  the
neighborhood,  which  he  then  named,  to  seize  them  by
forcé  of  arms ; but  on  no  account  to  retum  without  them.

These  men  immediately  left,  and,  after  they  had  gone,
I told  Montezuma  that  I was  very  grateful  to  him  for  the
diligence  he  had  used  in  the  imprisonment  of  those  men,
for  I must  render  an  account  to  Your  Roy  al  Highness
for  those  murdered  Spaniards.  To  enable  me  to  give
this,  it  now  only  remained  that  he  should  stop  in  my
quarters,  until  the  truth  was  established,  and  it  was
known  that  he  was  blameless.  I eamestly  prayed  him
not  to  feel  pained  at  this,  because  he  would  not  be  kept
a prisoner,  but  would  have  entire  liberty;  that  I would
place  no  impediment  to  his  Service  and  authority  in  his
dominions,  and  that  he  might  choose  any  room  he  pleased
in  the  palace  where  I was,  where  he  should  remain  at  his
pleasure,  well  assured  that  he  should  suffer  no  annoyance

240

Letters  of  Cortes

or  unpleasantness,  but  rather  that,  in  addition  to  his  own
attendants,  my  companions  would  also  obey  his  com-
mands.  We  had  much  conversation  and  argument  about
this,  which  would  be  too  lengthy  to  write,  and  even  too
prolix  to  recount  to  Your  Highness,  as  well  as  of  little
bearing  on  the  case,  henee  I will  not  say  more  than  that
finally  he  agreed  to  come  with  me,  and  immediately
gave  orders  to  prepare  the  apartment  he  wished  to
occupy,  which  was  well  fitted  up,  and  put  in  order.  This
having  been  done,  many  lords  carne,  and  having  taken
off  their  vestments,  which  they  carried  under  their  arms,
barefooted  they  brought  the  litter,  not  much  adorned,
and,  weeping,  they  placed  him  on  it,  in  profound  silence.
Thus  we  went  to  my  quarters  without  causing  any  com-
motion  in  the  city,  although  some  had  begun,  but,  when
Montezuma  heard  of  it,  he  ordered  it  to  be  stopped,  and
thus  all  was  as  completely  quiet  as  though  nothing  had
happened ; and  this  continued  all  the  time  I kept  Monte-
zuma  prisoner,  for  he  lived  at  his  entire  pleasure,  and  with
all  his  Service,  just  as  he  had  it  in  his  own  palace,  which
was  great  and  marvellous,  as  I will  hereafter  say.  And
I,  and  those  of  my  company,  did  everything  we  could
to  please  him.

Some  fifteen  or  twenty  days  having  passed  since  his
imprisonment,  those  who  had  been  sent  for  Qual-
M te  popoca,  and  the  others  who  had  killed  the

zmna^n  Spaniards,  returned,  bringing  the  said  Qual-

Chains  popoca,  and  one  of  his  sons,  and  with  them

fifteen  other  persons  whom  they  said  had  taken
part  in  the  murders.  Qualpopoca  was  carried  in  a
litter,  very  much  in  the  style  of  a lord,  as  he  in  reality
was.  They  were  delivered  to  me,  and  I kept  them  under
guard  in  prison,  and  afterwards  when  they  confessed  that
they  had  killed  the  Spaniards,  I had  them  interrogated
as  to  whether  they  were  vassals  of  Montezuma.  Qual-
popoca answered,  asking  if  there  existed  any  other  lord

Second  Letter

241

of  whom  he  might  be  vassal,  as  much  as  to  say  there  was
no  other.  I likewise  asked  them  if  what  had  been  done
there  was  by  Montezuma’s  order;  and  they  answered,
“ No,”  although  afterwards,  when  the  sentence,  that  they
should  be  bumed,  was  carried  into  execution,  all  with
one  voice  said  it  was  true  that  Montezuma  had  ordered
them  to  do  it,  and  that  they  had  obeyed  his  command.
So  they  were  burned  publicly,  in  one  of  the  squares,
without  occasioning  any  commotion,  and  the  day  when
they  were  bumed,  as  soon  as  they  confessed  that  Monte-
zuma  commanded  them  to  kill  the  Spaniards,  I ordered
him  to  be  put  in  chains,  which  frightened  him  not  a little.

After  I had  spoken  to  him,  I removed  the  irons
the  same  day,  and  he  remained  very  satisfied,  and  ever
afterwards  I endeavoured  to  please  him,  and  keep  him
satisfied  as  far  as  possible;  especially  did  I always  say
publicly  to  all  the  natives  of  the  country,  nobles  as  well
as  others,  who  carne  to  see  him,  that  Your  Majesty  had
been  pleased  that  Montezuma  should  continué  to  exercise
authority,  recognising  the  suzerainty  of  Your  Highness,
and  that  Your  Highness  would  be  well  pleased  by  their
obeying  him,  and  regarding  him  as  their  lord,  as  they
had  before  I carne  to  the  country.  So  good  was  my
treatment  of  him,  and  the  satisfaction  he  felt,  that  some-
times,  and  frequently,  I offered  him  his  liberty,  praying
him  to  return  to  his  palace ; but  he  told  me  each  time  that
he  was  contented  there,  and  that  he  did  not  wish  to  go,
because  nothing  that  he  wished  was  wanting,  more  than
in  his  own  palace,  whereas  it  might  happen  that,  if  he
went  back,  the  lords  of  the  country,  his  vassals,  would
importune  him  to  do  things,  in  spite  of  himself,  which
would  be  contrary  to  his  own  wish,  and  to  Your  High-
ness’s  Service.  He  added,  that  he  was  determined  to
serve  Your  Majesty  in  all  that  was  possible,  and  up  till
now  he  had  told  them  what  he  wanted  done,  and  was
content  where  he  was,  for,  should  anyone  attempt  to

VOL.  I. — 16

242

Letters  of  Cortes

make  suggestions  to  him  now,  he  could  excuse  himself
by  answering  that  he  was  not  free,  and  thus  evade  them.
He  often  asked  permission  to  go  and  enjoy  himself,  and
pass  the  time  in  certain  pleasure  houses,  both  out  of  the
citv  and  in  it,  and  I never  denied  him  this.  He  often
would,  with  five  or  six  Spaniards  go  to  enjoy  himself
one  or  two  leagues  out  of  the  city,  returning  ver}7  gladly
to  the  quarters  where  I kept  him;  and,  whenever  he  went
out,  he  would  present  many  valuables,  and  clothing,  as
well  to  the  Spaniards  who  went  with  him,  as  to  the  natives,
who  always  accompanied  him  to  at  least  the  number  of
three  thousand  men,  most  of  them  nobles  and  persons  of
distinction;  and,  as  he  always  gave  them  many  banquets
and  feasts,  they  who  went  with  him  were  always
contented.

When  I afterwards  understood  perfectly,  that  he
was  wholly  devoted  to  the  Service  of  Your  Royal
Highness,  I prayed  him,  so  that  I might  give
Investiga  tes a better  account  to  Your  Majesty  of  this
the  Gold  country,  to  show  me  the  mines  from  which
Mines  of  ^e  obtained  gold,  and  he  answered  with  perfect
MexlC0  good  will  that  he  would  gladly  do  so.  He  im-
mediately  sent  certain  of  his  servants,  distributing  them
two  by  two  over  four  provinces,  from  which  he  said  he
got  the  gold;  and  he  asked  me  to  send  Spaniards  with
them,  to  see  how  it  was  taken  out.  So,  for  each  of  his
own  people,  I sent  two  Spaniards,  and  some  went  to  a
province,  called  Cuzula,  eighty  leagues  from  the  great
city  of  Temixtitan,  the  natives  of  which  are  his  vassals,
and  there  they  were  shown  three  rivers,  from  each  of
which  they  brought  me  specimens  of  gold  of  very  good
quality,  although  it  was  taken  out  with  mean  tools,  as
they  had  only  those  with  which  the  Indians  extract  it.
On  the  road,  they  passed  through  three  provinces,  ac-
cording  to  what  the  Spaniards  said,  of  fine  land,  and  many
hamlets  and  cities,  and  towns,  very  populous,  and  con-

Second  Letter

243

taining  buildings  equal  to  any  in  Spain.  They  told  me
especially  of  a house  and  fort,  greater,  and  stronger,  and
better  built,  than  the  castle  of  Burgos,  and  that  the
people  of  this  province,  called  Tamazulapa,  were  better
dressed  than  any  others  we  have  seen,  and,  as  it  seemed
to  them,  more  intelligent.  Others  went  to  another
province  called  Malinaltepeque,  another  seventy  leagues
from  the  said  great  city,  and  more  towards  the  sea-coast;
and  they  brought  me  likewise  specimens  of  gold  from  a
great  river  there.

The  others  went  to  a country,  called  Teniz, 1 farther
up  this  river,  belonging  to  a people  of  a different  language
from  that  of  Culua,  and  the  ruler  of  that  country  is  called
Coatelicamat.  His  country  lies  in  a very  high  rugged
mountain  chain,  and  is  not  subject  to  Montezuma,  the
people  of  that  province  are  very  war-like,  fighting  with
lances,  twenty  or  thirty  palms  long,  and,  because  they
are  not  vassals  of  Montezuma,  the  messengers  who  ac-
companied  the  Spaniards  did  not  daré  to  enter  that
country,  without  first  notifying  the  chief  and  asking
his  permission.  They  told  him  they  had  come  with  the
Spaniards  to  see  the  gold  mines  in  his  country,  and  be-
sought  him,  on  my  part,  and  that  of  Montezuma,  their
lord,  to  permit  it.  Coatelicamat  answered,  that  he  was
very  willing  the  Spaniards  should  come  into  his  country,
and  see  the  mines,  and  whatever  else  they  wished,  but
that  the  Culuans,  who  were  subject  to  Montezuma,  must
not  come,  because  they  were  his  enemies.  The  Spaniards
were  somewhat  perplexed,  as  to  whether  they  should  go
alone,  or  not;  those  who  accompanied  them  told  them
not  to  go,  as  they  would  be  killed,  and  that  it  was  in
order  to  kill  them  that  Coatelicamat  would  not  permit
the  Culuans  to  accompany  them.  At  last  they  deter-
mined  to  go  alone,  and  the  lord  and  his  people  received
them  very  well,  and  showed  them  seven  or  eight  mines

1 Tenich.

244

Letters  of  Cortes

where  they  took  out  gold;  and  in  their  presence  the  In-
dians  took  some,  out  of  which  they  brought  me  specimens.
Coatelicamat  sent  me  certain  messengers  with  the
Spaniards,  offering  himself  and  his  country  for  the  Service
of  Your  Majesty;  and  he  sent  me  certain  valuables  of
gold,  and  such  wearing  apparel  as  they  have.

The  others  went  to  another  province,  called  Tuchite-
peque, 1 which  is  almost  in  a direct  line  towards  the  sea,
twelve  leagues  beyond  the  province  of  Malinaltepeque
where,  as  I have  already  said,  gold  had  been  found.
Two  other  rivers  were  shown  them  there,  where  gold  is
also  found.

As  there  is  in  those  parts,  according  to  what  the  Span-
iards who  went  there  informed  me,  every  facility  for
making  plantations,  and  procuring  gold,  I begged  Monte-
zuma  to  establish  a plantation  for  Your  Majesty  in  that
province  of  Malinaltepeque,  which  seems  the  best  adapted,
and  he  put  such  diligence  into  it,  that,  within  two  months
after  I had  spoken  to  him,  sixty  fanegas2  of  maize,  and
ten  of  beans  had  been  sown,  and  two  thousand  plants  of
cacap, 3 which  bears  a fruit  somewhat  like  almonds.
This  fruit  they  sell  ground,  and  esteem  so  highly,  that
it  is  used  instead  of  money  all  over  the  country,  and  with
it  everything  can  be  bought  in  the  market  places  and
elsewhere.  He  built  four  good  houses,  in  one  of  which,
besides  the  living  apartments,  they  made  a water  tank,
and  put  five  hundred  ducks  in  it;  these  are  much  es-
teemed,  because  they  pluck  their  feathers  every  year,  and
use  them  for  making  wearing  apparel.  And  they  placed
fifteen  hundred  chickens  in  it,  not  to  speak  of  other  farm
stock,  which  the  Spaniards  judged  to  be  worth  twenty
thousand  dollars  of  gold.  I also  prayed  Montezuma  to
tell  me  if  on  the  sea-coast  there  was  any  river  or  bay

1 Xuchitepec.

2 Hanega,  also  called  fanega,  a dry  measure  corresponding  approxi-
mately  to  the  bushel.

3 Cacao  from  which  chocolate  is  obtained.

Second  Letter

245

where  ships  could  enter  safely,  and  he  answered  me  that
he  did  not  know,  but  that  he  would  have  the  coast  drawn
for  me,  with  its  bays  and  rivers,  and  that  I might  send
the  Spaniards  to  see  them,  and  that  he  would  give  me
people  to  guide  and  take  them;  and  thus  we  did.

Another  day  they  brought  me  a cloth,  on  which  the
whole  coast  was  drawn,  showing  a river,  larger  than  the
others,  flowing  into  the  sea;  this  seemed  to  be  amongst
the  mountain  chains  calledSanmin, 1 which  form  such  a bay,
that  the  pilots  heretofore  believed  it  divided  the  province
called  Mazamalco.  Montezuma  told  me  I might  choose
whom  I wished  to  send,  and  he  would  provide  means  for
seeing  and  learning  everything.  I immediately  named  ten
men,  amongst  them  some  pilots  and  persons  acquainted
with  the  sea.  Fumished  with  the  provisions  he  gave
us,  they  left,  and  explored  the  whole  coast,  from  the
port  of  Chalchilmeca, 2 which  is  called  San  Juan,  where
I first  disembarked.

They  covered  about  sixty  odd  leagues,  but  nowhere
found  a river  or  bay  where  ships  could  enter,  al-
though  there  are  many  very  large  ones  on  The  Span¡
the  said  coast;  they  took  soundings  of  all  ardsSearch
from  the  canoes,  and  finally  reached  the  said  for  a
province  of  Cuacalco,3  where  was  the  river  Harbour
shown  on  the  chart.  The  chief  of  that  province,  called
Tuchintecla,  received  them  very  well  and  gave  them
canoes  to  explore  the  river.  They  found  the  shallowest
part  at  its  mouth,  two  and  a half  fathoms  in  depth,  and,
twelve  leagues  up  the  river,  the  greatest  depth  they  found
was  five  or  six  fathoms;  from  their  observations  they
judged  it  has  about  the  same  depth  for  thirty  leagues

1 Coatzacoalco  was  the  ñame  of  the  river;  the  place  described  is
between  the  sierras  of  San  Martin  and  Sant  Antón,  henee  the  ñame
Sanmin  may  be  a careless  or  an  intentional  contraction  of  San  Martin.

2 Chalchuihcuecan  was  the  Indian  ñame  for  San  Juan  de  Ulua,  the
port  of  Vera  Cruz.

3 Coatzacoalco.

246

Letters  of  Cortes

up  from  its  mouth.  On  its  banks,  are  many  large  towns,
with  an  innumerable  population,  and  all  the  province  is
level,  and  rich  and  abundant  in  produce.  The  people
of  this  province  are  not  vassals  or  subjects  of  Montezuma,
but  rather  his  enemies.  The  lord  of  it  sent  word,  when
the  Spaniards  arrived,  that  the  Culuans  must  not  enter
his  country  because  they  were  his  enemies,  but,  when  the
Spaniards  retumed  home  with  this  account,  he  sent  certain
messengers  with  them,  who  brought  me  valuables  of
gold,  tiger-skins,  feather-work,  stones,  and  stuffs.  These
told  me,  on  his  part,  that  Tuchintecla  had  known  of  us
for  a long  time,  because  his  friends  of  Puntunchan  (which
is  the  river  of  Gri jaiba),  had  told  him  that  I had  passed
there,  and  had  fought  with  them  when  they  did  not
admit  me  to  their  town,  and  how  afterwards  they  became
friends  of  mine,  and  vassals  of  Your  Majesty.  The  mes-
sengers said  that  Tuchintecla,  likewise,  offered  himself  to
Your  Royal  Highness,  with  all  his  country,  and  he  prayed
me  to  consider  him  as  my  friend,  on  conditions  that  the
Culuans  should  not  enter  his  country,  though  I might
see  everything  in  it,  which  might  be  useful  to  Your
Royal  Highness,  of  which  he  would  give  whatever  I
might  direct  every  year.

When  I leamed,  from  the  Spaniards  who  visited  that
province,  of  its  adaptability  for  settlement,  and  of  the
harbour  they  had  found,  I rejoiced  greatly;  for,  ever  since
I carne  to  this  country,  I have  sought  to  find  a harbour
on  its  coast,  where  I might  found  a settlement.  I had
never  succeeded,  however;  ñor  is  one  to  be  found  on  the
whole  coast,  from  the  river  of  San  Antonio,  which  is  next
the  Grijalba  to  that  of  Panuco  which  is  down  the  coast,
where  certain  Spaniards  settled  by  order  of  Francisco  de
Garay,  as  I shall  hereafter  recount  to  Your  Highness.

To  ássure  myself  still  more  about  that  province  and
harbour,  and  of  the  good  will  of  the  natives,  and  of  every-
thing else  necessary  for  a settlement,  I again  sent  certain

Second  Letter

247

of  my  experienced  people  to  ascertain  all  these  matters.
They  went  with  the  messengers,  whom  that  chief  Tuchin-
tecla  had  sent  to  me,  taking  some  things  for  him  which
I gave  them.  Upon  their  arrival,  they  were  well  re-
ceived  by  him;  and  they  again  examined  and  sounded  the
harbour  and  river  to  see  whether  a town  might  be  founded .
They  afterwards  brought  me  a long  and  exact  desciiption,
saying  that  there  was  everything  necessary  for  a settle-
ment,  and  that  the  chief  of  the  province  was  very  content,
strongly  desiring  to  serve  Your  Highness.  When  this
account  carne,  I hnmediately  dispatched  a captain,  with
one  hundred  and  fifty  men,  to  lay  out,  and  build  a town,
and  construct  a port;  for  the  chief  of  that  province  had
offered  to  do  this  as  well  as  everything  else  that  might
be  necessary  or  commanded  by  me;  and  he  even  built
six  houses  on  the  site  chosen  for  the  town,  and  said  that
he  was  very  pleased  we  should  come  there  to  settle,  and
remain  in  his  country.

In  the  past  chapters,  Most  Powerful  Lord,  I have  said
that,  at  the  time  of  my  coming  to  the  great  city  of  Temix-
titan,  a great  lord  had  come,  on  behalf  of  Montezuma,
to  meet  me  on  the  road,  who,  as  I learned  afterwards,
was  a near  relative  of  the  latter’s,  and  had  dominions
called  Haculuacan,1  adjoining  those  of  Montezuma.  The
capital  of  these  is  a very  great  city  on  this  salt  lake,
six  leagues  by  canoe,  and  ten  by  land,  from  this  city  of
Temixtitan.  The  city  is  called  Tezcuco,2  and  it  may  have

1 Acolhuacan.

2 Texcoco,  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  Acolhuacan,  stood  at  the
N.  E.  extremity  of  the  lake  of  the  same  ñame.  It  rivalled  México
in  size  and  importance,  was  the  centre  of  Nahua  culture,  and  has  been
described  as  the  ‘ ‘ Athens  ’ ’ of  the  Aztecs.  The  triple  alliance  of  México ,
Texcoco,  and  Tlacopan  (Tacuba)  formed  the  core  of  the  Aztec  Empire,
where  centred  the  civilisation  of  Anahuac.  The  Kings  of  Texcoco
and  Tlacopan  recognised  the  King  of  México  as  their  over-lord  in  war ,
and  in  the  affairs  of  the  central  administration,  but  in  all  other  respects
these  sovereigns  were  equal,  absolute,  and  independent,  in  their  respec-
tive kingdoms.  Texcoco  was  older  than  México,  and  Nezahualcoyotl,

248

Letters  of  Cortes

about  thirty  thousand  households.  There  are  in  it,  Sire,
very  wonderful  houses,  and  mosques,  and  very  large,  and
well  built,  oratories;  it  has  also  extensive  market  places.
Besides  this  city,  he  possesses  two  others,  one,  called  Ocur-
man,* 1  at  three  leagues  from  Tezcuco,  and  the  other,  called

the  greatest  of  its  rulers,  bore  the  title  of  Aculhua  Tecutl,  which  Mexican
historians  define  as  equivalent  to  Caesar.  This  King  once  declared  war
upon  México  over  a trifling  question  of  etiquette,  sacked  the  capital,
and  exacted  a heavy  indemnity.  The  kingdom  was  divided  into
seventy-five  principalities  or  lordships,  something  after  the  feudal
system  in  Europe  during  the  Middle  Ages.  The  last  king,  before  the
arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  had  been  Nezahualpilli,  a ruler  of  superior
ability,  one  of  the  greatest  princes  in  Mexican  history,  who  left  one
hundred  and  forty-five  children,  of  whom  there  were  four  sons  eligible
for  the  succession.  The  electors,  under  pressure  of  Montezuma,  chose
the  eldest,  with  the  result  that  the  youngest,  Ixtlitxochitl,  contested
the  election,  and  plunged  the  country  into  civil  strife  from  which  it
emerged  divided,  and  in  this  weakened  and  distracted  State  Cortes
found  it  upon  his  arrival.  The  ambitious  Ixtlilxochitl,  discontented
with  the  portion  he  had  received,  was  a permanent  pretender  to  his
brother’s  crown,  and  he  secretly  sent  an  embassy  to  Cortes  at  Cempoal
asking  his  help,  and  offering  his  own  alliance.  This  afforded  Cortes  an
early  insight  into  the  internal  dissensions  of  the  empire,  by  which  he
so  readily  and  ably  profited.  (Ixtlilxochitl.  Hist.  Chichineca.)  Texcoco
rapidly  diminished  both  in  population  and  importance  after  the  con-
quest,  and  Thomas  Gage,  who  visited  it  in  1626,  found  a village
containing  one  hundred  Spaniards  and  three  hundred  Indians,  re-
duced  to  poverty.  Great  havoc  had  been  wrought  by  the  wanton
destruction  of  the  magnificent  forests  of  giant  cedar  trees  in  the
neighbourhood.  Panfilo  de  Narvaez  accused  Cortes  of  using  seven
thousand  cedar  beams  in  the  construction  of  his  palace  alone.  (V oyage
de  Thomas  Gage,  Tom.  i.  cap.  xiii).

1 Near  by  Acolman  stand  the  pyramids  of  Teotihuacan  which
Cortes  nowhere  mentions,  though  it  seems  impossible  he  should  not  have
seen  them.  Of  the  two  large  pyramids,  the  greater  was  called  Tonatiuh
Ytzaqual,  or  House  of  the  Sun,  and  the  lesser,  Metztli  Ytzaqual,
House  of  the  Moon.  The  first  is  680  feet  long  at  the  base  and  180  feet
high;  the  second  is  much  smaller  at  the  base  and  34  feet  lower.  Other
smalí  pyramidal  mounds,  about  thirty  feet  high  were  arranged
in  regular  lines  or  streets,  leading  up  to  the  large  pyramids,  and  were
dedicated  to  the  stars.  As  this  plain  bore  the  Toltec  ñame  of  Mtcoatl,
or  Way  of  the  Dead,  it  has  also  been  thought  that  the  whole  group
formed  a necrópolis.  Siguenza  assigns  their  construction  to  the
Olmechs,  though  most  authorities  believe  they  were  built  later,  by  the

Second  Letter

249

Otumpa,  six  leagues  distant,  each  contaimng  between
three  and  four  thousand  householders.  This  province
and  lordship  of  Haculuacan  has  many  other  villages
and  hamlets,  and  very  good  lands  and  farms.  It  joins
on  one  side  with  the  province  of  Tascaltecal,  of  which  I
have  already  spoken  to  Your  Majesty.

This  lord,  called  Cacamazin, 1 rebelled,  after  the
imprisonment  of  Montezuma,  as  well  against  the  Service
of  Your  Highness,  to  which  he  had  offered  him-  pi0t  to
self,  as  against  Montezuma.  Although  he  Capture
was  required  many  times  to  obey  the  roy-  Cacamtzm
al  mandates  of  Your  Majesty,  he  never  complied,
for,  besides  my  sending  to  require  him,  Montezuma
also  sent  to  summon  him,  but  he  answered  that,  if
anything  was  wanted  of  him,  they  should  come  to  his
country,  and  that  there  he  would  show  what  he  was
worth,  and  the  Service  he  was  obliged  to  render.  Ac-
cording  to  my  information,  he  had  gathered  a multitude
of  warriors  well  prepared  for  action.  As  I was  unable  to

Toltecs.  When  I visited  them  in  1884  they  were  then  so  overgrown
with  vegetation,  and  in  such  a State  of  Progressive  dilapidation,  that
their  total  destruction  seemed  assured,  unless  prompt  measures  were
taken  for  their  preservation.  (Humboldt,  Vues  des  Cordilléres.
Chamay,  Ancient  Cities  of  the  New  World.)

56.  While  Cacamatzin  was  kept  in  Montezuma’s  capital,  his  brother
had  been  killed  by  the  Spaniards,  and  a tribute  levied  on  Texcoco,
with  such  methods  that  it  differed  only  in  ñame  from  pillage.  When
the  King  contrived  to  escape  from  México,  he  assembled  other  princes  of
the  neighbourhood  in  Texcoco,  among  whom  were  his  brothers  Coano-
coch  and  Ixtlilxochitl,  to  whom  he  proposed  that  a stand  should  be
at  once  made  against  the  invaders.  Premature  wranglings  over  the
división  of  the  fruits  of  their  expected  victories  broke  up  this  council,
not  only  without  any  practical  decisión  having  been  reached,  but
with  sharpened  animosity  between  the  three  rival  brothers.  Monte-
zuma’s part  in  the  treachery,  which  Cortes  naively  describes,  was
despicable.  Coanococh  and  Ixtlilxochitl  were  among  the  conspirators
who  betrayed  the  King.

Cacamatzin,  when  brought  into  Montezuma’s  presence  to  hear  his
exhortations  to  make  peace  with  the  Spaniards,  upbraided  the  Em-
peror  for  his  cowardice  and  treachery.  His  death  will  be  noticed
in  a later  note.

250

Letters  of  Cortes

win  him,  either  by  warnings  or  requirements,  I spoke  to
Montezuma,  and  asked  his  advice  as  to  what  we  ought
to  do,  for  the  rebellion  should  not  remain  unchastised.
He  answered,  that  to  seize  him  by  forcé,  would  expose
us  to  much  danger,  as  he  was  a great  lord,  and  had  many
forces  and  people,  and  could  not  be  taken  without  great
risk  of  many  people  perishing.  He  had,  liowever,
many  chiefs  from  the  country  of  Cacamazin  who  lived
with  him  and  whom  he  paid  and  he  would  speak  with
them,  so  that  they  might  win  over  some  of  Cacamazin’s
people,  and  being  assured  that  they  would  favour  our
party,  we  could  take  him  with  safety.

Montezuma  carne  to  an  understanding  with  those
persons,  who  induced  Cacamazin  to  meet  them  in  the
city  of  Tezcuco,  for  the  purpose  of  deliberating  on  certain
matters  of  State,  for,  as  chiefs,  they  were  grieved  that
he  was  doing  certain  things  that  might  ruin  him.  Thus,
they  assembled  in  a very  beautiful  palace  of  Cacamazin’s
on  the  borders  of  the  lake,  so  constructed  that  canoes
can  pass  under  it,  going  in  and  out.  They  had  secretly
prepared  certain  canoes,  with  forces  in  readiness,  in  case
the  said  Cacamazin  should  resist  his  imprisonment,  and,
while  in  this  consultation,  the  chiefs  seized  him,  before
his  people  suspected  anything,  and  brought  him  across
the  lake  to  the  great  city,  which  I have  already  said  is
six  leagues  from  there.  When  they  arrived,  they  placed
him  in  a litter,  as  was  customary,  and  required  by  his
rank,  and  brought  him  to  me,  and  I ordered  chains  to  be
put  on  him,  and  held  him  in  very  safe  keeping.

Acting  on  the  advice  of  Montezuma,  in  the  ñame  of
Your  Majesty,  I placed  his  son,  whose  ñame  is  Cucuz-
cacin, 1 in  his  lordship,  and  I ordered  that  all  the  tribes
and  lords  of  the  said  province  and  lordship  should  obey
him  as  ruler,  until  Your  Highness  should  order  other-

1 Cuicuitzcatzin : a younger  brother  who  was  baptised  and  became
known  as  Don  Carlos.

Second  Letter

251

wise.  Thus  it  was  done  thenceforward,  and  all  obeyed
and  served  him  as  lord,  the  same  as  the  said  Cacamazin,
and  he  was  obedient  in  everything  I commanded  in  Your
Majesty’s  ñame.

A few  days  after  the  imprisonment  of  Cacamazin,
Montezuma  held  a meeting  of  all  the  lords  of  the  city
and  the  neighbouring  countries;  and,  when  Speech  of
all  were  assembled,  he  sent  to  ask  me  to  Montezuma
join  them,  and,  when  I arrived,  he  spoke
in  this  manner:  “Mybrothers  and  friends,  you
know  that,  for  a long  time  you,  and  your  fatheis,
and  grandfatherSí  have  been,  and  are,  subjects  and
vassals  of  my  forefathers  and  myself,  and  that  you
have  always  been  well  treated  by  them,  and  by  me,  and
that  you  have  likewise  done  what  good  subjects  are
obliged  to  do  towards  their  rightful  sovereign.  I also
believe  that  you  have  kept  in  mind,  from  your  fore-
fathers, that  we  are  not  natives  of  this  country,  and  that
they  carne  to  it  from  another,  very  far  off , that  they  were
brought  here  by  a sovereign,  whose  vassals  they  all  were,
who  left  them  in  it,  but  who  returned  after  a long  time;
that  he  found  our  forefathers  already  settled  and  es-
tablished  in  this  country,  and  married  to  the  women,  and
having  a great  increase  of  sons,  so  that  they  did  not
choose  to  return  with  him,  ñor  much  less  to  receive  him  as
their  sovereign;  and  that  he  departed,  saying  that  he
would  return,  or  send  such  a forcé  that  they  would  be
compelled  to  submit.  You  also  know,  that  we  have
always  expected  him,  and,  according  to  what  the  Captain
has  told  us  of  that  King  and  Lord  who  has  sent  him
here,  and  according  to  the  direction  whence  he  says  he
comes,  I hold  it  to  be  certain,  and  you  must  also  hold  it
thus,  that  his  sovereign  is  the  one  we  have  been  expect-
ing  especially  as  the  Captain  says  that  they  have  had
information  there  respecting  us.

“Since  our  predecessors  did  not  act  justly  towards

252

Letters  of  Cortes

their  sovereign  lord,  let  us  do  so,  and  let  us  give  thanks
to  our  gods,  because  that  which  they  looked  for  has  come
to  pass  in  our  times.  I heartily  pray  you,  inasmuch  as
all  this  is  well  known  to  you,  that,  as  you  have  obeyed
me  as  your  sovereign,  henceforward  you  will  regard  and
obey  this  great  king,  because  he  is  your  rightful  sovereign,
and,  in  his  place,  you  must  hold  this,  his  Captain;  also
that  all  the  tributes  and  Services,  which  until  now  you
have  paid  to  me,  you  do  give  to  him,  because  I also
shall  pay  tribute,  and  serve  in  all  that  he  may  command
me.  In  so  doing,  you  will  do  your  duty  as  you  are  obliged
to  do,  and  you  will,  moreover,  in  doing  this,  give  me  much
pleasure.  ”

All  this  he  told  them,  weeping  the  greatest  tears,  and
the  greatest  sighs,  a man  can  give  vent  to;  and  all  those
lords  who  had  heard  him  were  likewise  weeping  so  much,
that,  during  a considerable  time,  they  were  unable  to
answer.  And  I assure  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  that  there
was  not  one  among  the  Spaniards  who  heard  this
discourse  who  did  not  feel  great  compassion.

After  they  had  somewhat  restrained  their  tears,  they
answered,  that  they  regarded  him  as  their  sovereign,  and
they  promised  to  do  all  that  he  ordered  them  to  do,  and
that  for  this,  and  for  the  reason  he  had  given  them,
they  would  do  it  gladly;  that  henceforth,  for  all  time,
they  gave  themselves  as  vassals  of  Your  Highness  and
henceforth  they,  all  together,  and  each  one  singly,  would
promise,  and  did  promise,  to  comply  with  all  that  should
be  commanded  them  in  the  royal  ñame  of  Your  Majesty,
as  good  and  loyal  vassals  ought  to  do ; and  that  they  would
concur  with  their  tributes  and  Services,  which  heretofore
they  had  given  to  the  said  Montezuma,  and  with  every-
thing  else  which  might  be  commanded  in  the  ñame  of
Your  Highness.  All  this  passed  before  a notary  public,
who  at  my  request  recorded  it  in  due  form,  in  the  presence
of  many  Spaniards  for  witnesses.

Second  Letter

253

This  decisión  and  offer  of  the  said  lords,  for  the  royal
Service  of  Your  Majesty  having  been  completed,  I spoke
to  Montezuma  one  day,  and  told  him  that  Your  xreasure
Highness  was  in  need  of  gold,  on  account  of  cer-  Coiiected
tain  works  ordered  to  be  made,  and  I besought  by  the
him  to  send  some  of  his  people,  and  I would  sPaniards
also  send  some  Spaniards,  to  the  provinces  and  houses
of  those  lords  who  had  there  submitted  themselves,
to  pray  them  to  assist  Your  Majesty  with  some
part  of  what  they  had.  Besides  Your  Highness’s  need,
this  would  testify  that  they  began  to  render  Ser-
vice, and  Your  Highness  would  the  more  esteem  their
good  will  towards  your  Service ; and  I told  him  that'  he
also  should  give  me  from  his  treasures,  as  I wished  to
send  them  to  Your  Majesty,  as  I had  done  with  the  other
things.  He  asked  me  afterwards  to  choose  the  Spaniards
whom  I wished  to  send,  and  two  by  two,  and  five  by
five,  he  distributed  them  through  many  provinces  and
cities,  whose  ñames  I do  not  remember,  as  the  papers
have  been  lost,  and  also  because  they  were  many  and
divers;  and  moreover  some  of  them  were  at  eighty  and
one  hundred  leagues  from  the  said  great  city  of  Temix-
titan.  He  sent  some  of  his  people  with  them  ordering
them  to  go  to  the  lords  of  those  provinces  and  cities,
and  tell  them  that  I had  commanded  each  one  of  them
to  contribute  a certain  measure  of  gold  which  he  gave
them.  Thus  it  was  done,  and  all  those  lords  to  whom
he  sent  gave  very  compliantly,  as  had  been  asked,  not
only  in  valuables,  but  also  in  bars  and  sheets  of  gold,
besides  all  the  jewels  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  the  feather-
work,  and  the  stones,  and  the  many  other  things  of  valué
which  I assigned  and  allotted  to  Your  Sacred  Majesty,
amounting  to  the  sum  of  one  hundred  thousand  ducats
and  more.  These,  besides  their  valué,  are  such,  and  so
marvellous,  that  for  the  sake  of  their  novelty  and  strange-
ness  they  have  no  price,  ñor  is  it  probable  that  all  the

254

Letters  of  Cortes

princes  ever  heard  of  in  the  world,  possess  such  treasures.
Let  not  what  I say  appear  fabulous  to  Your  Majesty,
because,  in  truth,  all  the  things  created  on  land,  as  well
as  in  the  sea,  of  which  Montezuma  had  ever  heard,  were
imitated  in  gold,  most  naturally,  as  well  as  in  silver,  and
in  precious  stones,  and  feather  work,  with  such  perfection
that  they  seemed  almost  real.  He  gave  me  a large  num-
ber  of  these  for  Your  Highness,  besides  others,  he  ordered
to  be  made  in  gold,  for  which  I fumished  him  the
designs,  such  as  images,  crucifixes,  medals,  jewelry  of
small  valué,  and  many  other  of  our  things  which  I made
them  copy.  In  the  same  manner,  Your  Highness  ob-
tained,  as  the  one-fifth  of  the  silver  which  was  received,
one  hundred  and  odd  marks,  which  I made  the  natives
cast  in  large  and  small  plates,  porringers,  cups,  and
spoons,  which  they  executed  as  perfectly  as  we  could
make  them  comprehend.

Besides  these,  Montezuma  gave  me  a large  quantity  of
stuffs,  which  considering  it  was  cotton,  and  not  silk,
was  such  that  there  could  not  be  woven  anything  similar
in  the  whole  world,  for  texture,  colours,  and  handiwork.
Amongst  these,  were  many  marvellous  dresses  for  men
and  women,  bed  clothing,  with  which  that  made  of  silk
could  not  be  compared,  and  other  stuffs  such  as  tapestry,
suitable  for  drawing-rooms  and  churches.  There  were
also  blankets  and  rugs,  for  beds  both  of  feather-work,
and  of  cotton  in  divers  colours,  also  very  marvellous,
and  many  other  things  so  curious  and  numerous  I do
not  know  how  to  specify  them  to  Your  Majesty.  He
also  gave  me  a dozen  cerbatanas,1  with  which  he  shoots,
and  of  their  perfection  I likewise  know  not  what  to  say
to  Your  Highness;  for  they  were  decorated  with  very
excellent  paintings  of  perfect  hues,  in  which  there  were
figures  of  many  different  kinds  of  birds,  animáis,  flowers,
and  divers  other  objects,  and  the  mouthpieces  and

i Long  tubes  or  pipes.

Second  Letter

255

extremities  were  bordered  with  gold,  a span  deep,  as  was
also  the  middle,  all  beautifully  worked.  He  gave  me  a
pouch  of  gold  net-work  for  the  balls,  which  he  told  me  he
would  give  me  also  of  gold.  He  gave  me  also  some  tur-
quoises  [ric]  of  gold,  and  many  other  things,  whose
number  is  almost  infinite. 1

To  give  an  account,  Very  Powerful  Lord,  of  the  great-
ness,  and  the  strange  and  marvellous  things  of  this  great
city  of  Temixtitan  to  Your  Royal  Excellency,  and  of  all
the  dominions  and  splendoar  of  Montezuma  its  sovereign;
of  all  the  rites  and  customs  which  these  people  practise,
and  of  the  order  prevailing  in  the  government,  not  only
of  this  city,  but  also  of  others  belonging  to  this  lord,
much  time  and  many  very  expert  narrators  would  be
required.  I shall  never  be  able  to  say  one-hundredth
part  of  what  might  be  told  respecting  them,  but,  neverthe-
less,  as  far  as  I am  able,  I shall  speak  of  some  of  the  things
I have  seen,  which  although  badly  described,  I know  very
well  will  cause  so  much  wonder,  that  they  will  hardly
be  believed,  because  even  we,  who  see  them  here  with
our  own  eyes,  are  unable  to  comprehend  their  reality.
Your  Majesty  may  be  assured,  that,  if  there  be  anything
wanting  in  my  relation,  it  will  be  rather  in  falling  short,
than  by  overdrawing,  not  only  in  this,  but  in  all  other
matters  of  which  I shall  give  an  account  to  Your  High-
ness;  but  it  seems  to  me  only  just  towards  my  Prince
and  Sovereign  to  tell  him  very  clearly  the  truth,  without
interpolating  matters  which  diminish  or  exaggerate  it.

Before  beginning  to  describe  this  great  city,  and  the
others  which  I mentioned  in  the  other  chapter,  it

1 It  had  been  decided  at  the  outset,  by  common  accord,  that,
after  deducting  the  royal  fifth  of  all  spoils  and  profits  of  whatso-
ever  nature,  which  went  to  the  crown,  one  fifth  of  the  remainder  should
be  the  portion  of  Cortes.  All  the  rest  was  to  be  divided  among  the
members  of  the  expedition,  those  who  remained  in  garrison  at  Vera
Cruz  sharing  equally  with  those  who  started  on  the  march  to  México.
( Doc . Ined..,  tom.  XXVI.,  p.  5-16,  tom.  XXVII.,  p.  37.  Bemol  Diaz
cap.  cv.)

256

Lctters  of  Cortes

appears  to  me  that  to  understand  them  better  I
should  describe  México,  which  is  where  this  great  city,
o i some  others  of  which  I have  spoken,  and  the
Describes  principal  seat  of  Montezuma  s dominión  are.
México  to  This  province  is  ciroular,  and  completely
Charles  V.  surroUnded  by  high  and  rugged  monntains.
Its  plain  is  perhaps  seventy  leagues  in  circumfer-
ence,  in  which  there  are  two  lakes,1  occupying  al-
most  all  of  it,  for  a canoe  travels  fifty  leagues  within
their  borders,  and  one  of  these  lakes  is  of  fresh  water,
and  the  other  larger  one  is  salt.  The  lakes  are  divided
from  one  anotheron  one  side  by  a small  chain  of  very
high  hills,  in  the  middle  of  one  end  of  this  plain,  except
for  a strait  between  these  hills  and  the  high  moun-
tains;  the  strait  is  about  a bow  shot  across.  Communi-
cation  between  one  lake  and  the  other,  and  between
the  cities,  and  the  other  towns  round  about,  is  by
means  of  canoes,  with  no  need  of  going  by  land.
The  large  salt  lake  rises  and  falls  in  its  tides  like  the
sea;  its  waters,  whenever  it  rises,  falling  into  the
fresh-water  lake  as  rapidly  as  though  it  were  a great
river;  and  when  it  ebbs,  the  fresh  water  then  runs  into
the  salt  lake.

This  great  city  of  Temixtitan  is  built  on  the  salt  lake,
and  from  the  mainland  to  the  city  is  a distance  of  two
leagues,  from  any  side  from  which  you  enter.  It  has
four  approaches  by  means  of  artificial  causeways,  two
cavalry  lances  in  width.  The  city  is  as  large  as  Seville
or  Córdoba.  Its  streets  (I  speak  of  the  principal  ones)
are  very  broad  and  straight,  some  of  these,  and  all  the
others,  are  one  half  land,  and  the  other  half  water  on
which  they  go  about  in  canoes.  All  the  streets  haev
openings  at  regular  intervals,  to  let  the  water  flow  frmo
one  to  the  other,  and  at  all  of  these  openings,  some  of

. The  lakes  of  Chalco  and  Texcoco,  the  first  being  of  fresh,  and  the
second,  of  salt  water.

Second  Letter

257

which  are  very  broad,  there  are  bridges,  very  large,  strong,
and  well  constructed,  so  that,  over  many,  ten  horsemen
can  ride  abreast.  Perceiving  that,  if  the  inhabitants
wished  to  practise  any  treachery  against  us,  they  had
plenty  of  opportunity,  because  the  said  city  being  built
as  I have  described,  they  might,  by  raising  the  bridges
at  the  exits  and  entrances,  starve  us  without  our  being
able  to  reach  land,  as  soon  as  I entered  the  city,
I made  great  haste  to  build  four  brigantines,  which
I had  completed  in  a short  time,  capable  whenever  we
might  wish,  of  taking  three  hundred  men  and  the  horses
to  land.

The  city  has  many  squares  where  markets  are  held?
and  trading  is  carried  on.  There  is  one  square,  twice
as  large  as  that  of  Salamanca,  all  sur-  The  Great
rounded  by  arcades,  where  there  are  daily  Market-
more  than  sixty  thousand  souls,  buying  and  Place
selüng,  and  where  are  found  all  the  lánds  of  merchan-
dise  produced  in  these  countries,  including  food  pro-
ducís, jewels  of  gold  and  silver,  lead,  brass,  copper,
zinc,  stone,  bones,  shells,  and  feathers.  Stones  are  sold,
hewn  and  unhewn,  adobe  bricks,  wood,  both  in  the
rough  and  manufactured  in  various  ways.  There  is  a
Street  for  game,  where  they  sell  every  sort  of  bird,  such
as  chickens,  partridges,  quails,  wild  ducks,  fly-catchers,
widgeons,  turtle-doves,  pigeons,  reed-birds,  parrots,  owls,
eaglets,  owlets,  falcons,  sparrow  - hawks  and  kestrels,
and  they  sell  the  sldns  of  some  of  these  birds  of  prey
with  their  feathers,  heads,  beaks,  and  claws.  They
sell  rabbits,  hares,  and  small  dogs  which  they  cástrate,
and  raise  for  the  purpose  of  eating.

There  is  a Street  set  apart  for  the  sale  of  herbs,  where
can  be  found  every  sort  of  root  and  medical  herb  which
grows  in  the  country.  There  are  houses  like  apothecary
shops,  where  prepared  medicines  are  sold,  as  well  as
liquids,  ointments,  and  plasters.  There  are  places  like

VOL.  I. — IJ

258

Letters  of  Cortes

our  barber’s  shops,  where  they  wash  and  shave  their
heads.  There  are  houses  where  they  supply  food  and
drink  for  payment.  There  are  men,  such  as  in  Castile
are  called  porters,  who  carry  burdens.  There  is  much
wood,  charcoal,  braziers  made  of  earthenware,  and  mats
of  divers  kinds  for  beds,  and  others,  very  thin,  used  as
cushions,  and  for  carpeting  halls,  and  bed-rooms.  There
are  all  sorts  of  vegetables,  and  especially  onions,  leeks,
garlic,  borage,  nasturtium,  water-cresses,  sorrel,  thistles,
and  artichokes.  There  are  many  kinds  of  fruits,  amongst
others  cherries,  and  prunes,  like  the  Spanish  ones.  They
sell  bees-honey  and  wax,  and  honey  made  of  corn  stalks,
which  is  as  sweet  and  syrup-like  as  that  of  sugar,  also
honey  of  a plant  called  maguey,1  which  is  better  than
most;  from  these  same  plants  they  make  sugar  and
wine,  which  they  also  sell.

They  also  sell  skeins  of  different  kinds  of  spun  cotton,
in  all  colours,  so  that  it  seems  quite  like  one  of  the  silk
markets  of  Granada,  although  it  is  on  a greater  scale;
also  as  many  different  colours  for  painters  as  can  be  found
in  Spain  and  of  as  excellent  hues.  They  sell  deer  skins
with  all  the  hair  tanned  on  them,  and  of  different  colours ;
much  earthenware,  exceedingly  good,  many  sorts  of
pots,  large  and  small,  pitchers,  large  tiles,  an  infinite
variety  of  vases,  all  of  very  singular  clay,  and  most  of
them  glazed  and  painted.  They  sell  maize,  both  in  the
grain  and  made  into  bread,  which  is  very  superior  in  its
quality  to  that  of  the  other  islands  and  mainland;  pies
of  birds,  and  fish,  also  much  fish,  fresh,  salted,  cooked,

i The  whitish,  slippery,  fermented  liquor  called  pulque  is  ex-
tracted  from  the  maguey  and  is  still  the  popular  drink  in  México;
as  it  must  be  drunk  fresh,  special  pulque  trains  daily  carry  supplies
to  towns  along  the  railway  lines.  Flavoured  with  pineapple,  straw-
berry,  and  other  fresh  fruit  juices,  and  well  iced,  it  is  a very  good  drink,
wholesome,  and  only  intoxicating  if  drunk  immoderately.  The  manu-
facture and  sale  of  the  fiery  spirit,  mescal,  also  drawn  from  the  maguey,
are  under  careful  restrictions  and  it  is  as  destructive  as  absinthe.

Second  Letter

259

and  raw;  eggs  of  hens,  and  geese,  and  other  birds  in  great
quantity,  and  cakes  made  of  eggs.

Finally,  besides  those  things  I have  mentioned,  they
sell  in  the  city  markets  everything  else  which  is  found
in  the  whole  country  and  which,  on  account  of  the  pro-
fusión and  number,  do  not  occur  to  my  memory,
and  which  also  I do  not  tell  of,  because  I do  not  know
their  ñames.

Each  kind  of  merchandise  is  sold  in  its  respective
Street,  and  they  do  not  mix  their  kinds  of  merchandise
of  any  species ; thus  they  preserve  perfect  order.  Every-
thing is  sold  by  a kind  of  measure,  and,  until  now,  we
have  not  seen  anything  sold  by  weight.

There  is  in  this  square  a very  large  building,  like  a
Court  of  Justice,  where  there  are  always  ten  or  twelve
persons,  sitting  as  judges,  and  delivering  their  decisions
upon  all  cases  which  arise  in  the  markets.  There  are
other  persons  in  the  same  square  who  go  about  continually
among  the  people,  observing  what  is  sold,  and  the  meas-
ures  used  in  selling,  and  they  have  been  seen  to  break
some  which  were  false.

This  great  city  contains  many  mosques,  or  houses
for  idols,  very  beautiful  edifices  situated  in  the  different
piecincts  of  it;  in  the  principal  ones  of  The  Aztec
which  are  the  religious  orders  of  their  sect,  Priests
for  whom,  besides  the  houses  in  which  they  keep
their  idols,  there  are  very  good  habitations  pro-
vided.  All  these  priests  dress  in  black,  and  never
cut  or  comb  their  hair  from  the  time  they  enter
the  religious  order  until  they  leave  it;  and  the  sons
of  all  the  principal  families,  both  of  chiefs  as  well  as
noble  citizens,  are  in  these  religious  orders  and  habits
from  the  age  of  seven  or  eight  years  till  they  are  taken
away  for  the  purpose  of  marriage.  This  happens  more
frequently  with  the  first-bom,  who  inherit  the  property,
than  with  the  others.  They  have  no  access  to  women,

2ÓO

Letters  of  Cortes

ñor  are  any  allowed  to  enter  the  religious  houses;  they
abstain  from  eating  certain  dishes,  and  more  so  at  certain
times  of  the  year  than  at  others.

Amongst  these  mosques,  there  is  one  principal  one,  and
no  human  tongue  is  able  to  describe  its  greatness  and
details,  because  it  is  so  large  that  within  its  circuit,  which
is  surrounded  by  a high  wall,  a village  of  five  hundred
houses  could  easily  be  built.  Within,  and  all  around  it,
are  very  handsome  buildings,  in  which  there  are  large
rooms  and  galleries,  where  the  religious  who  live  there
are  lodged.  There  are  as  many  as  forty  very  high  and
well-built  towers,  the  largest  having  fifty  steps  to  reach
the  top ; the  principal  one  is  higher  than  the  tower  of  the
chief  church  in  Seville. 1 They  are  so  well  built,  both
in  their  masonry,  and  their  wood  work,  that  they  could  not
be  better  made  ñor  constructed  anywhere;  for  all  the
masonry  inside  the  chapéis,  where  they  keep  their  idols,
is  carved  with  figures,  and  the  wood  work  is  all  wrought
with  designs  of  monsters,  and  other  shapes.  All  these
towers  are  places  of  burial  for  the  chief s,  and  each  one
of  their  chapéis  is  dedicated  to  the  idol  to  which  they
have  a particular  devotion.  Within  this  great  mosque,
there  are  three  halls  wherein  stand  the  principal  idols
of  marvellous  grandeur  in  size,  and  much  decorated  with
carved  figures,  both  of  stone  and  wood;  and  within  these
halls  there  are  other  chapéis,  entered  by  very  small  doors,
and  which  have  no  light,  and  nobody  but  the  religious
are  admitted  to  them.  Within  these  are  the  images  and
figures  of  the  idols,  although,  as  I have  said,  there  are
many  outside.

The  principal  idols  in  which  they  have  the  most
faith  and  belief  I overtumed  from  their  seats,  and  rolled
Cortes  down  the  stairs,  and  I had  those  chapéis,
Overthrows  where  they  kept  them,  cleansed,  for  they  were
the  Idols  fuu  of  blood  from  the  sacrifices;  and

i See  Appendix  V.,  cióse  of  Letter.

Second  Letter

261

I set  up  images  of  Our  Lady,  and  other  Saints  in
them,  which  grieved  Montezuma,  and  the  natives
not  a little.  At  first  they  told  me  not  to  do  it,  for,  if  it
became  known  throughout  the  town,  the  people  would
rise  against  me,  as  they  believed  that  these  idols  gave
them  all  their  temporal  goods,  and,  in  allowing  them  to
be  ill-treated,  they  would  be  angered,  and  give  nothing,
and  would  take  away  all  the  fruits  of  the  soil,  and  cause
the  people  to  die  of  want.  I made  them  understand  by
the  interpreters  how  deceived  they  were  in  putting  their
hope  in  idols,  made  of  unclean  things  by  their  own  hands,
and  I told  them  that  they  should  know  there  was  but  one
God,  the  Universal  Lord  of  all,  who  had  created  the
heavens,  and  earth,  and  all  things  else,  and  them,  and  us,
who  was  without  beginning,  and  immortal ; that  they  should
adore,  and  believe  in  Him,  and  not  in  any  creature,  or
thing.  I told  them  all  I knew  of  these  matters,  so  as
to  win  them  from  their  idolatries,  and  bring  them  to  a
knowledge  of  God,  Our  Lord;  and  all  of  them,  especially
Montezuma,  answered  that  they  had  already  told  me  they
were  not  natives  of  this  country,  and  that  it  was  a long
time  since  their  forefathers  had  come  to  it,  therefore
they  might  err  in  some  points  of  their  belief,  as  it  was  so
long  since  they  left  their  native  land,  whilst  I,  who  had
recently  arrived,  should  know  better  than  they  what
they  should  believe,  and  hold;  and  if  I would  tell  them,
and  explain  to  them,  they  would  do  what  I told  them,
as  being  for  the  best.  Montezuma  and  many  chiefs  of
the  city  remained  with  me  until  the  idols  were  taken
away  and  the  chapéis  cleansed,  and  the  images  put  up,
and  they  all  wore  happy  faces.  I forbade  them  to  sacri-
fice  human  beings  to  the  idols,  as  they  were  accustomed
to  do,  for  besides  its  being  very  hateful  to  God,  Your
Majesty  had  also  prohibited  it  by  your  laws,  and  com-
manded  that  those  who  killed  should  be  put  to  death.
Henceforth  they  abolished  it,  and,  in  all  the  time  I

2Ó2

Letters  of  Cortes

remained  in  the  city,  never  again  were  they  seen  to
sacrifice  any  human  creature.

The  figures  of  the  idols,  in  which  those  people  believe,
exceed  in  size  the  body  of  a large  man.  They  are  made
of  a mass  of  all  the  seeds  and  vegetables  which  they  eat,
ground  up  and  mixed  with  one  another,  and  kneaded
with  the  hearts’  blood  of  human  beings,  whose  breasts
are  opened  when  alive,  the  hearts  being  removed,  and,
with  the  blood  which  comes  out,  is  kneaded  the  flour,
making  the  quantity  necessary  to  construct  a great
statue.  When  these  are  finished  the  priests  offer  them
more  hearts,  which  have  likewise  been  sacrificed,  and
besmear  the  faces  with  the  blood.  The  idols  are  dedicated
to  different  things,  as  was  the  custom  of  the  heathen  who
anciently  honoured  their  gods.  Thus,  to  obtain  favours
in  war  these  people  have  one  idol,  for  harvests  another,
and  for  everything  in  which  they  desire  any  good,  they
have  idols  whom  they  honour  and  serve.

There  are  many  large  and  handsome  houses  in  this
city,  and  the  reason  for  this  is  that  all  the  lords  of  the
country,  vassals  of  Montezuma,  inhabit  their  houses  in
the  city  a certain  part  of  the  year;  moreover  there  are
many  rich  citizens,  who  likewise  have  very  good  houses.
Besides  having  very  good  and  large  dwelling  places,  all
these  people  have  very  beautiful  flower  gardens  of  divers
kinds,  as  well  in  the  upper,  as  in  the  lower  dwellings.

Along  one  of  the  causeways  which  lead  to  the
city,  there  are  two  conduits  of  masonry  each  two
The  ’ paces  broad,  and  five  feet  deep, 1 through  one
Aqueducts  of  which  a volume  of  very  good  fresh  water,
the  bulk  of  a man’s  body,  flows  into  the  heart  of
the  city,  from  which  all  supply  themselves,  and  drink.
The  other  which  is  empty  brings  the  water,  when
they  wish  to  clean  the  first  conduit,  for,  while  one
is  being  cleaned,  the  water  flows  through  the  other.

i An  estado  was  a man’s  height,  or  about  five  and  one-half  feet.

Second  Letter

263

Conduits  as  large  round  as  an  ox’s  body  bring  the  fresh
water  across  the  bridges,  thus  avoiding  the  channels  by
which  the  salt-water  flows,  and  in  this  manner  the  whole
city  is  supplied,  and  everybody  has  water  to  drink.
Canoes  peddle  the  water  through  all  the  streets,  and  the
way  they  take  it  from  the  conduits  is  this : the  canoes  stop
under  the  bridges  where  the  conduits  cross,  where  men
are  stationed  on  the  top  who  are  paid  to  fill  them.  At
the  different  entrances  to  the  city,  and  wherever  the
canoes  are  unloaded,  which  is  where  the  greatest  quan-
tity  of  provisions  enter  the  city,  there  are  guards,  in  huts
to  collect  a certum  quid  of  everything  that  comes  in.  I
do  not  know  whether  this  goes  to  the  sovereign,  or  to
the  city,  because  up  till  now  I have  not  been  able  to
ascertain,  but  I believe  it  is  for  the  sovereign,  for,  in
other  market  places  of  other  provinces,  that  contribution
has  been  seen  to  be  paid  to  the  ruler.  There  are  to  be
found  daily  in  the  markets  and  public  places  of  the  city
many  workmen,  and  masters  of  all  trades,  waiting  to  be
hired.

The  people  of  this  city  had  better  manners,  and  more
luxuiy  in  their  dressing  and  Service,  than  those  of  other
provinces  and  cities,  for  the  reason  that  the  sovereign,
Montezuma,  always  resided  there,  and  all  the  nobles,  his
vassals,  frequented  the  city,  so  better  manners,  and
more  ceremony  prevailed.  But  to  avoid  being  prolix
in  describing  the  things  of  the  city  (though  I would  fain
continué),  I will  not  say  more  than  that,  in  the  Service
and  manners  of  its  people,  their  fashion  of  living  was  al-
most  the  same  as  in  Spain,  with  just  as  much  harmony  and
order;  and  considering  that  these  people  were  barbarous,
so  cut  off  from  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  other  civilised
peoples,  it  is  admirable  to  see  to  what  they  attained
in  every  respect.  As  far  as  the  Service  surrounding
Montezuma  is  concerned,  and  the  admirable  attributes
of  his  greatness  and  state,  there  is  so  much  to  write  that

2Ó4

Letters  of  Cortes

I assure  Your  Highness  I do  not  know  where  to  begin,
so  as  to  finish  what  I would  say  of  any  part  respecting  it.
For,  as  I have  already  said,  what  greater  grandeur  can
there  be,  than  that  a barbarían  monarch,  like  him,  should
have  imitations  in  gold,  silver,  stones,  and  feather-work,
of  all  the  things  existing  under  heaven  in  his  dominión? —
gold,  and  silver,  things,  so  like  to  nature,  that  there  is
not  a silversmith  in  the  world  who  could  do  it  better;
and,  respecting  the  stones,  there  is  no  imagination  which
can  divine  the  instruments  with  which  they  were  so
perfectly  executed ; and  respecting  the  feather-work,
neither  in  wax,  ñor  in  embroidery,  could  nature  be  so
marvellously  imitated.

So  far,  the  extent  of  Montezuma’s  kingdom  is  not
known,  but  everywhere  within  two  hundred  leagues
Extent  of  on  and  the  other  side  of  this  capital,

the  Aztec  wherever  he  sent,  his  messengers  were  not
Sovereignty  disregarded, 1 although  there  were  some  pro-
vinces  in  the  midst  of  these  countries  with  which  he
was  at  war.  From  what  has  been  leamed,  and  from
what  I understand  from  him,  I judge  that  his  terrítories
were  as  large  as  Spain;  for  he  sent  messengers  from
here  to  Puntunchan,  at  sixty  leagues  distance,  beyond
the  river  of  Grijalba,  ordering  the  natives  of  a city,  called
Cumatan,2  to  give  themselves  as  vassals  to  Your  Ma-
jesty ; and  that  is  a distance  of  two  hundred  and  thirty
leagues  from  the  great  city.  This  I know  for  I have  made
the  Spaniards  go  a distance  of  more  than  a hundred

and  fifty  in  that  direction.

All  the  other  lords  of  this  country  and  province,  es-
pecially  those  of  the  neighbourhood,  resided  as  I have
already  said,  a greater  part  of  the  year  in  the  capital,

> Humboldt  estimates  its  extensión  at  20,000  square  leagües,
and  as  comprising  in  his  time,  the  intendencies  of  Vera  Cruz,  México,

Oaxaca,  and  Valladolid.  .

1 Given  in  Archbishop  Lorenzana’s  edition  as  Jumathlan,  a town

between  the  provinces  of  Oaxaca  and  Chiapa.

Second  Letter

265

and  all,  or  at  least  most  of  them,  had  their  first-bora  sons
in  the  Service  of  Montezuma.  There  were  fortified  places
in  the  dominions  of  these  lords,  and  Montezuma  sent
his  own  people  amongst  them  as  govemors,  and  collectors
of  the  taxes  and  reñís  which  he  received  from  each  pro-
vince.  These  men  kept  an  account  of  what  each  province
was  obliged  to  give,  by  means  of  characters  and  figures,
written  on  the  paper  they  make,  showing  what  each
province  was  obliged  to  pay  according  to  the  quality  of
its  land.  In  this  manner,  produce  from  all  the  said
provinces  carne  into  his  possession.

He  was  so  feared  by  the  present,  as  well  as  the  absent,
that  there  was  never  prince  in  the  world  more  so.  He
had  many  pleasure  houses,  within  and  without  the  city,
each  as  well  constructed,  to  serve  for  its  particular  kind
of  pastime,  as  could  be  described  or  desired  for  so  great
a lord.  Within  the  city,  he  had  residences  such  and  so
marvellous  that  it  seems  to  me  almost  impossible  to
speak  of  their  excellence  and  grandeur.  So  I limit  myself
to  saying  that  there  is  nothing  comparable  with  them  in
Spain.

He  had  a house,  a little  inferior  to  this  one,  where
there  was  a beautiful  garden,  with  arbors  overhanging
it,  of  which  the  marbles  and  tiles  were  of  Montezu-
jasper,  beautifully  worked.  In  this  house  there  ma’s
were  apartments  for  two  great  princes,  and  all  Palaces

their  servants.  It  had  ten  pools  of  water,  in  which
were  kept  all  the  many  and  divers  breeds  of  water  -
fowl  found  in  these  parts,  all  domesticated ; for  the
sea-birds,  too,  there  were  pools  of  salt  water,  and,
for  those  of  the  rivers  and  lakes,  there  was  fresh  water,
which  for  the  sake  of  cleanliness,  they  renewed  at  certain
times  by  means  of  pipes.  To  each  kind  of  bird  they
gave  the  food  which  suited  its  habits  in  its  free  state,  so
that  to  those  which  ate  fish  they  gave  it;  and,  likewise,
worms,  maize,  and  smaller  seeds  were  supplied  as  required

206

Letters  of  Cortes

by  the  different  birds.  I assure  Your  Highness  that  all
those  birds  which  ate  only  fish  received  each  day  two
hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  caught  in  the  salt  lakes.  Three
hundred  men  had  the  charge  of  these  birds,  for  their  solé
employment.  There  were  others  who  were  occupied  only
in  curing  the  birds  which  were  ailing.  Over  each  pool
for  these  birds,  there  were  beautifully  decorated  galleries,
and  corridors,  where  Montezuma  carne  to  amuse  himself
by  watching  them.  There  was  an  apartment  in  this  house
in  which  were  men,  women,  and  children,  white  of  face,
body,  hair,  and  eyelashes  from  the  day  of  their  birth.
There  was  another  very  beautiful  house,  with  a large
court,  paved  with  flags,  in  the  pattem  of  a chess  board.

There  were  also  houses  about  nine  feet  in  height,  and
about  six  paces  square ; one  half  of  each  was  covered  with  a
roofing  of  square  tiles,  and  the  other  half,  which  was  open,
had  a stout  lattice  of  wood.  Each  of  these  houses  con-
tained  a bird  of  prey,  representing  all  the  sorts  known  in
Spain,  from  the  kestrel  to  the  eagle,  besides  many  other
kinds,  which  had  never  been  seen  there;  and  there  were
great  numbers  of  each  of  these  kinds.  Across  the  tops
of  these  houses  there  was  a perch,  and  another  one  out
beyond  the  lattice,  so  that  the  birds  might  use  the  one  at
night  and  when  it  was  raining,  and  the  other  to  sun  them-
selves,  and  take  the  air.  All  these  birds  were  fed  daily  on
chickens,  with  no  other  food.  There  were  certain  large
rooms  in  this  palace,  fitted  with  great  cages,  very  well
constructed,  and  joined  with  heavy  timbers,  in  all  or
most  of  which  were  kept  lions,  tigers,  foxes,  and  every
kind  of  cat  in  considerable  numbers.  These  were  also
fed  on  chickens.  Three  hundred  other  men  had  charge
of  these  animáis  and  birds.

There  was  another  house  where  many  monstrous  men
and  women  lived,  amongst  whom  there  were  dwarfs,
hunchbacks,  and  deformed;  and  each  manner  of  monster
had  a room  apart,  and  they  also  had  persons  to  take

Second  Letter

267

charge  of  them.  I do  not  mention  the  other  diverting
things  Montezuma  had  in  this  city,  because  they  weie  so
many,  and  so  various.

His  service  was  organised  as  follows:  at  dawn  every
day,  six  hundred  lords,  and  men  of  rank,  carne  to
his  palace.  Some  of  these  sat  down,  and  Etiquette
others  walked  about  in  the  halls  and  corridors  0f  Monte-
of  the  palace,  talking  and  passing  the  time,
but  without  entering  the  room  where  he  was ;
the  servants  and  retainers  who  accompanied  them  filled
two  or  three  great  courts,  and  the  Street,  which  was  very
large.  They  remained  in  attendance  until  night.  When
they  served  food  to  Montezuma,  they  likewise  served  all
those  lords  with  like  profusión,  and  their  servants  and  fol-
lowers  also  received  their  rations.  The  larder  and  the  wine
cellar  were  open  daily  to  all  who  wished  to  eat  or  drink.

The  way  they  served  the  meáis  is  this:  three  or  four
hundred  youths  carried  in  countless  dishes,  for,  every
time  he  wished  to  diñe  or  sup,  they  brought  him  all  the
different  dishes,  not  only  meats,  but  also  fish,  and  fruits,
and  herbs,  to  be  found  in  the  land;  and  as  the  climate
is  coid  they  brought,  under  each  píate  and  dish,  a brazier
of  coals,  so  that  the  food  should  not  get  coid.  They  placed
all  the  dishes  together  in  a great  room  where  he  dined,
which  was  almost  filled ; its  floors  were  all  very  well  covered
and  very  clean,  and  he  sat  on  a small  cushion  of  leather,
beautifully  made.  Whilst  he  was  eating,  there  were  five  or
six  eider  lords  standing  a short  distance  from  him,  to  whom
he  offered  from  the  dishes  he  was  eating.  One  of  the  serv-
ants waited  to  bring  and  remove  the  dishes  for  him,  which
were  passed  by  others,  who  stood  further  off  as  the  Service
required.  At  the  beginning  and  end  of  each  meal,  they
always  brought  him  water  for  his  hands,  and  the  towel,
once  used,  he  never  used  again;  ñor  were  the  plates  and
service  in  which  a dish  was  served  ever  brought  again;
and  it  was  the  same  with  the  braziers.

208

Letters  of  Cortes

He  dressed  himself  four  times  every  day,  in  four  different
kinds  of  clothing,  all  new,  and  never  would  he  be  dressed
with  the  same  again.  All  the  lords  who  entered  his  palace
carne  barefooted,  and,  when  those  whom  he  had  sum-
moned  appeared  before  him,  it  was  with  their  heads  bent,
and  their  eyes  on  the  ground,  in  humble  posture;  and,
when  they  spoke  to  him,  they  did  not  look  him  in  the
face,  because  of  respect  and  reverence.  I know  they
did  this  out  of  respect,  for  certain  lords  reproved  the
Spaniards,  saying,  that  when  these  latter  spoke  to  me,
they  would  behave  with  a lofty  demeanour,  looking
me  in  the  face,  which  seemed  to  them  disrespectful  and
shameless.  When  Montezuma  went  out,  which  happened
rarely,  all  those  who  accompanied  him  and  those  whom  he
met  in  the  Street,  turned  their  faces  aside,  and  in  no  wise
looked  at  him,  and  all  the  rest  prostrated  themselves  until
he  had  passed.  One  of  the  lords,  who  carried  three  long
thin  rods,  always  went  before  him,  and  I believe  this  was
done  to  give  notice  of  his  approach.  When  he  descended
from  his  litter,  he  took  one  of  those  rods  in  his  hand,
and  carried  it  as  far  as  he  went.  The  ceremonies  which
this  sovereign  used  in  his  Service  were  so  many,  and  of  such
different  kinds,  that  more  space  than  I have  at  present
would  be  required  to  relate  them,  and  even  a better
memory  to  retain  them;  for  I believe  none  of  the  Sultans,
or  any  infidel  sovereign  of  whom  we  have  had  information
until  now,  has  ever  had  such  ceremonial  in  his  court.

I have  been  occupied  in  this  capital  in  what  seemed
to  conduce  to  the  Service  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  and  in
pacifying  and  winning  over  to  it  many  provinces,  thickly
peopled  countries,  very  great  cities,  towns,  and  forts;
and  in  discovering  mines,  and  learning  and  inquiring
into  many  of  the  secrets  of  Montezuma’s  dominions,  as
well  as  of  others  which  border  on  them,  of  which  he
had  information.  These  are  so  many  and  so  marvellous,
that  they  are  almost  incredible.  In  this,  I have  been

Second  Letter

269

assisted,  with  as  much  good  will  and  satisfaction  on  the
part  of  Montezuma  and  the  natives,  as  if  they,  cib  initio,
had  recognised  Your  Sacred  Majesty  as  their  king  and
ríghtful  sovereign;  and  with  no  less  good  will  have  they
done  all  I commanded  them  in  your  royal  ñame.  In  all
these  things  mentioned,  and  in  others  no  less  useful  to
the  Service  of  Your  Highness,  I spent  from  the  eighth
of  November,  1519,  to  the  beginning  of  May  this  present
year.

While  all  was  quiet  and  tranquil  in  this  city,  and
many  Spaniards  were  distributed  through  divers  parts,
pacifying  the  people  in  the  country,  I greatly  News  of  the
desired  that  ships  might  arrive,  with  the  Arrival  of
answer  to  the  account  I had  sent  to  Your  Narvaez
Majesty,  so  that  I might  forward  what  I now  send.
together  with  all  the  gold  and  jewels  I had  collected
for  Your  Highness.  At  that  time  there  carne  certain
natives,  vassals  of  Montezuma,  who  live  on  the  coast,
telling  me  that,  near  the  mountain  chain  of  San  Martin,
which  is  on  the  said  coast,  before  reaching  the  port
and  bay  of  San  Juan,  eighteen  ships  had  arrived;  and  that
they  did  not  know  whose  they  were,  because,  as  soon
as  they  espied  them  on  the  sea,  they  carne  to  let  me  know.
Following  the  said  Indians,  there  carne  also  a native  of
the  island  of  Fernandina,  who  brought  me  a letter  from
a Spaniard,  whom  I had  stationed  on  the  coast.  This  I
had  done  that  he  might  give  information  about  me,  and
about  that  town  near  the  port,  to  any  ships  that  might
arrive,  so  that  they  might  not  be  lost.  In  this  letter  he
said  that,  “on  such  a day,  a single  ship  had  arrived  off
the  harbour  of  San  Juan,  ” and  that  he  had  examined
all  the  coast  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  but  had  dis-
covered  no  other,  and  therefore  believed  it  to  be  the
ship  I had  sent  to  Your  Majesty,  since  it  was  time  for
this  to  return.  In  order  to  satisfy  himself  more  fully,
he  said  that  he  would  stay,  waiting  for  the  arrival  of

270

Letters  of  Cortes

the  said  ship  in  port,  so  as  to  get  information  which  he
would  immediately  bring  me.

Having  read  this  letter,  I despatched  two  Spaniards  one
by  one  road,  and  the  other  by  another,  so  that  they  might
miss  no  messenger  coming  from  the  ship.  I directed  them
to  go  to  the  said  port,  and  ascertain  how  many  ships
had  arrived,  from  whence  they  carne,  and  what  they
brought,  and  to  retum  as  quickly  as  possible  to  tell  me.
I hkewise  sent  another  to  the  city  of  Vera  Cruz,  to  an-
nounce  what  I had  leamed  about  those  ships,  so  that  they
might  get  information  there,  and  let  me  know;  and  another
went  to  the  Captain  (whom  I had  sent  with  a hundred
and  fifty  men,  to  form  a settlement  at  the  port  of  Quacu-
calco),  to  whom  I wrote,  that,  as  I had  leamed  that
certain  ships  had  arrived  at  the  port,  he  should  stop
wherever  that  messenger  might  meet  him,  and  not  pro-
ceed  any  further,  until  I should  write  to  him  again.
It  afterwards  appeared,  however,  that  he  already
knew  of  the  arrival  of  the  ships  when  he  received  my
letter.

Fifteen  days  elapsed  after  the  departure  of  the  messen-
gers,  and  as  I had  no  news  or  answers  from  them,  I was
not  a little  alarmed.  When  these  fifteen  days  had  passed,
other  Indians,  also  vassals  of  Montezuma,  arrived,  from
whom  I leamed  that  the  said  ships  had  already  anchored
in  the  port  of  San  Juan,  and  the  people  had  disembarked;
that  they  had  brought  about  eighty  horses,  eight  hundred
men,  and  ten  or  twelve  pieces  of  artillery.  All  of  this
report  was  pictured  on  paper  of  the  country,  to  be  shown
to  Montezuma.  The  messengers  also  told  me,  that  the
Spaniard  I had  stationed  on  the  coast,  and  the  other
messengers  I had  sent,  were  with  the  said  people,  and
had  told  these  Indians  that  the  captain  of  those  people
would  not  allow  them  to  retum,  and  for  them  to  tell  me
this.  Having  heard  this,  I determined  to  send  a religious,
whom  I had  brought  in  my  company,  bearing  a letter  of

Second  Letter

271

mine,  and  another  from  the  alcalde  and  the  municipal
officers  of  the  city  of  Vera  Cruz  who  were  with  me,  ad-
dressed  to  the  captain  and  people  who  had  arrived  at  that
port.  In  these  letters  we  informed  him  very  fully  of  all
that  had  happened  to  me  in  this  country;  that  I held
many  cities  and  ports  conquered  and  pacified,  subject
to  the  royal  Service  of  Your  Majesty;  that  I had  taken  the
principal  lord  of  all  these  regions  prisoner,  and  that  I was
in  the  capital.  We  wrote  all  about  its  character,  and  the
gold  and  jewels  I had  obtained  for  Your  Highness,  and
how  I had  given  an  account  to  Your  Majesty  of  the
country.  I asked  them  to  let  me  know  who  they  were,
and  if  they  were  rightful  subjects  of  the  kingdom  and
lordships  of  Your  Highness,  to  write  to  me  whether  they
had  come  to  this  country  by  a royal  mándate  to  settle
permanently,  or  intended  to  advance  or  return;  adding
that,  if  they  needed  anything,  I would  have  them  pro-
vided  with  everything  possible.  I said  also  that,  if  they
carne  from  any  place  outside  the  dominions  and  kingdoms
of  Your  Highness,  to  likewise  let  me  know,  for  if  they
needed  anything  I would  also  supply  it,  if  I could.  If
they  refused  to  inform  me,  I required  them  on  the  part
of  Your  Majesty  to  leave  your  countries,  and  not  to  land
in  them,  with  the  threat  that,  if  they  persisted,  I would
march  against  them  with  all  the  forcé  I had,  both  Span-
iards  and  natives,  and  would  take  them,  and  kill  them  as
foreign  invaders  of  the  kingdoms  and  dominions  of  my
king  and  sovereign.

Within  five  or  six  days  after  the  religious  had  gone
with  the  despatch,  twenty  Spaniards,  whom  I had
left  in  the  city  of  Vera  Cruz,  arrived  in  the  Des¡gns  o{
city  of  Temixtitan,  and  brought  me  a cleric  Panfilo  de
and  two  other  laymen  whom  they  had  taken  Narvaez
in  the  said  city.  From  them  I leamed,  that  the
armada  and  people  in  the  port  belonged  to  Diego
Velasquez,  and  had  come  by  his  orders,  under  a certain

272

Letters  of  Cortes

Panfilo  de  Narvaez, 1 a householder  of  the  island  of
Fernandina,  as  their  captain;  that  they  brought  eighty
horses,  many  pieces  of  artillery,  and  eight  hundred  soldiers,
among  which  latter  were  eighty  musketeers,  and  a hundred
and  twenty  bowmen;  that  Narvaez  carne  with  a com-
mission  as  Captain-General,  and  Lieutenant-Govemor
of  all  these  parts,  by  appointment  of  Diego  Velasquez,
with  faculties  from  Your  Majesty  for  all  this;  that  the
messengers  I had  sent,  and  the  man  I had  stationed  on
the  coast  were  with  Panfilo  de  Narvaez,  who  would  not
allow  them  to  return,  and  that  he  had  information  himself
from  them  about  my  founding  that  town  twelve  leagues
from  the  said  port,  and  of  the  people  who  were  in  it,  as
well  as  about  the  people  I had  sent  to  Quacucalco,  thirty
leagues  from  the  port,  in  a province  called  Tuchitepeque,
I learned  also  that  Narvaez  knew  of  everything  I had
done  in  the  country  in  the  Service  of  Your  Highness;
about  the  cities  and  towns  I had  pacified  and  about  the
great  city  of  Temixtitan;  about  the  gold  and  jewels  we
had  obtained  in  the  country,  and  all  else  that  had  hap-
pened  to  me.  Narvaez  had  sent  these  men  to  Vera  Cruz,
to  try  to  win  over  the  inhabitants  to  his  design  that  they
should  rebel  against  me.  They  brought  me  more  than  a
hundred  letters  which  Narvaez  and  his  companions  sent
to  people  in  Vera  Cruz,  telling  them  to  credit  what  the
cleric  and  the  others  with  him  would  say  in  his  ñame,
promising  them  in  the  ñame  of  Diego  Velasquez,  that,
if  they  would  do  so,  they  should  be  rewarded,  but  that

1 Panfilo  de  Narvaez,  a native  of  Valladolid,  first  settled  m
Jamaica,  afterwards  taking  part  in  the  conquest  of  Cuba,  as  captain
of  thirty  bowmen,  when  he  won  the  friendship  of  Diego  Velasquez,
who  made  him  one  of  his  chief  captains.  Las  Casas  describes  him  as
well  behaved,  and  brave  but  imprudent,  but  Bemal  Díaz  s opinión
of  him  was  less  pleasing  as  he  calis  him  vain  presumptuous,  foolish
and  proud,  but  admits  his  bravery.  He  was  forty  years  oíd  when  he
carne  to  México  to  arrest  Cortes  and  send  him  back  to  Cuba.  He
brought  with  him  the  curse  of  small-pox,  which  was  thus  introduced

into  México  by  a negro  of  his  crew.

Second  Letter

273

those  who  acted  to  the  contrary  would  be  very  severely
treated.  Many  other  things  contained  in  the  said  letters
were  reported  by  the  cleric  and  those  who  carne  with
him.

Almost  simultaneously,  there  arrived  one  of  the  Span-
iards  who  had  gone  to  Quacucalco,  bringing  letters  from
his  captain,  one  Velasquez  de  León,  who  informed  me  that
the  expedí tion  in  the  port  was  under  Panfilo  de  Narvaez,
who  carne  in  the  ñame  of  Diego  Velasquez.  This
León  forwarded  me  a letter  which  Narvaez  had  sent  him
by  an  Indian  for  he  was  a relative  of  Diego  Velasquez,
and  brother-in-law  of  Narvaez),  telling  him  how  he  had
leamed  from  my  messengers  that  León  was  there  with
those  people,  and  bidding  him  come  back  immediately  with
them,  because,  by  so  acting,  he  would  fulfil  his  obliga-
tions  towards  his  relative ; that  he  believed  I held  him
by  forcé,  and  other  similar  things  which  Narvaez  wrote
to  him.  The  captain  being  more  devoted  to  Your  Ma-
jesty’s  Service,  not  only  declined  to  accept  what  Narvaez
told  him  in  his  letter,  but,  after  having  sent  the  letter
to  me,  immediately  left  to  join  me  with  all  his  forces.
Afterwards  I informed  myself  from  that  cleric,  and  the
two  who  accompanied  him,  respecting  many  things  con-
cerning  the  intentions  of  Diego  Velasquez  and  Narvaez;
how  they  had  despatched  that  armada  and  forcé  against
me,  because,  instead  of  to  Diego  Velasquez,  I had  sent  to
Your  Majesty  the  description  of  this  country,  and  the  pre-
sents;  and  how  they  carne  with  evil  designs  to  kill  me,  and
many  of  my  company  whom  they  had  already  designáted.

I ascertained  likewise  that  the  licentiate  Figueroa,  the
judge  residmg  in  the  island  of  Hispaniola,  and  Your
Highness’s  judges  and  officials  there,  when  they  leamed
that  Diego  Velasquez  was  preparing  this  armada,  and  his
mtention  in  so  doing,  had  perceived  the  harm  and  injury
Which  would  result  to  Your  Majesty  by  their  comin/
and  had  sent  one  of  the  said  judges,  the  licentiate,  Lucas

VOL.  I— 18.

274

Letters  of  Cortes

Vasquez  de  Ayllon, 1 with  powers  to  require  and  order
Diego  Velasquez  not  to  despatch  the  armada.  Upon  his
arrival,  he  found  Diego  Velasquez  and  all  those  armed
people  at  the  point  of  the  island  of  Fernandina,  ready  to
sail,  and  he  required  them,  and  those  composing  the
armada,  not  to  depart,  because  Your  Highness  would  be
badly  served,  and  he  threatened  them  with  many  penalties,
notwithstanding  which,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  licentiate
required  and  ordered,  Velasquez  still  sent  the  armada.
The  licentiate,  Ayllon,  had  come  with  them  thinking
to  prevent  the  harm  which  would  follow  from  the  arrival
of  it,  for  it  was  notorious  to  him,  and  to  eveiybody,  that
the  armada  carne  with  evil  intentions.

I sent  this  cleric  to  Narvaez  with  a letter  of  mine,  in
which  I told  him  I had  learned  from  the  cleric,  and  those
who  carne  with  him,  that  he  was  captain  of  the  armada,

i The  audiencia  of  San  Domingo,  foreseeing  the  scandal  which
was  inevitable  from  such  an  expedition  against  Cortes,  sent  Lucas
Vasquez  de  Ayllon  to  Cuba  with  full  powers  to  stop  the  preparations,
and  prohibit  the  sailing.  Ayllon  followed  Diego  Velasquez  to  the  port
of  Trinidad  where  he  had  gone,  and  there  learned  that  Narvaez  was
at  Xagua,  some  fourteen  leagues  distant,  ready  to  jom  the  others  of
the  fleet  who  were  at  Guaniguanico.  He  also  discovered  that  mos
of  the  able-bodied  men  in  the  colony  had  enlisted,  and  that  the  island
would  be  left  with  few  defenders  in  case  of  trouble  with  the  natives;
he  went  therefore  to  Xagua,  and  notified  Narvaez  not  to  sail,  but  to
Ko  to  Guaniguanico,  where  he  intended  to  dissuade  the  governor  from
the  undertaking.  Though  Velasquez  appeared  at.  first  to  yield,  he
ended  by  repudiating  the  authority  of  the  audiencia,  though  he  con-
sented  to  give  pacific  instructions  to  Narvaez  as  to  his  manner  of  dealing
with  Cortes.  Ayllon  decided,  at  the  last  moment,  to  go  himself  with
the  armada,  and  prevent  trouble  between  the  rival  commanders  if
possible  Narvaez  however  was  heedless  of  the  notary  s protests  at
San  Juan  de  Ulna,  and  finally  rid  himself  of  his  importumties  by  send-
fng  him  back  to  Cuba  on  one  ship,  and  his  secretary  and  the  alguacil
on  another  Thus,  three  months  after  his  departure  on  his  mission,
Ayllon  landed  at  San  Nicolás  in  San  Domingo,  making  his  way  as  best  he
could  on  foot  across  the  island  to  report  his  ill  success  to  the  audieiici  .
This  fiouting  of  the  audiencia  cost  Diego;  Velasquez  any  tnumph  he
might  othemise  have  hoped  to  gain  over  Cortes,  and  Narvaez  s sum-
“sSvtS» wards  a representativa  of  the  government  bear»  out
Bemal  Diaz’s  estímate  of  his  character.

Second  Letter

275

and  that  I was  glad  it  was  he,  as  I had  thought
otherwise  seeing  that  my  messengers  had  not  returned.
I said,  however,  that,  as  he  knew  I was  in  this  Cortes
country  in  Your  Highness’s  Service,  I mar-  Writes  to
velled  that  he  did  not  write  to  me,  or  send  Narvaez
me  some  messenger  announcing  his  arrival,  for  he  knew
that  I would  be  rejoiced  at  it,  not  only  because
of  our  oíd  friendship,  but  also  because  he  had  come
to  serve  Your  Highness,  which  was  what  I most  desired.
Instead  of  which,  I said,  he  had  sent  corruptors  and
letters  of  seduction  to  those  under  me  in  Your  Majesty’s
Service,  inciting  them  to  rebel  against  me,  and  join  him,
as  if  we  were  infidels  the  one,  and  Christians  the  other,
vassals  of  Your  Highness  the  one,  and  traitors  the  other.
I asked  him  as  a favour  that  from  henee  forward  he
would  not  use  these  means  with  me,  but  first  let  me  know
the  cause  of  his  coming.  I said  I had  been  told  that  he
called  himself  Captain-General,  and  Lieutenant-Governor
for  Diego  Velasquez,  and  that  he  had  so  proclaimed  him-
self by  the  public  crier,  publishing  it  in  the  country,
and  had  named  alcaldes  and  municipal  officers,  and  had
executed  justice,  all  of  which  was  against  the  good  Ser-
vice of  Your  Highness,  and  against  all  your  laws;  that
this  was  so  because  this  country  belonging  to  Your
Majesty,  and  being  peopled  by  your  vassals,  and  having
tribunals  and  municipal  bodies  in  it,  he  should  not  ap-
propriate  to  himself  the  said  offices  without  first  having
received  them,  inasmuch  as  to  exercise  them  he  should
bring  provisions  from  Your  Majesty;  that,  if  he  had
brought  any  such,  I asked  as  a favour,  and  required  him
to  present  them  to  me,  and  to  the  municipal  authorities
of  Vera  Cruz,  as  they  would  be  obeyed  by  those  author-
íties,  and  by  me,  as  letters  and  provisions  of  our  King
and  rightful  Sovereign,  and  complied  with  as  far  as  it
would  profit  to  the  Service  of  Your  Majesty;  and  that  I
was  in  that  city,  where  I held  the  monarch  prisoner,  and

276

Letters  of  Cortes

had  a great  sum  of  gold  and  valuables,  belonging  not
only  to  Your  Highness,  but  also  to  my  company  and
myself,  which  I did  not  daré  to  leave,  since  I feared  that,
if  I left  the  city,  the  people  might  rebel,  and  such  a quan-
tity  of  gold  and  jewels,  and  such  a city,  would  be  lost
which  meant  the  loss  of  the  whole  country.  I likewise
gave  a letter  to  the  said  cleric  for  the  licentiate  Ayllon,
who,  as  I afterwards  leamed,  had  been  sent  away,  with
two  ships  as  a prisoner,  by  Narvaez  before  the  cleric
arrived.

On  the  day  the  cleric  left,  I received  a messenger  from
the  citizens  of  Vera  Cruz,  who  informed  me,  that  all  the
natives  had  risen  in  favour  of  Narvaez,  especially  those
of  the  city  of  Cempoal  and  their  party,  and  that  none
would  come  to  work  in  the  said  town  and  port,  ñor  do
anything  else,  because  they  said  that  Narvaez  had  told
them  that  I was  a traitor,  and  that  he  had  come  to  take
me  and  all  my  company  prisoners,  and  to  make  us  leave
the  country.  As  Narvaez’s  people  were  many,  and  mine
few,  and  he  had  brought  many  horses,  and  much  artillery,
and  I had  little,  they  wished  to  be  on  the  winning  side.
The  messengers  informed  me  also  that  they  had  learned
from  the  Indians,  that  Narvaez  would  occupy  the  city
of  Cempoal,  knowing  how  near  it  was  to  their  city,  and
they  believed  from  what  they  were  informed  of  the  said
Narvaez’s  bad  intentions  towards  all,  that  he  would
from  that  place  attack  them,  aided  by  the  Cempoalans.
They  let  me  know  that  they  were  leaving  the  town,  rather
than  fight  with  them,  and  to  avoid  scandal  they  would
go  up  the  mountain  to  the  house  of  a chief,  vassal  of
Your  Highness,  and  our  friend,  where  they  would  remam

until  I sent  them  directions  what  to  do.

As  I saw  the  great  mischief  which  was  spreadmg,  and
that  the  country  was  rebelling  on  account  of  Narvaez
it  appeared  to  me  that,  by  going  to  him  myself,  all  might
be  appeased,  because  the  Indians  would  not  daré  to

Second  Letter

277

Cortes
Leaves
México
to  Meet
Narvaez

rebel  on  seeing  me,  and  also  because  I thought  to  make
some  sort  of  arrangement  with  Narvaez  for  stopping  the
great  evil  at  the  outset.  I thereupon  started  the  same
day,  leaving  the  fort  well  provided  with  maize  and  water,
and  a garrison  of  five  hundred  men,  with  some  cannon.
Taking  the  others  (some  seventy  men),  I pursued  my
road,  accompanied  by  some  of  Montezuma’s  principal
people.

Before  I left,  I made  some  explanation  telling  him  “ to
look  to  the  fact  that  he  was  a vassal  of  Your  Highness,  and
that  now  he  would  receive  the  favours  from
Your  Majesty  for  the  Services  which  he  had
rendered  to  you;  that  I entrusted  to  him
those  Spaniards,  who  would  take  care  of  all  the
gold  and  valuables  which  he  had  given  me,  or
ordered  me  to  give  Your  Highness;  that  I was  longing
to  see  the  people  who  had  arrived,  and  to  learn  who  they
were,  as  I did  not  yet  know,  but  that  I believed  they  were
bad  people  and  not  vassals  of  Your  Highness.  He  prom-
ised  to  provide  those  left  behind  with  everything  necessary
and  to  take  great  care  of  all  I left  there,  belonging  to  Your
Majesty,  and  that  his  people  who  went  with  me  would
guide  me  by  a road  without  quitting  his  country,  and
would  provide  me  with  everything  I needed.  He  prayed
me  also,  that,  if  these  were  bad  people,  to  let  him  know,
and  he  would  immediately  raise  many  warriors  to  attack
them,  and  drive  them  out  of  the  country.  I thanked
him  for  all  this,  and  assured  him  that  Your  Majesty
would  order  many  favours  to  be  shown  him,  and  I gave
many  jewels  and  stuffs  to  him,  to  his  son,  and  to  many
other  lords  who  were  with  him  at  the  time.

In  the  city,  called  Churultecal,  I met,  returning  with
all  his  people,  Juan  Velasquez,  the  captain,  whom,  as  I
have  said,  I had  sent  to  Quacucalco.  Separating  those
who  were  indisposed,  whom  I sent  to  the  city,  I pursued
my  road  with  him  and  the  others.  Fifteen  leagues

278

Letters  of  Cortes

beyond  the  city  of  Churultecal,  I encountered  that  re-
ligious  father  [Fray  Olmedo]  of  my  company,  whom  I
had  sent  to  the  port  to  learn  what  sort  of  people  had  come
in  the  armada.  He  brought  me  a letter  from  Narvaez,
in  which  the  latter  wrote  me  that  he  brought  certain
powers  to  hold  this  country  for  Diego  Velasquez,  and  that
I should  immediately  come  to  him  to  obey  and  submit
to  them,  and  that  he  had  established  a town  with  al-
caldes and  municipal  officers.  From  the  same  religious,

I leamed  that  the  licentiate  Ayllon,  as  well  as  his  notary
and  alguacil,  had  been  taken,  and  sent  away  in  two
ships;  that  he  himself  had  been  approached  there  by
parties,  to  win  over  some  of  my  company  to  Narvaez;  and
how  they  had  boasted  before  him,  and  certain  Indians
who  accompanied  him,  of  their  forces,  both  of  foot
and  cavalry,  and  had  fired  the  artillery  from  the  ships  and
on  land  in  order  to  frighten  them,  saying  to  the  re-
ligious, “ See!  how  can  you  defend  yourselves  against
us  if  you  don’t  do  as  we  wish  you  to  do?”  He  told  me
also  that  he  had  seen  with  Narvaez  one  of  the  native
lords  of  this  country,  vassal  of  the  said  Montezuma,  and
govemor  of  all  his  country  along  the  coast ; and  he  leamed
that  he  had  spoken  to  Narvaez  on  the  part  of  Montezuma,
giving  him  jewels  of  gold,  and  that  Narvaez  had  also
given  him  certain  trifles;  and  that  Narvaez  had  sent
from  there  certain  messengers  to  Montezuma,  saying,
that  he  would  deliver  him,  for  he  had  come  to  take  me
and  all  my  company,  and  then  leave  the  country,  and
that  he  wished  no  gold,  but  that,  myself,  and  those  who
were  with  me,  once  prisoners,  he  intended  to  depart,
and  leave  the  country  and  the  natives  in  their  full  liberty.
Finally  I leamed  that  his  intention  was  to  possess  himself
of  the  country  by  his  own  authority,  without  asking
recognition  from  anyone;  and  that  if  I and  those  of  my
company  refused  to  accept  him  as  captain,  or  justice
in  the  ñame  of  Diego  Velasquez,  he  would  come  against

Second  Letter

279

us,  and  capture  us  by  forcé,  and  that  for  this  purpose
he  had  confederated  with  the  natives,  especially  with
Montezuma,  by  means  of  his  messengers.

When  I saw  how  manifest  was  the  harm  which  would
result  from  the  aforesaid  proceedings  against  Your  Ma-
jesty,  especially  as  I was  told  of  the  great  forcé  he  had
brought,  and  Diego  Velasquez’s  mándate  that,  as  soon
as  he  seized  us,  he  should  hang  me,  and  others  who  were
designated,  I did  not  hesitate  to  approach  nearer  to  him,
believing  that  I might  make  him  understand  the  great
disservice  which  would  result  to  Your  Highness,  and
dissuade  him  from  his  evil  intention  and  malicious  dis-
position  towards  us.

I continued  my  way,  and  fifteen  leagues  before  arriving
at  the  city  of  Cempoal,  where  Narvaez  was  camped,  there
approached  me  the  chaplain  sent  to  me  by  the  citizens
of  Vera  Cruz,  by  whom  I had  written  to  Narvaez,  and
the  licentiate  Ayllon;  he  was  accompanied  by  another
cleric,  and  a certain  Andrés  de  Duero, 1 householder  of
the  Island  of  Fernandina,  who  had  also  come  with  Nar-
vaez. They  told  me,  on  the  part  of  Narvaez,  in  answer
to  my  letter,  that  I might  still  obey  and  recognise  him  as
my  captain,  and  that  I must  yield  the  country  to  him,
otherwise  I should  be  punished,  as  Narvaez  brought  great
forces  with  him,  and  I had  very  few,  for  besides  the  many
Spaniards  he  had  brought,  most  of  the  natives  were  in
his  favour;  and  that,  if  I would  deliver  the  country  to  him,
he  would  give  me  all  the  ships  and  provisions  I desired,
and  would  allow  me  to  go  away  with  them,  and  all  those
who  wished  to  lea  ve  with  me,  taking  everything  I desired
without  any  hindrance  from  him.  One  of  the  clerics
told  me  that  Diego  Velasquez  had  authorised  this  offer,
and  had  given  his  instructions  to  Narvaez  and  the  two
clerics  jointly,  so  that,  in  this  matter,  they  could  make
all  the  concessions  I wished.  I answered,  that  I did  not

1 A secretary  of  Diego  Velasquez.

28o

Letters  of  Cortes

perceive  any  warrants  of  Your  Highness,  directing  me
to  deliver  the  country  to  them,  and  that  if  Narvaez
brought  any  he  should  present  them  before  me  and  the
Municipal  Council  of  Vera  Cruz,  according  to  Spanish
law  and  custom,  when  I would  be  ready  to  obey  and
comply  with  them;  but  that,  until  then,  I would  not  do
as  he  said  for  any  interest  or  concession,  for  I,  and  those
who  were  with  me,  would  rather  die  in  defence  of  the
country,  which  we  had  won  and  held  pacified  and  sure
for  Your  Majesty,  than  turn  traitors,  or  forfeit  our  loyalty
to  our  king.  They  advanced  many  other  propositions
to  win  me  over  to  their  project,  but  none  would  I accept
without  having  seen  the  warrants  of  Your  Highness
authorising  me  so  to  do ; and  these  they  could  not  produce
In  conclusión,  these  clerics,  Andrés  de  Duero,  and  my-
self,  agreed  that  Narvaez  and  myself,  with  as  many  others,
Ne  otia-  should  meet  with  perfect  surety  on  both  sides,
tions  With  when  he  would  satisfy  me  of  the  warrants  if  he
Narvaez  had  brought  any,  and  I would  give  my  answer.
I,  on  my  part,  sent  him  a safe  conduct,  signed,  and  he  also
sent  me  another,  signed  with  his  ñame,  which  as  it  seemed
to  me  he  had  no  thought  of  observing ; for  he  had  planned
that,  during  the  visit,  some  way  or  other  should  be  found
to  kill  me  suddenly,  and  two  of  the  ten  who  were  to  come
with  him  had  been  designated  to  do  this,  while  the  rest
were  to  fight  with  my  attendants.  They  said,  as  a
reason  for  this,  that,  once  I was  dead,  their  business  could
be  finished;  and  in  truth  it  would  have  been,  if  God,  who
in  such  cases  intervenes,  had  not  succoured  me  by  a certain
waming,  which  one  of  those  concerned  in  the  treachery
had  sent  me  together  with  their  safe  conduct.

Knowing  all  this,  I wrote  a letter  to  Narvaez,  and
another  to  the  three  commissioners,  telling  them  that  I
had  discovered  their  treacherous  intention,  and  would
not  go  as  had  been  agreed.  I immediately  sent  them
certain  requisitions  and  mandates,  by  which  I required

Second  Letter

281

Narvaez  to  make  known  to  me  any  warrants  he  brought
from  Your  Highness,  and  that,  until  he  had  done  so,  he
should  not,  under  certain  penalties  I imposed,  cali  himself
captain  or  justice,  or  meddle  with  any  duties  peitaining
to  the  said  offices.  In  like  manner,  by  the  same  mán-
date I commanded  all  the  persons  who  were  with  him
not  to  regard  ñor  obey  him  as  captain  or  justice,  and
summoned  them,  within  a certain  time  designated,  to
appear  before  me,  that  I might  instruct  them  what  was
proper  to  do  in  Your  Highness’s  Service.  I gave  notice
that,  if  they  did  otherwise,  I should  proceed  against  them
as  perfidious  traitors  and  wicked  vassals  who  had  rebelled
against  their  king,  and  sought  to  usurp  his  country  and
dominions,  to  deliver  them  to  persons  to  whom  they  did
not  belong,  and  who  had  no  claim  ñor  right  to  them;
and  also  in  the  execution  of  this  order,  that  if  they  did
not  appear  before  me,  or  obey  my  mándate,  I would
proceed  against  them,  and  imprison  them  according  to
the  law.  Narvaez’s  answer  was  to  imprison  the  notary
who  delivered  the  mándate,  and  the  persons  accompanying
him,  and  to  take  from  them  certain  Indians  who  accom-
panied  them,  who  were  all  detained  till  another  messenger
arrived  whom  I sent  to  inquire  after  them.  Before  them
he  made  a display  of  forcé,  and  threatened  them,  and
also  myself,  if  I did  not  deliver  the  country  to  him.

Seeing  that  I could  by  no  means  prevent  this  great
calamity  and  evil,  and  that  the  natives  of  the  country
were  revolting,  and  rising  day  by  day,  recommending
myself  to  God,  and  disregarding  all  injury  that  might
follow,  considering  that  if  I died  in  the  Service  of  my
king,  and  in  the  defence  and  upholding  of  his  countries
against  usurpation,  more  than  sufficient  glory  would
cover  me  and  my  company,  I gave  my  mándate  to  Gon-
zalo de  Sandoval,  alguacil  mayor,  to  seize  the  persons  of
Narvaez,  and  those  who  called  themselves  alcaldes  and
municipal  officers.  I placed  eighty  men  under  his  orders,

282

Letters  of  Cortes

to  make  the  arrest,  while  I,  with  the  remaining  hundred
and  seventy  (as  in  all  we  were  two  hundred  and  fifty
men),  followed  on  foot,  without  artillery  or  horses,  so  as
to  aid  him  if  Narvaez  and  his  companions  should  resist.
On  the  same  day,  the  alguacil  mayor  and  I,  with  the  rest
of  the  people,  arrived  near  the  city  of  Cempoal,  where
Narvaez  and  his  people  were  quartered.  He  learned  of
our  coming,  and  carne  out,  with  eighty  horsemen,  and  five
hundred  foot-soldiers,  leaving  the  rest  of  his  forcé  in  his
quarters,  which  were  in  the  great  mosque  of  that  strongly
fortified  city.  Having  marched  to  within  almost  a league
of  where  we  were,  and  not  finding  us,  he  believed  he  had
been  deceived,  so  he  returned  to  his  quarters,  holding
all  his  people  in  readiness,  and  placing  two  sentinels
almost  a league  outside  the  town.

As  I wished  to  avoid  all  scandal,  it  seemed  to  me  that
there  would  be  less  if  I went  by  night,  unperceived  if
Cortes  possible,  directly  to  the  quarters  of  Narvaez,

Defeats  which  I and  my  men  knew  very  well,  and

Narvaez  there  seized  him.  For,  once  he  was  a pris-
oner,  no  trouble  would  arise,  for  the  others  wished
to  submit  to  justice,  especially  as  most  of  them
had  been  forced  to  come  by  Diego  Velasquez,  fear-
ing  that,  unless  they  did,  he  might  take  away  their
slaves  in  the  island  of  Fernandina.  Thus  it  happened,
on  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  a little  after  midnight,  I at-
tacked  the  quarters.  I had  encountered  the  sentinels
Narvaez  had  placed,  and  my  vanguard  captured  one  of
them,  from  whom  I informed  myself  of  their  position,
but  the  other  escaped;  and  in  order  that  he  should  not
arrive  before  me  and  give  notice  of  my  coming,  I hastened
as  much  as  possible.  The  sentinel  arrived,  however,
almost  half  an  hour  before  me,  and,  when  I approached,
Narvaez  and  all  his  men  were  already  armed,  and  had
saddled  their  horses,  and  were  well  prepared,  with  two
hundred  men  guarding  each  quarter.  We  moved  so

Second  Letter

283

quietly,  that,  when  they  heard  us,  and  seized  arais,  I was
already  inside  the  courtyard  of  his  quarters,  where  all
the  people  were  gathered.  They  had  taken  possession  of
three  or  four  strong  towers  which  were  in  it,  and  all  the
other  strong  positions;  and  in  one  of  the  towers,  wheie
Narvaez  was  lodged,  he  had  placed  nineteen  guns  on  the
stairs.  We  reached  the  top  of  the  tower  so  quickly,
that  they  had  not  time  to  put  fire  to  more  than  one  of
the  pieces,  which  by  God’s  will  did  not  go  off,  or  do  us
any  harm.  Thus  we  mounted  the  tower  to  the  place
where  Narvaez  slept,  where  about  fifty  men  who  were
with  him  fought  with  the  alguacil  mayor  and  his  forcé;
and  although  required  many  times  to  yield  themselves
to  Your  Highness,  surrendered  only  when  fire  was  set  to
the  tower.  While  the  alguacil  mayor  was  capturing
Narvaez,  I,  with  those  who  had  stayed  with  me,  defended
the  entrance  of  the  tower  against  the  rest  who  sought
to  come  to  his  aid;  and  I or  dered  the  artillery  to  be  taken,
and  fortified  myself  with  it.  Thus,  with  no  more  loss
than  two  men,  who  were  killed  by  the  discharge  of  a gun,
all  those  we  wished  to  take  were  made  prisoners  within
an  hour.  After  the  rest  had  been  disarmed,  they  prom-
ised  to  be  obedient  to  the  laws  of  Your  Majesty,  declaring
that  till  then  they  had  been  deceived,  as  they  had  been
told  that  Narvaez  brought  warrants  from  Your  Highness,
and  that  I had  risen  in  rebellion  in  this  country,  and  was
a traitor  to  Your  Majesty,  together  with  many  other
similar  things.

As  all  now  understood  the  truth,  and  the  bad  inten-
tions  and  wicked  disposition  of  Diego  Velasquez  and  of
Narvaez  carne  to  light,  they  rejoiced  very  greatly  that
God  should  have  ordained  and  provided  such  an  ending.
For  I assure  Your  Majesty,  that,  if  God  had  not  mys-
teriously  intervened,  and  had  Narvaez  been  victorious
it  would  have  been  the  greatest  injury  which  for  a long
time  past  Spaniards  had  done  to  one  another.

284

Letters  of  Cortes

Narvaez  would  have  fulfilled  his  intention,  as  Diego
Velasquez  commanded  him,  which  was  to  hang  me,  and
many  others  of  my  company,  so  that  no  one  should  re-
count  what  had  happened.  And,  according  to  what  I
learn  from  the  Indians,  they  had  perceived,  that,  if  Nar-
vaez were  to  capture  me,  as  he  had  told  them,  it  could  not
be  without  loss  to  himself  and  his  people,  ñor  without
many  of  us  perishing;  so  that  they  meanwhile  could  kill
those  whom  I had  left  in  Temixtitan,  which,  indeed,  they
attempted  to  do.  Afterwards  they  intended  to  join
forces,  and  attack  those  who  remained  here,  and  free
their  country,  so  that  not  even  a memory  of  the  Spaniards
should  survive.  Your  Highness  may  be  assured  that  if
they  had  achieved  all  this,  and  succeeded  in  their  designs,
this  country,  which  has  now  been  conquered  and  pacified,
would  not  have  been  recovered  within  twenty  years.

As  so  many  people  could  not  be  maintained  together
in  this  city,  both  because  of  its  being  nearly  destroyed,
and  because  it  had  been  plundered  by  Narvaez,  and
abandoned  by  its  inhabitants,  two  days  after  Narvaez
had  been  taken  prisoner,  I sent  two  captains,  with
two  hundred  men  each,  one  to  go  to  the  town  and
port  of  Cucicacalco,  which  as  I have  told  Your  High-
ness, I had  founded,  and  the  other  to  that  river  which
the  people  from  Francisco  de  Garay’s  ships  said  they  had
seen,  for  I now  hold  them  securely.  I likewise  sent  two
hundred  other  men  to  the  city  of  Vera  Cruz,  where  I
ordered  Narvaez’s  ships  to  go.  I remained  with  the  rest
of  the  people  in  Cempoal,  to  provide  whatever  Your
Majesty’s  Service  required.  I also  sent  a messenger  to
the  city  of  Temixtitan,  by  whom  I made  known  to  the
Spaniards  I left  there  what  had  happened  to  me.

These  messengers  returned  within  twelve  days,  bring-
ing  me  letters  from  the  alcalde 1 there,  telling  me  that  the

1 See  Appendix  VI.,  cióse  of  letter.

Second  Letter

285

Indians  had  assaulted  the  fort  on  all  sides,  and  set
fire  to  it  in  many  parts;  that  they  had  sunk  mines,
and  that  our  people  had  been  in  much  trouble  News  from
and  danger;  and  that,  if  Montezuma  did  not  the

order  the  war  to  cease,  they  would  yet  perish,  .^^son
for  they  were  closely  surrounded,  though  there
was  no  fighting,  and  no  one  could  go  two  paces  outside
the  fort.  In  the  fight,  the  Indians  had  captured  a great
part  of  the  provisions  I had  left  them,  and  had  burned  mv
four  brigantines.  My  men  were  in  extreme  need,  and
begged  me  for  the  love  of  God  to  come  to  their  succour  in
all  possible  haste.  Seeing  the  extremity  in  which  these
Spaniards  were,  and  that  if  I did  not  rescue  them,  besides
the  Indians  killing  them,  and  taking  all  the  gold,  and
silver,  and  valuables,  which  I had  obtained  in  the  country,
belonging  to  Your  Majesty  and  also  to  me  and  the
Spaniards,  the  noblest  and  greatest  city  recently  dis-
covered  in  the  world  would  be  lost,  and  with  it  all  else
that  had  been  gained,  for  it  was  the  capital  to  which  all
gave  obedience.  I immediately  sent  messengers  to  the
captains  whom  I had  sent  off  with  expeditions,  telling
them  what  had  been  written  me  from  the  capital,  and
directing  them  to  return  immediately  from  wherever  they
were  found,  and  to  come  by  the  shortest  route  to  the
province  of  Tlascaltecal,  where  I,  with  the  people,  and  all
the  artillery  in  my  power,  and  the  seventy  horsemen,
would  unite  with  them.  When  we  joined  forces,  and
made  a review,  there  were  found  to  be  seventy  horsemen,
and  five  hundred  foot  soldiers.

I started  in  all  haste  with  these  troops  for  the  capital,
and  the  whole  length  of  the  road  there  never  appeared
anybody  from  Montezuma  to  receive  me,  as  was  cus-
tomary,  and  all  the  country  had  risen,  and  was  almost
deserted,  which  aroused  evil  suspicions  lest  the  Spaniards
whom  I had  left  in  the  city  were  dead,  and  the  natives
had  gathered  to  await  me  at  some  pass,  where  they  would

286

Letters  of  Cortes

take  me  at  a disadvantage.  Thus,  fearful,  I advanced
with  the  utmost  precaution  until  I reached  the  city  of
Tesnacan, 1 which,  as  I have  already  recounted  to  Your
Majesty,  is  on  the  shore  of  that  great  lake.  I inquired
of  some  of  the  natives  there  about  the  Spaniards  who
had  remained  in  the  great  city,  and  was  told  that  they
were  alive.  I asked  them  to  bring  me  a canoe,  as  I
wished  to  send  a Spaniard  to  obtain  Information,  and
said  that  while  he  was  gone,  one  of  the  natives  of  the
said  city,  who  seemed  to  be  a chief,  must  remain  with
me,  because  none  of  the  lords  and  chiefs  whom  I knew
appeared.  The  chief  sent  for  the  canoe,  and  dispatched  cer-
tain  Indians  with  the  Spaniards  whom  I was  sending,  while
he  remained  with  me;  but  while  this  Spaniard  was  em-
barking  to  go  to  the  city  of  Temixtitan,  he  saw  another
canoe  coming  across  the  lake,  and  waited  in  port  until
it  arrived.  In  it  carne  one  of  the  Spaniards  who  had
remained  in  the  city,  from  whom  I leamed  that  they
were  all  alive,  except  five  or  six  whom  the  Indians  had
killed,  and  that  the  others  were  still  besieged,  and  were
not  allowed  to  come  out  of  the  fort,  ñor  did  the  Indians
provide  them  with  anything  needful  except  on  payment,
and  at  a heavy  price.  Afterwards,  however,  when  they
heard  of  my  coming,  they  had  behaved  somewhat  better
towards  them,  Montezuma  saying  that  he  waited  only
for  my  arrival,  in  order  that  they  might  again  be  free  of
the  city  as  they  used  to  be.  Montezuma  also  dispatched
a messenger  to  me  with  the  said  Spaniard,  by  whom  he
sent  me  word  that  he  believed  I already  knew  what
had  happened  in  that  city,  and  that  as  he  thought  I
might  be  angry  on  account  of  it,  and  inclined  to  ven-
geance,  he  besought  me  to  put  aside  my  anger  because  he
was  as  much  grieved  as  I,  and  that  nothing  had  been  done
by  his  wish  or  consent.  He  sent  me  news  of  many  other

1 Texcoco.

Second  Letter

287

things,  to  appease  the  anger  he  supposed  I felt  for  what
had  happened,  desiring  me  to  come  to  the  city  and
saying  that  whatever  I ordered  would  be  complied  with
no  less  than  before.  I sent  him  word  to  say  that  I was
not  angry  with  him  in  any  way,  as  his  good  will  was  well
known  to  me,  and  that  I would  do  as  he  desired.

The  next  day,  which  was  the  eve  of  St.  John  Baptist,  1
I left,  and  slept  on  the  road,  three  leagues  from  the
capital,  and  on  St.  John’s  Day,  after  having  Cortes
heard  Mass,  I entered  about  noon,  and  saw  Re-enters
few  people  about  the  city.  Some  of  the  gates  México
at  the  cross  streets  and  entrances  to  the  streets
had  been  removed,  which  I did  not  like,  although
I thought  that  it  had  been  done  from  fear,  and  that
my  arrival  would  reassure  them.  I marched  directly
to  the  fort,  in  which,  and  in  the  principal  mosque  ad-
joining,  all  my  people  were  quartered;  and  those  within
the  fort  received  us  with  as  much  joy  as  if  we  had  given
them  anew  their  lives,  which  they  had  already  looked
upon  as  lost,  and  we  rejoiced  all  that  day  and  night,
believing  that  peace  had  been  restored.

The  next  day  after  Mass  I sent  a messenger  to  Vera
Cruz,  to  give  them  the  good  news  that  the  Christians
were  alive,  and  that  I was  safe  in  the  city.  The  messen-
ger returned  within  half  an  hour,  with  his  head  all  bruised
and  broken,  calling  out  that  the  Indians  in  the  city  were
in  array  of  battle,  and  had  raised  all  the  bridges;  and,
immediately  after  him,  such  a great  multitude  fell  upon
us  from  all  sides,  that  neither  the  roofs  ñor  the  houses
could  be  seen  for  the  crowd,  which  carne  on  with  the
greatest  shoutings,  and  most  frightful  yells  which  could
be  conceived  in  the  world.  With  their  slings,  they  threw
so  many  stones  into  the  fortress,  that  it  seemed  as  if  they
rained  from  the  heavens,  while  arrows  and  missiles  were
so  thick,  that  all  the  buildings  and  courts  were  so  full

1 Day  before  St.  John’s  Day,  which  fell  on  Sunday,  June  23.

288

Letters  of  Cortes

of  them  we  could  hardly  move  about.  I sallied  forth
against  them  on  two  or  three  sides,  where  they  fought  us
very  valiantly,  and  in  one  place,  where  a captain  had  gone
out  with  two  hundred  men,  they  killed  four,  and  wounded
him  and  many  others,  before  he  could  retreat.  On  the
other  side,  where  I was  engaged,  they  wounded  me,  and
many  other  Spaniards.  We  killed  few  of  them,  for  they
retreated  to  the  other  side  of  the  bridges,  and  from
the  roofs  and  terraces  did  us  much  injury  with  stones.
Some  terraces  we  captured  and  set  on  fire ; but  they  were
so  many  and  so  strong,  and  so  filled  with  people,  well
supplied  with  stones  and  other  kinds  of  weapcns,  that  we
were  not  strong  enough  to  take  them  all,  ñor  to  defend
ourselves  against  their  attack  at  their  pleasure.  They
attacked  the  fort  so  violently,  and  set  fire  to  it  in  so
many  places,  that  on  one  side  a great  part  was  destroyed
without  our  being  able  to  prevent  it,  until  we  stopped  it
by  breaking  the  walls,  and  pulling  down  a part  which
put  out  the  fire.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  strong  guard
of  musketeers  and  archers  with  some  field  pieces  I placed
there,  they  would  have  scaled  that  part  without  our  being
able  to  resist  them.  Thus  we  fought  all  that  day  until
night  was  well  advanced,  and  even  throughout  the  night
they  kept  up  their  cries  and  yells.  During  the  night,  I had
those  breaches  caused  by  the  fire  repaired,  and  all  the
rest  of  the  fort  which  seemed  weak  to  me;  and  I dis-
tributed  the  watch  and  the  guards,  for  on  the  next  day
we  would  have  to  fight  stoutly ; and  I cared  for  more  than
eighty  wounded.

At  dawn  the  following  day,  the  enemy  opened  the
battle  more  stoutly  than  the  day  before,  there  being
Deathof  such  a number  of  them  that  the  artillery
Montezuma  had  no  need  to  aim  but  just  to  shoot  into  the
mases  of  Indians.  Although  the  artillery  did  much
damage,  for  thirteen  arquebuses  were  playing,  besides
muskets  and  archery  which  were  also  doing  Service

Second  Letter

289

it  seemed  as  if  they  did  not  feel  it,  for  when  one
discharge  would  sweep  away  ten  or  twelve  men,  more
would  immediately  fill  their  places,  as  if  it  had  done
no  harm  at  all.  Leaving  the  necessary  guard,  such
as  could  be  spared,  in  the  fort,  I again  made  a sortie,  and
captured  some  bridges,  and  burnt  some  houses,  killing
many  of  the  defenders;  but  they  were  so  numerous  that,
although  we  did  them  a good  deal  of  damage,  we  made
very  little  impression  on  them.  We  had  to  fight  all  day
long,  while  they  fought  by  hours,  because  they  relieved
one  another,  and  even  thus  they  had  more  than  enough
men.  That  day,  they  also  wounded  some  fifty  or  sixty
Spaniards,  although  none  of  them  died;  and  I fought
until  nightfall,  retiring  only  from  sheer  fatigue  into  the
fort.  Seeing  the  great  damage  the  enemy  did  us,  and
how  they  wounded  and  killed  us  at  will,  and  that,  al-
though we  did  much  injury  amongst  them,  it  was  hardly
perceptible  on  account  of  their  number,  we  spent  that
whole  night  and  the  next  day  in  making  three  engines
of  wood,  each  accommodating  twenty  men,  so  that  they
could  not  hurt  us  throwing  stones  from  the  roofs,
for  the  engines  were  covered  with  planks.  Inside  theré
were  archers  and  musketeers,  and  others  armed  with
pikes,  pickaxes  and  bars  of  iron  for  making  breaches  in
the  houses,  and  knocking  down  the  barricades  which  the
Indians  had  made  in  the  streets.  While  these  machines
were  being  made,  the  combat  with  our  adversaries  did
not  cease,  for  whenever  we  went  out  of  the  fort,  they
would  strive  to  enter,  being  repulsed  only  with  great
difficulty,  Montezuma,  who  with  one  of  his  sons  and
many  other  chiefs  who  had  been  captured  at  the  beginning,
was  still  a prisoner,  asked  to  be  carried  to  the  roof  of  the
fort  where  he  could  speak  to  the  captains  and  the  people,
and  cause  the  war  to  cease.  I had  him  taken  thither,  and
when  he  reached  the  parapet  on  the  top  of  the  fort,  in-
tendmg  to  speak  to  the  people  who  were  fighting  there

VOL.  I. ig  ’

290

Letters  of  Cortes

one  of  his  own  subjects  struck  him  on  the  head  with  a
stone,  with  such  forcé  that  within  three  days  he  died.  I then
had  him  taken  out,  dead  as  he  was,  by  two  of  the  Indian
prisoners,  who  bore  him  away  to  his  people ; but  I do  not
know  what  they  did  with  him,  except  that  the  war  did
not  cease,  but  went  on  more  stoutly  and  more  fiercely
every  day. 1

That  same  day,  they  called  me  to  the  place  where
they  had  wounded  Montezuma,  saying  that  certain
captains  wished  to  speak  to  me.  I went,  and  there
passed  many  arguments  between  us,  I beseeching  them
not  to  fight  with  me  because  there  was  no  reason  for
it,  as  they  must  perceive  the  benefits  they  had  received
from  me,  and  how  they  had  been  well  treated  by  me.
Their  answer  was  that  I must  depart  and  leave  them
their  country,  and  then  the  war  would  cease,  and  that
otherwise  I might  be  sure  that  they  would  either  die,  or
finish  us.  It  appears  they  did  this  to  draw  me  out  of  the
fort/so  that  they  might,  at  their  pleasure,  trap  me  between
the  bridges,  while  in  the  act  of  leaving  the  city.  I an-
swered  that  they  must  not  think  I begged  for  peace  from
fear  of  them,  but  because  I was  grieved  at  the  damage  I
had  done  them  and  would  still  have  to  do  them ; and  also
for  the  destruction  of  such  a beautiful  city.  Still  they
answered  that  they  would  not  cease  to  make  war  upon
me  until  I left  the  city.

After  having  completed  the  engines,  I sallied  out
the  next  day  to  capture  certain  roofs  and  bridges,  carrying
the  engines  before  us,  followed  by  four  pieces  of  artillery,
many  archers  and  shield  bearers,  and  more  than  three
thousand  natives  of  Tascaltecal  who  had  come  with  me
and  helped  the  Spaniards.  When  we  reached  one  of  the
bridges,  we  placed  the  engines  and  scaling  ladders  agamst
the  waüs  of  the  terraces,  in  order  to  scale  them;  but  the
defenders  of  the  said  bridges  and  terraces  were  so  nu-

> Appendix  VII.,  death  of  Montezuma.

Second  Letter

291

merous,  and  threw  so  many  and  such  large  stones  at  us
from  above,  that  they  injured  the  engines  and  killed  some
of  the  Spaniards,  and  wounded  many  without  our  being
able  to  ad vanee  one  pace,  although  we  struggled  for  it,
fighting  from  morning  till  noon,  when  we  returned  to
the  fort  with  infinite  sorrow.  Their  courage  was  in-
creased  so  much  by  this,  that  they  attacked  us  almost
at  the  very  doors,  and  occupied  the  great  temple;  about
five  hundred  who  appeared  to  me  to  be  notable  persons,
ascended  the  highest  and  principal  tower,  carrying  up  a
large  supply  of  bread  and  water  and  other  stores.  Most
of  them  had  very  long  lances  with  very  broad  points,  all
longer  and  broader  than  ours,  and  not  less  sharpened1
and  from  there  they  did  great  injury  to  the  people  in  the
fort,  for  they  were  very  near  it.  Two  or  three  times
the  Spaniards  attacked  the  tower  and  attempted  to
mount  it,  but,  as  it  was  very  high,  and  the  ascent  very
steep,  being  a hundred  and  odd  steps,  and  those  above
were  well  supplied  with  stones  and  other  arms,  and
favoured  by  the  fact  that  we  could  not  capture  the
neighbouring  terraces,  every  time  the  Spaniards  at-
tempted to  ascend  they  were  rolled  back  beaten,  and
many  were  wounded.  Others  of  the  enemy  who  saw  this
from  other  parts  took  fresh  courage,  so  that  they  attacked
the  fort  fiercely.

Observing  that  if  they  succeeded  in  holding  that
tower,  besides  doing  us  much  injury  from  it,  they  also
gained  fresh  courage  to  attack  us,  I sallied  Corteg

out  from  the  fort,  although  my  left  hand  was  Captures

maimed  by  a wound  which  I had  received  the  Great

on  the  first  day.  I advanced  to  the  tower  Teocalli

with  some  Spaniards  who  followed  me,  and  easily
succeeded  in  surrounding  the  base,  although  those  who
surrounded  it  were  not  idle,  as  they  had  to  fight  the

1 Obsidian,  a hard  black  stone  capable  of  taking  an  edge  as  keen  as
a razor.

292

Letters  of  Cortes

adversarles  on  all  sides,  who,  for  the  purpose  of  helping
their  own  men,  carne  in  increased  numbers.  And  I
began  to  ascend  the  tower,  followed  by  some  Spaniards,
but  they  defended  the  ascent  very  stubbornly,  throwing
down  three  or  four  of  my  followers.  With  the  help  of
God,  and  His  Glorious  Mother  (for  whose  house  that
tower  had  been  set  aside,  her  image  being  placed  in  it) ,
we  reached  the  top,  where  we  fought  them  so  stoutly
that  they  were  forced  to  jump  down  on  some  terraces
about  a pace  broad  which  extended  round  it.  This  tower
had  three  or  four  of  these  terraces  about  sixteen  feet  one
above  the  other.  Some  of  the  enemy  fell  all  the  way
down,  and,  in  addition  to  the  injuries  they  received  in
the  fall,  were  immediately  killed  by  the  Spaniards  who
surrounded  the  base  of  the  tower.  Those  who  remained
on  the  terrace  fought  so  valiantly,  that  we  were  more  than
three  hours  in  completely  dispatching  them;  and  not  one
escaped.  Your  Sacred  Majesty  may  believe  that  we
captured  this  tower  only  because  God  had  clipped  their
wings;  because  twenty  of  them  were  sufficient  to  resist
the  ascent  of  a thousand  men  even  though  they  fought
very  valiantly  till  death.  I had  the  tower  set  on  fire,  as
well  as  others  in  the  mosque,  from  which  they  had  already
taken  away  and  carried  off  the  images  we  had  placed  in

them. 1

Some  of  their  pride  was  taken  out  of  them  by  our
obtaining  this  advantage,  so  that  they  fell  back  a little
on  all  sides,  and  I afterwards  returned  to  the  roof,  and
spoke  to  the  captains  who  had  talked  with  me  before,  and
who  were  somewhat  dismayed  by  what  they  had  seen.
They  immediately  appeared,  and  I told  them  to  look
about  and  see  that  they  could  not  hold  out  anywhere,
and  that  every  day  we  did  them  great  harm  and  killed

. The  cathedral  of  México  stands  on  this  site,  and  .the  statue  of
the  Blessed  Virgin  which  Cortes  first  placed  in  the  Aztec  templas  sa.d
to  be  the  one  now  venerated  in  the  Church  of  los  Remedios  near  Tacaba.

Second  Letter

293

many,  and  that  we  were  forced  to  burn  and  destroy  their
city,  for  I would  not  stop  till  there  was  nothing  left  of  it
or  them.  They  answered,  that  they  saw  very  well  that
they  had  sustained  much  damage  from  us,  and  that  many
of  them  had  perished,  but  that  they  were  already  all
fully  determined  to  die,  or  be  rid  of  us,  and  that  I might
behold  how  all  these  streets  and  squares  and  terraces  were
filled  with  people,  who  were  so  numerous  that  they  had
made  their  calculations  that,  if  twenty-five  thousand
of  them  perished  for  every  one  of  ours,  they  would  finish
with  us  first,  for  we  were  few  and  they  were  many.  They
told  me  all  the  high  roads  leading  to  the  entrances  to  the
city  had  been  destroyed  (as,  in  fact,  they  had  destroyed
all  save  one) , and  that  we  had  no  way  of  escape  save  by
water;  and  that  they  knew  very  well  that,  as  we  had  few
provisions  and  little  fresh  water,  we  could  not  hold  out
much  longer,  for  we  would  die  by  hunger,  even  if  they
did  not  kill  us.  In  truth  they  were  right,  for,  though
we  had  no  other  enemy  save  starvation  and  the  want  of
provisions,  these  would  suffice  to  kill  us  in  a short  time.
We  exchanged  many  other  arguments,  each  sustaining
his  ora  side.

Wnen  night  set  in,  I sallied  forth  with  certain  Spaniards,
and,  as  we  took  them  by  surprise,  we  captured  a Street
from  them,  burning  more  than  three  hundred  houses.  I
quickly  retumed  by  another  Street,  while  the  people  had
assembled  in  that  one,  in  which  I also  burned  many
houses;  especially  some  terraces  which  overlooked  the
fort,  from  which  they  did  us  much  damage.  They  were
greatly  frightened  by  what  we  had  done  that  night ; and
during  the  same  night  I ordered  the  engines,  which  had
been  damaged  the  day  before,  to  be  repaired.

In  order  to  follow  up  the  victory  God  had  given  us,
I sallied  forth  at  daybreak  into  the  same  Street  where  wé
had  been  routed  the  day  before,  where  I found  not  less
resistance  than  on  the  former  occasion.  As  our  lives

294  Letters  of  Cortes

and  honour  were  at  stake,  and  that  Street  led  to  the  only
sound  causeway  extending  to  the  mainland  (though,
before  reaching  it,  we  had  to  pass  by  eight  very  large  and
deep  bridges,  and  in  all  the  Street  there  were  many  quite
high  terraces  and  towers)  we  set  our  determination  and
spirit  in  it,  so  that,  God  helping  us,  we  gained  four  of  them
that  day,  and  burned  all  the  terraces,  and  houses,  and
towers,  to  the  last  of  the  bridges.  They  had,  however,
during  the  night  before,  made  a number  of  very  strong
barricades  of  adobes  and  clay  at  all  the  bridges,  so  that
the  discharges  of  arrows  from  the  crossbows  could  do
them  no  harm.  We  filled  in  the  bridges  with  the  adobes
and  earth  from  the  enclosures,  and  with  a quantity  of
stones  and  wood  from  the  houses  we  had  burned,  al-
though  this  work  was  not  done  without  danger,  and  many
Spaniards  were  wounded.  That  night  I took  many
precautions  to  guard  those  bridges  so  that  they  might
not  return  and  retake  them.

The  next  moming  I again  sallied  forth,  and  God  gave
us  likewise  such  good  fortune  and  victory,  al  though
innumerable  people  defended  the  bridges,  and  many
strong  barricades  which  they  had  made  during  the  night
before,  yet  we  captured  them  all,  and  filled  them  up.
At  the  same  time  certain  horsemen  followed  victoriously
in  pursuit  of  the  fugitives  as  far  as  the  mainland.  While
I was  engaged  in  repairing  the  bridges,  and  in  having
them  filled  up,  I was  called  in  great  haste,  being  told
that  the  Indians  who  attacked  the  fort  were  suing  for
peace,  and  that  certain  chiefs  and  captains  of  them  were
awaiting  me.  Leaving  my  people  and  certain  field-
pieces  there,  I,  with  two  or  three  horsemen,  went  to  see
what  the  chiefs  wanted.  They  said,  that,  if  I would
assure  them  that  they  would  not  be  punished  for  what
had  occurred,  they  would  raise  the  siege,  re-establish  the
bridges,  restore  the  causeways,  and  serve  Your  Majesty
as  they  had  before.  They  besought  me  to  have  brought

Second  Letter

295

there  one  of  their  people,  a religious  whom  I had  made
a prisoner,  and  who  was  similar  to  a superior  of  their
religión.  He  carne,  and  spoke  with  them,  and  made  an
agreement  between  them  and  me;  and,  as  it  appeared,
and  according  to  wliat  they  had  said,  they  immediately
sent  messengers  to  the  captains  and  people  who  were  in
outside  camps,  telling  them  that  the  attack  on  the  fort
should  cease,  as  well  as  all  other  hostilities.  Thus  we
took  our  leave  and  I entered  the  fort  to  eat.

When  I was  about  to  begin,  some  one  carne  hastily,  to
say  that  the  Indians  had  regained  the  bridges  which
we  had  captured  that  day,  and  had  killed  Narrow
some  Spaniards.  God  only  knows  how  much  Escape  of
disturbance  this  caused  me,  for  I was  think-  Cortes
ing  that  we  had  assured  a passage  for  our  retreat.
I mounted  my  horse  with  all  possible  haste,  and
rodé  through  the  length  of  the  Street,  with  some
other  horsemen  following  me,  and,  without  halting
anywhere,  I again  dashed  through  the  Indians,  and
recaptured  the  bridges,  pursuing  the  enemy  to  the
mainland.  As  the  foot  soldiers  were  very  tired,  and
wounded,  and  dismayed,  none  of  them  followed  me,  and
this  left  me  in  a very  dangerous  situation  after  I had
passed  the  bridges.  When  I sought  to  return,  I found
them  retaken,  and  more  deeply  dug  out  than  when  we
had  filled  them  up,  and  from  one  side  to  the  other  all  the
causeway  was  full  of  people,  not  only  on  land,  but  also  in
canoes  on  the  water,  who  goaded  us,  and  stoned  us  in
such  a manner,  that,  if  God  had  not  interposed  to  save
us  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  escape;  indeed  it  was
even  already  announced  in  the  city  that  I was  dead.
When  I reached  the  last  bridge  nearest  the  city,  I found
all  the  horsemen  who  had  gone  with  me  fallen  in  it,  and
one  horse  loose,  so  that  I could  not  pass,  but  was  obliged
to  return  alone  in  face  of  my  enemies.  I forced  something
of  a passage,  so  that  the  horses  passed,  and  after  this,  I

296

Letters  of  Cortes

found  the  bridge  free,  though  I crossed  with  much  trouble,
for  I had  to  jump  the  horse  from  one  side  to  the  other,
almost  six  feet,  but,  as  I and  he  were  armoured,  they  did
us  no  serious  hurt  beyond  slight  body  wounds.  Thus
victory  was  theirs  that  night,  for  they  had  captured  the
said  four  bridges.

Leaving  a guard  over  the  other  four,  I went  to  the
fort,  and  had  a wooden  bridge  constructed  which  fortv
men  could  carry,  and,  seeing  our  great  danger,  and  the
great  damage  we  daily  received  from  the  Indians,  and
fearing  also  that  they  might  destroy  that  causeway  as
they  had  the  others,  when  we  would  all  inevitably  perish,
and  because  many  of  my  company  entreated  me  many
times  to  depart,  and  because  all,  or  nearly  all,  were
wounded  so  badly  that  they  could  no  longer  fight,  I
determined  to  leave  that  same  night.  I collected  in
a room  all  the  gold  and  jewels  belonging  to  Your
Majesty  that  could  be  carried,  and  I delivered  it  in
pareéis  to  the  officials  of  Your  Highness,  whom  I
designated  in  your  royal  ñame,  beseeching  and  re-
quiring  the  alcaldes,  and  municipal  authorities,  and  all
the  people  who  were  there,  to  help  me  take  it  away.  I
gave  one  of  my  mares  for  this  purpose,  on  which  they
loaded  as  much  as  she  could  carry ; and  I designated  certain
Spaniards,  not  only  from  my  servants,  but  also  of  the
others,  to  accompany  the  said  gold  and  mare,  and  the
rest  of  the  officials,  alcaldes,  municipal  officers,  and
myself,  gave  and  distributed  the  remainder  to  the
Spaniards  to  carry  away.

Having  abandoned  the  fort,  and  much  treasure,  be-
longing not  only  to  Your  Highness,  but  also  to  the
The  Spaniards  and  myself,  I set  forth  as  secretly

Sorrowfui  as  possible,  taking  with  me  a son  and  two
Night  daughters  of  Montezuma,  Cacamazin,  the
lord  of  Aculuacan,  and  another  of  his  brothers,  whom
I had  put  in  his  place,  and  some  other  chiefs  of

Second  Letter

297

of  the  provinces  and  cities  whom  I held  as  prisoners.
When  we  reached  the  bridges  which  the  Indians  had
removed  we  laid  down  the  bridge  which  I camed  with  little
trouble  at  the  first  Crossing,  for  there  was  none  to  offer
resistance  save  certain  watchmen  who  shouted  so  loudly,
that,  before  we  carne  to  the  second,  an  infinite  multitude
of  the  enemy  had  risen  against  us,  battling  on  every  side
both  on  water  and  land.  I crossed  rapidly  with  five
horsemen  and  five  hundred  foot-soldiers,  with  whom
I passed  all  the  other  broken  bridges  swimming  until
I reached  the  mainland.  Leaving  those  people  there,  I
retumed  to  the  others  and  found  that  they  were  fighting
stoutly;  but  the  injury  our  people  received  was  beyond
calculation,  not  only  the  Spaniards,  but  also  the  Tas-
caltecas  who  were  with  us,  being  nearly  all  killed.
Though  the  Spaniards  killed  many  natives,  many  of  the
Spaniards  and  horses  were  killed,  likewise,  and  all  the
gold,  and  jewels,  and  many  other  things  which  we  carried,
and  all  the  artillery,  were  lost.

When  the  survivors  were  collected,  I pushed  them  on
ahead,  while  I,  with  three  or  four  horsemen  and  about
twenty  foot-soldiers  who  ventured  to  remain  with  me,  took
the  rear-guard,  fighting  the  Indians  until  we  arrived  at
a city,  called  Tacuba,  at  the  end  of  that  causeway.  God
only  knows  how  much  trouble  and  danger  I endured,
because  every  time  I faced  about  against  our  adversaries,
I carne  back  full  of  arrows,  and  darts,  and  stones,  for  as
there  was  water  on  both  sides,  they  could  assail  us  with
impunity  and  fearlessly.  When  we  attacked  those  on
land  they  would  leap  into  the  water,  thus  receiving  very
little  hurt,  except  that  some  who  in  the  skirmish
interfered  with  each  other  and  fell,  were  killed.  With
great  trouble  and  fatigue,  I conducted  my  remaining
people  to  the  city  of  Tacuba  without  being  killed  myself,
ñor  having  any  Spaniard  or  Indian  wounded,  except  one
horseman  who  had  gone  with  me  to  the  rear.  Those  who

298

Letters  of  Cortes

went  in  the  vanguard  did  not  have  less  fighting  than  those
on  the  flanks,  although  the  strongest  forcé  was  the  one
at  our  backs  where  the  peo  pie  of  the  city  pursued  us.

When  I reached  the  city  of  Tacuba,  I found  all  the
people  in  a panic  in  the  square,  not  knowing  where  to
go,  so  I made  great  haste  to  get  them  out  into  the  country,
before  more  of  the  inhabitants  should  gather  in  the  said
city  and  capture  the  roofs,  from  which  they  could  do  us
great  injury.  The  vanguard  said  they  did  not  know  the
way,  so  I sent  them  to  the  rear,  and  took  the  lead  myself
until  we  had  got  clear  of  the  city,  where  I awaited  them
at  some  farms.  When  the  rear-guard  carne  up.  I learned
that  they  had  sustained  some  injury,  and  that  some  of
the  Spaniards  and  Indians  had  been  killed,  and  that
much  gold  had  been  lost  and  left  on  the  road,  where  the
Indians  gathered  it  up.  I held  the  Indians  in  check  there
until  all  the  people  had  passed  on,  so  that  the  foot-soldiers
might  take  the  hill,  on  which  there  stood  a strong  tower
and  buildings.  These  they  captured  without  sustaining
any  injury,  for  I did  not  lea  ve  my  place,  ñor  allow  the
enemy  to  advance,  until  they  had  secured  the  hill.  God
only  knows  the  trouble  and  fatigue  we  sustained,  for  no
horse  of  the  twenty-four  was  left  which  could  still  run,
ñor  any  horseman  who  could  raise  his  arms,  ñor  a sound
foot-soldier  who  could  move.  When  we  reached  the
buildings,  we  fortified  ourselves  in  them,  and  the  enemy
surrounded  us  and  besieged  us  until  night,  not  leaving  us
an  hour’s  rest.  We  found  that  over  one  hundred  and
fifty  Spaniards  were  killed  in  this  fight,  forty-five  mares
and  horses,  and  more  than  two  thousand  of  the  Indians
who  had  aided  the  Spaniards;  amongst  the  latter,  they
killed  the  son  and  daughters  of  Montezuma,  and  all  the
other  chiefs  whom  we  carried  prisoners.

At  midnight,  believing  we  were  not  observed,  we  left
the  said  lodgings  very  silently,  leaving  many  fires  burning
in  it,  not  knowing  any  road,  ñor  where  we  were  going,

Second  Letter

299

except  that  an  Indian  of  Tascaltecal  told  us  he  would
guide  us  to  his  country  if  they  did  not  stop  us  on  the
way.  There  were  some  watchmen  very  near  who  heard
us,  and  alarmed  many  towns  round  about,  from  which
numbers  of  people  gathered  and  pursued  us  until  day-
break.  At  that  time  five  horsemen  who  rodé  ahead  as
scouts  met  some  bands  of  people  along  the  road,  and
killed  some  of  them ; these  were  routed  under  the  belief  that
more  horsemen  and  foot-soldiers  were  coming  up.  When
I saw  that  our  enemies  were  gathering  from  all  sides,  I got
into  order  our  people  who  were  still  fit  for  Service,  making
squadrons,  and  placing  them  in  the  vanguard,  rear-guard,
and  on  the  flanks,  with  the  wounded  in  the  centre,  and
I likewise  distributed  the  horsemen.  Thus  we  continued
all  that  day,  fighting  on  all  sides,  so  that  during  the  whole
night  and  day  we  did  not  advance  more  than  three  leagues.
When  night  carne  on  Our  Lord  was  pleased  to  show  us
a tower  and  good  lodging  place  on  a hill,  where  we  again
fortified  ourselves,  and  during  that  night  they  left  us
in  peace,  although  at  dawn  we  had  some  disturbance
from  a false  alarm  caused  by  our  own  fears  of  the
multitude  which  kept  coming  in  pursuit  of  us.

The  next  moming,  one  hour  after  daybreak,  I departed
in  the  order  already  mentioned,  taking  my  vanguard
and  rear-guard  in  good  order;  and  on  all  sides  we  were
followed  by  the  enemy,  yelling,  and  raising  the  whole
country,  which  is  thickly  populated.  The  horsemen,  al-
though we  were  few  attacked  them,  but  did  little  harm
amongst  them,  because,  the  ground  being  rough,  they
would  retreat  to  the  hills.  In  this  manner,  we  marched
that  day  along  some  lakes, 1 till  we  reached  a populous
town,  where  we  thought  to  ha  ve  some  skirmish  with  the
townspeople.  When  we  arrived  there,  they  abandoned  it,
and  went  to  some  other  towns  thereaboüts  in  the  neigh-
bourhood.  I rested  there  that  day  and  the  next,  not  only

1 The  lakes  of  Zumpango,  Xaltocan,  and  San  Cristóbal.

3°°

Letters  of  Cortes

because  both  the  wounded  and  the  sound  ones  of  my
people  were  very  weary  and  exhausted  with  hunger  and
thirst,  and  the  horses  likewise  were  well  tired  out,  but
also  because  we  found  there  some  maize  which  we  ate  and
carried  away  with  us  on  the  road,  boiled  and  roasted.
We  left  the  next  day,  always  pursued  by  our  adver-
sarles, who  attacked  us  on  the  vanguard  and  rear-guard
with  many  yells.  We  continued  our  march,  guided  by
the  Indian  of  Tascaltecal,  during  which  we  suffered  much
trouble  and  fatigue,  for  many  times  we  lost  our  way.
When  it  was  already  late,  we  reached  a plain,  where  there
were  some  small  houses  in  which  we  lodged  that  night,
suffering  great  want  of  food.

Early  next  morning  we  began  our  march,  and,  before
we  reached  the  road,  our  enemies  still  followed  our  rear-
guard.  Constantly  skirmishing  with  them,  we  arrived
at  a large  town,  two  leagues  distant,  where  there  were
some  Indians  stationed  on  the  top  of  a small  hill  to  the
right.  Believing  that  we  might  capture  them,  as  they
were  near  the  road,  and  also  discover  if  there  were  just
behind  the  hill,  any  more  than  those  who  were  visible,
I started  round  the  said  hill  with  five  horsemen  and  twelve
foot-soldiers,  and  behind  it  there  was  a great  city1  of
many  people  with  whom  we  engaged  fiercely.  On  account
of  the  rocky  country,  and  the  great  number  of  their  people,
and  our  small  numbers,  we  had  to  retire  to  the  town
where  our  people  were.  I carne  out  of  this,  very  badly

1 Otumba.  Prescott  observes  that  even  Bernal  Díaz,  who  was  some-
what  sceptical  on  other  occasions,  admits  the  apparition  of  St.  James
mounted  on  a white  charger  at  Otumba.  Voltaire  comments  as  follows:
“ Ceux  qui  ont  fait  des  revelations  de  ces  étranges  evenemens  les  ont  voulu
relever  par  des  miracles  qui  ne  servent  en  effet  qu’a  les  rábaisser.  Le  vrai
miracle  fút  la  conduite  de  Coríez.”  Possibly,  but  it  is  by  the  faith  which
we  were  promised  should  move  mountains  that  such  heroic  deeds  are
accomplished,  and  the  material  apparition  required  to  satisfy  a Voltaire
would  be  but  a poor  thing  compared  to  the  reality  of  the  Spanish  con-
queror’s  faith  in  the  presence  and  guidance  of  his  patrón  saints.  As
well  doubt  the  Pucelle's  belief  in  her  “ Voices. "

Second  Letter

301

wounded  in  the  head  by  two  sling  stones,  and  after  bind-
ing  up  the  wounds  I made  the  Spaniards  lea\  e the  town,
because  it  did  not  seem  to  me  a safe  camp  foi  us,  and  %e
marched  thus  with  great  numbers  of  Indians  pursuing
us,  fighting  so  stoutly  that  they  wounded  four  or  five
Spaniards  and  as  many  horses.  They  killed  us  a horse,
also,  and  God  only  knows  how  great  was  its  valué  to  us,
and  what  pain  we  suffered  at  its  death,  because,  after
God,  our  only  security  was  the  horses;  but  we  consoled
ourselves  with  its  meat,  and  ate  it  without  leaving  even
the  skin,  so  great  was  our  want;  for,  since  leaving  the
capital,  we  had  nothing  to  eat  but  roasted  and  boiled
corn,  and  not  always  enough  of  that,  and,  in  addition,
some  herbs  which  we  gathered  in  the  country.

Seeing  that  the  enemy  increased  every  day,  and  grew
stronger,  and  that  we  were  becoming  weaker,  that
night  I ordered  the  wounded  and  sick,  whom  The  Battle
we  carried  behind  us  on  our  ¡horses,  to  pro-  of  °tumba
vide  themselves  with  crutches  and  other  contri v-
ances  for  supporting  themselves,  so  that  the  horses
and  sound  Spaniards  would  be  free  to  fight.  From
what  happened  to  us  the  next  day,  it  seemed  that
the  Holy  Ghost  had  inspired  me  with  this  thought,
for,  after  we  had  left  this  camp  in  the  morning,  and
marched  about  a league  and  a half,  so  great  a multitude
of  Indians  carne  out  to  encounter  me,  that  all  about  us
we  could  not  see  the  ground,  so  completely  was  it  covered
by  them.  They  attacked  us  on  all  sides  so  violently  that
we  could  not  distinguish  each  other,  for  being  so  pressed
and  entangled  with  them.  Certainly  we  believed  that
to  be  our  last  day,  so  great  was  the  forcé  of  the  Indians
and  so  feeble  the  resistance  they  encountered  in  us;  for
we  were  already  exhausted,  and  almost  all  of  us  wounded
and  fainting  from  hunger.  But  Our  Lord  was  pleased
to  show  His  great  power  and  mercy  to  us,  for,  with  all
our  weakness,  we  broke  their  great  pride  and  haughtiness,

302

Lctters  of  Cortes

in  that  many  of  their  prominent  and  important  persons
perished,  for  they  were  so  many  that  they  hindered  one
another,  and  were  unable  either  to  fight  or  to  fly.  We
spent  a great  part  of  the  day  in  this  struggle,  until  it
pleased  God  that  one  of  those  persons,  who  must  have
been  an  important  chief,  fell,  for  with  his  death  all  the
battle  ceased.  After  this,  we  continued  our  way  more
easily,  although  some  of  them  still  harassed  us  until  we
reached  a small  house  in  the  plain,  where  we  lodged  that
night  and  on  the  open  ground.  From  there  we  first
descried  certain  mountains  of  the  province  of  Tascaltecal,
at  which  not  a little  joy  filled  our  hearts,  because  we
recognised  the  country,  and  knew  our  way,  although  we
were  not  quite  positive  of  finding  the  natives  faithful  and
friendly;  for  we  feared  that,  seeing  us  so  reduced,  they
might  wish  to  put  an  end  to  our  lives,  in  order  to  recover
the  liberty  which  they  had  formerly  enjoyed.  This
thought  and  suspicion  cast  us  into  an  affliction  which
equalled  that  which  we  felt  whilst  fighting  with  the
Culuans.

The  next  moming  at  daybreak,  we  began  to  march
by  a very  level  road  which  led  directly  to  the  said  province
of  Tascaltecal  upon  which  only  a few  of  our  adversaries
followed,  although  very  near  were  many  large  towns;
from  some  hills  in  our  rear,  though,  from  a distance,  they
still  continued  yelling  at  us.  On  this  day,  which  was
Sunday,  July  8th,  we  left  all  the  country  of  Culua,  and
entered  the  province  of  Tascaltecal,  at  a village  of  some
three  or  four  thousand  households,  called  Gualipan, 1
where  the  natives  received  us  very  well,  and  somewhat
relieved  our  great  hunger  and  weariness,  although  for
much  of  the  provisión  which  they  gave  us  they  asked
payment,  and  would  only  accept  gold.  This  we  were
obliged  in  our  great  necessity  to  give.

We  remained  three  days  in  this  town,  and  Magiscatzin,

1 Hueyothlipan.

Second  Letter

3°3

and  Sicutengal,  and  all  the  chiefs  of  the  said  province
and  some  of  those  of  Quasucingo,  carne  to  see  and  speak
to  me,  showing  much  grief  for  what  had  happened  to  us,
and  endeavouring  to  consolé  me,  reminding  me  that  they
had  often  told  me  that  the  Culuans  were¿traitors  against
whom  I should  be  on  my  guard,  but  that  I would  not
believe  it.  Inasmuch  as  I had  escaped  alive,  they  said
I ought  to  rejoice,  for  they  would  aid  me  until  death  to
obtain  satisfaction  for  the  injury  the  Culuans  had  done
me.  They  added  that  they  felt  obliged  to  do  this  as
vassals  of  Your  Highness,  besides  which  they  also  suffered
because  of  the  many  sons  and  brothers  who  had  perished
in  my  company,  and  on  account  of  other  injuries  which
in  past  times  they  had  recei\ed,  so  I might  be  sure  they
would  be  my  true  and  steadfast  friends  until  death.  As
I now  carne  wounded  and  almost  all  of  my  company
exhausted,  they  wanted  us  to  go  into  the  city,  four
leagues  from  this  town,  where  we  might  rest,  and  they
would  care  for  us  and  restore  us.  I was  very  grateful  to
them,  and  accepted  their  invitation,  and  gave  them  some
few  things  from  the  valuables  which  had  escaped,  at  which
they  were  well  contented;  and  I went  with  them  to  the
said  city,  where  I likewise  had  a good  reception.  Magis-
catzin  brought  me  a bedstead  of  finely  finished  wood,  with
some  bed-clothing,  such  as  they  used,  for  me  to  sleep  in,
for  we  brought  none;  and  he  helped  everybody  with  all
that  he  had  and  could.

When  I quit  this  city  for  Temixtitan,  I had  left  here
certain  sick  persons  and  some  of  my  servants  with  silver
and  wearing  apparel  belonging  to  me,  and  certain  other
household  things  and  provisions,  in  order  to  march
forward  unencumbered  lest  anything  should  happen
to  us,  and  all  the  documents  and  agreements  which  I had
made  with  the  natives  of  these  parts  should  be  lost.  All
the  clothing  of  the  Spaniards  who  carne  with  me  had
likewise  been  left,  as  they  only  took  away  what  they  wore,

3°4

Letters  of  Cortes

and  their  bedding.  I leamed  that  another  servant  of
mine  had  come  from  Vera  Cruz,  bringing  provisions  and
things  for  me.  He  had  been  accompanied  by  horse-
men  and  forty-five  foot-soldiers,  and  had  likewise  taken
with  him  the  others  whom  I had  left  there.  He  carried
all  the  silver  and  clotliing,  my  own  as  well  as  that  of  my
companions,  with  seven  thousand  dollars  of  melted  gold,
which  I had  left  there  in  two  chests,  without  counting
other  valuables,  and  other  fourteen  thousand  dollars  of
gold  in  pieces,  which  had  been  given,  in  the  province  of
Tuchitepeque,  to  that  captain  whom  I had  sent  to  build
the  town  of  Quacucalco.  He  carried  also  many  other
things  which  were  worth  more  than  thirty  thousand
dollars  of  gold.  This  I learned,  and  also  that  the  Indians
of  Culua  had  killed  them  all  on  the  road,  and  taken  their
treasure.  I likewise  learned  that  they  had  killed,  on  the
roads,  many  other  Spaniards  who  were  coming  to  the
city  of  Temixtitan,  believing  that  I was  there  at  peace,
and  that  the  roads  were  as  secure  as  I had  before  held
them.  I assure  Your  Majesty  that  all  of  us  were  plunged
into  such  sadness  by  this  news  that  it  could  hardly  have
been  worse,  because  the  loss  of  these  Spaniards  and  the
treasure  recalled  the  deaths  and  losses  of  the  Spaniards
who  had  been  killed  in  the  city,  at  the  bridges,  and  on
the  road;  and  especially  as  it  roused  much  suspicion  in
me  that,  in  like  manner,  the  people  of  Vera  Cruz  might
have  been  attacked,  and  that  those  whom  we  considered
our  friends  might  have  rebelled,  upon  hearing  of  our  defeat.
To  leam  the  truth,  I immediately  dispatched  messengers
accompanied  by  Indians  to  guide  them,  whom  I ordered
to  avoid  the  high  road  until  they  arrived  at  Vera  Cruz,  and
to  let  me  know  promptly  what  had  happened  there.  It
pleased  Our  Lord  that  they  should  find  the  Spaniards  very
well,  and  the  natives  perfectly  faithful.  It  was  a great
relief  to  learn  this  after  our  losses  and  griefs,  though  it  was
very  bad  news  for  them  to  hear  of  our  disaster  and  rout.

Second  Letter

305

I remained  twenty  days  in  this  province  of  Tascaltecal,
healing  my  wounds  which  with  the  poor  care  on  the
road  had  become  much  worse,  especially  the  Events  in
wound  on  my  head;  and  I also  had  all  the  Tiascaia
wounded  of  my  company  cared  for.  Some  of  them
died,  not  only  from  their  wounds,  but  also  on  ac-
count  of  our  past  troubles;  others  remained  maimed
in  their  arms,  and  others  lame  in  their  legs,  for  their
wounds  were  very  bad,  and  for  curing  them  there  was
very  little  means.  I myself  lost  two  fingers  of  my  left
hand.

Seeing  that  many  of  ours  were  dead,  and  that  those
who  survived  were  wounded,  and  disheartened  by  the
dangers  and  troubles  through  which  they  had  passed,  and
fearing  others  still  ahead,  my  men  entreated  me  many
times  to  go  to  Vera  Cruz;  for  there  we  could  fortify  our-
selves  before  those  natives,  whom  we  still  considered  our
friends,  seeing  our  rout  and  diminished  numbers,  could
join  with  our  enemies,  and,  taking  the  passes  over  which
we  had  to  cross,  attack  us  on  the  one  side,  and  our  people
at  Vera  Cruz  on  the  other.  Being  there  together,  and
having  ships  we  would  be  stronger  and  better  able  to
defend  ourselves,  in  case  they  should  attack  before  we
summoned  aid  from  the  Islands.  I,  however,  remembered
that  Fortune  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  daring,  and  that
we  were  Christians,  confiding  in  the  very  great  mercy
of  God,  who  would  never  permit  us  to  perish ; and  I con-
sidered that  to  show  so  little  courage  before  the  natives,
especially  our  friends,  might  cause  them  to  abandon  us
the  sooner,  and  turn  against  us;  that  this  great  and  noble
country,  at  peace  and  on  the  point  of  being  secured
under  Your  Majesty,  would  be  lost.  The  war  must  be
continued,  to  bring  about  the  pacification  of  this  country
as  it  was  before,  and  I determined  on  no  account  to  go
to  the  sea-port,  but  rather,  disregarding  all  difficulty  and
danger  which  might  offer,  I said  that  I would  not  abandon

VOL.  I.— -20

3°ó

Letters  of  Cortes

this  country ; for  besides  its  being  disgraceful  to  me  and
very  dangerous  to  all,  we  would  act  treasonably  towards
Your  Majesty,  and  I was  determined  to  return  against
the  enemy  from  all  possible  points,  and  to  take  the
offensive  against  them  in  every  way  I could.

After  stopping  twenty  days  in  this  province,  although
I was  not  yet  well  of  my  wounds,  and  those  of  my  com-
Expedition  Pany  were  st^  somewhat  weak,  I left  for
t0P  another,  called  Tepeaca,  which  belonged  to

Tepeaca  the  league  and  confederation  of  Culua,  our

enemy.  I had  been  informed  that  the  inhabitants
there  had  killed  ten  or  twelve  Spaniards  who  were
on  their  way  by  the  road  which  passes  there,  from
Vera  Cruz  to  the  capital.  The  said  province  of  Tepeaca
borders  with  those  of  Tascaltecal  and  Churultecal,
for  it  is  very  large.  As  we  were  entering  that  province,
many  natives  carne  out  to  attack  us,  defending  the  road,  as
best  they  could,  by  fortifying  themselves  in  strong
and  dangerous  positions.  To  avoid  prolixitv,  I do  not
give  an  account  of  all  the  particulars  of  this  war , I will
only  say  that,  after  the  requirements  had  been  made  on
the  part  of  Your  Majesty,  that  they  should  make  peace,
and  they  had  refused  to  submit,  we  fought  with  them
se v eral  times;  and,  with  the  help  of  God,  and  the  royal
good  fortune  of  Your  Highness,  we  always  scattered
them,  and  killed  many,  without  their  killing  one  of  us
in  the  whole  course  of  the  said  war,  or  woundjng  one
solitary  Spaniard.  Although,  as  I have  said,  this  prov-
ince is  very  large,  I pacified  many  cities  and  provinces
subject  to  it  in  about  twenty  days,  and  the  lords  and
chiefs  of  it  carne  and  offered  themselves  as  vassals  to
Your  Majesty.  Moreover  I expelled  [many  Culuans,
who  had  come  to  this  province  to  help  the  natives  in
making  war  upon  us,  and  to  hinder  them  by  fair  means
or  foul  from  becoming  our  friends.  Thus  I had  to  busy
myself  up  till  now  in  this  matter  which  is  not  yet  alto

Second  Letter

307

gether  finished,  for  there  are  still  some  cities  and  towns
to  be  pacified,  which  by  the  help  of  Our  Lord  will  shortly
be,  like  these  others,  subject  to  the  royal  dominión  of
Your  Majesty.

In  a certain  part  of  this  province,  where  they  killed
those  ten  Spaniards,  the  natives  were  always  very  active
in  the  war,  and  very  rebellious,  and  had  to  be  reduced
by  forcé  of  arms.  I made  a number  slaves,  of  whom  I
gave  a fifth  part  to  the  officials  of  Your  Majesty.  I did
this  especially  as,  in  addition  to  their  having  killed  the
said  Spaniards,  and  rebelled  against  the  Service  of  Your
Highness,  they  eat  human  flesh,  a fact  so  notorious  that
I do  not  send  proofs  of  it  to  Your  Majesty.  I was  also
moved  to  make  the  said  slaves  in  order  to  strike  terror
into  the  Culuans,  and  also  because  there  are  many  who
will  never  mend  themselves  until  great  and  severe  punish-
ment  is  inñicted  upon  them.  We  entered  upon  this  war
with  the  aid  of  the  natives  of  Tascaltecal,  and  Churultecal,
and  Quasucingo,  by  which  our  friendship  has  been  well
confirmed;  and  we  are  convinced  that  they  will  always
serve  Your  Highness  as  loyal  vassals.

While  conducting  this  war  in  the  province  of  Tepeaca,
I received  letters  from  Vera  Cruz,  telling  me  that  two  ships
had  arrived  in  that  port,  belonging  to  Francisco  de  Garay
who  it  appears  had  again  sent  more  people  to  that  great
river  which  I described  to  Your  Highness,  and  that  the  na-
tives there  had  fought  with  them,  killing  se  venteen  or  eigh-
teen  Christians,  and  wounding  many  others.  They  had
likewise  killed  seven  horses,  and  the  remaining  Spaniards
who  retumed  to  the  ships  had  escaped  by  their  good  legs.
The  captains  and  all  of  them  had  arrived  very  much
shattered  and  wounded,  and  my  lieutenant  had  received
them  very  kindly  and  taken  care  of  them.  That  they
might  convalesce  the  better,  he  had  sent  some  of  the
said  Spaniards  to  the  country  of  a friendly  chief  near
there,  where  they  were  well  attended  to  and  provided

3°8

Letters  of  Cortes

for.  All  this  grieved  su  as  much  as  our  own  past  troubles,
but  perchance  this  rout  would  not  have  happened  to
them  if  they  had  united  with  me  at  first,  as  I have  al-
ready  recounted  to  Your  Highness;  for  I was  then  well
informed  about  everything  in  these  parts,  and  they  would
have  had  such  advice  from  me  that  what  had  happened
could  not  have  occurred,  especially  as  the  lord  of  that
river  and  country,  called  Panuco,  had  given  himself  as  a
vassal  to  Your  Majesty.  In  recognition  of  his  allegiance
he  had  sent  me  certain  gifts  by  his  messenger  to  the  city
of  Temixtitan,  as  I have  already  stated.  I have  written
to  Vera  Cruz,  that  if  the  captain  of  Francisco  de  Garay  de-
sires  to  leave,  to  lend  him  assistance,  and  help  him  to
dispatch  his  ships.

After  having  pacified  and  subjugated  to  the  royal  Ser-
vice of  Your  Highness  all  of  this  province  which  has  been
f pacified,  Your  Majesty ’s  officials  and  I con-
Segura  ferred  many  times  respectmg  the  measures

de  la  to  be  taken  for  its  security.  Seeing  that

Frontera  the  natives  had  first  given  themselves  as  vassals
of  Your  Highness,  and  then  rebelled  and  killed  the
Spaniards,  and  that  they  were  on  the  road  and  pass
where  the  trafile  of  all  the  sea-ports  had  to  pass  towards
the  interior,  we  considered  that,  if  it  were  left  to  itself
as  before,  the  natives  of  this  country,  and  also  of  Culua
who  were  very  near,  would  again  try  to  seduce  them
into  rebellion,  from  which  would  follow  much  harm  and
impediment  to  the  pacification  of  these  parts,  and  to
the  Service  of  Your  Highness;  and  the  said  traffic  would
cease,  especially  as  on  the  road  to  the  coast  there  are  two
very  steep  and  rough  passes,  which  confine  with  the  said
province,  where  the  natives  could  defend  themselves
with  little  difficulty.  For  this,  as  well  as  for  other  reasons
and  weighty  causes,  it  seemed  to  us  that,.  to  prevent  the
aforesaid  evils,  a town  should  be  founded  in  the  best  part
of  the  said  province  of  Tepeaca,  where  the  necessary  con-

Second  Letter

309

ditions  could  be  found  for  the  colonists.  And  for  the  pur-
pose  of  carrying  this  out,  I,  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Majesty,
gave  the  said  town  the  ñame  of  Segura  de  la  Frontera, 1
and  I named  alcaldes  and  municipal  and  other  ofñcers
as  is  customary ; and,  for  the  better  security  of  the  house-
holders  of  this  town,  materials  are  being  brought  to  build
a fort  on  the  place  I designated ; as  materials  hereabouts
are  of  good  quality,  all  possible  haste  shall  be  employed.

While  writing  this  account,  messengers  carne  to  me
from  the  chief  of  the  city,  called  Guacachula, 2 about  five
leagues  from  this  province,  and  situated  at  the  entrance  of
a pass  leading  to  the  province  of  México.  They  told  me,
on  behalf  of  the  said  chief,  that  several  days  before  they
had  intended  to  come  to  me  to  tender  the  obedience  they
owed  to  Your  Majesty,  as  your  vassals,  and  I must  not
consider  them  culpable,  believing  their  failure  to  do  so
was  voluntary.  They  told  me  that  some  captains  of
Culua  were  lodged  in  their  city,  and  that  in  it  and  about
a league  distant  were  thirty  thousand  men  in  garrison,
guarding  that  pass,  to  prevent  our  Crossing  it,  and  also
to  prevent  the  natives  of  their  city  and  other  neighbouring
provinces  from  serving  Your  Majesty,  and  becoming
our  friends ; and  they  said  they  would  ha  ve  come  to  offer
themselves  to  Your  Royal  Service,  had  those  men  not
prevented  them.  They  let  me  know  this  that  I might
remedy  it,  because,  besides  the  obstruction  it  was  to  those
who  were  well  disposed,  the  people  of  the  city  and  neigh-
bourhood  suffered  much  injury,  as  they  were  taxed  and
ill-treated  by  the  many  armed  warriors  who  took  their
women  and  chattels.  If  I would  help  them,  they  said
they  would  obey  any  orders  I gave  them.

'The  city  was  founded  early  in  September,  1520,  on  the  hillside,
in  a position  both  strategically  and  commercially  advantageous ;
fortifications  were  built  and  strict  laws  against  gambling,  blaspheming,
etc.,  were  enacted.  The  present  town  is  called  Tepeaca,  and  stands  on
the  plain.

2 Huaquechula:  another  republic:  also  spelled  Guaquechula.

3io

Letters  of  Cortes

After  thanking  them  for  their  information  and  offer,  I
immediately  gave  them  thirteen  horsemen,  two  hundred
foot-soldiers,  and  some  thirty  thousand  Indian  allies,
to’  accompany  them.1  It  was  agreed  that  they  should
lead  them  by  roads  where  they  would  not  be  seen,  and,
when  they  approached  near  the  city,  its  chiefs,  and
inhabitants,  and  other  vassals  and  confederates,  should
be  notified,  and  should  surround  the  quarters  where  the
captains  were,  to  capture  and  kill  them  before  their  men
could  help  them,  so  that,  when  the  latter  did  appear,
the  Spaniards  would  already  be  in  the  city  waiting  to
fight  and  rout  them.  They  and  the  Spaniards  marched
by  the  city  of  Churultecal  and  through  some  parts  of  the
province  of  Quasucingo,  which  borders  on  the  territory
of  Guacachula  within  four  leagues  of  it;  and,  in  a town
of  the  said  province  of  Quasucingo,  it  is  said  that  they
told  the  Spaniards  that  the  natives  of  that  province  were
leagued  with  the  Guacachulans  and  Culuans  to  entice  the
Spaniards  with  this  project  to  the  said  city,  where  they
could  kill  them.  As  the  fright,  with  which  the  Culuans
in  their  city  and  country  had  inspired  them,  had  not  yet
altogether  abated,  this  information  alarmed  the  Span-
iards ; and  the  captain  whom  I had  sent  with  them  made
an  investigation,  and  took  prisoner  all  those  chiefs  of
Quasucingo  who  were  with  them,  and  the  messengers  from
the  city  of  Guacachula,  and  retumed  with  them  to  the
city  of  Churultecal,  four  leagues  from  there.  Thence,
together  with  the  proofs  he  had  obtained,  he  sent  to  me
all  the  prisoners,  attended  by  horsemen  and  foot-soldiers.
The  captain  also  wrote  me  that  our  people  were  frightened
because  the  enterprise  seemed  very  difficult.  On  the
arrival  of  the  prisoners  I spoke  to  them  by  my  interpreter,
and,  having  used  all  diligence  to  learn  the  truth,  it  ap-
peared  that  the  captain  had  misjudged  them  so  I im-

i Diego  de  Ordaz  and  Alonso  de  Avila  were  in  charge  of  this
expedition  which  took  the  road  by  Cholula.

Second  Letter

3IX

mediately  set  them  free  and  satisfied  them,  protesting
that  I believed  them  loyal  vassals  of  Your  Sacred  Ma-
jesty,  and  that  I would  go  myself  to  destroy  the  Culuans.
To  avoid  showing  any  timidity  or  hesitancy  to  the  na-
tives,  both  friends  and  enemies,  it  seemed  that  I ought  not
to  abandon  the  proposed  expedition.  To  relieve  the  fears
of  some  of  the  Spaniards,  I determined  to  suspend  other
business,  and  the  dispatch  for  Your  Majesty  which  I was
writing,  and  thus  I set  out  that  same  hour  with  all  possi-
ble  haste,  arriving  the  same  day  at  the  city  of  Churultecal
(which  is  eight  leagues  from  this  city)  where  I found
the  Spaniards,  who  still  affirmed  their  conviction  of  the
treachery.

The  next  day,  I slept  in  the  town  of  Quasucingo,
where  the  chiefs  had  been  arrested.  Having  agreed
with  the  messengers  of  Guacachula  as  to  wdiere  Capture  of
and  how  we  should  enter  their  city,  I started  Guacachula
the  next  day,  one  hour  before  daybreak,  arriving
near  it  about  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning.  About
half  a league  distant  from  it,  certain  messengers  of
the  city  met  me  on  the  road  to  tell  me  that  every-
thing  was  well  planned  and  ready,  and  that  the  Culuans
knew  nothing  of  our  coming,  because  the  natives  of  the
said  city  had  captured  certain  of  their  spies,  who  were
on  the  road,  and  also  some  others  whom  the  Culuan
captains  had  stationed  on  the  walls  and  towers  of  the
city  to  overlook  the  country.  All  our  adversaries  were
thus  off  their  guard,  believing  they  were  protected  by
their  watchmen  and  spies;  henee  I might  ad vanee  un-
discovered.  I therefore  made  haste  to  reach  the  city
unseen,  for  we  were  marching  over  a plain  where  we  might
easily  be  observed.

It  appeared  that  as  soon  as  the  townspeople  perceived
us,  and  saw  how  near  we  were,  they  immediately  sur-
rounded  the  quarters  of  the  captains,  and  began  to
attaclc  the  others  scattered  throughout  the  city.  When

312

Letters  of  Cortes

I arrived  within  a bow  shot  of  the  city,  as  many  as  forty
prisoners  were  brought  to  me,  and  I made  the  more
haste  to  enter.  There  was  a great  uproar  in  all  the
streets  of  the  city.  Fighting  with  the  adversarles,  and
guided  by  the  inhabitants,  I reached  the  captains’
quarters  which  I found  surrounded  by  more  than  three
thousand  men  striving  to  enter  the  gate.  They  had
taken  possession  of  the  upper  stories  and  terraces,  but
the  captains  fought  so  well  and  so  steadily  that  they  could
not  forcé  an  entrance;  although  the  Culuans  were  few,
they  fought  like  valiant  men,  and  besides  the  building
was  strong.  When  I arrived,  we  entered  with  so  many
natives  that  it  was  impossible  to  prevent  the  defenders
being  killed  forthwith;  for  I wished  to  take  some  alive,
in  order  to  get  information  about  matters  in  the  capital,
and  to  learn  who  was  sovereign  after  the  death  of  Mon-
tezuma,  and  about  other  things.  I could  only  rescue
one  more  dead  than  alive,  who  informed  me  as  I shall
relate  hereafter.  They  killed  many  who  were  quartered
in  the  city,  and  the  survivors,  leaming  of  my  coming,
began  to  fly  towards  the  garrison,  but  many  of  them
were  likewise  killed  in  the  pursuit.  This  tumult  was
so  quickly  heard  and  understood  by  the  men  of  the
garrison,  who  were  on  a certain  elevation,  commanding
the  city  and  the  surrounding  plain,  that  those  who  were
escaping  from  the  city  encountered  the  others  who  were
coming  to  its  relief  to  see  what  had  happened.  The  latter
were  altogether  more  than  thirty  thousand  men,  and  the
most  brilliant  troops  we  had  yet  seen,  for  they  wore  many
omaments  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  feathers,  and,  as  the
city  was  large,  they  began  to  set  fire  to  it  in  the  quarter
where  they  entered.  This  became  quickly  known  to  the
inhabitants,  and  I sallied  forth  with  only  horsemen,
for  the  foot-soldiers  were  already  very  tired.  We  broke
through  the  enemy,  who  retreated  to  a position  which  we
took  from  them,  following  them  up  and  overtaking  many

Second  Letter

3I3

of  them  on  a very  rough  slope,  so  that  when  we  gained
the  top  neither  the  enemy  ñor  ourselves  were  able  to
advance  or  retreat.  Many  fell  dead,  without  a wound,
stifled  by  the  heat,  and  two  horses  were  exhausted,  one
of  which  died.  We  did  much  damage,  for  many  of  our
Indian  allies  carne  up,  and,  as  they  arrived  fresh  and  the
adversarles  were  almost  dead,  they  killed  many,  so  that
in  a very  short  time  the  field  was  cleared  of  the  living,  and
covered  with  the  dead.  We  reached  the  batracks  and  huts
which  they  had  recently  made  in  the  field,  and  which
were  in  three  divisions  each  of  which  appeared  like  a
good-sized  village.  In  addition  to  their  warriors,  they
had  a great  display  of  servants,  and  provisions,  and  camp
supplies,  there  having  been,  as  I learned  afterwards,
some  notable  persons  in  it.  All  was  despoiled  and  burned
by  our  Indian  friends,  who,  I assure  Your  Majesty,  had
gathered  to  the  number  of  one  hundred  thousand  men.
Having  by  this  victory  expelled  all  the  enemy  from  the
country,  and  driven  them  beyond  some  bridges  and
narrow  passes,  we  returned  to  the  city,  where  we  were
well  received,  and  quartered  by  the  inhabitants;  and
we  rested  in  that  city  three  days,  being  in  great  need  of
repose.

At  this  time,  the  natives  of  a large  city,  called  Ocupa-
tuyo  (which  is  on  the  top  of  these  sierras,  two  leagues
from  the  enemy’s  camp,  and  also  at  the  foot  of  the
mountain  chain,  where  I said  the  smoke  comes  out) , carne
to  offer  themselves  to  the  Service  of  Your  Majesty.  They
said  that  their  chief  had  gone  away  with  the  Culuans
when  we  pursued  them,  believing  that  we  would  not  stop
before  reaching  his  city,  but  that  they  had  desired  my
friendship  for  many  days,  wishing  to  come  and  offer
themselves  as  vassals  of  Your  Majesty,  although  their
chief  would  not  allow  it  ñor  consent  to  it,  in  spite  of  their
having  entreated  his  permission.  They  said  that  now
they  wished  to  serve  Your  Highness,  and  that  the  brother

314

Letters  of  Cortes

of  the  said  chief,  who  had  shared  their  opinión  and  in-
ten tions  was  likewise  still  of  the  same  mind.  They
prayed  me  that  I would  approve  his  succession  to  the
lordship,  and  that  although  the  other  might  return,  I
would  not  consent  to  his  being  received  as  their  chief;
if  so  neither  would  they  receive  him.  I told  them  that,
as  they  had  been  of  the  league  and  confederation  of
Culua,  and  had  rebelled  against  the  service  of  Your
Majesty,  they  deserved  severe  punishment,  and  that  I
had  thought  to  execute  it  upon  their  persons  and  prop-
erty;  but,  inasmuch  as  they  had  come,  saying  their  chief
was  the  cause  of  their  rebellion  and  uprising.  I,  in  the
ñame  of  Your  Majesty,  pardoned  their  past  error,  and
received  and  admitted  them  to  Your  Royal  service.  I
wamed  them  that  if  they  committed  a similar  error  again
they  would  be  punished  and  chastised,  but  if  they  provéd
loyal  vassals  of  Your  Royal  Highness,  I would  favour
and  help  them  in  Your  Royal  ñame;  and  they  promised
to  do  this.

This  city  of  Guacachula  is  situated  in  a plain,  bounded
on  one  side  by  very  high  and  rugged  hills,  and  on  the
Fortifica-  other  by  two  rivers  about  two  bow  shots
tions  of  apart,  each  of  which  flows  through  very  deep
Guacachula  an¿  large  ravines.  There  are,  consequently,
very  few  entrances  to  the  city,  and  those  which
exist  are  so  rough  to  ascend  and  descend,  that  it  can
hardly  be  accomplished  on  horseback.  The  entire
city  is  surrounded  by  a very  strong  wall  of  stone  and
mortar,  the  outside  being  about  twenty  feet  high,  while
from  the  inside  it  is  about  on  the  same  level  with  the
ground.  There  is  a battlement  along  the  wall  three  feet
high,  to  protect  them  in  fighting,  and  they  have  four
entrances,  broad  enough  for  a man  to  enter  on  horseback.
At  each  of  these  entrances,  there  are  three  or  four  curves
in  the  wall,  doubling  one  over  the  other,  and  above  these
tumings  there  is  also  a battlement  on  the  walls,  from

Second  Letter

3*5

which  they  can  fight.  They  keep  a great  quantity  of  all
sorts  of  large  and  small  stones  all  along  this  wall  which
they  use  in  fighting.  This  city  may  have  some  five  or
six  thousand  households,  and  in  the  surrounding  hamlets
subject  to  them  as  many  others  or  more.  It  is  veiy  ex-
tensive,  and  within  the  city  are  many  gardens  of  fruits
and  aromatic  herbs,  as  is  their  custom.

After  resting  three  days  in  this  said  city,  we  went  to
another,  called  Izzucan,  four  leagues  distant  from  Gua-
cachula,  because  I was  informed  that  there  were  many
Culuans  in  garrison  there  also,  and  that  the  people  of
the  said  city,  and  of  other  towns  and  places  dependent
on  them,  were,  and  showed  themselves  to  be,  very  partial
to  the  Culuans  because  their  chief  was  a blood  relation
of  Montezuma.  So  many  of  the  natives,  vassals  of  Your
Majesty,  accompanied  me  that  they  almost  covered  the
country  and  the  mountains  as  far  as  we  could  see,  and  in
truth  there  were  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty
thousand  men ; and  we  arrived  at  the  said  town  of  Izzunca
at  ten  o’clock,  finding  it  deserted  by  women  and  young
people,  but  there  were  about  five  or  six  thousand  well-
armed  warriors  in  it.  When  the  Spaniards  appeared
before  it,  they  attempted  some  defence  of  their  city,  but
they  shortly  abandoned  it,  because  from  the  side  to  which
we  were  guided  for  entering  we  found  a practical  entrance.
We  pursued  them  through  the  city,  forcing  them  to  jump
over  the  creneliated  top  of  the  wall  into  a river  which
surrounds  it  on  the  other  side,  whose  bridges  being
destroyed  we  were  somewhat  delayed  in  Crossing  it;  and
we  followed  in  pursuit  of  them  about  a league  and  a half,
in  which  distance  I believe  few  escaped.  Returning  to
the  city,  I sent  two  of  its  natives  who  had  been  taken
prisoner  to  speak  to  the  principal  persons  of  the  city,
for  the  chief  of  it  had  also  gone  with  the  Culuans  of  the
garrison,  so  as  to  induce  them  to  return  to  their  city;
and  I promised  them  in  the  ñame  of  Your  Majesty  that,

31 6

Lctters  of  Cortes

being  loyal  vassals  of  Your  Highness  from  henceforth,
they  would  be  well  treated  by  me,  and  their  rebellion
and  past  error  forgiven.  These  natives  left,  and  three
days  later  some  of  the  principal  persons  carne  and  asked
pardon  for  their  error,  saying  that  they  could  not  have
acted  otherwise,  because  they  had  done  what  their  chief
commanded  them,  but  that  they  promised  from  hence-
forth, inasmuch  as  their  chief  had  gone  and  left  them,
to  serve  Your  Majesty  well  and  loyally.  I reassured
them,  telling  them  to  return  to  their  homes,  and  to  bring
back  their  wives  and  children  who  were  in  other  places
and  towns  of  their  allies ; and  I told  them  likewise  to  tell
the  inhabitants  of  those  towns  to  come  to  me  and  I would
pardon  them  the  past,  for  they  would  not  like  that  I should
be  obliged  to  come  to  them,  as  then  they  would  sustain
much  damage,  which  would  greatly  grieve  me.  Thus  it
was  done,  and  within  two  days  that  city  of  Izzucan  was
again  populated;  and  its  dependencies  carne  to  offer
themselves  as  vassals  of  Your  Highness,  and  all  that
province  remained  very  secure,  and,  with  those  of
Guacachula,  our  friends  and  allies.

A certain  difference  aróse  as  to  whom  the  province
of  this  city  of  Izzucan  belonged  in  the  absence  of  the
Disputed  chief  who  had  gone  to  México.  The  former
Succession  rightful  chief  of  this  province  had  been  put
at  izzucan  £0  ¿ea^h  by  Montezuma,  who,  in  his  place
put  the  present  ruler,  whom  he  had  married  to
one  of  his  own  nieces;  and  a dispute  had  arisen
as  to  the  right  of  succession  between  a bastard  son
of  the  murdered  chief  and  the  son  of  his  legitimate
daughter,  who  had  married  the  chief  of  Guacachula.  It
was  agreed  amongst  them,  that  the  lordship  should
be  inherited  by  that  son  of  the  chief  of  Guacachula  who
descended  by  the  legitimate  line  from  the  oíd  chief,
for,  although  the  other  was  a son,  he  could  not  inherit

Second  Letter

317

my  presence  they  gave  obedience  to  that  boy,  who  was
about  ten  years  oíd;  and,  not  being  of  an  age  to  govem
them,  they  decided  that  the  bastard  únele  should  act  with
three  other  chiefs,  one  of  Guacachula,  and  two  of  Izzucan,
who  should  be  governors  of  the  country  and  should  have
control  of  the  boy  until  he  should  be  of  an  age  to  rule.

This  city  of  Izzucan  may  have  some  three  or  four
thousand  households,  and  its  streets  and  markets  are
well  laid  out.  It  has  one  hundred  mosques  and  strong
oratories  with  their  towers,  all  of  which  we  burnt.  It
stands  on  a plain  at  the  foot  of  a medium-sized  hill,
where  they  have  a very  good  fort,  and,  on  the  other
side  towards  the  plain,  it  is  surrounded  by  a deep  river
which  flows  near  the  wall,  which  is  thus  surrounded  by  the
deep  ravine  of  the  river.  Over  the  ravine  they  have
made  a battlement,  about  six  feet  in  height,  which
extends  all  round  the  city,  and  all  along  the  wall  they
had  placed  many  stones.  The  valley  is  circular,  and
very  fertile  in  fruits  and  cotton,  which  latter  is  not
produced  on  the  heights  because  of  the  coid,  and  it
belongs  to  tierra  caliente  because  it  is  well  protected  by
the  mountain  ranges.  The  whole  valley  is  irrigated  by
well  constructed  aqueduets.

I remained  in  this  city  until  I could  leave  it  well  peopled
and  pacified.  There  likewise  carne  to  it,  to  offer  them-
sevles  as  vassals  of  Your  Majesty  the  chief  of  the  city
called  Guajocingo,  and  the  lord  of  another  city,  ten  leagues
distant  from  that  of  Izzucan,  on  the  frontier  of  México.
There  carne  also  people  from  eight  of  the  towns  of  the
province  of  Coastoaca. 1 This  is  one  of  those  mentioned
in  previous  chapters,  where  the  Spaniards,  whom  I had
sent  to  seek  gold  in  the  provinces  of  Zuzula2  and  Tama-
zula3  (for  they  joined  each  other)  had  said  that  there
because  he  was  a bastard.  Thus  it  was  settled,  and  in

1 Oaxaca.  J Zozolla.  3 Tamazollan.

Letters  of  Cortes

318

were  very  great  towns  and  houses,  well  built  of  the  best
masonry,  such  as  we  liad  not  seen  in  any  of  these  parts.
This  province  of  Coastoaca  is  forty  leagues  from  that
of  Izzucan.  The  natives  of  the  said  eight  towns  offered
themselves  as  vassals  of  Your  Highness,  and  said  that
four  others  in  the  same  province  would  come  very  soon.
They  asked  me  to  excuse  them  if  they  had  not  dared  to
do  so  before  for  fear  of  the  Culuans,  but  said  that  they
never  had  taken  up  arms  against  me,  ñor  had  they  par-
ticipated  in  the  killing  of  any  Spaniards,  and  that  always
since  offering  themselves  to  the  Service  of  Your  Highness
they  had  been  good  and  loyal  subjects  in  their  hearts,
but  had  not  dared  to  manifest  it  out  of  fear  of  the  Culuans.
Thus  Your  Highness  may  be  very  sure  that,  Our  Lord
favouring  Your  Royal  good  fortune,  we  shall  within  a
short  time  regain  what  was  lost,  or  the  greater  part  of  it ;
because  every  day  many  provinces  and  cities,  who  before
were  subject  to  Montezuma,  come  to  offer  themselves
as  vassals  of  Your  Majesty;  for  they  see  that  those  who
do  so  are  well  received  and  treated  by  me,  and  that  those
who  do  otherwise  are  destroyed  one  after  another.

From  prisoners  taken  in  the  city  of  Guacachula,  es-
pecially  from  that  wounded  man,  I learned  very  fully
Montezu-  about  the  affairs  of  the  capital  of  Temixtitan,
ma’s  and  how,  after  the  death  of  Montezuma,
Successor  a brother  of  his,  lord  of  the  city  of  Izta-
palapa,  called  Cuetravacin, 1 had  succeeded  to  the
lordship,  because  the  son  of  Montezuma,  who  should

1 After  the  death  of  Montezuma,  Cuitlahuaczin  of  Iztapalapan,
who  had  been  in  chief  command  of  the  rising  against  the  Spaniards,
assumed  the  chieftainship  and  three  months  later  (Aztec  calendar)
he  was  appointed  emperor.  He  married  Montezuma’s  daughter,  the
Princess  Tecuichpo.  His  coronation  was  celebrated  with  the  cus-
tomary  solemnities,  the  prisoners  taken  on  the  Sorrowjul  Night,  both
Spaniards  and  Tlascalans,  serving  as  victims  for  the  sacrifices.  The
newly  elected  sovereign  had  to  cope  with  a situation  bristling  with
difficulties — dissensions  within,  insubordination  in  the  tributary  prov-
inces, the  enemy  without,  and  finally  and  most  terrible  of  all,  the

Second  Letter

319

have  inherited  the  sovereignty  was  killed  at  the  bridges
and  of  his  two  other  living  sons  one  is  said  to  be
mad,  and  the  other  palsied.  They  said  that  for  these
reasons  and  because  he  had  made  war  against  us,  the
brother  had  inherited,  and  was  regarded  as  a very  valiant
and  pmdent  man.  I likewise  learned  how  they  were
fortifying,  not  only  the  city,  but  other  places  in  the  do-
minión, and  how  they  were  preparing  walls,  barricades,
trenches,  and  all  kinds  of  arms;  and  I learned  especially
that  they  were  making  long  lances,  like  pikes,  for  the
horses,  and  we  have  even  seen  some  of  these  with  which
they  were  fighting  in  the  province  of  Tepeaca,  and  in  the
hamlets  and  bmldings  where  the  Culuans  were  quartered
at  Guacachula,  we  likewise  found  many  of  them.  I
learned  many  other  things  which  I omit  in  order  not  to
weary  Your  Highness.

small-pox,  which  raged  throughout  the  country.  To  this  dread  pest,
called  by  the  Aztecs,  Teozahuatl — Cuitlahuac  fell  a victim,  and  after  a
brief  reign  of  eighty  days,  died  on  Nov.  25,  1520.  During  this  period
he  had  exerted  every  effort  to  unite  all  the  forces  of  México  against
the  common  enemy,  sending  embassies  to  friends  and  foes  alike,  urging
that  oíd  diíferences  be  buried  for  the  moment,  and  that  all  should  make
common  cause  to  expel  or  destroy  the  strangers.  He  found  a supporter
in  Xicotencatl,  who,  like  himself  had  never  believed  in  the  semi-divine
character  of  the  teules,  or  gods  as  the  Spaniards  were  commonly
termed,  but  had  from  the  first  distrusted  them,  and  counselled  their
destruction.  Maxixcatzin  withstood  Xicotencatl  in  the  Tlascalan
Senate  when  the  embassy  from  México  appeared  proposing  an
alliance;  in  the  acrimonious  dispute  which  ensued,  the  oíd  Senator
struck  the  young  General,  and  knocked  him  down  the  steps  of  the
rostrum.  Maxixcatzin  prevailed  over  the  divided  opinions,  and  the
ambassadors  withdrew  hurriedly  to  report  their  failure  to  their  sove-
reign.  Cortes  was  informed  of  these  negotiations,  and  visited  Maxix-
catzin to  thank  him  for  holding  the  Republic  to  the  Spanish  Alliance.
As  will  be  seen  in  a note  to  the  Third  Letter,  Xicotencatl’s  sentiments
towards  the  Spaniards  never  changed.  His  foresight  was  keener  than
that  of  his  countrymen,  and  he  discemed  that  the  white  men  were
far  more  formidable  enemies  than  the  Mexicans,  but  the  lust  for
present  revenge  prevailed  over  considerations  of  future  independence.
Xicotencatl  was  unsupported,  and,  in  the  end,  he  paid  with  his  life  the
price  of  his  invincible  aversión.

32°

Letters  of  Cortes

I sent  four  ships  to  the  island  of  Hispaniola,  that  they
might  return  quickly  with  horses  and  people  for  our
assistance ; and  I likewise  sent  to  buy  four  others,  so  that
they  might  bring  from  the  island  of  Hispaniola,  and  the
city  of  San  Domingo,  horses  and  horsemen,  bows,  and
powder,  because  this  is  what  we  most  need  in  these  parts.
Foot  soldiers  armed  with  shields  are  of  little  Service,
on  account  of  the  great  number  of  people,  and  their
having  so  great  and  such  strong  cities  and  forts.  I there-
fore  wrote  to  the  licentiate  Rodrigo  de  Figueroa,  and  to
Your  Highness’s  officials  in  the  said  island,  asking  them
to  favour  and  assist  me  as  much  as  possible,  as  it  was  of
such  importance  to  Your  Highness’s  Services,  and  the
security  of  our  lives,  since,  on  the  arrival  of  this  help,
I intended  to  return  against  the  capital  and  its  country;
and  I believe,  as  I have  already  told  Your  Majesty,
that  it  will  again  in  a short  time  return  to  the  condition
in  which  I had  it  before,  and  that  the  past  losses  will
be  made  good.  Meanwhile,  I am  engaged  in  building
twelve  brigantines  to  launch  on  the  lake,  and  already
they  are  making  the  decking  and  other  parts  of  them,
because  they  have  to  be  carried  overland,  so  that  on  their
arrival  they  may  be  joined  and  completed  in  a short
time.  Nails  are  also  being  made  for  them,  and  the
pitch,  sails,  tow,  oars,  and  other  things,  which  are  neces-
sary  are  being  got  ready.  I assure  Your  Majesty  that,
un  til  I achieve  this  end,  I shall  take  no  rest,  ñor  shall  I
cease  to  strive  in  every  possible  way  and  manner  for  it,
disregarding  all  the  danger,  and  trouble,  and  cost,  which
may  come  upon  me.

Two  or  three  days  ago,  I leamt  by  a letter  from  my
lieutenant  at  Vera  Cruz,  that  a small  caravel  had  ar-
rived  in  that  port  with  about  thirty  seamen  and  landsmen,
who  said  they  were  seeking  the  people  whom  Francisco
de  Garay  had  sent  to  this  country.  Of  these  latter  I
have  written  to  Your  Majesty  that  they  arrived  in  such

Second  Letter

321

want  of  provisions  that,  i£  they  had  not  found  succour
there,  they  would  have  died  from  hunger  and  thirst.  I
leamed  from  them  how  they  had  reached  the  river
Panuco,  remaining  anchored  there  thirty  days  without
seeing  any  people  along  all  the  river  or  in  the  country,
from  which  it  is  believed  that  that  country  has  been
deserted  on  account  of  what  had  happened  there.  The
people  of  the  said  caravel  likewise  said  that  two  or  three
other  ships  of  the  said  Francisco  de  Garay  would  folio w
immediately  behind  them  with  people  and  horses,  and
that  they  believed  they  had  already  passed  down  the
coast.  It  seemed  to  me,  then,  that  it  was  not  in  com-
pliance  with  Your  Highness’s  Service  that  these  ships
and  people  should  be  lost  through  going  in  ignorance  of
the  affairs  of  the  country,  as  the  natives  might  do  them
more  harm  than  they  had  the  first  ones.  The  said
caravel  should  be  sent  to  seek  those  two  ships,  in  order
to  notify  them  of  what  had  happened,  and  to  bring  them
to  the  port  of  the  said  city,  where  the  captain  sent  by
Francisco  de  Garay  was  waiting  for  them.  And  God
grant  that  he  finds  them  in  time  before  they  go  ashore,
because,  as  the  natives  were  already  on  the  look-out,
and  the  Spaniards  were  ignorant,  I fear  they  may  sustain
much  harm,  and  that  it  would  not  serve  God  Óur  Lord
and  Your  Highness,  for  it  would  enrage  those  dogs  [the
Indians]  all  the  more,  and  inspire  them  with  more  courage
and  daring  against  those  who  might  come  hereafter.

I said  in  one  of  the  preceding  chapters,  that  I had
leamed  that,  after  the  death  of  Montezuma,  his  brother,
called  Cuetravacin,  who  had  been  raised  as  Montezu
lord,  was  preparing  many  kinds  of  arms,  and  Ja’s
fortifying  himself  in  the  capital,  and  in  other  Successor
cities  near  the  lake.  And  a short  time  since  I
have  likewise  leamed  that  the  said  Cuetravacin  has
sent  his  messengers  to  all  the  countries,  provinces
cities,  subject  to  the  said  sovereignty,  to  promisé

VOL.  I 21

322

Letters  of  Cortes

his  vassals  that  he  has  graciously  remitted  during  one
year  all  tributes  and  taxes  which  they  are  obliged  to
pay  him,  on  condition  that  they  would  use  every  means
to  make  a very  cruel  war  on  all  Christians,  either  killing
them  or  expelling  them  from  the  country;  and  that  they
were  to  do  in  like  manner  to  all  natives  who  were  our
friends  or  alhes.  Although  I ha  ve  trust  in  Our  Lord  that
they  will  not  be  able  to  carry  out  their  intention,  I am
in  extreme  need  of  help  and  aid,  because  the  Indians,
our  friends,  come  daily  from  many  cities,  towns,  and
hamlets,  to  ask  for  help  against  their  enemies  and  ours,
the  Culuans,  who  make  war  on  them  because  they  hold  to
our  friendship  and  alhance,  and  I am  not  able  to  help
everywhere  as  I would  wish.  But,  as  I say,  may  it  please
Our  Lord  to  augment  our  few  forces,  and  to  send,  not
only  His  own  help,  but  also  that  which  I have  sent  to
ask  from  Hispaniola.

From  what  I have  seen  and  understood  conceming  the
similarity  between  this  country  and  Spain,  in  its  fertility,
its  size,  its  climate,  and  in  many  other  features  of  it,  it
seemed  to  me  the  most  suitable  ñame  for  this  country
would  be  New  Spain  of  the  Ocean  Sea,  and  thus  in  the
ñame  of  Your  Majesty  I have  christened  it.  I humbly
supplicate  Your  Highness  to  approve  of  this  and  order  that
it  be  so  called.

I have  written  to  Your  Majesty,  although  badly  ex-
pressed,  the  truth  of  all  that  has  happened  in  these  parts
and  whatever  it  was  most  necessary  Your  Highness
should  know,  and,  by  my  other  letter  which  goes  with
this  present,  I send  to  supplicate  Your  Royal  Excellency
to  send  a trustworthy  person  to  make  an  enquiry  and
investigation  of  everything,  for  the  purpose  of  informing
Your  Sacred  Majesty  of  all.  In  this  dispatch  I also
again  very  humbly  supplicate  the  same,  for  I shall  con-
sider  it  a very  particular  favour,  as  giving  entire  credit
to  what  I write.

Second  Letter

323

Very  High  and  Most  Excellent  Prince,  may  God,  Our
Lord,  preserve  the  life  and  the  very  royal  person  and  the
very  powerful  State  of  Your  Sacred  Majesty,  and  augment
it  for  long  time  with  increase  of  many  greater  kingdoms
and  dominions,  according  as  your  royal  heart  may  desire.
From  the  town  of  Segura  de  la  Frontera,  of  this  New
Spain,  on  the  3oth  October,  1520.  Your  Sacred  Ma-
jesty’s  very  humble  servant  and  vassal,  who  kisses  the
very  royal  feet  and  hands  of  Your  Highness.

Fernán  Cortes.

Note.1 — After  this,  the  news  arrived  on  the  first  of  the
month  of  March  past  from  the  said  New  Spain,  of  how
the  Spaniards  had  taken  by  forcé  the  great  city  of  Temix-
titan,  in  which  more  Indians  had  perished  than  did  Jews
in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  when  it  was  taken  by
Vespasian,  and  in  it  there  was  likewise  a greater  number
of  people  than  in  the  said  Holy  City.  They  found  little
treasure  because  the  natives  had  thrown  and  submerged
it  in  the  waters;  they  took  only  two  hundred  thousand
dollars,  and  the  Spaniards  remained  well  fortified  in  the
said  city,  which  at  present  has  about  fifteen  hundred
foot  soldiers,  and  five  hundred  horsemen,  and  they  have
more  than  one  hundred  thousand  friendly  natives  in  their
camp.  These  are  great  and  strange  things,  and  it  is
without  doubt  another  world,  and  the  solé  desire  to  see
it  causes  envy  to  us  who  are  outside  its  borders.  The
news  which  we  hold  to  be  worthy  of  belief  is  up  to
the  beginning  of  April,  1522.  This  present  letter  of  re-
lation  was  printed  in  the  very  noble  and  very  loyal  city
of  Seville  by  Jacob  Cromberger,  a Germán,  on  the  8th  of
November,  1522.

1 This  postscriptum  was  obviously  not  written  by  Cortes,  but  by
some  one  who  read  his  letter;  it  was  added  before  the  receipt  of  his

third  letter,  and  was  printed  with  the  first  edition  in  1522.

APPENDICES

325

APPENDIX  I.

MARINA

With  these  few  casual  words,  Cortes  refers  to  the  existence
of  one  of  the  chief  characters  in  the  splendid  drama  o£  the  conquest
— his  Indian  mistress  Marina,  without  whose  aid  the  success  of  the
Spaniards  is  hardly  thinkable.  He  mentions  her  once  again  in  his
Pifth  Letter,  but  she  appears  in  his  narrative  only  under  the  vague
figure  of  “the  interpreter  whom  I had  with  me.”

There  are  almost  as  many  different  accounts  of  Marina’s  birth
and  childhood  as  there  were  writers  to  compose  them,  but  all  agree
that  she  was  of  noble  lineage,  which  Herrera  says  was  evident  from  her
superior  bearing  and  manners.

Señor  García  Icazbalceta  in  Note  37  to  the  second  of  the  Diálogos
de  Cervantes,  gives  us  a critical  study  of  Marina.  The  conclusions  of
this  leamed  writer  admit  the  versión  given  by  Bemal  Diaz,  in  spite
of  the  fact  that  this  contradicts  those  of  his  contemporaries,  Las
Casas  and  Gomara,  the  latter  of  whom  must  have  had  his  information
from  his  patrón  Cortes,  himself.  Clavigero  adopted  Bemal  Diaz  as  his
authority,  as  did  also  Solis.  Prescott  noticed  the  diiferences  among  the
early  writers,  but  refrained  from  pronouncing  in  favour  of  any  one  of
them.  All  these  authorities,  however,  were  anterior  to  García  Icazbal-
ceta. It  would  be  impossible  for  any  student  of  history  to-day  to
neglect  his  valuable  work  in  Mexican  archives,  or  to  ignore  his  con-
clusions, which  may  be  safely  followed  and  especially  in  this  instance,
in  which  they  are  sustained  on  the  narrative  of  Bemal  Diaz.  Orozco  y
Berra  has  also  eliminated  some  of  the  conñicting  statements  conceming
Marina  by  an  ingenious  dissertation  on  the  habitual  confusión  of
the  spelling  of  Mexican  ñames  by  the  Spaniards,  and  particularly  by
those  writers  who,  never  having  been  in  México,  were  passably  ignorant
of  Indian  nomenclature  and  Mexican  geography,  and  took  their  infor-
mation second-hand,  often  from  illiterate  or  inaccurate  persons.

Marina  was  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  Painalla,  in  the  province  of
Coatzocoalco.  Her  mother  married  a second  time,  and,  upon  the
birth  of  a son,  she  agreed  with  her  husband  to  dispose  of  her  daughter,
in  order  that  the  son  might  inherit  their  property.  This  plan  was
effected  by  giving  the  young  girl  to  some  Indians  of  Xicalango,  and
publishing  her  death,  the  body  of  a slave’s  child  being  substituted  to
deceive  the  people.  The  Xicalango  Indians  sold  the  girl  to  others  in

327

328

Letters  of  Cortes

Tabasco,  and  thus  she  carne  to  be  among  the  twenty  slaves  presented
to  Cortes  by  the  cacique  of  that  province.  Marina,  in  the  distribution
of  these  women,  fell  to  the  share  of  Puertocarrero.  When  Jerónimo
de  Aguilar  joined  Cortes,  it  was  found  that  he  could  speak  to  Marina
in  Maya,  which  closely  resembled  the  language  of  Tabasco,  and,  as  her
mother  tongue  was  the  Mexican,  it  carne  about  that,  in  treating  with
envoys  from  the  interior  and  during  the  march  through  Tlascala  and
Cholula  to  the  capital,  Cortes  spoke  in  Spanish  to  Aguilar  who  spoke  in
Maya  to  Marina  who  spoke  with  the  Mexicans  in  their  own  tongue.

Her  family  ñame  was  Tenepal,  and  her  Indian  ñame  was  Malinal,
derived  from  Malinalli,  which  is  the  sign  of  the  twelfth  day  of  the
Mexican  month;  thus  her  Christian  ñame  in  baptism,  which  was
Marina,  was  really  derived  from,  or  suggested  by,  her  Indian  ñame,  and
as  the  Indians  could  not  pronounce  the  letter  r there  was  practic.ally
no  change  of  ñame,  save  that  in  her  new  and  important  position  they
gave  her  the  tzin,  which  was  a title  of  respect,  and  henceforth  she  was
called  Malintzin.  The  Spaniards  corrupted  this  into  Malinche.  Cortes
carne  to  be  universally  known  as  Captain  Malintzin  or  simply  Malin-
tzin, and  to  thousands  of  Indians,  he  had  no  other  ñame  than  that  of
this  slave  girl  (Orozco  y Berra,  vol.  iv.,  cap.  v.).

Doña  Marina,  as  the  Spaniards  called  her,  was  quick  at  learning
Spanish,  which  her  intímate  relations  with  Cortes  facilitated,  or,  as
Prescott  poetically  puts  it,  “because  it  was  the  language  of  lo  ve.”
Perhaps  it  was  on  her  side,  but  there  is  little  evidence  to  show  that  it
was  on  his.  Marina  was  cherished  because  she  was  useful,  not  because
she  was  beloved,  and  the  circumstances  forced  her  into  intímate  rela-
tions with  Cortes,  which  were  also  favoured  by  her  beauty  and  her
superior  wit.  Aussi  bien  celle-ci  qu’une  autre  was  doubtless  his  view
of  the  sentimental  side  of  his  relations  with  her.

After  Puertocarrero’s  departure  with  the  despatches  and  treasure,
Marina  reverted  definitely  to  Cortes.  Once  the  expedition  had  left
the  coast  provinces,  she  became  more  and  more  indispensable,  as
Aguilar  spoke  no  Mexican  and  the  Maya  language  was  not  intelligible
to  the  Mexicans.  As  soon  as  she  had  sufficiently  mastered  Castilian
to  be  able  to  dispense  with  Aguilar  as  an  intermediary  between  herself
and  Cortes,  her  position  became  a dominant  one  and  she  held  the  fate
of  the  Spaniards  in  her  hand.  But  most  of  all  was  she  supreme  over
her  own  people  and  dispensed  peace  or  war  at  her  pleasure;  for  she
alone  could  shape  the  results  of  the  negotiations  and  treaties  between
Cortes  and  the  caciques.  Thus,  an  unforeseen  turn  in  Fortune's
wheel  raised  this  princess  from  the  degradation  of  slavery  into  which
an  unnatural  mother  had  delivered  her,  and  landed  her  in  the  Span-
iards’ camp,  where  she  became  the  mistress  of  a nation  s destinies.
She  showed  herself  so  able,  that  Bernal  Diaz  affirms  that  they  all  held
her  to  be  like  no  other  woman  on  earth,  and  that  they  had  never
detected  the  smallest  feminine  weakness  in  her;  she  alone  of  all  the
women  was  saved  from  the  tragedy  of  the  Sorrowful  Night , and  she

Appendix  I.  Second  Letter  329

saved  herself.  There  is  no  way  of  knowing  how  faithfully  and  disin-
terestedly  she  played  her  part  of  interpreter;  certainly  she  gave  herself
absolutely  to  Cortes,  and  her  devotion  to  the  Spaniards  never  faltered,
but  who  shall  say  that  she  also  did  justice  in  her  presentaron  of  the
Indians’  claims  and  interests  in  the  negotiations  she  directed  ? Author-
ities  differ  as  to  the  number  of  children  bom  to  Cortes  and  Doña
Marina;  the  eldest  son,  Don  Martin,  afterwards  became  a Knight  of
Santiago,  and  the  existence  of  at  least  one  daughter  seems  to  be  suffi-
ciently  certain.  In  October,  1524,  Marina  was  married  to  Juan
Xaramillo,  described  as  an  hildalgo.  Bernal  Diaz  says  that  the  bride-
groom  was  ignorant  of  Marina’s  past,  which  makes  one  wonder  where
he  carne  from,  and  Gomara’s  explanation  that  he  was  drunk  at  the
time  sounds  more  plausible.  On  the  expedition  to  Yucatán  there  was
a dramatic  encounter  between  Doña  Marina  and  her  perfidious  mother
and  the  younger  half-brother  in  whose  interest  she  had  been  sacrificed.
The  recognition  seems  to  have  been  instantaneous  and  mutual , the
mother,  fearing  vengeance,  threw  herself  at  her  daughter  s feet,  begging
forgiveness,  which  was  accorded,  with  the  philosophic  assurance  that
when  $he  had  so  treated  her  child,  she  did  not  know  what  she  was
doing  (as  indeed  it  appeared),  and  that  she  thanked  God  for  the  boon
of  the  Christian  religión  and  the  happiness  of  having  given  her  master
a son  and  the  joy  of  possessing  an  excellent  husband  in  Juan  Xara-
millo. Doña  Marina’s  Christian  morality  betrayed  it’s  recent  adop-
tion  and  weak  growth  at  this  point.  She  loaded  her  relatives  with
gifts  and  sent  them  home  rejoicing.  Bernal  Diaz  was  reminded  by
this  incident  of  the  meeting  between  Joseph  and  his  brethren  in  Egypt.
Xaramillo  became  an  alcalde  in  México,  and  in  1528  a grant  of  land
was  given  to  him  and  his  wife  near  Chapultepec.  Prescott  describes
Marina  as  returning  to  her  native  place,  where  an  estáte  was  given  her,
but  Icazbalceta  says  she  ended  her  days  in  México,  rich  and  respected;
Orozco  y Berra  concedes  that  she  was  rich,  but  doubts  that  she  was
respected.  A curious  painting  represents  Cortes  with  Marina  standing
beside  him  at  the  execution  of  a Cholulan  servant  of  Andrés  de  Tapia,
who  was  condemned  to  be  tom  to  pieces  by  fierce  dogs;  she  piously
holds  a rosary  in  her  hand  as  she  watches  the  brutal  spectacle,
which  took  place  in  1537.  Doña  Marina  still  lived  therefore  in  1537,
but  the  date  of  her  death  is  not  recorded  (Oviedo,  Hist.  Gen.  y Nat.
lib.  xxxiii.,  cap.  i.;  Las  Casas,  Hist.  de  las  Indians,  lib.  iii.,  cap.  cxxi.;
Clavigero,  tom.  iii.,  ¡p.  12;  Bernal  Diaz,  cap.  xxxvii.,  Garda  Icaz-
balceta, Diálogos  de  Cervantes;  Orozco  y Berra,  vol.  iv.,  cap.  v.).

APPENDIX  II.

MEXICO-TENOCHTITLAN

The  migratory  period  of  the  Aztecs  in  the  valley  of  Anáhuac  carne  to
its  cióse  with  the  foundation  of  Mexico-Tenochtitlan  in  1325.  The
ñame  México  signifies  habitation  of  the  god  of  war,  Mexitli — otherwise
known  as  Huitzilopochtli.  The  ñame  Tenochtitlan  signifies  o cactus
on  a rock  and  was  given  to  the  new  city  because  the  choice  of  the  site
was  decided  by  the  augurs  beholding,  perched  upon  a cactus  plant
which  grew  on  a rock,  an  eagle  with  a serpent  in  its  talons.  The  em-
blem  of  the  cactus  and  the  eagle  holding  a serpent  became  the  national
standard  of  México,  and  is  displayed  in  the  coat  of  arms  of  the  present
Republic.

The  two  islands  of  Tenochtitlan  and  Tlatelolco  stood  in  the  salt
waters  of  the  lake  of  Texcoco,  separated  from  one  another  by  a narrow
channel  of  water,  and  in  the  beginning,  Tlatelolco  had  its  sepárate  chief ;
but  in  the  reign  of  Axayacatl,  the  last  king  of  Tlatelolco,  called  Moqui-
huiz,  was  overthrown,  and  the  islands  afterwards  became  united  by
bridges  and  formed  one  city,  with  a single  ruler.  The  city  was  joined
to  the  main  land  by  three  great  causeways,  so  solidly  built  of  earth
and  stone,  and  having  draw-bridges  to  span  the  canals  which  crossed
them,  as  to  excite  the  admiration  of  the  Spaniards.  The  northern
causeway,  from  the  Tlatelolco  quarter,  extended  for  three  miles  to
Tepejaca,  where  stands  the  present  shrine  of  Guadaloupe ; the  causeway
reaching  to  Tlacopan  (Tacuba)  was  two  miles  long,  and  the  Southern
road,  by  which  the  Spaniards  entered,  extended  for  seven  miles  to  Itz-
tapalapan,  with  a división  at  the  small  fortress  of  Xoloc,  where  one
branch  diverged  to  Coyohuacan  and  henee  caused  Cortes  to  mention
four  causeways,  which  strictly  speaking  was  correct.  Robertson  er-
roneously  speaks  of  a causeway  leading  to  Texcoco.  While  the  width
of  these  splendid  roads  varied,  Clavigero  says  that  all  were  wide  enough
for  ten  horsemen  to  ride  abreast  (vol.  iii.,  lib.  ix.).  To  the  minute
description  of  the  city  given  in  the  letter  of  Cortes,  it  seems  unneces-
sary  to  add  anything;  he  says  nothing,  however,  about  the  number  of
inhabitants,  which  all  the  earlier  authorities  practically  agree  in
numbering  at  60, 000  households — by  an  obvious  error  the  Anony-
mous  Conqueror  speaks  of  60,000  people,  which  should,  of  course,  be
families.  Zuazo,  Gomara,  Motolinia,  Peter  Martyr,  Clavigero,  and
others,  give  this  estímate,  henee  it  may  be  safely  stated,  that  the

330

Appendix  II.  Second  Letter  331

city’s  population  was  not  less  than  300,000  souls;  though  Orozco  y
Berra,  while  admitting  these  figures,  observes  that  considenng  t e
actual  area  and  tbe  large  spaces  occupied  by  palaces  and  public  bui
ings,  tbe  people  must  bave  been  a good  deal  crowded.

Very  contradictory  appreciations  of  tbe  beauty  of  the  Aztec  capital,
the  grandeur  of  its  buildings,  and  tbe  merit  of  íts  arcbitecture,  bave
been  given  by  difierent  writers.  Prescott’s  marvellous  picture  of  tbe
ancient  city  is  familiar  to  all  students  of  Mexican  history,  and  bardly
less  well  known  and  rivalling  the  American  historian  s delightful
pages,  are  the  chapters  of  Sir  Arthur  Helps,  praised  by  Ruskin  for
tbeir  “beautiful  quiet  English,”  in  which  he  compares  México  to
Tbebes,  Nineveb,  and  Babylon,  among  tbe  great  cities  of  antiquity,  and
to  Constantinople , Venice,  and  Granada,  among  those  of  módem  times,
not  besitating  to  declare  that  it  was  “at  that  time  the  fairest  in  the
•world  and  has  never  since  been  equalled  ” (Hernán.  Cortes,  p.  108).
The  distinguished  Mexican  scholar  Señor  Alaman  ( Disertaciones , tom.
i.,  p.  184)  expresses  his  conviction  that  the  city  of  México  contained
no  buildings  of  beauty  or  merit;  that,  aside  from  the  royal  palaces,  the
rest  of  íhe  houses  were  adobe  huts,  amongst  which  rose  the  squat,
truncated  pyramids  of  the  temples,  unlovely  to  behold,  decorated
with  rude  sculptures  of  serpents  and  other  horrible  figures,  and  having
heaps  of  human  skulls  piled  in  their  court  yards.  He  sustains  this
dreary  appreciation  by  the  argument  that  there  would  otherwise
have  remained  some  fragments  of  former  architectural  magnificence,
whereas  there  is  absolutely  nothing.  These  eminent  writers  seem  un-
willing  to  allow  that  Tenochtitlan  may  have  been  a wonderfully  beauti-
ful city  and  at  the  same  time  have  possessed  few  imposing  buildings  and
no  remarkable  architecture.  The  descriptions  of  Mr.  Prescott  and  Sir
Arthur  Helps  are  masterpieces  of  word-painting  which  charm  us,  but
they  are  based  upon  early  descriptions  in  which  impeachable  importance
is  given  to  architectural  features  of  the  city.  It  is,  as  Señor  Alaman
remarks,  incredible  that  not  a fragment  of  column  or  capital,  statue  or
architrave  should  have  been  saved  to  attest  the  existence  of  great  archi-
tectural monuments,  even  though  150,000  men  were  diligently  engaged
for  two  months  in  destroying  the  buildings,  filling  up  canals  with  the
debris  and  that  finally,  when  the  city  carne  to  be  rebuilt,  many  idols
and  other  larger  fragments  of  temples  were  used  in  the  foundations  of
the  cathedral,  which  rose  on  the  site  of  the  great  teocalli.  Palaces,  such
as  Montezuma’s  is  described  by  the  Spaniards,  may  be  vast  in  extent,
with  beautiful  courts,  fountains,  gardens,  and  audience  halls,  they
may  be  luxurious  and  filled  with  curious  and  beautiful  objects,  but
they  add  little  to  the  picturesque  or  imposing  appearance  of  a capital ;
the  temples  were  sufficiently  numerous,  but  none  save  the  great  temple
seem  to  have  been  lofty,  and  even  the  principal  teocalli  had  but  1 1 4
steps,  so  that  its  heighth  was  only  remarkable  by  comparison  with
the  great  stretch  of  low  flat-roofed  houses  about  it.  Cortes  describes
the  destruction  of  the  city,  day  by  day,  which  he  sincerely  deplored  as

332

Letters  of  Cortes

necessary  to  subdue  it,  but  he  does  not  mention  any  one  building
which  he  sought  to  save,  as  he  must  infallibly  have  done,  had  he  been
buming  an  Alhambra  or  a Doge’s  Palace  or  been  forced  to  blow  up  a
Santa  Sophia.  It  seems  impossible  that  any  one  should  seriously  pre-
tend  that  the  waters  of  Texcoco’s  lake  mirrored  such  farades  as  are
reflected  in  the  canals  of  Venice,  or  that  there  was  a Rialto  among
the  bridges,  so  hotly  contested  by  the  Spaniards.  Orozco  y Berra
wisely  reproves  the  comparison  which  Alaman  draws  between  México
and  Rome  as  notoriously  misplaced.  But,  between  the  dazzling  word
pictures  of  Prescott  and  Helps  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other
Alaman’s  depressing  sketch  of  a squalid  town  of  hovels,  inhabited  by
bloodthirsty  cannibals,  there  is  still  roora  for  a beautiful  city  in  which
dwelt  a sovereign,  amidst  surroundings  of  interesting  splendour.

Even  without  conscious  intention  to  mislead,  it  was  inevitable  that
the  Spaniards  should  fall  into  exaggeration  in  describing  the  city  of
México ; first,  because  they  necessarily  used  the  same  terms  to  portray
what  they  saw  as  they  would  have  used  in  describing  Rome,  París,
or  Constantinople ; second,  because  the  contrast  between  such  Indian
towns  as  they  had  seen  and  the  capital  was  undoubtedly  very  great,
and  their  long  years  of  rough  life,  perilous  voyages,  and  the  absence  at
times  even  of  shelter  from  the  elements,  made  any  large  town  with
some  System  of  order,  with  houses  having  court-yards,  gardens  and
embroidered  hangings,  seem  worthy  to  be  compared  with  great  cities
elsewhere  seen  and  dimly  remembered ; and  lastly  because  México  was
unquestionably  a very  beautiful  city.  It  could  hardly  have  been
otherwise  in  such  a situation,  and  the  Spaniards,  not  stopping  to
analyse  wherein  its  charms  lay,  fell  into  the  easy  error  of  attributing
them  to  architectural  excellence  and  grandeur,  which  were  really
wanting.

Solis  adopts  the  conquerors’  style,  without  having  their  excuse
and,  were  he  writing  of  the  Courts  of  Leo  X.,  or  Louis  XIV.,  he  could
hardly  use  other  language  than  he  does  in  describing  Montezuma
and  his  household.

The  very  ignorance  and  naiveté  of  the  conquerors  are  good  warrants
for  the  truth  of  much  that  they  wrote,  for  as  they  were  illiterate  men
(even  Cortes  had  but  a scanty  store  of  learning,  gathered  during  his
brief  course  of  two  careless  years  at  Salamanca)  without  sufficient
knowledge  to  invent  descriptions  of  the  Mexican  laws,  customs,  religión,
and  institutions,  the  facts  which  they  state,  and  in  which  they  agree,
are  indubitable.  The  Aztec  Empire  possessed  some  highly  developed
institutions;  to  mention  but  one,  there  was  the  system  of  couriers  or
the  post,  which  kept  up  daily  and  rapid  communication  between  the
capital  and  the  provinces,  and  that  at  a time  when  no  country  in
Europe  possessed  anything  equalling  it.

Their  religión  was  established  with  a regular  hierarchy,  and  a calen-
dar of  festivals,  which  were  observed  with  a really  admirable  ritual,
marred  only  by  the  barbarity  of  certain  rites ; their  deities  were  gloomy

333

Appendix  II.  Second  Letter

and  ferocious,  fear  was  the  motive  of  worship,  human  sacrifico  the
only  means  of  placating  the  gods,  and  thus  religión,  which  should
soften  and  humanise  manners  and  elevate  character,  was  engulfed  ín  a
dreadful  superstition,  which  held  the  nation  in  a State  of  permanent
degradation,  with  the  result  that  the  most  civilised  amongst  the
Indians  of  North  America  were  at  the  same  time  the  most  bar-
barous.  The  perfect  ordering  of  this  system  impressed  the  Spamards,
while  its  awful  rites  horrified  them.

Their  state  was  well  ordered,  and,  in  many  respects,  govemed  ac-
cording  to  wise  and  enlightened  standards,  and  that  their  civilisation
was  of  no  mean  order  is  proven  by  the  following  factors  in  it :

I.  The  rights  of  private  property  were  recognised  and  respected ; its

transfer  was  effected  by  sale  or  inheritance.

II.  All  free  men  were  land  owners,  either  by  absolute  possession  or  by

usufruct  derived  from  holding  some  public  office  in  the  state,
and  these  composed  the  nobility : others  held  land  in  commun-
ity,  pareéis  being  allotted  to  a given  number  of  families,
wljose  members  worked  them  in  common  and  shared  their
produce  equitably.

III.  Taxes  were  levied  according  to  an  established  system  and  were

paid  in  kind,  thus  filling  the  government  store-houses  with
vast  accumulations  of  all  the  producís  of  the  Empire.

IV.  Justice  was  administered  by  regularly  appointed  judges,  who

interpreted  the  laws  and  exercised  jurisdiction  in  different
distriets.

V.  Markets  were  held  as  Cortes  describes.

VI.  The  streets  were  regularly  cleaned,  lighted  by  fires  at  night,

and  patrolled  by  pólice;  public  sanitary  arrangements  were
provided,  and  the  city  was  probably  more  spacious,  cleaner,
and  healthier  than  any  European  towns  of  that  time.

VII.  Public  charity  provided  hospitals  for  the  sick  and  aged.

VIII.  Sepárate  arts  and  trades  flourished,  and  the  metal-workers,

lapidaries,  weavers,  etc.,  learned  their  trades  by  a regular
system  of  instruction  and  apprenticeship  pretty  much  as
in  the  guilds  of  Europe.

IX.  The  great  public-works,  such  as  the  causeways,  aqueduets,

canals  with  locks,  and  bridges,  were  admirably  constructed,
and,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  capital  at  least,  were
numerous.

X.  There  was  a fair  knowledge  of  the  medicinal  and  curative  pro-

perties  of  herbs,  barks,  roots,  and  plants,  though,  if  the
medicine  men  were  skilled  in  the  use  of  poisons,  it  seems
strange  that  they  did  not  rid  themselves  of  the  hungry  invad-
ers  at  some  of  the  feasts  which  were  constantly  offered  them.

XI.  In  the  arts,  the  lapidaries,  feather-workers,  and  silversmiths

produced  the  best  work.  Mexican  paintings,  judged  as  works
of  art,  are  crude  and  primitive  enough,  but  their  real  valué

334

Letter  of  Cortes.

and  interest  lie  in  the  fact  that  they  are  chronicles  in  pic-
íure  writing,  of  which,  unfortunately,  too  few  have  been  pre-
served;  ideas  were  rarely  and  imperfectly  represented  by  this
method,  which  was  only  serviceable  for  recording  material
faets.  Music  was  the  least  developed  of  all  the  arts.

XII.  Their  solar  system  was  more  correct  than  that  of  the  Greeks

and  Romans.  The  year  was  divided  into  eighteen  months,
of  twenty  days  each,  with  five  complementary  days  added,
which  were  holidays,  but  were  considered  unlucky,  especially
as  birthdays.  For  full  information  on  the  Mexican  calendar,
solar  system,  and  astronomical  Science,  the  student  is  re-
ferred  to  Orozco  y Berra.  Hist.  Antiqua,  lib.  iv.,  where  these
subjeets  are  lucidly  explained.

XIII.  There  we  were  regularly  graduated  social  classes,  the  lowest

being  composed  of  peasant-serfs  called  Mayeques  who  were
bound  to  the  land ; above  them  carne  ascending  grades  until
we  reach  the  Emperor  at  the  top  of  all.

Three  features  characteristic  of  the  feudal  system  everywhere
are  found:  A.  An  overlord  or  Emperor,  supreme  in  the  cen-

tral government,  whose  standard  all  followed  in  war  and  whose
authority  and  person  were  regarded  as  semi-divine.  B.  Prac-
tically  independent  nobles  or  chiefs  of  tribes,  levying  their  own
taxes  holding  peoples  and  cities  in  subjection,  transmitting
their  titles  by  right  of  inheritance  and  ready  to  contend  with
the  Emperor  himself  on  questions  of  etiquette,  and  precedence.
Many  of  these  were  his  kinsmen  and  all  were  allied  amongst
themselves,  thus  forming  an  aristocracy  of  rank  and  power.
C.  A people  reduced  to  practical  serfage.

Sumptuary  laws  prescribed  the  dress  of  the  difíerent  orders,
and  the  regulations  governing  court  dress  for  different  occasions
were  rigidly  enforced;  all  removed  their  sandals  in  the  emperor’s
presence,  and  even  the  greatest  nobles  covered  their  omaments
with  a plain  mantle  when  they  appeared  before  him.  The  Aztec
language  was  extremely  polite  and  contained  not  only  titles,
but  many  ceremonious  phrases  of  respect  and  expressions  of
courtesy  and  deference.

The  crown  descended  in  the  same  family,  but  a council  of  six
electors,  chosen  during  the  lifetime  of  the  sovereign,  met  im-
mediately  after  his  death  and  elected  a successor  from  among
the  eligible  princes  of  the  royal  family.

Alongside  these  indications  of  an  advanced  civilisation  are  found

several  others  which  show  a nation  still  in  its  infaney:

I.  They  did  not  know  the  use  of  wax  or  oil  for  lighting  purpose.

II.  They  used  no  milk.

III.  They  had  no  coinage : cacao  nuts  were  commonly  used  as  a stand-

ard of  valué  and  also  gold  dust  put  up  in  quills,  but  usually

335

Appendix  II.  Second  Letter

commodities  were  exchanged.  Sahagun  mentions  a sort  of
coin  which  the  Mexicans  called  quahtli  or  eagle,  but  he
does  not  describe  it.  Montezuma  paid  his  losses  at  play
with  the  Spaniards  in  chips  of  gold,  each  of  the  valué  of  fifty
ducats;  thispiece  was  called  tejuelo,  but  it  does  not  cer-
tainly  appear  tohave  been  a coin.

IV.  There  was  no  system  of  phonetic  writing.

V.  They  kept  no  domestic  animáis  save  rabbits,  chickens,  and  little

dogs,  all  of  which  they  ate ; and  they  had  no  beasts  of  burden.

VI.  Their  only  cereal  was  maize.

VII.  They  knew  neither  iron,  ñor  tin,  ñor  lead,  though  the  moun-

tains  were  full  of  them,  and  their  only  hard  metal  was  copper.
Even  from  the  summary  and  incomplete  indications  here  given,  it  is
seen  that  the  Aztec  State  possessed  many  excellent  institutions  and
elements  of  an  advanced  civilisation,  and,  despite  the  co-existence  of
certain  limitations  which  have  led  some  to  doubt  the  development
claimed  for  them,  our  interest  in  the  origin  and  history  of  the  myste-
rious  races  of  Aiáhuac  is  stimulated  to  wonder  and  admiration  for  what
we  do  know  of  their  empire,  and  to  boundless  regret  for  the  disap-
pearance  of  all,  save  the  few  vestiges  which  remain  to  excite  a curiosity
they  are  inadequate  to  appease.

It  is  not  required  to  endow  México  with  “the  glory  that  was
Greece  or  the  grandeur  that  was  Rome  ” in  order  to  admit  that  it  was
beautiful.

APPENDIX  III.

ORIGINS  OF  MEXICAN  CIVILISATION

The  difíerent  tribes  or  nations  of  Anáhuac  carne,  according  to  their
several  traditions,  from  the  north-west,  in  a series  of  migrations,
but  of  their  original  starting  point  they  preserved  no  clear  record.
M.  de  Guigne  presents  proofs  to  show  that  the  Chínese  visited  México
as  early  as  458  a.d.;  Hom  {de  originibus  Americanis,  1Ó99),  Scherer
{Recherches  Hist.),  Humboldt  {Essai  Polit.)  and  other  authorities,
without  a dissentient  voice,  assign  an  Asiatic  origin  to  the  Toltecs  and
other  Mexican  peoples.  That  México  received  settlers  from  other
parts  of  the  world  seems  also  certain.  Aristotle  {De  Admirandis  in
natura)  relates  that  Carthaginian  sailors  passed  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,
and,  after  sailing  sixty  days  to  the  west,  reached  a beautiful  and  fertile
country,  and  that  so  many  began  to  go  thither  that  the  Senate  of
Carthage  passed  a law  suppressing  such  emigration,  to  prevent  the
depopulation  of  the  city.  The  theory  of  the  submerged  Atlantis,
and  the  arguments  on  which  it  rests,  are  too  well  known  to  require
explanation.

The  efforts  to  graft  Mexican  civilisation  on  to  an  Asiatic  or  African
stock  have  not  been  entirely  successful,  for,  while  there  undoubtedly
exist  points  of  striking  similarity,  these  seem  to  be  counterbalanced  by
still  more  important  divergencies.  The  paucity  of  positive  data  or  even
coherent  traditions  has  left  a wide  field  open  to  speculation,  of  which
many  learned  and  ingenious  seekers  have  availed  themselves  to  the
fullest  extent,  but  without  achieving  results  commensurate  with  their
labours.  Without  attempting  a thorough  search  into  the  racial  origin
of  the  tribes  which  Cortes  found  in  the  valley  of  México,  it  may  be
briefly  stated  that  the  best  evidence  before  us  points  to  Yucatán  as
the  centre  of  the  highest  American  civilisation,  from  whence  a know-
ledge  of  law,  arts,  and  manufactures,  and  the  influence  of  an  organised
religious  system,  spread  northwards.  The  splendid  ruins  of  Yucatán  and
Central  America  attest  the  existence  of  a race  of  people,  which,  what-
ever  its  origin,  was  isolated  from  European  and  Asiatic  influence  alike
since  an  epoch  which  it  is  impossible  to  fix,  but  which  was  certainly
very  remóte.  This  race — the  Maya — possessed  a civilisation,  sui
generis,  and  entirely  unique  on  the  North  American  continent,  the
focus  of  which  had  already  shifted  to  the  high  valley  of  México  long
before  the  Spaniards  first  visited  the  country  in  the  sixteenth  century

336

I

Appendix  III.  Second  Letter  337

leaving  the  ancient  cities  of  Uxmal,  Palenque,  Utatlan,  and  the  others
in  the  Southern  región,  in  ruins.  What  devastating  influences  pro-
duced  this  movement  in  an  entire  people  is  not  known,  and  the  length
of  time  occupied  by  it,  is  problematical,  though  it  must  have  extended
over  centuries,  ebbing  and  flowing  intermittently.  The  conflicting
traditions  as  to  the  direction  from  which  tribes,  law-givers,  and  priests
arrived  in  Anáhuac  are  doubtless  owing  to  distinct  movements  at
different  times  of  the  Southern  peoples  in  their  wandering  search  for
a new  and  permanent  abiding  place.  These  early  migrations  from
south  to  north,  were  succeeded  during  the  period  commonly  termed
the  Middle  Ages,  by  a counter  movement,  and  the  descendants  of  the
first  Maya  emigrants  began  to  return  southwards,  conquering  or  ab-
sorbing  the  different  peoples  they  encountered.  Although  some  of  the
peoples  had  preserved  much  of  the  culture  bequeathed  them  by  their
forefathers,  there  was  no  uniform  civilisation  existing  among  them,
save  in  the  case  of  the  Toltecs,  who  seem  still  to  have  been  in  the  full
enjoyment  of  their  Mayfi  heritage.

The  Toltecs  left  their  country,  called  Huehuetlalpallan,  in  the  vague
north-west,  in  the  year  554  a.d.,  and,  after  one  hundred  and  four  years
of  migratory  Ufe,  they  founded  the  city  of  Tollantzinco  in  648,  whence
they  again  moved  in  667  to  Tula,  or  Tollan,  from  which  date,  their
monarchy,  which  lasted  three  hundred  and  eighty-four  years,  is
reckoned  (Clavigero,  vol.  iv.).  According  to  Torquemada,  the  Chi-
chimecas  followed  within  nine  years  after  the  extinction  of  the  Toltec
sovereignty,  but  Clavigero’s  calculation  shows  the  improbability
of  this,  for  several  reasons,  the  most  convincing  of  which  is  the  in-
medible chronology  of  their  kings.  Torquemada  says  that  Xolotl
reigned  113  years,  his  son  lived  to  be  170,  and  his  grandson  104
years  oíd,  while  another  king,  Tezozomoc  reigned  180  years!  It  is
obvious  that  the  Chichimeca  period  must  either  be  shortened,  or  the
number  of  kings  increased.  After  the  Chichimecas  carne  the  six
tnbes  of  Tlascala,  Xochimilco,  Acolhua  (Texcoco),  Tepanec,  Chalco,
and  Tlahuichco,  closely  followed  by  the  Colhuans  or  Mexicans,  who  tirst
arrived  at  Tula  m 1196,  and,  after  several  shorter  migrations,  finally
founded  Mexico-Tenochtitlan  in  1325,  as  is  related  inAppendix  II.  of
this  letter.  The  last  tribe  to  come  was  that  of  the  Otomies  in  1420.
oturim  beheved  that  the  tribes  of  Xicalango  and  the  Olemchs  ante-
ated  the  Toltecs,  but  says  that  no  records  or  picture-writings  explain-
mg  their  origin  were  discoverable  in  his  time.  From  the  foundation
of  México  m 1325,  the  form  of  govemment  was  aristocratic  till  1352
when  according  to  Torquemada’s  interpretation  of  their  picture-
writings,  the  first  King  Acamapatzin,  eighth  predecessor  of  Montezuma
II.,  was  elected,  and  reigned  for  thirty-seven  years.

The  Aztec  civilisation,  which  attained  its  highest  development  in  Ten-
ochtitlan  and  Texcoco,  never  reached  the  level  of  the  Maya  culture,  ñor
id  ffscit.es  contam  any  such  admirable  buildings  as  those  whose  ruins
still  delight  and  mystify  the  traveller  in  Yucatán  and  Central  America.

VOL.  I.— 21

338

Letters  of  Cortes

Outside  its  few  centres  of  leaming  and  luxury,  the  numerous  tribes
under  Montezuma’s  rule  were  dwellers  in  caves,  living  by  the  chase  and
in  no  way  sharing  in  the  benefits  of  the  Aztec  polity,  In  moráis  and
manners,  the  Aztecs  were  inferior  to  the  Toltecs,  and  though  they
adopted  and  continued  the  civilisation  of  their  predecessors,  they  were
devoid  of  their  intellectual  and  artistic  qualities,  and  tumed  their
attention  more  to  war  and  commerce  as  the  surest  means  for  riveting
their  supremacy  on  their  neighbours.  When  Cortes  arrived,  Texcoco
and  Tlacopan,  though  still  calling  themselves  independent,  and  ruled
by  sovereigns  who  held  themselves  co-equal  with  Montezuma,  were
rapidly  sinking  into  a condition  of  vassalage.  The  Aztec  religión
was  likewise  of  a militant  order;  it  was  polytheistic  and  readily
admitted  the  gods  of  conquered  or  allied  nations  into  its  pantheon.
Upon  the  milder  cult  of  the  older  religious  systems  they  had  adopted(
these  devotees  of  the  war-god  speedily  grafted  their  own  horrible
practices  of  human  sacrifices,  which  augmented  in  number  and  ferocity
until  the  temples  became  veritable  charnel  houses.  With  such  a bar-
barous  religious  system  draining  their  very  life’s  blood,  and  a relentless
despotism  daily  encroaching  on  their  liberties,  it  is  small  wonder  that
Cortes  was  hailed  as  a liberator  by  the  subject  peoples  of  México.

In  the  third  chapter  of  his  Historia  Antigua,  Don  Manuel  Orozco
y Berra  examines  what  he  terms  the  two  schools,  the  religious
and  the  philosophical,  whose  teachings  conceming  the  origin  and
early  history  of  the  Mexicans  are  based  upon  the  interpretation  of
the  ancient  and  authentic  Mexican  painting,  now  preserved  in  the
National  Museum  in  México,  and  which  carne  into  the  possession  of  the
historian  Ixtlilxochitl  from  his  royal  ancestors  of  Texcoco.  The  religious
reading  of  this  unique  Chronicle  (it  is  always  Orozco  y Berra  who  is  my
authority)  sought  to  harmonise  its  chronology,  and  certain  primitive
events  in  the  national  history,  with  the  biblical  story,  and  all  the  early
writers  of  this  school,  Carlos  de  Siguenza,  Gemelli  Careri,  Clavigero,
Veytia,  and  others,  found  in  it  an  account  of  the  creation,  the  flood,
the  tower  of  Babel,  the  dispersión  of  the  nations,  and  other  incidents  of

the  mosaic  records.  . .

The  philosophical  school,  of  which  Humboldt  was  the  chief,  following
other  lines,  arrived,  however,  at  a similar  result,  and  connected  the
foundation  of  México  with  the  cessation  of  the  deluge,  and  thus  the
problem  of  the  origin  of  American  races  and  animáis  was  solved.

Don  Fernando  Ramirez,  some  time  Curator  of  the  Mexican  National
Museum,  by  showing  the  interpretation  of  both  these  schools  to  be  mere
illusions,  demolished  their  conclusions,  and  interpreted  the  picture
as  merely  representing  the  wanderings  of  the  Mexicans  in  the  valley
itself  covering  an  area  of  about  nine  miles  and  a period  of  hardly  more
,ha„  443  ye¿  calculating  from  r3aS  back  to  88a,  *.»..  the ^earkeat
chronological  sign  m the  painting:  «hile  the  water  represented,  u not
the  flood  of  but  the  neighbouring  lake  of  Chalco.

The  complex  question  of  the  relation  in  which  the  Maya  and  Toltec

339

Appendix  III.  Second  Letter

civilisations  stood  to  one  another  has  not  yet  found  a generally  ac-
cepted  solution.  Working  in  the  light  which  anthropology , ethnology,
archasology,  and  kindred  módem  Sciences  aíford,  many  valuable
facts  have  been  recently  discovered  and  the  investigations  still  pro-
ceeding,  yearly  contribute  highly  specialised  knowledge  to  the  sum
of  what  the  early  Spanish  writers  amassed  but  failed  to  scientifically
classify.  But  with  all  this,  the  path  through  the  American  historical
labyrinth  remains  a tortuous  one:  whether  the  Toltecs  preceded  the
Mayas  and  brought  into  Yucatán  the  high  civilisation  of  which  noble
remains  attest  the  existence,  or  whether  this  civilisation  was  of  Maya
origin  and  afterwards  spread  towards  the  north,  influencing  the  Toltecs,
are  questions  on  which  various  opinions  are  held  by  modem  investi-
gators.  I incline  to  accept  the  latter  theory,  but  while  such  leamed
authorities  are  still  at  variance,  it  were  presumption  for  a mere  student
of  early  American  history  to  present  conclusions.

In  this  brief  summary  olí  such  a large  subject,  I have  sought  to
fumish  the  general  reader  with  an  intelligible  explanation  of  the
origins  and  history  of  the  civilisation  which  Cortes  beheld  when
first  he  visited  México.

APPENDIX  IV.

QUETZALCOATL

Montezuma  here  refers  to  Quetzalcoatl  who  figures,  under  different
ñames  in  different  times  and  places,  as  a mortal  man,  as  a deified  legis-
lator,  and  as  a primitive  divinity,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  sepárate  the
mythical  in  his  history  from  tlie  real.  He  was  known  in  Yucatán
under  the  ñame  of  Kukulcan,  the  meaning  of  which  is  identical  with
Questzalli  and  Cohuatl — a plumed  serpent.

Quetzalcoatl  was  a Toltec  deity,  and  was  venerated  as  the  god  of  the
air,  especially  identified  with  the  east  wind,  which  brought  the  fertilising
rains.  As  the  teachings  and  prophecies  attributed  to  him  potently  influ-
enced  the  attitude  of  the  Mexicans  towards  the  Spaniards,  on  their
arrival  in  the  country,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  both  his  mythical  and
historical  character.  In  the  native  mythology,  Quetzalcoatl  personified
the  principie  of  good  in  contradistinction  to  the  principie  of  evil,  under
the  figure  of  Tezcatlipoca.  The  story  of  his  residence  among  the
peoples  of  Anáhuac  relates  that  he  arrived  at  Tollan  (Tula)  the  capital
of  the  Toltecs,  as  chief  of  a band  of  strangers,  from  unknown  parts,
and  that  he  was  well  received  by  the  natives  to  whom  he  taught
the  arts  of  agriculture,  metal  working,  architecture,  and  mechanics.
He  introduced  also  the  new  religious  virtues  of  chastity,  trust  in  one
God,  the  love  of  peace,  and  the  practice  of  charity  and  penance.  He
also  brought  the  Toltec  calendar  to  the  state  of  perfection  in  which
it  was  found  amongst  the  Aztecs.  He  wore  a white  tunic  on  which
were  black  or  red  crosses,  which  sounds  something  like  a pallium.
He  was  large  of  person,  white  faced,  and  wore  his  black  hair  and
beard  long.  Exercising  the  high  priesthood,  he  initiated  the  golden
age  of  the  Toltecs,  during  which  the  cotton  grew  in  various  colours,
red,  blue,  orange,  and  purple,  maize  crops  were  over-abundant,  the
canes  grew  as  large  round  as  tree  trunks,  and  pumpkins  so  big  that  a
man’s  arms  could  not  encircle  one;  nobody  was  ever  hungry,  animáis
were  all  tame,  and  the  birds  sang  wonderfully.  Sahagun  catalogues
him  as  the  eighth  king  of  the  Toltecs.  This  halcyon  period  was  brought
to  an  end  by  the  machinations  of  the  evil  spirit  Tezcatlipoca  who
descended  to  earth  on  a spider’s  web,  and,  taking  the  form  of  a vener-
able sage,  tempted,  Quetzalcoatl  beyond  his  strength,  and  made
him  drunk  on  pulque,  during  which  orgies  the  god  violated  his
of  chastity.  This  fall  shook  the  faith  of  his  people  and  the

340

vows

34i

Appendix  IV.  Second  Letter

legend  recounts  furtlier,  that,  in  a war  brought  on  by  the  same
evil-spirit,  the  Toltecs  were  worsted.  A universal  famine  followed
upon  the  war,  only  to  be  succeeded  by  a terrible  pestilence.  Signs  and
portents  foretold  the  destruction  of  the  race,  and  Quetzalcoatl  bumed
his  house,  buried  his  treasures  in  a secret  place,  and,  despite  the
opposition  of  his  adherents,  left,  called  as  he  declared,  by  his  master,
to  the  mystic  land  of  Tlapallan.  His  progress  through  the  country
was  attended  by  prodigies  and  miracles  until  he  reached  Cholula,
where  he  rested  for  twenty  years,  teaching  the  people,  and  pontificating
in  their  great  temple.  But  the  enemy,  hearing  of  this,  prepared  again
to  make  war  on  the  friends  of  Quetzalcoatl,  who,  to  prevent  this  disas-
ter,  left  with  four  disciples  for  the  sea-coast.  Here  according  to  some
versions,  the  waves  parted,  allowing  him  to  pass,  and  according  to
others,  he  made  himself  a raft  of  serpents,  and,  spreading  his  mantle
for  a sail,  was  wafted  away  to  the  unknown  east.  Another  legend
describes  him  as  causing  his  funeral  pyre  to  be  erected,  from  which
his  heart  ascended  into  the  skies,  where  it  figures  as  the  planet
Venus.

The  belief  in  his  prophecy,  that  he  or  his  representatives  would  one
day  retum  to  re-establish  and  render  triumphant  his  religious  teach-
ings,  was  wide-spread,  and  fumishes  something  of  a parallel  to  the
Messianic  hope  prevalent  amongst  the  Jews,  or  to  the  expectation  of
a second  visible  coming  of  Christ  on  which  the  early  Christians
counted.  He  was  to  return  as  an  avenger,  and  henee  his  coming  was
dreaded  by  the  Aztecs,  who  believed  in  it  so  firmly  that  they  carried
on  a cult  to  propitiate  him,  though  their  religious  practices  did
violence  to  his  humaner  teachings.

The  mysterious  disappearance  of  the  Toltecs  from  Anáhuac  may
have  been  caused  by  the  war,  famine,  and  pestilence,  of  this  legend,  and
the  remnant  of  the  people  may  have  made  an  exodus  with  their  priestly
leader,  leaving  their  city  to  the  victors,  and  thus  might  be  explained
the  sudden  disappearance  of  that  people.  While  the  material  benefits
which  Quetzalcoatl  brought  to  the  Toltecs  and  Cholulans  were  readily
enough  assimilated,  it  is  probable  that  his  religious  teachings  were  not
widely  difiused  or  properly  understood  by  the  mass  of  the  people,  and
after  his  departure  they  rapidly  became  mixed  with  ancient  supersti-
tions.  Christian  doctrines  became  denaturalised  and  blended  with
pagan  traditions,  thus  losing  their  significance  and  efficacy.  The
original,  national  cult  of  the  Toltecs  reasserted  itself  with  the  addition
of  some  beliefs  and  ritual  forms.  The  passage  through  México  of  a few
Christians  under  the  leadership  of  one  possessing  the  superior  character
and  intelligence  attributed  to  Quetzalcoatl  would  suffice  to  introduce
new  moral  and  religious  ideas,  and  produce  great  changes  in  the
beliefs  of  the  more  cultivated  people ; for  the  indubitable  unity  of  all
mankind  is  essentially  a unity  of  spirit,  which  draws  together  widely
diversified  races,  whose  physical  features  are  dissimilar,  and  whose
customs  are  alien  to  one  another.

342

Lctters  of  Cortes

Religión  springs  from  an  inherent  aspiration,  common  to  human
nature  everywhere,  towards  a knowledge  of,  and  unión  with,  what  is
divine  and  eternal.  The  development  of  this  instinct  carries  humanity
through  the  same  phases  according  to  laws  governing  religious  evolu-
tion,  which  are  universal.  Asia,  Africa,  and  ancient  Europe,  have
produced  religious  Systems,  each  with  its  myths,  rites  of  sacrifice,
practices  of  penance,  vigils,  ceremonial  observances,  and  consecrated
priests,  and  the  conclusión  seems  obvious  that  within  human  nature
itself  are  found  the  springs  from  which  these  various  independent
systems — identical  in  their  intention  but  so  different  in  their  moral
valué — originate.  Man  is  potential  to  respond  to  the  demands  of  his
own  being,  whether  in  the  physical  and  material,  or  in  the  moral  and
spiritual  order,  and,  although  the  organisation  and  development
observed  in  primitive  religions  many  differ  widely  in  different  quarters
of  the  globe,  yet  wherever  mankind  dwells  in  community,  religious
development  stands  on  the  same  foundation  and  proceeds  according
to  the  same  fundamental  law.

It  need  therefore  in  reality  be  no  more  astonishing  that  the  Maya
race  and  its  descendants  should  have  evolved  a completely  organised
religious  system,  with  an  impressive  ritual  and  a well-ordered  calendar
of  ecclesiastical  festivals,  independently  of  any  previous  communica-
tion  with  the  oíd  world,  than  that  they  were  found  to  have  a know-
ledge of  spinning,  weaving,  and  metal  working,  and  an  effective  system
of  civil  government.  All  due  allowance  being  made  however  for  such
considerations,  the  beliefs  and  practices  of  the  Mexicans,  which  were
so  like  Christian  ones  as  to  exelude  the  hypothesis  of  mere  chance,  were
numerous  and  striking.

Duran  says  of  their  triune  idol  that  “being  one,”  he  is  adored  under
three  ñames,  and  having  three  ñames,  he  is  adored  as  one  almost  as  we
believe  in  the  most  Holy  Trinity . The  persons  of  this  trinity  were  T otee
the  lord  of  the  majesty  and  fear;  Xipe,  the  man  despised  and  perse-
cuted,  and  Tlatlauhquitezcatl,  the  mirror  of  splendour.  Children  were
baptized  between  three  and  twelve  years — signifying  a new  birth
by  pouring  on  of  water  to  cleanse  them  from  the  taint  of  inherited  sin ,
and  auricular  confession  was  practised  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin  com-
mitted,  penances  being  imposed.  Even  their  revolting  human  sacri-
fices  seem  to  have  been  a degraded  and  materialised  interpretation  of
our  Lord’s  words  of  consecration  when  instituting  the  Eucharistic  sacri-
fice,  for  the  flesh  of  the  victim  was  eaten  reverently,  while  sacramental
words  were  pronounced  calling  it  the  food  of  the  soul  and  the  very  flesh
of  the  god  to  whom  the  sacrifice  was  being  offered.  Holy  water  was
used  in  many  ceremonies,  and  especially  at  the  crowning  of  kings.
At  stated  times,  a sort  of  passion  play  was  performed  in  which  a man
was  bound  to  a cross  and  killed  with  arrows.  All  these,  and  many
other  ceremonies  bearing  a striking  analogy  to  Christian  rites,  much
impressed  the  Spaniards,  especially  the  friars,  who  composed  a
voluminous  literature  on  the  subject.  Sometimes,  indeed,  theones  were

Appendix  IV.  Second  Letter  343

built  up  on  rather  frail  foundations  of  fact,  and  conclusions  were
reached  by  undue  straining  of  the  imagination  rather  than  by  the  exer-
cise  of  critical  research.  The  Indians  frequently  misled  their  new
teachers,  giving  such  interpretation  of  their  rites  as  they  thought  would
be  most  acceptable,  when  not  themselves  ignorant  of  the  real  significance
of  their  symbols  and  ceremonies;  as,  indeed,  many  poorly  instructed
Christians  to-day  could  not  explain  intelligibly,  to  an  inquiring  visitor
from  Mars,  the  meaning  of  emblems  and  practices  with  which  they  are,
nevertheless,  familiar.  But  with  every  such  allowance,  there  still
remains  a sufficient  number  of  authenticated  and  perfectly  understood
doctrines  and  observances  in  the  ancient  Mexican  cult,  to  argüe  con-
vincingly  their  Christian  origin;  henee  many  writers  have  identified
Quetzalcoatl  with  some  unknown  Christian  missionary  priest — possibly
an  Oriental  bishop — while  others  have  even  thought  he  was  the  apostle
St.  Thomas.  This  startling  opinión  has  not  lacked  eloquent  defenders,
but  it  is  excluded  from  serious  consideration  by  the  fact  that  St.
Thomas  lived  in  the  first  century,  and  Quetzalcoatl  in  the  tenth,  with-
out  adducing  others  which  conclusively  disprove  it.

The  identity  of  Quetzalcoatl  remains  an  unsolved  mystery,  and,
after  his  departure,  it  became  merged  into  that  of  mythical  di-
vinities,  with  a plumed  serpent  for  his  emblem.  The  confused
notions  which  the  Mexicans  preserved  conceming  his  life,  his  acts
and  miracles,  and  his  final  disappearance,  and  their  interweaving
of  other  legends  of  their  more  beneficent  deities  with  his  imperfectly
transmitted  doctrines,  and  the  distorted  faets  in  his  personal  history
are  no  more  extraordinary  than  many  of  the  popular  tales  from  lives
of  the  saints,  and  other  wonder  stories  which  are  cherished  from  gener-
ation  to  generation  by  ignorant  and  imaginative  people  everywhere.
Unless  some  heretofore  undiscovered  treasure  house  of  lost  records
delivers  the  key  to  the  early  history  of  the  Toltecs,  there  seems  little
hope  that  our  imperfect  knowledge  conceming  him  will  receive  any
important  additions.  The  systematic  destruction  of  the  picture  writ-
ings  of  the  ancient  Mexicans,  and  particularly  of  everything  connected
with  their  religión,  which  was  carried  on  for  years  with  misguided  zeal
by  the  Spaniards,  cut  off  the  source  from  which  fuller  information
might  have  been  hoped.  Much  and  very  severe  criticism  has  fallen
upon  the  ecclesiastics — notably  Bishop  Zumarraga — -by  whom  this  sad
destruction  was  accomplished,  and  the  not  unnatural  vexation,  with
which  historians  view  what  now  seems  to  have  been  a work  of  ignorant
and  unnecessary  fanaticism,  has  lent  undue  vehemence  to  the  blame
assigned  to  these  well-intentioned  iconoclasts.  The  destruction  is  un-
doubtedly  most  regrettable,  but,  in  strict  justice,  it  must  be  admitted
that  the  extent  of  the  loss  which  American  history  sustained  is
entirely  problematical,  for  we  do  not  certainly  know  that  the  destroyed
records  contained  anything  which  has  not  been  learned  from  others
which  were  preserved,  and  from  the  Indians  themselves  at  the  time  of
the  conquest.  On  the  other  hand  our  debt  to  the  friars  is  very  great,

344

Letters  of  Cortes

for  to  them  alone  is  it  owing  that  anything  at  all  survived  the  Spanish
conquest.  They  alone,  amidst  the  hordes  of  gold-greedy  colonists
who  scoured  the  country  in  search  of  mines  and  slaves,  established
humane  relations  with  the  Indians,  learned  their  language,  studied
their  records,  and  while  bringing  them  into  schools  to  teach  them
Christianity,  learned  from  them  all  that  could  be  discovered  concerning
their  own  religión,  history,  and  traditions.  Franciscans  such  as
Sahagun,  Torquemada,  Motolinia,  Landa,  and  Lizana,  Jesuits  such  as
Acosta,  Duran,  and  later  Clavigero — to  mention  some  of  the  more
notable  amongst  many  workers — are  the  fathers  of  American  history,
to  whose  labours  is  due  the  preservation  of  an  enormous  mass  of
information — all  we  possess  in  fact — which  would  otherwise  have
perished  irrevocably.

It  may  be  safely  assumed  that  little  or  nothing  of  importance  which
the  Indians  themselves  knew  escaped  the  researches  which  these  and
other  men  of  their  order  conducted  with  patience  and  intelligence.
Those  among  the  early  ecclesiastics  in  whom  the  critical  faculty  was
wanting  made  good  this  lack  by  their  diligence,  amassing  the  materials
which  served  later  writers,  to  whom  fell  the  task  of  assorting  the  con-
fused  historical  lumber  they  had  collected.  It  appears  that  the  Mexi-
cans  knew  surprisingly  little  about  their  own  history,  and  that  their
trustworthy  traditions  did  not  carry  them  very  far  back.  The  Indians
of  Yucatán,  in  the  time  of  Diego  Landa,  were  unable  to  decipher  the
inscriptions  on  the  ruined  temples,  and  only  the  most  vague  and  im-
probable legends  concerning  the  buildings  of  their  ancient  cities
survived  amongst  them.  It  does  not  seem,  therefore,  unreasonable  to
temper  our  impatience  towards  Bishop  Zumarraga’s  act  of  vandalism
by  the  reflection  that  the  destroyed  records  would  have  probably
fumished  no  link  between  the  civilisation  of  Anáhuac  and  that  of
Yucatán  and  Central  America.

Authorities  consulted  on  Quetzalcoatl,  Sahagun,  lib.  iii.,  cap.  v.-
xiv.;  Torquemada,  lib.  iii.,  cap.,  vii. ; Motolinia  in  Icazbálceta  pp.  io,
30,65;  Mendieta,  p.  82-98;  Clavigero,  tom.  ii.,  p.  11-14;  Servando
Teresa  de  Mier  in  Bustamante;  Orozco  y Berra,  tom.  i.,  cap.  iv.,
tom.  ii.,  cap.  iii.;  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,  lib.  ii.,  cap.  iv.,  lib.  iii.,
cap.  ii.  Charnay,  Ancient  Cities ; Bulletins  of  Bureau  of  American
Ethnology.

APPENDIX  V.

THE  TEMPLE

This  statementis  obviously  inaccurate;  Cortes  has  just  said  that  fifty
steps  led  to  the  summit  of  the  chief  teocalli  which  would  allow  for
a very  modest  elevation,  whereas  the  Giralda  Tower  of  Seville  Cathe-
dral  wasbuilt  300  years  before  México  was  discovered  and  was  then  185
feet  high.  Neither  was  it  during  this  first  visit  to  the  temple  of  Tlatel-
olco  in  Montezuma’s  company  that  the  idols  were  overthrown  ; that
event  happened  in  the  teocaUi  of  the  great  temple  on  another  occasion
when  Montezuma  was  not  present.  Most  writers — including  Prescott
— misled  by  Cortes,  have  confused  the  two  visits  and  the  two  different
temples,  but  Bemal  Diaz  makes  it  perfectly  clear  that  the  first  visit,
was  to  the  temple  adjoining  the  market  place  in  the  Tlatelolco  quarter
of  the  city.  This  temple  was  even  loftier  than  the  principal  one,  and  the
arrangements  in  both  were  essentially  the  same  (Orozco  y Berra,
lib.  ii.,  cap.  iv. ; Icazbalceta,  Diálogos  de  Cervantes,  p.  201).  The
great  teocalli  of  the  chief  temple  was  completed  in  the  form  in  which
the  Spaniards  beheld  it  by  Montezuma’s  grandfather,  Ahuitzotl,  in
1487,  when  the  solemn  dedication  was  celebrated  by  the  sacrifice  of  a
vast  number  of  human  victims,  estimated  by  Torquemada  at  72,344
( Monarchia  Indiana,  lib.  ii.,  cap.  lxiii.),  by  Ixtlilxochitl  at  80,000
Historia  Chicimeca),  but  more  credibly  fixed  by  the  Tellerian  and
Vatican  Códices  at  the  still  respectable  figure  of  20,000.  Pretexts
for  wars  with  various  tribes  were  invented  in  order  to  procure  the
victims  for  this  ghastly  hecatomb,  and  the  ceremony  of  incessant
slaughter  occupied  two  days.

The  exact  form  and  dimensions  of  the  temple  are  not  positively
known,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  pyramid  was  an  oblong,  measuring
something  o ver  three  hundred  feetin  length  at  its  base  and  rising  in
graduated  terraces  to  a height  of  something  less  than  one  hundred  feet.
Bernal  Diaz  ( Hist . Verdad.,  cap.  viii.,)  says  that  he  counted  the  steps,
which  numbered  one  hundred  andfourteen , and  this  tallies  almost  exactly
with  the  statement  of  Andrés  Tapia  ( Relación , p.  582,)  that  he  counted
one  hundred  and  thirteen  steps.  Bernal  Diaz  also  measured  thepyra-
mids  at  Cholula  and  Texcoco  in  the  same  way,  and  counted  one  hundred
and  twenty  steps  on  the  former,  and  one  hundred  and  seventeen  on  the
latter,  henee,  if  he  was  accurate,  the  great  pyramid  of  México  was  not
the  loftiest  in  the  empire.  Not  one  of  the  Spaniards  who  saw  this

345

346

Letters  of  Cortes

edifice  seems  to  have  observed  it  critically,  or  to  have  left  a complete
architectural  description  of  it  to  posterity.  They  were  all  more  im-
pressed  with  the  horrors  they  witnessed  in  it  and  their  dreadful  signific-
ance  than  with  the  architectural  details ; all  agree  that  it  was  a most  awe-
some  place,  in  which  darle,  gruesome  chambers,  smelling  like  a slaughter
house,  contained  hideous  idols,  smeared  with  human  blood.  In  these
dim  recesses,  demoniacal  priests,  ciad  in  black  robes,  with  grotesquely
painted  faces,  framed  in  blood-clotted  locks,  celebrated  their  inhuman
rites,  and  offered  smoking  hearts  on  golden  salvers  to  the  monstrous
deities  there  enthroned.  The  presiding  figure  of  this  theocratic  charnel
house  was  that  of  the  god  of  war  Huitzilopochtli — the  humming  bird  to
the  left — and  of  his  image  Bemal  Diaz  gives  a careful  description.  Its
face  was  distorted  and  had  terrible  eyes;  the  body  was  covered  with
gold  and  jewels,  and  was  wound  about  with  the  coils  of  golden
serpents;  in  the  right  hand  was  held  a bow,  and  in  the  left  a bundle
of  arrows.  Suspended  from  the  idol’s  neck  was  a necklace  of  human
heads  and  hearts  made  of  gold  and  silver  with  precious  stones  set  in
them,  and  by  its  side  stood  the  figure  of  a page,  called  Huitziton,
bearing  a lance  and  shield  richly  jewelled.  This  little  statue  of  the
page  was  carried  by  the  priests  in  battle,  and  was  also  on  certain  occa-
sions  borne  with  much  pomp  through  the  streets.  The  honours  of  these
altars  were  shared  by  Tezcatlipoca — Shining  Mirror — who  was  called
‘‘the  soul  of  the  world.”  He  was  a god  of  law  and  severe  judgment
and  was  much  dreaded.  His  statue  was  of  black  obsidian,  and  sus-
pended from  his  plaited  hair,  which  was  confined  in  a golden  net,
was  an  ear  made  of  gold,  towards  which  mounted  tongues  of  smoke
symbolising  ascending  prayers.  On  the  summit  of  the  teocalli  stood
a great  cylindrical  drum  tlapanhuehuetl) , made  of  serpents’  skins,
which  was  beaten  on  certain  solemn  occasions,  and  as  an  alarum.  It
is  said  to  have  given  forth  a most  sinister  sound,  which  could  be  heard
for  miles.  During  the  siege,  the  Spaniards  had  sad  cause  to  shudder
at  its  fearsome  roll  which  announced  the  sacrifice  of  their  captive  com-
rades,  whose  white,  naked  bodies  were  even  discemible  in  the  dusky
procession  which  moved,  in  the  glare  of  torches  and  the  sacred  fires,
up  the  terraces  of  the  pyramid  on  its  way  to  the  stone  of  sacrifice.
The  area  of  the  courtyard,  some  twelve  hundred  feet  square,  was
paved  with  fíat  polished  stones,  which  were  so  slippery  the  Spaniards’
horses  could  hardly  keep  their  footing.  Four  gates  in  the  surrounding
wall,  called  coaiepantli,  gave  entrance  to  the  courtyard,  one  facing
each  of  the  cardinal  points,  and  over  each  gate  there  was  kept  a store
of  arms  in  readiness  for  attack  or  defence.  Sahagun  ( Hist . Nueva
España,  tom.  i.,  p.  197)  enumerates  seventy-eight  different  buildings
inside  the  wall  surrounding  the  courtyard;  they  comprised  chapéis,
cells  for  priests,  fountains  for  ablutions,  quarters  for  students  and
attendants,  and  a number  of  smaller  teocalli.  This  tallies  with  the
description  of  Cortes  and  Bernal  Diaz,  and  makes  it  evident  that  the
entire  group  of  buildings  somewhat  resembled  the  Kremlin  at  Moscow,

347

Appendix  V.  Second  Letter

or  a vast  cathedral  cióse.  In  one  of  the  temples  the  Spaniards  esti-
mated  that  a symmetrical  pyramid  of  bones  contained  one  hundred  an
thirty-six  thousand  human  skulls.  Amongst  these  temples  there  was
one  dedicated  to  Quetzalcoatl,  circular  in  form  and  having  íts  entrance
built  in  imitation  of  a serpent’s  open  mouth.  Bernal  Díaz  says  that
this  was  a veritable  hell,  or  abode  of  demons,  in  which  they  saw
frightful  idols,  cauldrons  of  water  in  which  to  prepare  the  flesh  of  the
victims,  which  the  priests  ate,  and  furnishings  like  those  of  a butcher  s
stall ; so  that  he  never  called  the  place  other  than  hell.

Human  sacrifices  and  cannibalism  were  practised  even  in  honour  of
the  beneficent  deity  of  the  Toltecs,  whose  mild  teachings,  puré  life,
and  aversión  to  war,  persuade  us  that  he  must  have  been  a Christian
bishop.  Nothing  more  conclusively  proves  that,  in  spite  of  their
material  prosperity,  their  extended  empire,  and  a certain  reñnement  in
their  social  life,  the  Aztecs  occupied  a much  lower  moral  and  intel-
ectual level  than  did  their  Toltec  predecessors  in  Anáhuac.  From
the  Toltecs  they  had  received  the  foundations  of  their  civilisation ; all
that  was  good  in  their  religión  or  true  in  their  philosophy,  all  that  was
known  amongst  them  of  Science,  they  received  from  that  mysterious
race  whose  only  records  are  a few  neglected  and  almost  unknown
ruins.

After  the  conquest,  the  great  temple  was  razed  to  the  ground.  In
its  foundations  were  found  a quantity  of  treasures,  which  had  been
placed  there  as  offerings  when  the  pyramid  was  first  begun.  The
stone  idols  and  carvings  were  for  the  most  part  built  into  the  founda-
tions of  the  Christian  cathedral  which  stands  upon  its  site.

Montezuma  had  readily  assented,  very  soon  after  the  arrival  of  the
Spaniards,  to  the  installation  of  a chapel  in  the  Spanish  quarters,  and
a room  was  consequently  prepared,  in  which  mass  was  said  daily,  as
long  as  the  supply  of  wine  held  out.  The  soldiers  said  their  daily
prayers  before  the  cross  and  the  sacred  images,  especially  at  the  hour
of  the  Ave  María.

While  seeking  for  the  best  place  to  erect  the  altar  in  this  room,
Alonso  Yañez  discovered  a concealed  door,  which  Cortes,  who  was
informed  of  the  discovery,  ordered  to  be  forced  open.  Beyond  was  a
vast  chamber  containing  the  treasure  of  Axayacatl  and  other  Aztec
kings,  forming  a great  heap  of  gold  and  jewels  in  the  centre  of  the
room,  while  all  the  walls  were  covered  with  splendid  stuffs,  thick
feather-work,  shields,  and  other  objects  of  precious  metáis.  After
inspecting  the  fabulous  collection,  Cortes  had  the  door  sealed  up
again,  and  cautioned  his  followers  not  to  betray  their  knowledge  of
its  existence  to  the  Mexicans  (Bernal  Diaz,  cap.  xciii.).  Andrés  de
Tapia’s  account  (Incazbalceta,  Doc.  Ined.,  tom.  ii. , p.  580)  says  that
Cortes  told  Montezuma  of  his  discovery,  and  that  the  emperor  pre-
sented  him  with  all  the  gold  and  jewels  in  that  treasury.

After  repeated  conversations  with  Montezuma  on  religious  subjects,
none  of  which  seemed  to  advance  his  conversión,  the  patience  of  Cortes

348

Letters  of  Cortes

gave  out,  and  it  was  when  the  Spaniards  had  been  about  five  months
m the  City  that  the  destruction  of  the  idols  in  the  great  teocalli  took
place.  The  scene  in  the  temple  is  characteristic  of  the  times  and  the
man.

Human  life  was  cheap  in  Cortes’s  eyes,  and  the  cruelties  inflicted
on  the  natives  in  the  furtherance  of  his  designs  show  that  it  was  not
the  inhuman ity  of  the  sacrifices  which  filled  him  with  the  most  abhor-
rence.  It  was  the  sight  of  idolatry,  of  people  given  over  to  devil
worship,  that  inflamed  his  Catholic  blood,  and  there  seems,  on  this
occasion,  to  have  been  no  friar  Olmedo  at  hand  to  restrain  him,  as
in  Cholula.  He  first  called  the  priests  together  and  delivered  a pious
exhortation,  explaining  the  fatherhood  of  God,  the  brotherhood  of
man,  and  other  Christian  beliefs,  conjuring  them  to  abandon  the  super-
stitions  which  imperilled  their  immortal  souls,  to  purify  the  altars,
and  dedicate  them  to  the  true  God  and  the  saints.  As  the  priests
defended  their  own,  the  controversy  enraged  Cortes  beyoncl  control,
and  seizing  an  instrument  he  began  smashing  the  idols  right  and  left
with  such  magnificent  fury  that  Andrés  de  Tapia  declared  that  he
seemed  like  a supematural  being.  Montezuma  was  notified,  and
entreated  him  for  prudence’s  sake  to  desist,  as  such  profanation  would
provoke  an  uprising  of  the  people.  Cortes,  however,  was  deaf  to  re-
monstrance,  and  the  idols  were  cast  out,  the  temple  washed  and  put
in  order,  two  altars  being  set  up,  one  to  Our  Lady  and  the  other  to
Saint  Christopher,  with  their  respective  statues  upon  them.  Mass
was  thenceforth  said  there,  and  some  of  the  Indians  carne  to  the
ceremony,  as  they  wanted  rain  and,  their  own  gods  being  overthrown,
they  were  willing  to  invoke  the  Spaniards’  God.  Cortes  declared  they
should  have  rain,  and,  with  the  most  confident  faith,  ordered  prayers
and  a procession  to  obtain  this  blessing;  although  the  procession  set
forth  under  a cloudless  sky,  it  returned  after  Mass  in  such  a down-
pour  that  the  people  waded  ankle  deep  in  the  streets.  Malintzin’s
religión  was  vindicated  (Andrés  de  Tapia  Relación,  p.  584-6).

APPENDIX  VI.

MASSACRE  OF  THE  MEXICAN  NOBLES

This  was  Pedro  de  Alvarado.  Simultaneously  four  messengers  ar-
rived  from  Montezuma  to  complain  that  the  captain  had  ordered  an
unprovoked  attack  upon  the  Mexicans  during  a religious  festival,  and
that  the  latter  had  merely  defended  themselves  as  best  they  could.
The  feast  of  Toxcatl  fell  upon  the  tenth  of  May,  and  only  the  highest
and  noblest  adomed  with  their  richest  ornaments,  but  unarmed,
took  part  in  the  ceremonial  dance.  Cortes  had  consented,  before  he
left  México,  to  the  usual  celebration,  with  the  proviso  that  there  should
be  no  human  sacrifices,  though  very  likely  the  priests  reserved  their
intention  to  perform  that  part  of  the  rites  privately.  The  first  con-
trariety  aróse  from  Alvarado’s  refusal  to  allow  the  statue  of  Huitzilo-
pochtli  to  be  restored  to  its  former  place,  from  which  it  had  been
ejected  to  malee  room  for  the  altars  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  St.
Christopher.  The  Tlascalans  next  excited  his  suspicions  that  the
festival  was  merely  a pretext  to  collect  a large  multitude  in  the  city,
the  real  object  being  to  fall  upon  the  diminished  garrison  and  exter-
mínate it.  On  the  day  of  the  feast,  Alvarado  and  others  saw  certain
idols,  decked  out  for  the  procession,  standing  in  the  court  of  the  temple,
and  also  three  youths  in  new  robes  and  with  shaven  heads,  which  indi-
cated  that  they  were  destined  for  sacrifice.  Alvarado  seized  the  in-
tended victims,  and,  by  putting  them  to  worse  tortures  than  those  of
the  sacrificial  stone,  under  which  one  of  them  died,  he  obtained  such
testimony  as  he  wanted  from  the  other  two,  who  were  mere  lads,  to
prove  that  a general  revolt  was  planned.  What  these  poor  creatures
could  be  supposed  to  know  of  such  conspiracies  does  not  appear,  but
Alvarado  was  satisfied,  and,  arming  his  men,  he  left  some  in  charge
of  Montezuma,  with  orders  to  kill  the  nobles  who  were  with  him,  and
repaired  with  the  others  to  the  great  teocalli,  where  six  hundred  nobles
and  priests  were  dancing,  while  some  three  thousand  others  assisted
as  spectators.  The  appearance  of  the  Spaniards  caused  no  interruption,
but,  at  a given  signal,  they  drew  their  weapons  and  fell  upon  the  defence-
less  people,  slaughtering  them  without  quarter;  the  doors  were  guarded,
so  few  escaped,  but  they  gave  the  alarm  and  roused  the  city.  Mean-
while  the  nobles  of  the  court  had  been  slain,  and  the  Spaniards  had
fortified  themselves  inside  their  quarters.  The  exact  place  where  the
dance  took  place  is  uncertain.as  neither  Cortes  ñor  Bernal  Diaz  mentions

349

35o

Letters  of  Cortes

it;  Acosta  contradicting  most  of  the  early  writers,  argües  that  it  must
ha  ve  been  the  court  of  the  palace  where  Montezuma  was.  It  nowhere
appears,  however,  that  Montezuma  was  present,  and,  as  the  dance  was  a
religious  rite,  the  temple  court  would  seem  more  indicated  for  its  cele-
bration.  Alvarado,  who  was  wounded  on  the  head  by  a stone,  ap-
peared  before  Montezuma  crying:  “ See  what  your  subjects  have  done  ! ”
but  the  Emperor  answered  that  had  he  not  begun  the  disturbance  the
Mexicans  would  have  remained  peaceable,  adding,  “ You  have  un  done
yourself  and  me.”  Ñor  did  Alvarado’s  explanations  satisfy  Cortes,
who  openly  showed  his  anger  upon  his  arrival.

Indeed,  his  conduct  seems  destitute  of  any  reasonable  excuse,  and  his
efforts  to  excúlpate  himself  at  his  trial  were  weak  and  confused;  at  best
he  had  but  the  word  of  a captive,  an  intended  victim,  and  that
wrung  from  him  under  torture.  Replying  to  Art.  IV.,  of  the  accusations
against  him  he  alleged,  (i)  that  it  was  common  report  in  the  city  that,
during  Cortes’s  absence,  the  reduced  garrison  would  be  crushed;  (2)  on
the  morning  of  the  festival  he  had  seen  a large  number  of  sharp  pointed
sticks,  with  which  the  Mexicans  openly  boasted  they  would  kill  him
and  his  men;  (3)  the  admission  of  the  captive  victim,  which  was  con-
firmed  by  a native  of  Texcoco;  (4)  that  a skirmish  had  already  taken
place  in  the  palace,  in  which  he  himself  was  wounded,  and  one  Span-
iard  was  killed,  and  that  all  would  have  shared  the  same  fate.  Torque-
mada  adds  the  detail  that  huge  cauldrons  were  prepared  in  which  to
cook  the  Spaniards.  Las  Casas  advances  the  theory  usual  with  him,
that  Alvarado  wished  to  strike  such  a blow  as  would  terrorise  the
Indians.  Herrera  admits  that  a revolt  may  have  been  brewing,  but
deprecates  the  Wholesale  massacre  and  the  taking  of  jewels  from  the
dead  bodies.  Clavigero  scouts  the  idea  of  a conspiracy,  and  affirms
that  this  was  an  invention  to  shield  Alvarado.  Oviedo,  Sahagun,
and  Fr.  Duran,  all  exempt  the  Indians  of  rebellious  intentions.  Setting
aside  the  weighty  unanimity  of  these  authorities  on  the  question  of  the
alleged  conspiracy,  Alvarado’s  conduct  would  still  be  without  justifica-
tion,  even  had  there  been  an  intention  to  attack  him,  for  his  proper
course  would  have  been  to  collect  all  the  Spaniards  and  Tlascalans  in  his
quarters,  with  sufficient  provisions,  hold  Montezuma  and  the  court
nobles  as  hostages,  notify  Cortes  by  messenger,  and  stand  strictly  on
the  defensive  until  help  or  instructions  carne.  The  situation  cannot  be
properly  paralleled  with  that  of  Cortes  in  Cholula,  for  the  conditions
were  entirely  different.  Alvarado  was  the  most  violent  of  all  the
Spanish  captains,  and  his  brutality  culminated  in  this  inhuman  mas-
sacre,  which  drove  the  long  suffering  Mexicans  to  desperation;  it
destroyedthe  last  illusion  about  the  celestial  origin  and  character  of  the
white  men,  and  brought  on  the  tragedy  of  the  Sorrowful  Night,  and
the  siege,  with  its  long  train  of  misery  and  destruction.  From  that  day
forward,  the  Mexicans  were  deaf  to  all  overtures  from  the  Spaniards;
regardless  of  suffering,  and  indifferent  to  death,  they  sought  only
vengeance.

APPENDIX  VII.

DEATH  OF  MONTEZUMA

Montezuma’s  assurance  to  the  people  that  he  was  not  held  a prisoner,
but  lived  with  the  Spaniards  from  choice,  free  to  come  and  go  at  his
pleasure,  was  so  contrary  to  obvious  facts,  and  his  reproof  to  them
for  taking  arms,  as  though  they  had  been  the  aggressors,  was  so  unjust,
that  he  failed  to  secure  the  cessation  of  hostilities.  On  the  contrary ,
he  had  hardly  finished  speaking  when  the  young  prince  Quauhtemotzin,
who  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  people,  reviled  him  as  a coward  and
the  effeminate  tool  of  the  Spaniards,  declaring  that  his  subjects  re-
nounced  obedience  to  one  who  had  so  degraded  his  royal  dignity.
With  that  he  hurled  a stone,  and,  in  the  volley  of  missiles  which  fol-
lowed,  one  struck  the  Emperor  on  the  head  ( Codex  Ramírez  in
Orozco  y Berra,  tom.  iv.,  cap.  x. ; Acosta,  Hist.  Nat.  y.  Moral  de  las
Indias,  lib.  vii.,  cap.  xxvi.).  Clavigero  refuses  to  believe  that  Quauhte-
motzin so  insulted  his  royal  únele,  but  offers  no  reason  for  his  disbelief.
The  Spaniards,  who  had  been  charged  to  protect  Montezuma’s  person
with  their  shields,  were  not  quick  enough,  and  it  is  said  he  was  also
wounded  by  arrows  in  the  arm  and  in  the  leg.  The  wounds  were  not,
however,  serious,  but  the  unfortunate  monarch  was  evidently  deter-
mined  not  to  survive  this  supreme  humiliation,  and,  refusing  to  allow
his  hurts  to  be  properly  dressed,  he  remained  without  food  in  a pro-
foundly  dejected  condition.  Herrera  describes  Cortes  as  showing  the
greatest  concern,  solicitously  visiting  the  Emperor  to  comfort  him,
but  it  seems  little  likely  that  in  the  midst  of  his  perilous  occupations
the  commander  found  time  to  condole  with  his  wounded  captive,  for
Montezuma’s  tardy  efforts  for  peace  had  failed  completely,  and,  though
Prescott  says  that  the  Aztecs  “shocked  at  their  own  sacrilegious
act. . .dispersed,  panic-struck  in  different  directions . . . so  that  not
one  of  the  multitudinous  array  remained  in  the  great  square,”  there
seems  to  be  no  authority  for  believing  that  any  such  dramatic  revulsión
of  feeling  took  place.  Montezuma  had  fallen  from  his  royalty  and  his
high  priesthood,  to  be  a thing  of  scorn  and  loathing  to  his  people,
while  his  influence  on  the  course  of  events  was  less  than  nil.

Montezuma  Xocoyotzin  ninth  king  of  México  died  on  June  30,  1520,
in  the  fifty-fourth  year  of  his  age,  the  eighteenth  of  his  reign,  and  in
the  seventh  month  of  his  captivity.

His  death  was  attributed,  by  the  Spaniards,  to  the  wound  caused

35i

352

Letters  of  Cortes

by  the  stone,  which  struck  him  on  the  head;  by  the  Mexicans,  it  was
on  the  contrary , asserted  that  he  was  put  to  death  by  Cortes.  The
Codex  Ramírez,  before  quoted  from  the  work  of  Orozco  y Berra,  States
that  Montezuma  was  found  stabbed  to  death  by  the  Spaniards,  with
the  other  chiefs  who  shared  his  captivity.  Acosta  accepts  this  as
true,  and  Father  Duran  (cap.  76)  says  “They  found  him  dead  with
chains  upon  his  feet,  and  five  dagger  wounds  in  his  breast,  and  with  him
many  other  of  the  chiefs  and  lords  who  were  prisoners.”  Amongst
the  nobles  were  the  kings  of  Tlacopan  and  Texcoco  and  the  lord  of
Tlatelolco.  Cacamatzin,  according  to  Ixtlilxochitl  was  stabbed  forty-
ñve  times,  and  he  adds  that  Montezuma  died  from  the  wound  in  his
head,  ‘‘although  his  vassals  say  that  the  Spaniards  themselves  killed
him,  and  plunged  a sword  into  his  fundament  ” ( apud , Orozco  y
Berra,  tom.  iv.,  cap.  x.).  The  murder  of  the  other  chiefs  was  deemed
necessary,  as  it  was  neither  possible  to  be  burdened  with  them  in  the
flight  from  the  city,  ñor  was  it  wise  to  release  them.  Their  bodies  were
thrown  out  of  the  Spanish  quarters  at  a spot  called  Teayotl,  because  of  a
stone  turtle  which  stood  there,  in  the  hope  that  their  fate  might  dis-
courage  the  people,  and  also  give  them  occupation  in  preparing  their
funerals  as  required  by  custom  (Sahagun,  lib.  xii.,  cap.  xxiii.;  Ixtlil-
xochitl,  Hist.  Chichimeca).  Cortes’s  account  of  the  wounding  and
death  of  Montezuma  was  naturally  followed  by  Gomara  \ Oviedo  also
copies  his  words,  and  says  that  he  heard  the  same  account  viva  voce
from  Pedro  de  Alvarado;  Herrera  asserts  that  the  emperor’s  wound
was  not  mortal  (lib.  x.,  cap.  x.),  but  that  he  died  because  he  refused
all  attendance  and  food;  and  Bernal  Diaz,  who  relates  the  same  story,
adds  the  affecting  detail  that  Cortes  and  all  the  captains  and  soldiers
wept  as  though  they  had  lost  a father  ( Verdadera  Hist.,  cap.  cxxvi.),
which  those  may  believe  who  can.  Clavigero  refers  to  the  grief  of  the
Spaniards,  as  described  by  Bernal  Diaz,  and  says  that,  in  view  of  the
contradictory  accounts,  it  seems  impossible  to  know  the  truth  adding,

' I cannot  believe  that  the  Spaniards  would  take  the  life  of  a king  to
whom  they  owed  so  many  benefits,  and  from  whose  death  they  would
derive  only  evil. ” He  does  not  say  why  he  cannot  believe  this;
Montezuma’s  influence  was  gone;  another  leader  had  been  chosen  by
the  nation  in  the  person  of  the  brave  Quauhtemotzin,  and  when  Cortes
announced  his  death,  offering  to  deliver  his  body  for  burial  they  cried
out:  “We  want  Montezuma  neither  living  ñor  dead  !”  (Herrera,  lib.
x.,  cap.  x.)  Henee  the  fallen  sovereign’s  presence  was  only  an  em-
barrassment  to  Cortes,  who  was  planning  to  fight  his  way  out  of  the  city
with  as  few  encumbrances  as  possible — even  the  precious  gold  was
being  left  behind.  The  moment  the  emperor  became  an  obstacle,  his
doom  was  sealed,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  character  or  conduct  of
Cortes  which  warrants  the  belief  that  he  was  influenced  by  sentiments
of  compassion  for  the  king  he  had  degraded,  while  his  disposal  of  Caca-
matzin at  that  time,  and  of  Quauhtamotzin  later  in  Yucatán,  revealed
the  absence  of  any  scruples  whatever.  Prescott  joins  Clavigero  in  his

Appendix  VII.  Second  Letter  353

generous  assumption,  and  with  a fine  outburst  of  indignation  finds  it
“hardly  necessary  to  comment  on  the  absurdity  of  this  monstrous  ím-
putation."  Such  sentiments  do  credit  to  the  magnammity  of  these
writers,  for  it  is  manifestly  the  nobler  part  to  adimt  such  a charge
against  Cortes,  only  when  forced  by  irrefutable  proofs,  which  m this
case  are  not  forthcoming.  Orozco  y.  Berra,  the  results  of  whose  ex-
haustive  researches  are  expressed  in  calm,  judicial  language  m his
Conquista  de  México,  adopts  the  Indian  versión.  Clavigero  has
perhaps  said  the  xnost  that  generous  impartiality  will  allow,  when
he  States  that  “There  reigns  such  variety  among  histonans  that  it
seems  impossible  to  verify  the  truth.”  Torquemada  (lib.  iv.,  cap.
Ixx.)  records  that  Montezuma’s  body  was  taken  to  Copalco  where
it  was  crernated,  according  to  the  Aztec  usage,  though  the  solem-
nity  was  marred  by  the  insults  heaped  by  some  of  the  by-standers
upon  the  hapless  corpse.  Herrera  was  of  the  opinión,  that  the  body
was  buried  at  Chapultepec,  because  the  Spaniards  heard  great  la-
mentations  in  that  quarter,  and  because  that  was  the  place  of  royal
sepulture,  but  the  observation  of  Clavigero  on  this  opinión,  that  there
was  no  fixed  place  for  burying  the  sovereigns  and  that  Chapultepec,
being  some  three  miles  distant  from  the  Spanish  quarters  it  was  hardly
likely  they  could  have  heard  lamentations,  seems  to  weaken  this
assumption.

Diego  Muñoz  Camargo,  the  Tlascallan  historian,  would  seem  to  be
the  chief  authority  for  the  pious  legend  that  Montezuma  was  baptised
by  his  own  desire  just  before  he  died,  and  that  Cortes  and  Pedro  de
Alvarado  were  his  godfathers.  Gomara  asserts  that  the  Emperor  had
expressed  his  wish  to  become  a Christian  prior  to  Cortes  s departure
from  México  to  meet  Narvaez,  but  that  the  ceremony  was  deferred
until  E áster  so  that  itmight  be  celebrated  with  more  solemnity,  and
was  afterwards  forgotten  amid  the  confusión  of  the  changed  circum-
stances.  The  silence  of  Cortes  on  a matter  he  would  have  been  eager
to  report  in  his  letters,  seems  alone  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  assertion,
and  Torquemada,  who  would  also  have  not  been  slow  to  enroll  a royal
convert,  does  not  admit  the  story  ( Monarchia  Indiana,  lib.  iv.,  cap.
Ixx.).  A most  instructive  dissertation  on  this  subject  is  contained
in  an  interesting  study  by  Don  José  Fernando  Ramírez  entitled
Bautismo  de  Motecuhzoma  II.,  Noveno  Rey  de  México.

A pathetic  figure  is  that  of  this  Aztec  king,  gifted  with  some  of  the
highest  qualities  of  his  race,  venerated  during  a long  and  prosperous
reign  almost  as  a demi-god,  only  to  be  humbled  to  the  very  dust.  The
starting  point  of  his  downfall  was  his  superstition,  for  had  he  listened  to
his  generáis  rather  than  to  his  priests  Cortes  and  his  handful  of
adventurers  would  never  have  left  the  sea-coast  alive.  The  misfortunes
and  humiliations  of  the  last  months  of  his  life  seem  to  have  completely
changed  his  character,  so  that  from  the  time  of  his  docile  abdication
at  the  bidding  of  Cortes,  to  the  infamy  of  his  appearance  on  the  walls
of  the  Spanish  quarters  to  rebuke  his  long-suffering  people,  was  but  a

354

Letters  of  Cortes

step  on  the  way  to  the  nameless  grave  where  his  dishonoured  form
was  finally  laid.

Prescott’s  description  of  the  scenes  of  Montezuma’s  death-bed,  with
Cortes  present  to  whom  he  confided  his  daughters,  is  based  upon
Cortes’s  own  narration  made  in  the  grant  afterwards  conceded  to  one
of  the  daughters,  Doña  Isabel,  when  she  married  Alonzo  Grado,  who  is
described  in  the  same  document  as  an  hidalgo  of  Alcántara  (Prescott,
lib.  iv.,  cap.  ii.)

It  is  to  Cortes’s  credit  that  he  recognised  the  debt  of  the  Spanish
crown  to  Montezuma,  and  that  he  procured  the  royal  protection  for  his
children.

END  OF  VOLUME  I.
