==============================================================================
The Reign of the House of Rothschild
Egon Caesar Corti (1886-1953) (1928)
Edition staged: New York: Cosmopolitan Book Corporation, 1928 (English translation). Internet Archive community scan.
Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/count-egon-caesar-corti-the-reign-of-the-house-of-rothschild-searchable-1928
Rights: Public Domain in the US. Published 1928 in the United States; US copyright expired 1 Jan 2024 (95-year term). Author died 1953.
Language: English
Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library (antarctic-labs.com).
Documentary history of the Rothschild banking house 1830-1871, from family archives. Complete English text.
==============================================================================

THE REIGN OF
THE HOUSE'OF ROTHSCHILD


REoTE CORT!
(GM


hag. Wo BLE


THE REIGN OF THE
HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
BY


BRIAN & BEATRIX°LUNN


LONDON
VICTOR GOLLANCZ LTD
14 Henrietta Street Covent Garden

1928


Made and Printed in Great Britain by
The Camelot Press Limited, London and Southampton


Genealogy


Foreword


Synopsis
Chap. I.
I.


Ii,


EX.


CONTENTS


facing title-page


: . page
of ‘The Rise of 0 the House of Rothschild”
Weathering the Crises of 1830


The Rothschild Loans in Relation to Home
and Foreign Politics, 1882-1835


The Part Played by the Rothschilds in the
Early History of Railways in Europe


. Differences between the Five Brothers with


regard to Spain


The Rothschilds’ Peace ee in the
Crisis of 1840


. The Rothschilds Before and During the


Revolution of 1848


. Fighting for Position with Louis N: aplen,


Cavour, and Bismarck


. From the Crimean War to the Italian War


of 1859
The Eveniful Years : 1866 and Jens 871


Epilogue .


Notes


Bibliography


Index


1x


xi


117
165
218
279


BA5
387
429
467
481
487


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Freperick Wiii1am III or Prussia . - FACING PAGE
Tur FRANKFORT Bourské

SapPHIR"

PERIER ‘i : , ‘ . ; : .


OPENING OF THE STOCKTON AND DARLINGTON RaiLway,
277TH SEPTEMBER, 1825


TRAVELLING ON THE LIVERPOOL AND MANCHESTER Ral.-
way, 1881


TriaL TRIP oF THE FIRST AUSTRIAN RaiLway, 147TH
NovEMBER, 1837 .


Franz Rreren


OreninG CEREMONY OF THE Karser Ferpinanps Norp-
BAIN, 7TH JULY, 1889


QuEEN Marie CHRISTINE OF SPAIN

Count ToRENO . : :

A Rovuscuixp billet d’entrée ‘ F ; : F
THIERS . . . : :

HEINE

Prius IX

ACHILLE FouLp .

"Napo.eon III . : : : : ‘ ’
BISMARCK .

"Meyer Cari, BARon RotTuscHILp

CavouR


‘a
CARTOON REPRESENTING THE VISIT OF NAPOLEON III to
JamMEs ROTHSCHILD AT FERRIERES ON 17TH FEBRUARY,
1802-60 os ee
{se Brotgers PEREIRE
foe Empress Evcinm
Baron LroneL DE RoruscHiyp . 3 ¢
i Vii a


FOREWORD


Tus volume carries on the history of the House of
Rothschild as revealed by the relevant documents up
to the Peace that concluded the Franco-German war in
1871. In the writing of this volume, as in the case of
The Rise of the House of Rothschild, the Rothschild
family have brought no influence of any kind to bear ;
my aim has been to portray without prejudice or parti-
ality the positively fabulous part which the House played
in the cvents of the nineteenth century. Original docu-
ments and letters that had been intercepted have
occasionally afforded particularly illuminating revela-
tions, although in the case of extracts from some of the
letters it is necessary to bear in mind that the originals
were probably carefully altered by the Rothschilds
themselves, with the deliberate intention of making upon
persons like Metternich a definite impression such as
would .ssist them in carrying out their plans. Seen in
this light, they are no less instructive and characteristic
of the methods of the House than the more ingenuous
documents which undoubtedly constitute a large propor-
tion of those used in this work.

I must again point out that I cannot claim to have
dealt with the subject exhaustively ; but it has perhaps
been possible, by means of the many thouSand docu-
ments that have been collected, to present a series of
varied but relevant pictures such as may afford a general
impression which, in its surprising and fantastic effect,
should give some idea of the nd¥ure, the work, the aims,
and the power of this House during the nineteenth
century.

The Epilogue, which appears at the end of the book, of
course makes no claim to continue the treatment of the
subject on the same lines ; it merely attempts to bring
out one or two of the more striking moveg executed by

ix


x FOREWORD


the House of Rothschild on the political chessboard
during the sixty years leading up to the present day—
moves which show how the House, in spite of. growing
difficulties, vanishing influence, and the powerful compe-
tition of younger and richer firms, has endeavoured
until the most recent times to maintain its position,
to influence international politics, and, although with
diminishing success, to drive them along the path which
corresponded to the interests of the bank.

As in the case of the first volume, I have to express my
gratitude to a large number of persons who have assisted
me in my work.

In addition to those persons mentioned in the first
volume, I am also indebted to Professor W. Alison
Phillips, and to the gentlemen of the Record Office and
of the British Museum in London, who were particularly
kind in the assistance they gave to me, a forcigner.
Further, I am indebted to Dr. von Kurzl-Buntscheiner ;
to the expert writer on economic subjects, R. Drapala ;
to the legal authority, Herr von Meyer-Leonhard of
Frankfort ; and finally to Fraulein Lilli von Werner, the
daughter of the painter Anton von Werner; who have all
been most obliging in placing documents and portraits
at my disposal.

I can but conclude by expressing the hope that this
volume, which in my opinion reveals, as few others have
done, the intricate activities of high politics as intimately
observed from behind the scenes, will have a wide appeal.


SYNOPSIS OF “THE RISE OF THE HOUSE
OF ROTHSCHILD.”


Meyer Amschel Rothschild, the son of a small Jewish
retailer and moneychanger, who lived in the Frankfort
Ghetto, was the founder of the Rothschild Bank, which
became an important concern towards the end of the
eighteenth century, especially as the result of the wars follow-
ing upon the French Revolution. Meyer Amschel came into
touch with Court circles through dealing in old coins and
antiquities, and established a special relationship with the
Elector of Hesse, whose property he looked after to a great
extent during the Napoleonic Wars, where he acquired
credit, important connections, and financial profit. He
employed his five sons in the family business. The House,
which had become rich, made itself generally useful to
Napoleon’s enemies. His most gifted son, Nathan, who had
emigrated to England, played a particularly important part
in these iransactions. His second son, James, under the
ingenious pretext that he was acting in France’s interests,
ventured to go to Paris, but remained in constant touch with
Nathan, who was in the enemy country of England. When
Napoleon fell, the Rothschilds showed their hand and
openly joined the side of the victorious Allies. During the
Napoleonic Wars they had become immensely wealthy,
particularly through handling the British subsidies to the
Allies, with the result that they were able out of their own
resources to assist with loans the States that had been
impoverished by the war. Austria was one of the
candidates for a loan, and in 181 %that country ennobled the
Rothschilds in order to put them under an obligation, after-
wards inducing Solomon, on the conclusion, of a loan
operation, to settle in Vienna, in which city’ he resided
permanenfly, becoming the confidential adviser of the all-
powerful Metternich. When, in 1820, Metternich wished to
suppress the Revolution at N aples, which had no moneu to
xi


xii SYNOPSIS


deal with the problem itself, Metternich sent the fifth brother,
Carl Rothschild, to Naples, where he carried through
ingenious arrangements whereby that State was herself
forced to raise loans to defray the costs of the invasion.
Thus, besides the original House of Frankfort there were
now four branches, in London, Paris, Vienna, and Naples,
each of them being managed by one of the five brothers, who
worked in complete harmonious co-operation.

Up to the year 1830 the wealth of the Rothschilds had
constantly and prodigiously increased, and they now
possessed a virtual monopoly of State loans, which they
arranged for ail the great Powers of that period. The
Rothschilds had just underwritten three important loans for
France, Austria, and Prussia, and had not completed their
flotation, when the July Revolution broke out quite suddenly
and unexpectedly in 1830, with the result that Charles X
lost his throne, and the House of Rothschild, with its large
holdings of Rentes, which had suddenly fallen enormously
in value, was faced with a serious crisis. The five brothers,
however, courageously sel about the task of saving the
existence of this World Louse.

At this point the story as contained in the second volume
begins.


/ Has Rowe (ade %


CHAPTER I
Weathering the Crises of 1880


Tue sudden outbreak of the Paris Revolution of 18380,
affecting, as it did, the whole of Europe, had placed
the House of Rothschild in an exceedingly dangerous
position. It required the active intervention of the
English branch, as being the least affected, to save
the situation. Solomon had hastened to Paris from
Vienna, and he and James were staying together at
the actual secne of action. The most important task,
that of endeavouring to maintain peace, had to be left
to them. It was essential that Austria and France,
whose large loans the brothers Rothschild had just
irrevocably committed themselves to taking over, should
be induced, in spite of the conditions in the French
capital, to maintain peace, in order that the large
quantity of loan certificates still lying in the Rothschild
safes should rise in value and circulate again amongst
the public. The brothers naturally endeavoured, where-
ever possible, to relieve themselves of responsibilities
which had become onerous in the depressed condition
of the market. A suitable occasion arose in connection
with thei: business with Prussia, where the last trans-
action, the conversion of the sterling loan of 1818,:
negotiated by the Prussian financial representative,
Rother, was not to be concluded until the 8th October,
1882. This was a case where they could set to work to
secure the cancellation of a deal which could only have
been profitable under really favourable conditions,
and in the actual circumstances was bound to result
in loss, owing to the impossibility of pl&cing public
securitieg on any of the markets of Kurope. Nathan
accordingly decided that it was essential that he should
recover his freedom of action in that quarter. With
me end in view, he determined, without letting Berlin
I 1


2 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


know what was in his mind, to secure the goodwill of
the Prussian Treasury officials by meeting them in
an important matter, as a special mark of his confidence.
In connection with the loans concluded in 1818 and
1822 with the House of Rothschild, Prussia had de-
posited securities* with the London bank in the form
of mortgage deeds and debentures, which Nathan was
not required to return until many years later, when the
amortisation of the debt had proceeded according to
plan. Nathan returned these in September 1830, per-
fectly realising that at a time when nobody would
accept them, the certificates did not constitute a particu-
larly valuable security, while Berlin would be favourably
impressed by Nathan’s returning them so soon, and
long before he was obliged to do so. His action produced
the desired effect. Rother, who was President of the
Seehandlung Bank, wrote to his King in great enthusiasm
saying, “* It is only the great confidence which Rothschild
feels in the Institute, which Your Prussian Majesty has
entrusted to me, that has led the banker to take this
step.” Rother did not miss this opportunity of indicating
to his sovercign that he had himself rendered a valuable
service. He emphasised the fact that Nathan’s action
was “all the more praiseworthy, as showing a special
desire to be accommodating, having regard to the
critical nature of the general situation.”* But Rother
was soon to perceive why Nathan had been so friendly
and obliging ; for, towards the end of November, 1830,
Solomon’s son Anselm came to Berlin on Nathan’s
behalf, in order, if possible, to secure the complete
cancellation, or at any rate the substantial modifi-
cation, of tlge conversion agreement concluded with the
Prussian Government on the 25th February, 1880.
Although the ground had been well prepared, it was
impossible for Rother, after taking so much credit with
his sovercignyfor the satisfactory conclusion of the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 3


agreement, suddenly to suggest that it should be
cancelled. For weeks he discussed the matter with
Anselm, who brought all his powers of persuasion to
bear to induce Rother to accept the Rothschilds’ pro-
posal. In mid-January Rother reported on the matter
to his sovereign,‘ pointing out that the banking firm
of Nathan Rothschild in London had been placed in an
unfavourable position, through recent political events,
with regard to the agreement which had been concluded
in much more auspicious circumstances. ‘In conse-
quence of the financial stringency from which the whole
of Europe is suffering,” wrote Rother, ‘‘ Baron Anselm,
who is still here with full powers to act on behalf of the
firm, has been putting forward with growing insistence
various proposals for the partial cancellation, or modi-
fication, of the terms of the agreement made here on
the 25th February, 1830. In view of the circumstances,
however, there can be no question of the complete or
partiai cancellation of the contract, such as the firm
desires, and I believe that in the course of our written
and verbal negotiations of the last month I have
succeeded in persuading Baron von Rothschild that
such a procedure would not be consonant with the
honour o" his House.”

These were fine words, but in his heart Rother had
already accepted the Rothschilds’ point of view and
their proposals, which amounted to leaving a balance
of £1,850,000 of 5 per cent. securities unredeemed,
and postponing to a later date their conversion to
a 4 per cent. basis. Rothe? followed this emphatic
statement with an entirely contrary recommendation,
contriving so to gild the pill for his sovcreigg as to make
it seem a positive advantage for Prussia not to take
her stand upon the letter of the contract.

“It is desirable,” Rother further reported to his
royal master, “‘ that these proposals should, if possible,


4 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


be accepted, since, in view of such future ‘financial
transactions as are under present conditions inevitable,
it appears to me to be of the utmost importance to
Your Royal Majesty’s finances that the Rothschild
business firm should be granted every possible assistance
that is consistent with the credit of the State ; and the
conversion operation under discussion would obviously
involve the firm in such heavy loss as to produce a
state of acute tension. If Nathan Meyer von Rothschild’s
firm were to be.compelled strictly to observe the dates
laid down in the contract, in spite of the unfavourable
conditions now obtaining, it would necessarily endeavour
to sell the new 4 per cent. bonds at any price in all
markets, and thereby deal a severe blow to our public
credit. Our experience has taught us that financial
transactions in which the von Rothschild firm do not
act as intermediaries, but as opponents, are apt to fall
through ; and schemes entered into with men of no
substance, such as we unfortunately find on our Bourse
here, result in nothing. According to an approximate,
and certainly not exaggerated estimate, the House of
Rothschild has failed to place £1,934,400 of the new
4 per cent. loan. This is now quoted at 79.5, as against
the contract price of 98.5, so that the firm stands to
lose 19 per cent., or about 2,572,752 reichsthaler. This
does not take into account the fact that some of the
joint underwriters of these 4 per cent. debentures here
and abroad, having suffered bankruptcy, are unable
to take them up, whilst others, including business men
of substance, are refusing“*to accept them, now that they
have fallen sec much in value, thus involving a further
loss of at legst 500,000 reichsthaler to the von Roths-
childs, so that the family will have to reconcile them-
selves to a diminution of their wealth by thret million
thaler on this one transaction alone, unless’ business in
public securities revives—a possibility which appears


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 5


to be exceedingly remote in view of the growing general
uncertainty.

“The House of Rothschild, or rather its principal
negotiator, Baron Solomon von Rothschild of Vienna,
really did regard this business (at the time) simply as a
matter of honour, as, even if things had gone as well
as they possibly could, there was no profit to be made
out of them. I cannot but regret that, as a result of
the concessions which he made, this execllent man
should now have to suffer the reproaches of most of the
members of his family.”

Thus, in spite of his opening words, Rother supported
the Rothschilds’ request, as he feared a “ damaging
breach ” with the firm. King Frederick William, who
had unqualified confidence in Rother, and understood
nothing about financial matters, concurred in_ his
recommendation. Anselm Rothschild perceived that
there was reason to hope for far-reaching concessions,
and suddenly increased his demands accordingly. He
was now unwilling to accept. any of the restrictions to
which Rother had wished to subject his proposals ;
and he actually began to modify some of his first pro-
posals in his own favour, this being attributable to the
influence of Nathan, who had not entirely approved
of the matter being left to the youthful Anselm, who
was then only twenty-seven years old; and at the
beginning of March he sent Carl Rothschild, who was
staying at Frankfort, to his assistance in Berlin. Rother
was now exposcd to the joint attack of a senior and a
junior Rothschild, and their persistence was gradually
reducing the fortress to a state where it was ready to
capitulate. b

At thgsamce time, in order to support his brother and
his nephew, in their arduous struggles in the interests
of the firm, Meyer Amschel wrote from Frankfort to
the Prussian Finance Minister, Count Lottum': “I


6 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


hope that Finance Minister von Motz, of blessed memory,
who knew me, gave Your Honour a not wholly un;
favourable impression of me; and I hope that, never
having had the opportunity of direct personal com-
munication with Your Honour, your correspondence
with my firm here and your other relations with them
will have afforded adequate proof of my true manner
of thinking. Your Excellency will be aware that since
we have enjoyed the privilege and good fortune of
entering into henourable business relationship with the
Prussian Government our efforts have been tirelessly
directed to devoting to it our best services and our whole
possessions, uninfluenced by any private considerations.
Though the most recent transaction has, by reason of
the violent events that have shattered peace and order
in many parts of Kurope to their foundations, failed as
yet to lead to a successful issuc, so that we have to
suffer not mercly the disappointment of failing to carry
through an operation, but also have to bear a con-
siderable loss, yet we arc ble to rest in the firm con-
viction that we can face God and the world as honourable
people as far as our business methods are concerned.
The decision in this, our just cause, which has been
exhaustively discussed by my brother and nephew, is,
according to their letters, soon to be taken. In taking
the liberty to submit my request that the scttlement of
this matter may be expedited, I would excuse myself
to Your Exeellency on the ground of the prevailing
unsettled conditions, which involve me in innumerable
tasks, to attcnd to all of which is difficult and almost
impossible to .ne, in view of my age and failing health.
I am therefnre exceedingly desirous for the speedy re-
turn of iny brother Carl, who has obeyed the urgent
s ammons to go to Berlin. I regard him as my right-hand
man, and find it hard to be without him. I would there-
fore submissively beg Your Excellency, so far as in


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 7


your power lies, most kindly to assist in carrying out
he wishes which I have expressed ; I cherish the firm
onviction that the settlement of our business will be
effected in such a manner as is to be expected of the
just and loyal nature of the Prussian Government. . . .”

In consequence of this letter and the constant efforts
made by the two Rothschilds at Berlin, Rother finally
decided to report to his sovereign that the alleviations
previously granted by the King at his suggestion did
not appear to be adequate. “‘ They make such a point,”
wrote Rother, “of the risks to which they would be
exposed in carrying out the contract of the 25th
February, 1830, and of the loss which they would
probably suffer even under the modified terms, and they
find that they are so hampered in all their financial
dealings, by the prejudicial reactions resulting from it,
that they are aiming at securing complete relief from
the contract, and the definite fixing of the sum which
they shall be called upon to sacrifice in return.” The
brothers were offering to pay a fixed sum of money’ as
compensation, provided that they could be entirely
liberated from the obligations of the contract, though
on the understanding that they should be permitted
‘immediatvly to take up the business again, “ if cir-
#umstances should take a sufficiently favourable turn
to make such a course of action appear desirable to
them.” Rother advised the King to accept these further
demands of the Rothschilds. “ It is only just,”’ he wrote,
“not to demand greater sacrifices from this firm than
is absolutely necessary in order to achicve the advan-
tages which the State expected to achicve through the
conversion transaction.” ‘

He also suggested that it would not be an easy matter
to force@the House of Rothschild to carry out their
obligations under the contract if they should obstinately
refuse to do so, notwithstanding the damage to their


8 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


business prestige. Moreover, such a struggle would
last a long time, and would bring discredit upon the
country’s financial administration. He therefore recom-
mended that all the Rothschilds’ demands should be
agreed to, but suggested that it should be made a con-
dition of any new agreement that their offer should be
accepted only if they undertook to participate in a further
loan transaction, subject to conditions which should be
discussed, and which should be adjusted to the prevail-
ing state of affairs. It is true that Rother fully realised
that such a loan transaction could be carried through
only under entirely different conditions. “ Recent
political events,” he wrote to the King," “and the
financial stringency prevailing in all great European
States, make it almost impossible at present to obtain
substantial sums on loan by the methods adopted
hitherto. ... Through the recent French loan of January
1830, and the conversion from 5 to 4 per cent. of the
Prussian debt contracted in 1818, in which latter trans-
action they associated a number of other banking firms
with themselves, involving them in enormous losses,
the von Rothschild banks have entircly lost their credit
in transactions of this kind. They could not now find
anybody to associate themselves with them in sucn a
transaction, and although their wealth, even after losses
estimated at 17,000,000 gulden, is still very consider-
able, they lack the cash necessary for transactions of
this kind, since their property, which consists of bonds
of all the Kuropean States, cannot at present be turned
into money on any Bourse. The Rothschild banks are
therefore no-r refusing to take over any large loans
direct, secking, as in the case of Austria, to deal with
them on a commission basis, and while they will make
advances on account, they procecd to sell tke newly
created bonds at excecdingly low prices, thus damaging


the Statgé concerned.”


t
t


FREDERICK WILLEAM


ut


or


itl


SSLA


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 9


Nevertheless, Rother meant to try to carry through
a new transaction with the Rothschild bank, involving
an amount of several million thaler,’ in return for bills
on the Prussian Treasury running over a period of
years. As he himself states, he wished, in spite of all
his misgivings, again to deal exclusively with the Roths-
child banks, since in his opinion the Berlin banks were
“not strong enough to carry through such big trans-
actions.”’ This solution pleased the Rothschilds exceed-
ingly. Whilst they were yct unable definitely to bind
themselves to such an obligation, as they realised that
their business was suffering from temporary embarrass-
ment. they did not say no; in order to keep the matter
secrct, they referred Rother to one of the other
brothers, namely, Solomon in Vienna. They said that he
would have the fina) decision in this new transaction.
There was the possibility that conditions might in:prove
in the meantime, in which case it would be exceedingly
pleasant vw carry through an important deal with the
State of Prussia. They were genuinely grateful to
Rother. Through his decisive influence with the King
he was worth his weight in gold to them. Without the
Rothschilds having to bind themselves definitely to
garry out the new transaction, the Ning agreed to every-
thing.’ The contract of the 25th February, 1830, was
cancelled on the payment of the penalty mentioned
above, and Rother was given a free hand and _ plein
pouvoir to conclude « new agreement for advances
with the Rothschilds, when it should be judged that a
suitable time had come. Thanks to Rother’s powerful
support, Nathan’s plan of relieving the firm in that
direction had suecceded. This relicf was very substantial,
and with regard to the Prussian Government's wish for
further transactions, the Rothschilds really did mean,
Bs soon as they saw their way clear, to apply any free


bash to that purpose. They would appear to be showing
k


10 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


their gratitude in a practical way, and would, at the
same time, be able to do a profitable bit of business.

The news of these events came as a great relief also
to James Rothschild, who was struggling in Paris to
maintain peace; he was at the storm-centre, and the
Rentes, which had fallen so sharply after the July
revolution, and of which his firm held such a large
quantity, were still suffering from the internal and
external political dangers that threatened the new
throne. Up to the present things had gone quite well.
Practically all countries, including Austria, had
acquiesced in recognising the new King. The Tsar had
held aloof longest ; but the danger of military interven-
tion by Europe, openly directed against Philippe’s
usurpation of the throne, had been averted.

Baron von Prokesch wrote in his diary" on the 17th
December, 1830 : “ It is all now a question of ways and
means, and what Rothschild says gocs, but he won’t
give any money for war.” When Rentes began again to
rise a little, the political situation again became dis-
turbed, as the Paris Revolution had affected Italy.
In the Papal States, and in the small States of Central
Italy, popular indignation broke out against the in-
tolerant and inquisitorial suppression vf all liberal
sentiment. Karly in February the Duke of Modena was
driven from his country ; the end’ of the temporal power
of the Pope was proclaimed at Bologna; and even
Maric Louise was forced to flee from her pleasant retreat
at Parma. The exiled monarchs successfully begged
Metternich for military assistance from Austria, while
the rebels looked to France for help. They failed, how-
ever, to secure more than platonic support in that
quarter. Although France indulged in emphatic diplo-
matic threats, Louis Philippe was secretly e.:ceedingly
averse from entcring upon hostilities whioh would have
brought him into conflict with one of the great Powers,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 11


which had only just recognised him. James Rothschild
supported him to the utmost of his powers in his efforts
to avoid such a contretemps. He remained on guard in
Paris, feeling the pulses of the King and his Ministers,
and sent his brothers and nephews in all quarters of
the globe his terse, characteristic reports of the political
condition of affairs.

“ Rentes stood at 59.25," he wrote, on the 14th
February, 1831, just after news of the risings at Modena
and Bologna had reached Paris.:: ‘I am_ satisfied,
since I find Ministers all for peace, and I hope that
matters will come right. The King wants peace. . .
I know that when trouble broke out in Italy, Marshal
Soult wanted to take up a position on the frontier, but
the King was so much opposed to this that he never
mentioned the matter again ; even if Austria had inter-
vened in the Modena affair, nothing would have happened,
for it is rcalised that Austria would have been perfectly
right in doing so, as he (Louis Philippe) is too weak. No
one wants anything but peace, whatever they say ; we
are tenselv awaiting news from Italy, as we have none.”

That was what James always hungered after—news
-——and to get it earlier than anybody clse. This was
particularly important just now, when one had to
estimate the influence upon the Bourse of any possible
military intervention by Austria in Italy.

“ We are free from worry just now,” James wrote two
days later,'* to his brother Solomon, who had returned
to Vienna, “‘ but it is not easy to judge what things
will look like this evening, although everything seems
settling down, and it is to be hoped that we shall be at
peace again. It seems that things are not so bad in Italy.
I beg you, my dear Solomon, if Austria should decide
to intervehe with regard to the Papacy, to let me know
at once, as such action is certain to react unfavourably
upon Rentes ; the War Minister told me yesterday that


12 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


it would be very serious if that were to happen. Such
an event might have grave consequences.”

Solomon carefully extracted these sentences from his
brother’s letter, to show them to Metternich, so that,
in considering the question of intervention in Italy, the
Chancellor should realise that such action would produce
@ menacing reaction in France. The Rothschilds’ inter-
ests were bound up with those of the Bourse in the
elimination of any new inflammable material, so that
it was natural that they should view with dismay the
appearance of a new bone of contention in Italy that
appeared likely to endanger the peace hitherto main-
tained, contrary to Metternich’s expectations. Yet they
could not fail to appreciate the fact that Metternich’s
inveterate hatred of everything that was revolutionary,
or opposed to the principle of legitimacy, was a more
powerful factor than their influence. Disregarding
France’s threats, Metternich sent Austrian troops across
the Po to march against the rebels. This naturally
produced a panic in London and Paris. Nathan in
England, who had latterly been constantly suffering
from illness, took a much more serious view of the
situation. He had no regard for the Paris Ministers, least
of all for the Prime Minister Laffitte, the ruined banker,
who had the hardihood to guide the financial destinies
of a kingdyum like France, after having signally failed
to manage his own affairs. Ife expressed himself freely
in a letter to his brother.

* Quotations have weakened because of a rumour
on the Stock Exchange that France has declared war
on Austria. I was with (name illegible) this evening,
and he sayl, ‘ Who can trust the French ? They change
every day.’ Then I went to Bilow, and_he said:
‘Rothschild, J believe your brother in Paris is being
misled, for the King and his Ministers never keep their
word ; they change every day. They write to Talleyrand*


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 18


here. Prussia and Russia write in a friendly way, and
do not want war; the French, however, must decide
for war. ... They write this unpleasant letter to
Talleyrand, who is afraid to show it, and says he hasn’t
had a letter.

“In fine, they will probably carry on with intrigues
until they are ready to declare war. I maintain that it
is almost impossible to keep the peace unless these
people destroy one another in their own country, and
Laffitte, who no longer has influcnce, falls from power.
Ouvrard’ has had considcrable purchases made on his
account ; we shall probably have better news from
Paris to-morrow.

““ Herries here says that Peel** will certainly be asked
to join the Ministry, that Wellington will become
Foreign Minister, and that, unless France gives way, he
is convinced that the British Army will go to Germany.

“It would be as well for you to tell the King that he
must hold himself aloof, and not trifle with England,
for she is not to be trifled with. I shall go and see Talley-
rand to-morrow. England has no faith in your Ministers,
who want nothing but revolutions, in which old
Lafayette, and I know not who else, assists. Your
King and his Ministers have only to show that they
don’t want war: they must not change their tone from
day to day. Go to the King and tell him that Peel,
Palmerston, und Wellington are coming into power.”

By these last words Nathan wished to convey to his
brother that the Tories would probably take the helm
again in England, and that that country, therefore,
was also unlikely to tolerate the support of revolution-
aries in Italy or elsewhere. James, however, had received
an exactly contrary report regarding developments in
England ftom an influential French quarter. He Was
assured that, on the contrary, the Liberal Prime Minister,
Grey, would remain in office with his Ministry, and


14 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


carry his Reform Bill. This view of the situation
naturally gave the Government in Paris more confidence,
and caused it to harden in its attitude towards the
conservative Powers, such as Austria. The Bourse,
sensitive as it was to any suggestion of war, immediately
reacted to the chilly atmosphcre.

** Rentes have fallen a lot to-day,” James reported
to Vienna," “‘ because there was a rumour that there
would be a Reform in England, and that a revolution
would break out there, and that Austria had declared
war; as a matter of fact, I believe that the fact that
eighty thousand more troops have been, or are to be,
called up, and that France adopts a milder tone with
Austria, indicates that Austria’s intervention will not
matter. England being in the position I have described,
people will say here all the more emphatically, ‘ We
trust Austria will not intervene.’ Saint Aulaire™ left
to-day with most pacific instructions. He is to tell the
revolutionaries that France is absolutely determined
that Italy shall remain as she is, and Sebastiani and
Laffitte are as friendly as they can possibly be. But
what is the good of talking if people avt the opposite.
Laffitte sent for me, together with Périer, Houman,
Aguado, and the Treasury officials to see whether
an operation could be arranged. He spcaks confidently
of peace ; if he wantcd war he would not have called us
together.”

Laffitte’s Ministry was, however, already at its last
gasp. The financiers had been called in to discuss the
idea of saving the French Treasury at the last moment
by the sale of State forests. Louis Philippe had, however,
already yithdrawn his confidence from the Prime
Minister, and secretly offered his portfolio to another
financier, Casimir Périer. The news which had leaked
out to those who were in the know had produced @
favourable reaction on the Bourse, as it had long lost


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 15


confidence in Laffitte. The name of Périer was as music
to the ears of James Rothschild. It meant the control
of affairs in France by a man who was both his personal
acquaintance and his intimate business friend, and with
whom he had for years discussed everything affecting
business or politics. Delighted at the excellent prospects
for the future, he hastened to let his family know
the good news by a special courier.


“My pEAR Brotners,” he wrote," ‘I am
sending a courier because Rentes have risen;
the three per cents. here closed at 53.20, because
it is generally stated that Périer will enter the
Ministry. I was talking to Périer this morning,
and he says he will accept office only on condition
that he, and not the King, is really First Minister.
He docs not want war. I said to him, ‘I am
convinced in my heart that the foreign Powers
are not thinking of attacking France, and that
our good Prince is doing all he can for peace . . .’
Novy, my dear Solomon, you must sce that if my
friend Périer takes office his Ministry is supported,
for thirty-two million people making a revolution
are a danger to all countries. ‘ And,’ Peérier said
to me, ‘if people want to do something for the
King they should try to give France a piece of
Belgium ; that would really strengthen the King’s
position, but he does not press for it.’ He said
to me, ‘ If the others will do something, we will
ketp peace for ever.’ And now, my dear Solomon,
I have been seeing Perier daily for six months,
and he said to me to-day, ‘ You are net making
efforts for France alone, but for the whole .of
Europe, and you can count on my never telling
you a lie.’ He is a very excellent fellow. ...

““ Now I tell you that when Perier is in the


16 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


saddle it depends on the Powers whether they
have war or not. ... I tell the whole world
that the Powers only want peace. The business
men are all in agreement about the loan here, and
I shall go with them, because I don’t want to be
out of it ; we can’t say yet what will happen, but
I am confident because of Périer, as, if we have
war, he will suffer losses on his properties and
factories ; for that reason I believe in peace. . . .

““T have had a long conversation with Soult
to-day ; he too says, ‘ We ask for nothing better
than to disarm as soon as all the armics cease
from threatcning us. . . .2 When we are certain
of peace abroad we shall have peace at home.
Péricr told me that he would keep the present
Chamber, and not dissolve it... for he can count
on this Chamber. It’s not certain yet about Périer,
for until I see a thing in the Moniteur I don’t
believe it.”


In Austria things certainly did not look like peace.
The revolutionary risings throughout the world so
terrified Metternich that, in spite of Austria’s financial
difficulties, he pressed more and more obstinately for
extensive military preparations. Count Kolowrat, the
most powerful man in the State after Metternich, and
in many respects his rival, had but a slight hope of
maintaining peace.*

It had been decided to raise three powerful armies in
Bohemia, Italy, and Inner Austria. For this, of course,
the necessary money had to be raised, and, although
it went egainst the grain with Solomon Rothschild to
provide the means for military preparations, he was
not prepared to remain outside when the Austrian
Treasury proccedcd to conclude an agreement with the
State bankers, of whom he, too, was one—as well as


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 17


Eskeles, Sina, and Geymiiller—for raising thirty-six
million gulden through the gradual sale of five per cent.
Metalliques. In any case, the possible gain on Exchange,
and the two per cent. commission on such a substantial
amount were not to be despised. .

Things certainly did not look like peace, for when
Austria ‘began to arm, France naturally followed suit.
It would have been difficult to say which was in the
worst condition financially, but they spent money
lavishly on their military preparations. In these cir-
cumstances it was particularly important to learn what
kind of Ministry was to be finally constituted in France.
James in Paris was still anxious about his friend Périer,
whose Ministry was not yet assured.


“My Derar Brotuer,” James wrote to
Solomon in fear and trembling on the 11th
March, 1831,* “cas the French Government is

e sending a couricr I am letting him take these
Nines to you to let you know that we have every
hore of obtaining a peace Ministry now.

‘“*T saw Pcrier at seven o’clock this morning.
He said to me, ‘ Nothing is settled yet, because
I must have a talk with the King and explain
to him that I will not take office as a war Minister
but as a peace Minister, so that we can get the
question of intervention properly settled; for
if Austria intervenes in the Rome affair I will
not go to war...’ On news arriving that
Modena had been occupicd by the Austrians
on the 6th, Sebastiani said to me, ‘ We shall
certainly maintain peuce.’ Now, if their inter-
vention had mattcred he could not hav® said

* thif to me. I must mention that eighty thousand
men have been called up, but this is more to. keep
the country quiet than in order to make war.


18 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


““T must admit that Périer gives me con-
fidence, for he has much to lose and is not, like
Laffitte, a ruined man... A lot will depend
upon the kind of attitude taken by Russia. My
fine dreams of tranquillity, peace, and everything
else, are vanishing, for Périer has just informed
me that Soult will not agree to his becoming
Premier, so that the Ministry cannot be formed
—if this is a fact, the alarmists will turn it to
account and make demonstrations in the streets,
and the whole world will believe in war. The
position is dreadful. I shall probably send you
a courier if anything new occurs.

“ Yours,
“* JAMES.”


James determined to throw all his influence into the
scales to place Péricr in the saddle. We spared no
effort. He went to the King himself, and urged him to
ask Peérier to join the Ministry. He pointed out that he
was exceptionally competent and industrious, that he
had pacific views, was well versed in financial matters,
and was devoted to his country.

Casimir Périer was actually called upon to form a
Ministry on the 18th March, 1831, and James had
the satisfaction of seeing his efforts crowned with
success. In the interests of his house he had to fight
for peace in Paris, as Solomon had to at Vienna, and the
appointment of Périer, if it did not imply final victory,
at any rate constituted a considerable succcss. He
immediately reported the good news to his brothers
and then turned his attention to the markets, observing
theiryeaction to this event.


“My Dear Brotner,” James r&ported in
this connection,” “ prices are, thahk God, begin-
ning to rise, and we closed at 58.70. I am of


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 19


opinion that the advance will continue, for we
have a peace Ministry which will make every
effort to maintain peace ; they will not interfere
in Italy, I hope. That is to say, we must contrive
with the Government here that the mob does not
get excited and say that we have sacrificed the
Italian people. If the Powers wish to maintain
peace, they must strengthen the hands of this
peaceful Ministry, and prove that they do not
mean to attack France. If it were only possible
for Russia and Austria to make a declaration
that Belgium shall remain independent and that
France will not be attacked, in order to allay
anxiety, for people here still believe that as soon
as Russia has finished with Poland, France will
be attacked.

‘** Now, my dear Solomon, you are in a better
position to judge, and I beg you to get this
matter cleared up. I went to the King and said
to him, ‘ My family and all my property are in
France, so that Iam not likely to mislead Your
Majesty or to lull vou into a false sense of security,
inducing you to believe that foreign Powers
want peace when they really intend war—and
on whose account? I am convinced that the
Powers wish to restore order in Italy, and feel
that they cannot stand by and do nothing, when
the house is being fired under them (sic). If
Your Majesty will take Péricr into the Ministry,
your credit will rise and everything will improve.’

“ Now, you see, the changes have been made.
The King is going to the Tuilcrics, and the
Ministry is to make a speech proclaimimg its
primciples. What impression this will make I
do not*know, but I believe it can only be a good
one if they have the strength of mind to go


20 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


through with it; and I see that they are calling
enough troops to Paris to frighten people.
Everything now depends upon the foreign Powers,
and that is where you must bring your influence
to bear; for if we do not preserve peace: no
Power will be able to maintain its eredit and
Rentes will not remain as firm as I hope. Casarus,
a natural son of Ouvrard, is sclling the Big Book
(Rentes which are entered in the Big Book of
the State), and is frightening everyone off
speculating on a rise, while any small drop makes
a most lamentable impression on people’s spirits.

“TI confess that I have great hope and con-
fidence in the present Ministry, for they have
strength and they want peace.”


Nathan also wrote from Mngland to say that that
country, in spite of the Ministry, which was Liberal and
favoured Reform, would not merely refuse to encourage
France in warlike undertakings, but would actually take
drastic action if she did.

“ Our Government,” Nathan wrote to Solomon,"
who in turn hastened to pass it on to Metternich, “‘ has
taken very strong measures against France, and these
should make a very good impression throughout Europe ;
that is to say, if France docs not remain quict, but takes
action against the other three Powers, we shall join the
three Powers, but if the other three Powers take action
against France, we shall join France.”

It appeared, therefore, that England, too, wished to .
maintain peace. The name of the new French Prime
Minister yas a guarantze for the maintenance of peace
throwBhout the world, and his first public statements in
the Chamber showed that he stood for the principle
of non-intervention. James sent a further enthusiastic
report to his brother about these statements in the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 21


Chamber. A French loan was again being discussed ;
James wanted to take part in it again, and the prospects
of the loan were essentially dependent on the general
political situation.


“My Dear Brotner,” he wrote on the 19th
March, 1831," ‘I am sending you a courier,
not for business reasons, but merely in order to
send to you, for Prince Metternich’s information,
the speeches of Ministers here, which must create
a profound impression both in England and in
Germany. You will sce that their principle is
peace and nothing but peace. Now if Prince
Metternich is really candid, they will do what
he wishes here, and I beg of you carefully to
consider with the Prince how important it is to
give the Government the strength it needs. We
are expecting a drop in prices here because the
bankers, with the former President du Conseil
at their head, are selling, because each of them
wants to take part in the new loan, and I believe
that as soon as the loan has been floated we shall
see a sharp rise; for we have a fricndly Prime
Minister ; and it cannot be said that the Minister
is deceiving you, for then he would be deceiving
the whole French nation, and would have to
offend the great majority of Frenchmen. ... I
have spoken to Werther» and Apponyi to-day ;
they are exceedingly pleased with Péricr’s speech,
and believe that their Governments will certainly
make every effort to strengthen the new Cabinet,
and Werther, who always looks on ¢he_ worst
side, is now quite optimistic. I therefore ask orfty
oné quystion—shall we maintain peace or not?
If France carries out what sire says, and having
regard to Périer’s character I am sure she will,


22


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


I do not see why we should not soon be disarm-
ing, and revert again to peaceful conditions. «

““T would therefore urgently beg you, my dear
Solomon, not to leave Prince Metternich any
peace as to the importance of strengthening the
Ministry here, and pester him to maintain peace,
which is so necessary to Europe, the Prince alone
having the power to maintain it. He knows you
and realises that you are a candid and honour-
able fellow, who always acts above board, and
that all the reports which I have sent you for
his information have proved to be well founded.

“Yesterday morning Sebastianin was in a
rage, and would not permit the Austrian inter-
vention. To-day, however, he is like a lamb
because the British Ambassador made him give
a categorical explanation of his warlike speech
of yesterday.

‘“* Believe me, my dear Solomon, your Prince
Metternich, who has alreidy achieved such
world-wide fame, can still further immortalise
himself if he maintains peace now; for all the
Chanccelleries act in accordance with his decisions.

“Write and tell me what the Prince’s present
opinion is, and if you can let me have anything
to communicate from him to Casimir Périer, so
much the better, since that greatly increases
and strengthens confidence.”


This all sounded very fine, but meanwhile the Austrian
troops had advanced in Italy. They were not content
to orcupyeModena and Parma, but marched on Bologna
irr pirsuit ct the Provisional Government of Modena.
Bologna had also revolted, and shaken off the Papal


yoke. Everyone hoped for assistance from France, but


this was not forthcoming ; the Austrian troops entered


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 28


Bologna, and the Papal rule was restored. This was
naturally very unpleasant, both for the Paris peace
Ministry, which stood for the principle of non-interven-
tion, and for James. James did everything to allay
the indignation which was flaming up in Paris, and to
prevent any hasty action being taken.


*“* As I have already written,’’ Jamcs reported
to his brother at Vienna,* ‘‘ people here were
furious when the Austrians entcred Bologna ;
it was not so much the occupation itself as
Maison’s** statements ; he has reported his con-
versations with the Prince, which, it would
appear, were excecdingly heatcd. It scems that
the Prince definitely said to him that they would
not occupy Bologna until they had Iearned the
result of the negotiations. That is what at first
made Sebastiani so furious ; however now, thank
God, everything is much better. Yesterday the
note was drafted which is to be sent to Austria.
It contained the phrase: ‘ évacuez immédiate-
ment Bologi:.’ Pozzo, Granville, and your humble
servant spoke to Périer, suggesting that Austria
would be offended, and regard the note as too
strong. It was read to the Cabinet, and they were
all opposed to that draft. A fresh draft was
made, which is very mild and excellent, but I
heard that it contained the words, “ évacuez
promptement. I saw Perier about it. The note
hasn’t been handed in yet. I shall sce that this
is left out.

_ “Tf the Prince will consider the position of the
Government here, I am confident that wesbgll
haye peace, for the Cabinet here is making every
effort to that end. Now, my dear Solomon, do
what you can to help; the Prince wil] see that I


24 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


have truly described Casimir Périer’s character.
If that excellent man remains in sound health,
he will act like Villéle, and entirely follow out his
methods, but he must have the Prince’s support.

“T hope that His Highness will be so gracious
as to give you morc favourable instructions, such
as I can use with reference both to Casimir
Périer and also to the King.

“Everything now depends, my dear brother,
upon ascertaining whether Austria is prepared
to say, ‘ Things are quict in Italy now: we are
evacuating Roman territory, and shall arrange
a conference in Rome to which all Ministers will
be invitcd, with a view to re-establishing Italy’s
position’; this will decide the question of peace
or war.

“ T beg of you to answer me on all these points,
for in eighteen days the loun comes up, and I
want to know where I stand.”


France continued to be platonicall:’ indignant about
the invasion of Italy. Now that the rebels had been
everywhere suppressed, James felt that if only Solomon
succeeded in persuading Metternich to excrcise greater
modcration, to withdraw his troops, and to settle the
questions in dispute, more particularly in the Vapal
Statcs, by means of a conference of ambassadors, much
would have been achieved; they would then have
reason to hope that the peace of Europe would not be
disturbed, at any rate through the Italian trouble.
But Italy was unfortunately not the only centre of
disturbance. Belgium, who after the July Revolution
had feecd herself from her unnatural union with Holland,
was also struggling to maintain her independence, and
hoping for French assistance. The Eastern Powers, led
by Austria and Russia, looked askance upon this


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 25


revolutionary movement too. Metternich would dearly
have liked to send troops into Belgium and Poland, as
he had donc into Italy ; but this would have made war
with France inevitable. England, who was not prepared
to see a country so close to her islands under the rule
of France or anybody else, proved a determining factor
in this matter.

The Conference of London, which dealt with the
question of Belgium’s independence and her King,
induced France to modify her demands with regard to
Belgium, and the Périer Ministry were more ready to
agree to these concessions. The French gave up their
suggestion of placing the son of Louis Philippe on the
throne of Belgium, and proceeded seriously to consider
Prince Leopold of Coburg, the candidate proposed by
England. However, Belgium would not concur in the
boundaries which had been fixed for her, or on the
question of Luxemburg. Metternich was pleased by
France’s moderation, and James and Solomon were no
less so. The Government in Paris had sent a note to
Austria which as James put it, ‘was happily
phrased ”; he expected that when it reached Vienna
Metternich would be pleased with it. James hoped that
the confidence which Metternich had in Casimir Périer
would be further justified, and that the Belgian affair
would pass over without seriously cndangcring peace.
Things certainly did not look well in Belgium. The news
from that country sent the 8 per cent. French Rentes
down to 46.70 on the Ist April, 1831, a fact which James
sadly reported to his brother Solomon. Paris wanted
the Austrians to evacuate Papal territory as speedily
as possible. The prospects of peace varied from day to
day, and James was anxiously watching thespalijjcal
barometgr, and the reactions of the scnsitive Bourse.
At the beginning of April reassuring news was received
from Italy and Belgium ; although it was not justified


26 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


by the facts, French Rentes immediately rose in value.


““T have just been with Périer,” James wrote
to his brother in Vienna, on the 9th April, 1831,"
*“‘ and he said to me, ‘I am sorry to see Rentes
rising so much, because things are still very
unsettled. Apponyi’s despatches could not be
more satisfactory, but one cannot help wishing
that the Austrian forces would evacuate Italian
territory as speedily as possible. Yes, my dear
Rothschild, we must show that there is confid-
ence in us abroad too ; come and see me to-morrow
morning at nine o’clock, and we will discuss the
matter at length. We desire and intend peace.
Do reassure Prince Metternich on this point.
The news from Belgium is not too good; they
are unwilling to accept the protocol of the 20th,
and would rather go to war. I will not stand aloof,
but will act with the Allies ; this question, which
may be an occasion for war, must be settled,
and we are doing our best.’ Now, my dear
Solomon, I believe that Rentes may rise to 60,
but they might fall again, because the situation
is absurd. The signatures for underwriting Rentes
at 100 per cent. are coming in strong, but how
can the total of 120 millions be reached ? ”


Metternich did, in fact, give way in Italy, because he
did not, after all, want to endanger Périer’s peace
Ministry, which might have been succeeded by a
Chauvinistic one. There was a powerful anti-war party
within Austria too. It enjoyed the support of the Arch-
duke Carl, as well as that of Mctternich’s opponent,
CoyossKoléwrat, Minister of the Interior, and of Baron
von Kiibeck, who kept pointing out the acute financial
distress resulting from this continued military expendi-
ture. The Austrian troops slowly evacuated the Papal


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 27


States, retiring on the Po, and only left small detach-
ments in occupation of Ancona and Bologna. Metternich
also was not uninfluenced by the fact that the consider-
able hopes which he had had of Russia were not being
realised. The Russians, against whom the Poles were
putting up a stiff fight, made hints to Prussia and
Austria in April 1831, that they should join in the
campaign against the Poles, and such was Mctternich’s
affection for the conservative Tsar that he was for a time
inclined to lend a sympathetic ear to these suggestions.
He tried to adumbrate this idca at a ministerial confer-
enee™ at which Count Kolowrat was present, but
Solomon Rothschild had already heard of this scheme,
and realised all the diplomatic complications involved.
Ife was on good terms with Count Kolowrat too ; now
that his intimate friend Metternich was contemplating
a line of action that did not fit in with his plans, he went
straight to Kolowrat to warn him against the Russian
adventure, and to beg him to use all his influence against
it at the conference, with the result that Kolowrat,
who wel onied any opportunity of opposing Metternich,
spoke cinphaticaliy against it. Metternich’s attitude at
this time led Baron von Kiibeck to make the following
remark about him” ; “ Prince Metternich is an absolute
weathereock, constantly vecring between Tatistchev
(Russian Anibassador at Vienna) and war, and Solomon
and peace.”

Belgium continued to be a centre of unrest. The
Belgian Congress refused to have anything to do with
the Luxemburg question, or any of the other provisions
of the protocol of the 20th January, 1831. A few hot
blooded orators were for throwing down the gauntlet
to the rest of Kurope, and the Dutch collected a nifemac-
ing arm on the northern frontier of Belgium. Louis
Philippe was represented at the Belgian Regency by a
Special envoy, General Belliard, and the reports which


28 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


he sent were disturbing. The effect was soon felt in
Paris.

** Rentes,” James wrote to Vienna on the
11th April, 1831,* “ had risen—the 8 per cents.
to 59 and the 5 per cents. to 89. Now they have
suddenly dropped, and the 8 per cents. stand
at 55.50 and the 5 per cents. at 84. This is all due
to Belgium, and Gencral Belliard, who has
returned from Brussels, having reported that the
Belgians are detcrmined to march into Luxem-
burg, to go to war with the whole world, and not
to give way on any point; their heads having
been turned largely by Poland’s attitude to
Russia.

“ Périer and Scbastiani both tell me that
they mean to stick to the Allies, and will not
let the Belgians foree them into war, but people
here are afraid that the Government may not
be strong enough to restrain the nation, and
that war may be the result.

“T must tell you, my dear Solomon, that I
immediately read out your letters to Perier,
Iest it should be said that Austria withdrew her
troops from Italy on receiving a note from
France ; and he was very pleased.”

The Belgian problem was still a difficulty, and was
to lead to furthcr dangerous crises and complications.
The French Ministry, howev er, felt that it was much
more secure, and it had the best possible reason for
satisfaction, for the 120 million loan, which had scarcely
seemed a practical proposition at 70, was actually being
issyoawer vl 50,


9


“The Company,” reported James," “ yester-
day took over the loan at 84 (this means 81.50
for the public) at the repeated requests of the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 29


Government. Most of the bankers find they can’t
make a profit, because they bear it in advance
at very low prices. But what does that matter
to us ? It all increases the power and popularity
of this present Ministry, especially of Casimir
Périer, who wants to keep the peace, and that
is our primary aim and object.

“The public did not consider the King’s
specch to the Chamber forecful enough, although
it is good as far as it gocs. More is expected of a
Royal speech. He would not use the specch
written by Perier, but delivered one of his own
compositions. He appears to sct great store by
making his own specches. ... The outlook
secms to be improving, as I have reason to hope
that the Belgians will give way, and with God’s
help everything will go through satisfactorily.”


James continued to write in an optimistic vein‘:
“ In their foreign policy I find that peace is the one aim
of the Government. Unfortunately the Polish affair is
somewhat going t.: the heads of the French, but it does
not affect Périer, whom 1 saw early to-day, and who was
absolutely delighted after yesterday’s mecting of the
Chamber, in which he carried his Electoral Law by a
majority of three hundred. The session is now closing,
and we shal. have a Grencral Election.”

Nathan was not so happy. He was troubled about
Belgium, about Portugal, where Don Miguel was giving
trouble, and about Grey’s Reform Bill. Ic, too, was
of opinion that everything would turn out all right,
but,” he said at the end of his report." “ unfortunately
every trivial political occurreree upscts tltehugjpess
communjty.””

Nevertheless, the Belgian problem secmed to be on
the verge of settling itsclf, through the choice of that


80 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


clever Prince, Leopold of Coburg. He was the candidate
favoured by England, and was looked on with more
favour by France since he had become the suitor of the
French King’s daughter. \3\ D4:


‘J am very pleased,” James wrote to Vienna
on the 2nd of June, 1881," ‘‘ that we can now
have the satisfaction of sending you better news.
On receipt of the good news from England,
Rentes opened at 60.70, and stood at about this
figure until the Bourse closed. There were several
buyers at the end of the day, and we were in-
formed that the Government had reccived news
by telegraph that Prince Leopold had been
elected king at one o’clock, by the same majority
as before. We had it put in the Temps, and the
article is so well written that it really has done a
great deal of good. ... It is generally believed
on the Bourse that the Belgian problem is
settled ; but from our own Ictters this is not
quite clear.”


The Eastern Powers, however—Austria, Prussia, and
Russia —still adhered to the King of Holland, who
refused to recognise the new Belgian kingdom of the
Coburgs, simply treating it as non-existent. Herein lay
the seeds of a first-class | Isuropean complication. Sevas-
tiani, the French Minister for Forcign Affairs, said to
Rothschild at this time, “Try to prevent Austria
from arming so openly and intensively. Everything seems
to be happening at once, as I have just had news that
the Empcror of Brazil has arrived at Cherbourg with
hig fami, having abdicated in favour of his son. Lfis
Empress is fe Nowing on a French frigate. Whe next
itcm will be to conquer Portugal and give her-a con-
stitution.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 81


The Brussels Deputies had travelled to London in
order to discuss the detailed conditions regarding the
assumption of the Government by their newly elected
King. They were still unwilling to recognise the decision
of the Conference, in accordance with which Luxemburg
and Limburg werc to be allotted to Holland. Nathan
Rothschild immediately called on the Delegates in
London, and learnt from them that they had instructions
to offer to Holland a monetary indemnity for leaving
these two territories to Belgium. For on this point the
Belgians refused to yield.

James in Paris took a wholly favourable view of the
situation. Ilis view was that the Coburger was not a
partisan, cither of England or of France, who would
gladly have Belgium in her pocket. The most important
thing, after all, was that the 3 per cent. Rentes stood
at 60.70 and the 5 per cents, at 89, i.e., somewhat higher.
His only anxiety was that the reinstated Duke of Modena,
who was carrying out an extreme policy of revenge and
reaction, should again become a source of trouble.


“ In any ease, everything is very uncertain,”
wrote Janes. “ Rentes are rising and falling
five points at a time, and we must keep our heads.
The Almighty will turn everything to a good
purpose. . . . Sebastiani said to me, * Belgium
is as good as scttled, and the world is furious with
me, because I mean to keep peace. Whoever
else may lose their heads, we will keep peace.
Iam a man of honour and I stick to what I say.
You may count on peace, if only Prince Metter-
nich will back us up, and prevent the Duke of
Modena from acting so stupidly, and“@xpczing
us, to attacks in the Chamber.’

“You see, my dear brether, he is absolutely
devoted to the cause of peace ; what I told you


32 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


yesterday I heard in strict confidence from the
Minister of Marine.”


In the end the Luxemburg question was shelved,
and the Belgian Delegates were persuaded to accept the
conditions proposed by Prince Leopold for taking over
the Government. He proceeded to Brussels in accord-
ance with his promise, although he could only count
on England and France, and was assured of the hostility
of the Eastern Powers and the King of Holland.

The course of events, which appeared to be converg-
ing on a satisfactory conclusion, was gratifying to
James as establishing the success of the Conservative
Ministry, “‘ my Ministry,” as he called it, when writing
confidentially to his brothers. The Chamber had just
been dissolved, and the country had heen asked to
express its opinion through an election. The result was
an unqualified success, and the new Chamber contained
a large majority in support of the Ministry.

“This result is all the more remarkable,” Count
Apponyi wrote to Metternich from Paris, “sinece the
Government refrain from making any attempt to
influence the electors. Baron Rothschild, qualified elector
in the Department Scine-ct-Oise, who controls fifteen
to twenty votes in respect of his property at Ferriéres,
told the Ministers that he was prepared to use his
influence with his people against the eleetion of Gcaeral
Lafayette. They thanked him for his offer, but asked
him to refrain from doing so. To act thus at a highly
critical moment implics no small faith in one’s lucky
star.’’**


¥ nave the satisfaction, my dear brother,’ James
wrote to Sol mon,** “ of being able to regard the course
of events much more calmly, according to* all the
information I receive, and I have every reason to hope


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 83


that the horizon, which is still dark, will shortly
brighten.”” Jamcs spoke in terms of the highest praise
of Périer’s Ministry, although he fully realised that the
Ministry had to contend with bitter foes at home, and
had to deal with passions, ambitions, and vanities.
Up to the present, however, he said that it had fought
loyally and worthily for general peace and harmony
amongst the Powers, which constituted the main
interests of the French nation and the whole of Europe.


“Our Ministry,” James wrote, “ will derive
great strength from the satisfactory solution
of the Belgian problem. Anarchy in Belgium
provided our anarchists with a ficld of operations
from which they could prepare the ruin of Franee ;
and now we sce Belgium scttling down and
organising herself... . Prince Leopold will soon
arrive to take possession of his throne. Peace
will be established in Belgium, and disorderly
elements will be firmly dealt. with. At the same
time we have to reckon with the fact that there
will be an opposition of 150 members, some of
them clever and cloquent, others full of ambition
and cunning. They will be bold and enterprising,
and, having the bencfit of unlimited freedom of
the Press, will be supported by their insolent
and perfidious journal. They will give the Ministry
no quarter, and we shall have to wait and see
how events will develop.”


James had every reason not to feel entircly reassured,
in spite of all the promising indications. 'The main crisis
in Belgium was still to come, and involved tit™de>ger
of a mighty conflict between the Eastern and Western

owers. King: Leopold’s arrival at Brussels was more
than the Dutch could stand, and on the 2nd August,


84 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


1881, they gave notice that the armistice was at an end,
and marched on Belgium with a strong force. Leopold,
who had only a small force at his disposal, appealed to
France and England for help, and French troops did
actually enter Belgium. This news naturally produced a
panic in Paris: ‘“‘ There were wild movements on the
Bourse to-day,” James reported ; “‘ 8 per cent. Rentes
closed at 53.20, and the 5 per cents. at 84.”’ The French
Ministry was to be reconstructed, and James was of
opinion that the new Ministry would be still stronger,
as the Chamber feared the ultra-liberals. ‘‘ I haven’t
quite got the courage,” James wrote to his brother,
** and I don’t want to run any risks, or I would buy... .
Good-bye, my dear brother, don’t worry, the world is
not going under. I feel satisfied that the Chamber
will get over its foolishness.”

To James's great satisfaction the rumours of a change
of Ministry came to nothing. Périer remained in office,
and succecded skilfully in allaying the indignation of
Austria and Prussia, from whom immediate military
intervention was gencrally feared, by the declaration
that the troops would be recalled homme as speedily as
possible. The Conference of London also intervened at
once, and with energy, on behalf of peace. As carly as
the 5th August, James wrote to say‘’ that the whole
world believed that the difficulties in Belgium would
speedily be ended by the strong and prompt meosurcs
that had been taken.


‘** Yesterday’s alarm on the Bourse,”’ he con-
tinued, “ that Prussia would send troops to the
assistance of the Dutch, has entirely passed, and,
tii calm reflection, one cannot but realise that
Prus: ia is, of all Powers, least in a position to
demand war, and has done most to -avoid it.
The King of Holland is much blamed, and people


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 85


find it almost impossible to believe that he would
take such a step without previously having
secured the promise of assistance from other
Powers. . . . It is, however, to be hoped that,
when the King of Holland sces the British Fleet
and the French Army, he will give way. We have
had no letter from London to-day, but we do not
doubt that the British Fleet has already sailed,
because the Ministry has written again from
here, asking that it should. ... In a few days we
shall see whether all the Powers desire peace as
keenly as they have all the time been saying. I
believe that Russia does not want peace, although
fortunately her Government is not in a position
to make war alone. When this matter is pcace-
fully over, we can hope for quict for some time,
as the Ministry will be strengthened ; and we
must hope that we shall have peace for a long
time.”


In point of fact, the Belgian problem did not give rise
to a Eurepean war. Prussia decided against intervention,
and Metternich wis restrained from military adventures
by the clements in his own country which were opposed
to such distant expeditions, by an outbreak of cholera
at Vienna in August, end last, but not least, by Solomon
Rothschiid’s constant admonitions against military
intervention. Joint action by France and England
had effectively checked the King of Holland, and the
final solution of the Luxemburg and other territorial
problems had becn deferred to a later date. For
many more years thesc constituted a bone of con-
tention between Belgium and Holland, and rested in a
crisis some years later, to which further reference will
be made. The most important. thing for the House of
Rothschild was that the gencral European war was


86 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


avoided, in spite of these, and any subsequent,
revolutionary disturbances.

The two States whose loans the brothers Rothschild
carricd in their portfolios did not become involved in
any warlike adventures on a large scale, and the small
military operations they undertook were soon over.

A beneficent tranquillity supervened, which allowed
Rentes, and other securities on the various European
Bourses, to recover. Thereby the principal danger to the
House of Rothschild was averted. Relieved of their
responsibilities in Prussia, holding a large mass of
appreciating securities in Vienna and Paris, and fecling
reassured as to the political future, at any rate as to the
next few years, they proceeded to look out for profitable
financial transactions, such as they had not been
venturing upon recently, owing to their straitened
financial resources, and the general uncertainty of the
political situation. Of the five brothers, James had
especially distinguished himsclf in the campaign after
the July revolution. Even at the most critical moments
he did not lose his head, and, as his letters prove, always
contrived to maintain a fairly optitcistic outlook. He
had always done what he could to assist in maintaining
peace, his methods displaying the most consummate
ingenuity. James had been positively everywhere. fe
was to be seen in the rooms of the King and of the
Ministers, in the political salons of the capital as -vell as
on the Bourse, and at the mectings of industrialists
and business men who controlled the economic life.
He was always the advocate of peace and diseretion.
The House of Rothschild as a whole had really reason
to be thankful to him at that time. It was largely due
to bis eXorts that the House was able to mect all the
duc claims ‘ade upon it, even at this difficult period.

At the beginning of the year 1882, the crisis in the
firm’s fortunes-—which began with the July revolution


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 37


—might be regarded as weathered. An important asset
contributing to this result had been the unique position
which James had so rapidly achieved at the Court of
the French King, and amongst those whom he had called
in to assist in the government. The French Prime
Minister often told James, before anyone else, of im-
portant measures of the French Government, and,
for instance, repeatedly informed him of the substance
of a Royal speech to the Chamber the day before it was
delivered.« The credit of the House of Rothschild had
suffered only temporarily ; the difficult times were now
over, and the reputation which the firm enjoyed for
solidity and financial power, even under the most
adverse conditions, was again secured throughput
Europe.


Cuaprer II


The Rothschild Loans in Relation to Home and Foreign
Politics, 1882-1835


Tue avoidance of a first-class European crisis, and the
relief afforded by the gradual recovery of Rentes, made it
possible for the House of Rothschild again gradually to
enter into loan transactions with States and private
individuals, subject, it is true, to special precautions and
limitations, As carly as the middle of May 1831, Solomon
and Carl Rothschild proceeded to put into effect the
arrangement for making advanccs to Prussia, which had
been promised when times should improve, on the cancel-
lation of the old agreement. A contract was centered into
for gradually providing an advance of 3,000,000 thaler,
and 590,000 were immediately paid to the Sechandlung
Bank on account. At that time Prussia was as sadly
in need of money as Austria, for although war did
not result, both States had embarked upon expensive
military preparations. This was especially true of
Austria. As early as February 1831, that country, instead
of realis} 1¢ an expected surplus, had already incurred a
deficit of 22,000,000 gulden, as the result of extra military
expenditure, and in the course of the year this sum
increased to, roughly, 85,000,000 gulden, in consequence
of the additional expenditure on armaments that Metter-
nich kept demanding. As Kiibeck, who sharply criticised
Metternich’s action, put it, there was no way out, except
by ‘the road to the king of financiers.’ The four banks,
under the leadership of the House of Rothschild, gave
Austria a loan of 30.000,000 gulden at a discount of 20 per
cent., but made it an express condition that they should be
relieved of any responsibility' in the event of™war. The
Rothschilds thereby achieved a double object : on the one
hand, they sechred a picce of busitiess which would be profit-
able under peace conditions, and, or the other hand, made
39


40 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


wise by their former experiences, they obtained an insur-
ance against the war policy of Metternich, which they
disliked ; for this clause would, on a declaration of war,
immediately deprive the Chancellor of the advantages of
the loan.
This, however, did not satisfy Metternich, and he
racked his brains for a means of obtaining ready moncy.
He remembered the 20,000,000 francs which in 1815 had
been sct aside out of the French war indemnity for the
purpose of building a German Federal fortress, and which
had been left on deposit with the brothers Rothschild at 34
per cent. interest. The money, however, belonged to the
whole German Fedcration, and not merely to its leading
members, Austria and Prussia. But Rothschild was a con-
fidential banker of these two States, and they both had an
interest in obtaining cash. They soon came to an arrange-
ment for taking the money into their own control, on the
pretext that, in spite of repeated demands, the Roths-
childs had not provided any security for the considerable
amount involved. It suddenly became apparent that
gencral conditions were such that the crec.i even of the
most firmly established businesses could be easily under-
mined, and that the Rothschilds could provide security
only in paper, and not in tangible effects, as they were not
possessed of any. The two “ administering ” States there-
fore felt that they had no alternative but to take the
money into their own control. There was one serious
difliculty about this ; they did not wish to say anything to
the Federal Diet about it, as objections might. be raised.
t was, therefore, arranged that the Rothschilds should
apparently keep control of the money as herctofore. The
Rothschilds understood the position perfectly, and ex-
ploited ft for o' taining favourable counter-conditions.
The transaction wes concluded ; Austria and Prussia each
received half the monev, while the Rothschilds remained
deltors to the Confederation, and Austria and Prussia


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 41


guaranteed the payment to Rothschild only if the neces-
sity should arise. In actual fact, it was not until the year
1846 that they repaid these moneys to the Fedcral
Treasury.

In addition to their transactions with Governments, the
House of Rothschild was receiving numcrous requests for
loans from private persons, especially the Vienna and
Frankfort branches. which received applications from the
higher German and Austrian nobility, so many of whom
were heavily in debt and living beyond their means.
Prominent amongst these were the requests of Prince
Paul Anton von KEsterhazy, Austrian Ambassador in
London, who was a great-grandson of Haydn's famous
patron, and notorious for his extravagant manner of lift.
We had inherited the expensive and magnificent passions
of his equally extravagant father, but he was the special
favourite of the Chancellor Metternich. As a result of his
enormous expenditure, which was the talk of the whole of
London, he fell more and more heavily into debt, and had
to have recourse to leans which, in the cond, seriously
imperiled ¢ven his colossal inheritance. In June 1831,
Metternich decided 16 approach Solomnon Rothschild, and
hegged him for advice regarding the financial settlement
of Ksterhazy’s affairs. He naturally meant that Rothsehild
should grant a further loan, and remarked that the
Prince’s brother-in-law, the Prince of Thurn and Taxis,
might stand security. Rothschild replicd to Metternich
that he felt that, having regard to the diseredited state
of the Ksterhazy family property, it would be exceedingly
difficult to negotiate a mortgage on it, in spite of the
guarantee of the Prince of Thurm and Taxis. “ My
humble advice would be,” Solomon wrote.t " that, as the
Prince of Thurn and Taxis seems to have the note desire
to lend a helping hand to his brother-in-law, he should
decide to maké the Joan himself... . My tirm at Frank-
fort-on-Main, which for many years has had the honour of


42 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


having dealings with the House of Thurn and Taxis, would
carry through this business with all the more enthusiasm
if His Highness should request us to do so, because it is
particularly devoted to all the parties interested.”

Although the Rothschilds always endeavoured to be of
service to important familics, this reply shows what
caution they exercised. They contrived, however, so to
treat those who applied to them that they felt. under an
obligation to the Ifouse, even when it did not fully meet
their wishes. This is well illustrated by the introductory
words in a letter written about this time by Prince
Esterhazy to Solomon Rothschild. ?

* As your friendly feelings to my Iouse are well-known
to me,” the letter ran, “and as you have accepted my
invitation to come and see me and have shown your
svimpathy in my financial affairs, and have also assured ine
of your readiness to assist me and my son with your
advice and help, Tcannot but fecl grateful to vou. You are
well known for your exceptional qualities, and your only
pleasure is to do good and be helpful, so that I cannot bul,
hope for the best.”

Rothsehild dealt with this letter, as far as Metternich
was concerned, by assuring the writer that nothing would
give him ercnter pleasure than to collaborate in the set lic:
ment of the Prince Esterhazy's affairs, with the approval!
of Prince Mciternich, Rothschild hardly ever did auy-
thing of this kind without first obtaining a definite state-
ment from Mettermech, as in that way he had a kind of
additional insurance if anvthing went wrong. As a gencral
ride, proposals sponsored by Metternich were always
favourably considered by the Rothschilds, for, while
they were rarely losers by any “ accommodation ™ they
pranted. they aaly always followed it up by ae a
tavour for themselves.

The Rothschilds had long been handicapped by the fact
tat, while as foreign Jews they were tolerated at Vienna


T ROURSE


PRANK EOE


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 43


and in the monarchy’s territories —and through their
riches and ingenuity they had won access even to the
highest cireles —yet they were subject to certain hamper-
ing restrictions imposed upon the Jews. The most serious
of these was that Jews were not allowed to acquire any
real property within Austria.

Solomon Rothschild was still living in the Hotel Zum
Romischen Waiser, although it is true that he and his
clerks had taken over the whole hotel. Besides, during the
erises of the July revolution they had been seriously
embarrassed by the fact that their enormous property con-
sisted almost entirely of paper securities, the value of
whieh was far too dependent upon the vagaries of the
Bourse, and upon war and rumours of war. Solomon pon-
dered on a way out of this dillieulty, and if was not long
before he approached Metternich with another request.
As was his practice in such cases, Solomon began by
enumerating the services which his TLouse had performed
for the State of Austria,


* Most Gr v.crous CuanxceLsor,'—- When Tis
Majesty, the Emperor, by his lei lers patent of the
year 1822. was pleased to elevate me and my
brothers to the estate of hereditary barons. we felt
that we could Hatter ourselves that we must,
situated as we were then, have given some proof
of our devotion to the sacred person of This
Majesty and the most noble House of Austria, in
order lo have deserved his gracious notice.

“As we look back upon the time that has since
clapsed, and call to mind the vericus serviecs which
in the intervening period we have had the good
fortune to be called upon to reuder to the Govern-
ment, we fecl that. without being tmimiodest, we
may oursclves hear witness to the fact that we have
not merely continued to be worthy of the fas ours


44:


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


so graciously conferred upon us in the past, but
have perhaps also earned some further claim upon
the grace of Tfis Majesty the Emperor.

“Your Highness, under whose benevolent aus-
pices it has mainly been our good fortune to
exercise our activities in His Majesty’s service, has
had a special opportunity of appreciating the value
of any services we may have rendcred. I shall there-
fore refrain from wearying you with a lengthy
repetition of facts, but shall confine myself to the
simple statement that, in all major operations
undertaken by the Treasury during this period for
establishing the credit of the State by measures
that were both wisely and boldly conceived by the
Treasury, the part played by us was always of
relatively great importance, since we applicd all
our resources to ensuring their success, The
Treasury is also well aware thai at the most diffi-
cult times [have always been rcudy to devote my
best efforts to [is Majesty's service, Finally, Your
Highness is alone in a position grrciously to esti-
mate the extent to which my Heuse may, apart
from its commercial activities, through its other
coun: etions, have been in the fortunate posifian to
render usciul services to the Imperial Govern-
ment, 2...

“The request that [am now venturing to make
on behalf of myself and my brothers is that we
should be most graciously permittcd to purchase
estates and other real property within the boun-
darics of the Austrian monarchy. Tam well aware
that this request is contrary to the provisions of the
law. Wi stujesty may, however, of his grace, make
execeplions in individual cases, and I feel that, if
Your Highness will represent to Wis Majesty in a
favoucaile light sich circumstances as may speak


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 45


in our favour, your kind intercession should
not fail to prevail upon the most benevolent
and most just of monarchs to grant our humble
petition.

“Our hope that this request may be granted is
strengthened by the fact that in putting it forward
we are not influenced by the ambition of achieving
greater prestige, our sole objcct being one that His
Majesty must regard as being perfectly legitimate,
namely, to convert part of the wealth with which a
kind providence has blessed us into a form in which
it will be remunerative whatever vicissitudes may
befall us, and whatever may be the fate of the rest
of our property, so that we may be able to leave at
least a part of it firmly secured to our successors,
We further desire, if His Majesty should grant our
request, to be permitted to create entailed estates
in respect of the properties to be purchased, these
to be heritable only in the direct male line of cach
of the five brothers of the Rothschild family... .
We ccel we should not altogether refrain from
pointing out that the Government will find the
granting of our humble request to be not wholly
inconsistent with its own advantage, sitice it can-
not regard with indifference the possibility of
attracting considerable capital sums to the country
which will beconie subject to taxation ; and it must
be keenly interested to sce landed property passing
into the hands of owners who command the means
... through the control of greater capital resources,
of producing beneficial effects upon trade and
industry.”


_ This request was entirely oppored to the enrrent law ;
it involved the making of another exception, which was
bound to provoke considerable dissatisfaction amongst


46 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


other Jews, for it was certainly not proposed to grant this
to them all. Metternich was strongly in favour of granting
it, as the Rothschilds proposed to acquire property in
Austria to the value of several million, and he felt that
they would be more under his control if they had such con-
siderable real property in the country, but it was neces-
sary first to consult several other departments. As was so
often the case, this request was pigeonholed, and in the
end it fell into the background owing to the cholera
epidemic, which reached Vienna at the beginning of
summer, and spread in an alarming way.

This discase, which was a particularly serious menace
in the condition of medical science at the time, had
approached the city from the north. The first cases
occurred in the middle of August, and produced a positive
panic among the ruling classes at Vienna, especially as the
Empceror’s personal pliysician, Stifft. who was the supreme
authority in health matters in the monarchy, had given
an assurance that the illness would never reach Vienna,
and did not admit that it was infectious! The helplessness
and ignorance of the doctors was absol. tely indescribable.
All doctors in the Government service were compelled,
against their convictions, to accept Stifft’s view.* But
when, to the discomfiture of the Tmpcror’s physician,
the first causes occurred at Vienna, the Imperial Family
were thrown into 1 state of coniplete panic. Most of tie
Imperial Princes fled to the provinces, while the Eniperor
and the rest of the Court eut themselves off completely at
Schénbrunn from the rest of the world. Count Kolowrat.
Metternich’s rival, took refuge at Tsehl.

Gentz’s intimate relations with the Rothschilds had
lately developed into Ghe habit of a daily conversation.
When, however, on the 14th August, after a visit. to his
beloved Fanny Elsster, he called on Solomon Rothschild
at the Roémische Kaiscr, as his custom ‘was, to discuss
politics and business, he was told that the Baron had left


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 47


Vienna the day before on account of the cholera, and had
left his manager, Goldschmidt, in charge.

Metternich alone showed on this occasion, as usual, that
he was not affected by panic, and that he was a man of
personal courage. He remained quietly in Vicnna, and
availed himself of the opportunity of getting everything
into his own hands, and stealing a march on Kolowrat.
Kolowrat’s flight had provoked the IEmpcror’s displeasure,
but it required an official letter from the Empcror to bring
him back to Schénbrunn. He immediately opposed
Mctternich’s policy again, asserting that the political
unrest and financial difficulties which Metternich occa-
sioned by his eternal military expenditure were, together
with the cholcra, proving the ruin of Austria, Under these
conditions it would have been untimely to have put for-
ward the Rothschild petition, and it therefore remained
in its pigeonhole.

During the next few months, business was more or less
at a standstill at Vienna, Carl Rothschild at Naples,
however, Was engaged in carrying through a loan trans-
action which was completely in harmony with Metter-
nich’s political syst m, and whieh is specially noteworthy,
having regard to the position of the borrower. The
spiritual Head of the Church, the Pope, was to follow the
example of so many monarchs and princes of Christendom
and contract a loan with the Jewish House of Rothschild
on behalf of the Papal States. The various risings in the
Papal States, which had followed upon the July revolu-
tion, and had necessitated the intervention of Austrian
troops in order to re-establish the temporal power of the
Church, compelled the Holy Sce to take precautions
against the repetition of such occurrences. This too called
for military expenditure, and Metternich advised it ; but
a great deal of money was required, and the Papal finances
were at that time, completely disorganised. It was impos-
sible further to increase the burdens of taxation upon a


48 THE IIOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


discontented people ; the only way was to have recourse
to a loan, and this was not an easy matter. Various
quarters were sounded, but always without success.
Thereupon, two ladies of the high nobility, who were
devoted to the IToly Father, were commissioned to find
means of obtaining such a loan. They were the Duchess
Bassano in Paris, and the Countess Stephanori in Rome.
On her list of financicrs to be called upon, the Duchess in
Paris found the name of Jamcs Rothschild, while the
Countess in Rome found that of Carl Rothschild of Naples,
whoatthattime was constantly travelling between Frank-
fort and Naples. ‘The Countess wrote to ask him to come
to Rome to discuss a financial matter of the highest import-
ance. Carl guessed what it was about ; he wanted first to
discuss the matter with his brother in Paris, and he also
preferred to conduct the first negotiations, if any, by letter,
in order to prepare the ground in advance. He therefore put
off his journcy to Rome, The Austrian Minister at Naples,
Count Lebzeltern, who was in constant personal touch with
Carl Rothschild, reported to Vienna that the Pope was
obviously in great financial diflicultics, and that Carl
Rothschild did not show any keen desire to lend his moncy
to the Pope. He had therefore been thinking of a way out
by which the business could be carried through by substi-
tuting for the Papal States, Naples, as being a more reliable
debtor. The kingdem of the two Sicilies had long wished to
acquire the principalities of Benevento and Ponte Corvo,
which belonged to the Papal States. Carl Rothschild pro-
posed that Naplcs should purchase these from the Pope,
and that he should advance the purchase price to the
State of Naples.

The Holy Sec, however, would not agree to this, on the
ground that it could not surrender any portion of the
territory of the Patrimonium Petri without breaking its
oaths. There followed a period of intenstve negotiations
between Carl Rothschild, Naples, and the Papal States;


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 49


but it was easy to see that Carl Rothschild was playing for
time, and waiting for the political situation in Kurope to
clear up, and for the return of generally peaceful con-
ditions.

“Ife shows,” observed Count Lebzeltcrn,: “ little in-
clination to make his firm solely responsible for a business
of such importance, and one that, in view of prevailing
conditions, involves so much risk.’? Metternich was dis-
mayed by this report. [fe was exceedingly anxious to pro-
vide the Pope with the means necessary to re-establish in
the rebellious provinces what Metternich called “ authority,
order, and peace.” The Chancellor therefore decided to
make a personal appeal ; he invited Solomon to his house,
and explained to him the importance which Austria at-
tached to the conclusion of the Papal lean. Metternich
begeed the banker to use his influence with his brothers,
expecially with the one at Naples, so that they might
make every possible effort to carry the matter through.
He also instructed Count Apponyi, in Paris, to take similar
steps with regard to James. James was, at the moment,
negotiatins with the Roman banker, Torlonia, who had
travelled co Paris, aed who had offered to take up half the
loan, since the Efouse of Rothschild would) not deal with
the whole amount. Apponyi went to the two bankers, and
made proposals in accordance with Metternich’s instrue-
tions. The find result was that the Pope received his loan
from the two bankers jointly.

James reported this to Apponyi with great delight.
“Irom the start,” he wrote,! “we were execedingly
anxious (empressés) to sce our name associated with the
flotation abroad of a loan for the Roman State. The fact
that Your Excellency sponsored it, ind that we were in-


3


‘formed that Austria was interested in its) conclusion,


merely served as a strong additional spur to us in our
efforts to carry ‘the matter through (embrussions chaude-


ment cette affaire). We are happy that we have sueceeded


50 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


in settling this matter, and we doubly congratulate our-
selves, as we are simultaneously carrying out the inten-
tions of His Holiness’s Government and the wishes of the
Austrian Government.”

Nevertheless, James had misgivings. He feared that: the
Papal States would not punctually carry out their obliga-
tions with regard to interest payments, and urged Austria
to exert pressure upon the Papal Government in this
direction.

“When we undertook this loan, thereby assuming a
very heavy responsibility to the public, who will associate
our name with this business, we naturally counted upon the
fact that the Holy See would appreciate the implications
of the responsibility we have undertaken, and the extent
of its responsibilities, and the degree to which its credit
will depend upon a strict and punctual performance of its
obligations. It would be absolutely impossible for it to
obtain any further eredits or any further assistance what-
ever abroad if it were to fail in any wey in carrying out its
obligations with the utmost punctuality.”

The reason why James was worried was because there
were rumours current that, in the case of former loans, the
Papal Government had, on occasion, suspended interest
payments. Jatucs emphasised the fact that punctual pay-
ments were the life-blood of credit, and that they alone
would make it possible in future, in a case of necessity. to
obtain new money. James further turncd the situation to
account by calling attention to the condition of his
Jewish co-rcligicnists in Roman territory, expressing a
hope that their conditions would be iniproved as a resiut
of the loan. He stated in conclusion that the fact that
Austria had given his House a kind of moral guarantee
that the Pay i Government would conscientiously observe
their obligations, had given him the confidence necessary
to unvite other capitalists to take part in thie scheme 5 and
he did not orit to convey the usual impression-—that an


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 51


arrangement which, after all, involved a substantial
profit for his firm, constituted a political favour for which
the Rothschilds were entitled to the gratitude of the
States concerned.

Solomon, who was still staying at Munich, which had
not yet been visited by the cholera, expressed his satisfac-
tion to Metternich at the conclusion of the arrangement.
* As Your Highness,” he wrote to the Chancellor,’ ‘“ has
shown so much interest in the welfare of the Roman State,
and has seen fit to concern yourself particularly for the
loan, it will give me especial satisfaction if the arrange-
ments work smoothly, now that the matter has been
settled, so that confidence, contentment, peace, and
tranquillity may be firmly established in the Roman
State.”

The Joan enabled the Papal Government to raise a small
army of a few thousand men for the better security of its
temporal power ; but the affair aroused considerable com-
ment in the Christian world, especially when Pope
Gregory XVI received Carl Rothschild in audience on the
10th Jasuary, 1832, conferred upon him the ribbon and
star of the newls founded Order of St. George, and per-
mittcd him to kiss his hand instead of his toc. And yet
Rothschild did not cven have himself baptised in return.
Baron von Kitheek noted these occurrences in his diary,
with some extrenicly malicious comments.’ The much-
dreaded wit, critic, and journalist, M. CG. Saphir, might
well have exerciscd his sharp tongue upon them. Saphir
had made his position impossible in most of the places
where he had lived and written; at Pesth, Berlin, and
Munich. He made so many enemies by his pointed and
satirical style of writing that he was forced, as a result of
assaults and unpleasantness of various kinds, to leave one
town after enother, and conseaicntly soon found himself
im material difficulties. He was an ugly little man with
sharp features. His bald head had but one wisp of flaming


52 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


red hair, which gave him a faunlike appearance. He
wrote with extraordinary facility, and his output was
considerable. He was insanely vain, and violently per-
secuted anyone who showed him ill-will. When he had
money he spent it recklessly in giving most magnificent
parties. Rothschild and Sina often footed the bill for such
entertainments, for the very good reason that it paid
better to have him as a “ dear” friend than as a cheap
enemy. The drain, however, grew irksome as time went on,
and Solomon Rothschild began to wonder how the fellow,
who was always short of money, could be provided for,
and at the same time muzzIed. He decided to try and
secure Saphir, the revolutionary satirist, for Metternich’s
cause, and to get a substantial income provided for him,
as a publicist writing in Metternich’s interest. When, to-
wards the end of 1831, Saphir again came to the banker,
and complained of his lack of funds, Rothsehild put this
proposition to him, and asked him: to state definitely
whether he would agree to the condition that he should
devote his talents to the good catse-~i.c., Metternich,
Saphir asked for a short time for consideration, and nest.
day sent a letter to Rothschild clearly outlining his posi-
tion: “ With reference to our conversation of yesterday,”
he wrotes' “there may be a certain advantage in iny
putting mv ideas into writing, as some of them, if put
verbally, might convey the suggestion of flattery. ... You
wish me to put forward a proposition. My reply is that
your general kuropean reputation for justice and fair
dealing is such that I feel that To can leave the whole
matter. and the settlement of all the conditions with full
confidence In your hands... . My literary efforts have
always been dirceted to che service of the good cause. Pos-
sihly Twas ot always right in my judement as to what
was the betier sause. [tf will naturally be a satisfaction to mc
to have more se ope for serving my country in accordance
with my 1 clings, ancl it will suit me perfectly te be placed


SVT


THE IITQUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 58


in a position in which I need no longer worry about con-
siderations with which a man writing for his living has so
often to concern himself, so that I can give free play to the
weapons of my wil and imagination, since wit and satire
are often effective where arguments fail. The eminent
gentleman and subtle observer of our times and manners
on whose behalf you were speaking (Metternich) will, with
his profound knowledge of men and affairs, appreciate
this point. [ am, therefore, prepared entirely to devote
myself with all my energy, and with the enthusiasm of a
man of honour, to the interests of the better cause... .
You are well able to judge of the value to be attached to
an established writer, and to give an opinion as to the
money which his services may justly command.”

Rothschild reported the result of these negotiations to
Mettermi hy and the latter was quite sympathetic to the
idea of sceuring for his own ends the man whose clever
and witty pen had so often been dipped in malice and
hatred.

“Your Highness,” Solomon Rothschild  reported,'*
“ean make of this ian what you please, and in my
opinion his youth and the grim necessity of carning a
living have been more responsible for his past faults than
malice itself, He was moved to tears when he heard Your
Highnes.’s kind opinion.

“I feel 1 must say that the request in Herr Sanhir’s
letter that the arrangement should be made to apply over
a certain period is not unreasonable ; in my opinion, two to
three years should be suficient to try the experiment, and
at the end of that time ene could farther consider how he
could best be made use of. If Your Highness should be
pleased to grant him a couple of thousand gulden a year,
so that he could draw five hundred. eulden quarterly, as
he has no means and his busauness involves a certain
amount of expenditure, I believe that he would not have
been acquired at too high a price, and he hiniself would. be


54 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


satisfied. If Your Ilighness is prepared favourably to con-
sider this suggestion I should be glad to have your decision
at an carly date, as, owing to the cholera, 1 cannot foresee
how long I shall still remain here [in Munieh].”

Metternich agreed to take Saphir into his service, and
proposed first to offer him fifteen hundred to two thousand
gulden for a year, on probation, Saphir asked that the
period should be extended to three years, and Rothschild
successfully supported his request. ‘Thus Saphir seerctly
entered the service of the Austrian Government, for the
matter was at first kept a secret betweenthe three persons
concerned. Ilis readers were certainly much astonished by
the changed note in Saphir’s writings, but Rothschild was
highly pleased with what he had done. He had achieved
a triple object : first, he had secured a substantial salary
for a period of some years for a fellow Jew with dan-
gerous gifts, who had been a constant drain on his
purse ; sccoudly, he could show Metternich that he had
gained a redoubtable writer for his cause ; and, thirdly,
he had secured himself against pe sible attacks in
that quarter, as he could reasonably count on Saphir’s
gratitude.

About this time Rothschild sueceeded in rendering
another important service a personal one, In 1831 thie
Chancellor had married his third wife, the beautiful and
vivacious Countess Melanie Zichy-Ferraris, whose family
were often cmibarrassed owing to their extravagance. The
Emperor Nicholas of Russia, who had known the Zichys
since the Congress of Vienna, lent her four hundred thous-
and franes, which he converted into a present on Metter
nich’s martiaye. Howes er, a special arrangement had had
tobe made, hich was carried through jointly by Roths-
ehild and Eskeles.¢ Solomon Rothsehild therehy carned
the gratitude of the Chanccllor’s wife, and be also loaded
her with presents aud flowers on every possible occasion.
It was thiough her chat the Jewish baron achieved: his


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 55


unique position in exclusive Viennese socicty. It was not
only at Vienna that the social rise of the Rothschilds was
so marked. Nathan was invited to the best houses
throughout England, and James’s quite exceptional posi-
tion at the Court of the new King, Louis Philippe, was
most clearly marked by the conferring upon him of the
Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour, the Knight’s Cross
of which he had held since 1828. The magnificent balls and
banquets which he gave to the leaders of socicty at his
splendid palace in Paris helped him to consolidate his
position. On one of these occasions an unpleasant incident
oceurred, which caused the heir to the throne, the Duke
of Orléans, to be quite unjustly annoyed with James
Rothschild. Whilst, with the help of England, Louis
Philippe was consolidating his position abroad, he was far
from being so successful with society in Paris, amongst
whom the legitimate nobility had a great deal of influence.
As Baron Hiigel, who was in Metternich’s confidence,
wrote from Paris, there was a kind of opposition of the
salons ; aid those families who had remained loyal to the
exiled Thing went so far as to carry on secret correspond-
ence with their sclatives who had left the country with
Charles X. These énigrés intrigued throughout the world,
and made special efforts to induce the Hastcrn Powers to
make war on Louis Philippe, in order to place Charles X
on the throne once more,

The legitimists in Paris made satirical remarks about
the people who swarmed about the new King and the heir
to the throne with a view to securing good jobs, and the
opposition paper, La Jode, published a drama @ clef, De
la Comédie de la Cour des Oiseaua. in which all these adven-
turers were represented as hens ta a farmyard, flocking
round the grand poulot, as the Duke of Orleans was called.
From this time onwards the hei to the throne was always
known by the nickname grand poulot, The Duke of
Orléans was present at an informal gathering in James


56 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothschild’s house. This gave an opportunity to a cer-
tain young Monsieur de Blancmenil, the son of an ardent
legitimist who would not go to Court, of saying to a
fellow-legitimist in a voice loud enough for the Duke of
Orléans to hear, “‘ Why, here comes the grand poulot ! ”
This apparently harmless remark was aimed at the close
connection between the new Royal House and the Jew
banker. It was overheard by adherents of the new régime,
and one of them came forward on behalf of the Prince.
Heated words ensued, and the Duke of Orléans at once
realised what was happening. 'T'wo of his adjutants went
to the young men to demand an explanation. They
assured the adjutants that they had no wish to offend
the Duke, and had not thought that he could overhear
their remarks, and the matter was then dropped ;'* but
the heir to the throne never went to James Rothschild’s
house again, in spite of all the efforts that Rothschild
made, and all the invitations he sent him.

Meanwhile, anxiety was still felt ove the Belgian pro-
blem, which was far from being finally settled. The ifde-
pendence of that State had not yet been recognised and
there was still reason to fear that warlixc complications
might arise. On account of the cholera, Solomon Roths-
child had not yet returned to Vienna, and his business
was being carried on by his confidential manager,
Leopold von Werthcimstein. Austria had, meanwhile,
issued a further loan of 50,000,000 gulden, in whieh the
Vienna branch ef the House of Rothschild participated.
Solomon wanted to travel from Munich to Paris via
Frankfort in order to take general stock there of the
position and undertakinps of the firm. He wanted te
bring his Paris brother sume cheerful news. He therefore
wrote to Metternich from Frankfort."

“Your Hig’ cess is aware that we have subscribed a
quarter of the last loan of 50,000,000, ‘and have also
purcliased sceuritics on the Bourse in order to maintain


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 57


the price of Metalliques, that we are carrying through
other important financial operations, and that we are
also negotiating new ones. As these are closely affected
by the course of political events, and I would like to see
my: brother happy and free from worry, I would humbly
beg Your Highness to be pleased to let my manager,
Leopold, know your opinion as to the present situation,
and whether the Austrian Government will recognise
Belgium, and allow the settlement to be ratified. I would
also regard it as a special mark of your favour if Your
Highness would have the kindness to honour me with
a few words in writing. They are sure to bring me great
peace and comfort. [am thinking of starting for Paris in
the immediate future, and am sending a member of the
firm there to-day, so that we may get Your Ilighness’s
gracious news as soon as possible, and without any fear
of letters being tampered with.

“To shall have the privilege of submitting to Your
Highness my most humble reports from Paris, and trust
that they may be of use to the Austrian Government.”

Meanwhile Nathan wrote from London to say that the
Reform Lill would he nassed, that it was hoped that the
Kastern Powers would ratify the agreement regarding
Belgium, and that, in his opinion, all public securities
would improve in the next three months."

On his arrival in Paris, Solomon had really good news
to report. He lad to make use of an amanucnsis, as he
suffered from severe rheumatism in the region of the
eves ; but this did not prevent him from thoroughly in-
vestigating the situation in Paris,

“ During my stay in Paris,” he wrote to Metternich,"
“ Thave seriously occupied myself with the study of the
internal condition of France, and have arrived at the
satisfactory conviction that the Government grows
stronger every’ day. In my opinion, the opposition in the
country consists only of certain newspapers, the kind of


58 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


opposition which is not to be taken seriously. All decent
people are supporting the present Ministry, and seeking
to maintain tranquillity ; the former kind of popular out-
break (émeutes) is out of date, and, however much and
however violently the opposition papers may write, they
will not be able to start them again. The spirit of good-
will is manifesting itself in the Chamber of Deputies. . . .
If only the Great Powers would send in their ratifications
of the Belgian affair, M. Périer would be able to state
publicly, ‘I wanted peace, and I can now show that I
have completed the work that ] began.’ Such a statement
would still further inerease the confidence which this
man inspires, and everything would then proceed satis-
factorily in the Chambers.

“The opposition in the Chamber of Deputies is purely
obstructionist in its tactics, partly because the Deputies
are afraid of being blamed when they return to their
Departments for not having effected enough economics,
and partly because there are amongst them a hundred to
a hundred and twenty people who. having no property
themselves, do not wish others to have any either, and
therefore press for economics and reductions.

“ Unless the Government should be disappointed with
regard to the Belgian affair, the Chambers can adjourn
in two or three months, and the Ministry can then deal
with the internal situation for twelve to fifteen months
without any Chambers, to great advantage. At the same
time, trade will expand in all directions, and we shall
have a firm and settled Government, such as we have
been accustomed to in the past. Such a happy consum-
mation, however, can be achieved only provided that the
specdy settlement of all points of dispute between
Belgium and Holland is assured... . There is confidence
in the pres: at Ministry ; it is, of course, unpleasant lo
have to admit that peace is dependent entirely upon a
single individual, but this will adjust itsclf in time, when


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 59


the necessary stability has been achieved. It is reassuring
in this connection to note that the King is absolutely
devoted to M. Péricr. Your Highness’s well-known judg-
ment is such that, on perusing this letter, you will be
able to appreciate how far the views I have expressed are
sound, and it will be a cause of great satisfaction to
me if I shall prove to have presented the position
adequately.”

Solomon deliberately painted things in rather rosy
colours, for the French Cabinet were, in point of fact,
actually considering a counter-move to the further inter-
vention of Austrian troops in the Papal State. The Papal
mereenarics who had been raised with Rothschild’s
money had failed to control the sporadic rising which
had broken out on the withdrawal of the Austrian troops,
and the Holy Father had been forced again to apply for
help to Count Radetzky, the Austrian commander in
Italy. It was not in the Icast gratifying to Metternich to
be called upon again to play the réle of Papal policeman,
but on the 28th January, 1832, the Austrians again
oceupicd Pologna. This was a serious blow to Périer’s
peace Ministry. All Périer’s enemies immediately pro-
tested that such action was an attack upon the honour
of France, and Péricr was forced, at any rate as a matter
of form, to make a display of armed force in the Papal
States, for, after all, the risings following upon the July
revolution hid all cointed on the support of liberty-
loving Franee. A French squadron accordingly sailed
into Ancona, and landed troops there to oceupy the
town and the citadel. Metternich strongly protested
against this action, but there was no serious intention,
cither in Paris or Vicnna, of making it a casus belli.
French troops were simply to remain at Ancona until the
Austrians had gvacuated the Papal States. The powder
Magazine nad very nearly been fired, but Metternich was
less anxious for war than usual. As he could not rely with


60 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


confidence on Prussia, or count with absolute certainty
upon Russia, which was so distant from a possible
theatre of war in the west, he might have been left to
make war alone. Nevertheless, the Rothschilds feared
that he might go to war; and Solomon and James con-
tinued their efforts in Paris to climinate this danger as
far as possible. They again did everything in their power
to stamp out the smouldering entbers, as is indicated by
a long and positively poetic effusion of Solomon’s, who
was particularly skilful at flattering the Chancellor.


“ Most EXCELLENT PRINCE !

“How rightly Your Highness appreciated my
feelings in favouring me with the letter containing
the clad news of the safe delivery of your most hon-
oured lady. No one could have heard the news of
this happy event with more pleasure than I, who
have so often witnessed the family happiness of
Your Tlighness, and who see tn this dear child the
confirmation of such tender and happy bonds.

“ May the dear Princess grow up in the likeness
of her gracious mother, and sweeten the harsh
labours of politics for Your Highness ; and may
you for a long period of years continue to see all
your wishes crowned with success, as you con-
tinue in the possession of the most lovable of
wives, and the most promising of children.

“ Your Highness knows my loyalty of heart and
my entire devotion too well to doubt the sincerity
of my feelings, or to regard this letter as other
than the expression of a loyal friend.

“ [should have liked ere thisto have allowed my-
selfithe privilege of sending Your Excellency a few
lines trom here, but unfortunately, my cyes have
been troubling me so much that I have been foreed
togiveupcven the most pleasant occupations. With


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 61


just pride I numbcr among them the privilege of
being allowed to correspond with Your Highness,
for when one has had the privilege, as I have, of
living so long in the ncighbourhood of the wisest
and most lovable of statesmen ; when one has, as
I have, been in a position to appreciate Your
Highness’s paternal disposition, one cannot but
be acutely sensible of the loss occasioned by being
deprived of this daily pleasure, and I must there-
fore seek such compensation as I ean in the episto-
lary correspondence which Your Highness has so
graciously permitted.

** Politics here are proceeding on the same lines
as ever. As Your Highness has so rightly observed,
Périer made a great mistake in his action at
Ancona; this is attributable not so much to a
lack of honour as to weakness. He felt that he had
to conciliate the opposition, and cxpected his
action to win some of them over to his side, but, as
is always the case with such half measures, he has
gaiiced nothing with the one party, and has lost
s‘anding to 2 certain extent with men of goodwill.
Vis intentions, however, arc honourable, and he
is concerned only for the maintenance of peace,
in which his own position is so closely involved.

* He hopes that he may continue to enjoy Your
High ness’s friendly and powerful support in his
endcavours. You occupy a great position, my dear
Prince, a position entirely worthy of your noble
character and of your benevolent intentions, for
it is only trough the exercise of your judgment
that stability can be maintained in Europe, as it
has hitherto been maintained, thanks only to Your
Highness.

** Continue therefore. i) your peaccful endeav-
ours, my dear Prince, and do not allow yourself


62


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


to be Ied astray by a mistake of Périer’s. . .
from the path of high and noble endeavour which
you have hitherto pursued. To Your Highness
alone is it granted to prevent the outbreak of all-
destroying war, and to extend the beneficent influ-
ence of peace over the whole of Europe. Continue
to carry out this lofty mission, for in your hands
lies the destiny of the world ! You would not, my
dear Prince, consider me capable of unworthy
flattery. and you may regard what I say as the
expression of an honourable man who has grown
erey in business. You are the one and only com-
petent statesman of our time. Be more and more
of a guide to Peéricr. Let him have the benefit of
your judgment and experienec. You know how to
appreciate the possession of real power. Pévicr
really has a hard row to hoe here ; it is hard for a
Minister to stand up against this unrestraint of the
Press, to find his most sceret plans published
before they are matured, and his most varefully
thought-out measures malicionsly attacked hy
poisonous pens. Nevertheless, we comfort our
selves with the hope that this nuisance will brin:
about its own destruction, for it has already tos!
its influence with the more decent pertion of th:
nation.

“ Lhave taken the liberty of having some sm
things, such as are so tastefully produced iii thus ,
country of fashion and frivolity, made for sour
gracious lady and her dear little Princess, as 2
small token of my affectionate feclings. May |
venture to ask that Your Highness will be my
eTacious intermeduary, so that I may hope to be
forgive a by your most gracious lady for my
liberty.’ :


The speetre of cholera appreciably spoilt the pleasure


VERIER


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 63


,of Solomon’s stay in Paris. He had fled to Munich from

Vienna on its account, and the mysterious discase had
now pursued him to Paris. During the beginning of April
1882 about thirty thousand people developed cholera in
the French eapital, and about half of these died of the
disease. Those elements which were hostile to the Gov-
ernment and to the King exploited the excitement
produced by the outbreak to cause fresh disturbances.
During the night all the street corners were placarded
with the following notice, which the astonished Parisians
read next day :*


© Tlow ro Conquer tuk CHOLERA EripeMic.

“ Take three hundred heads of members of the Paris
Chamber, particularly including those of Casimir Perier,
Sebastiani, d’Argout, Louis Philippe and his son ; roll
them over the Place de la Révolution, and the air of
Franee will be cleansed.

“A JULY SOLDIER.”


The Royal Family and the Ministry, however, dis-
plaved heroie courage on this occasion. The Duke of
Orleans and the Prime Minister even visited the cholera
Vielins in the hospital. This was to prove fatal to Perier,
who contracted the disease a few days after his visit fo
ihe hospital, and died. James and Solomon Rothschild
were mffeeted. not merely by the personal loss. for the
event wa’ of profound importance to their political and
financial schemes. ‘The brothers were overwhelmed with
terror of the frightful plague. Solomon took refuge in one
of his brother's country houses near Paris. a fact which
seriously limited his politienal activities and the scope of
reports to Metternich,

While Solomon and James were adjusting themselves
to the new position resulting from Pdvier's death, Nathan
in England was also expericneing atime of internal


64 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


political stress. Since March 1832, the Reform Bill,
which was so widely to extend the franchise and to
abolish ancient abuses, had been the centre of interest.
Lord Grey was determined to carry it, in spite of the
bitter opposition of the Upper House. This could only be
done through a mass creation of new peers, to which the
King refused to agree, with the result that the Prime
Minister resigned on the 9th May. The Conservative
Duke of Wellington, who was opposed to reform, was
indicated as the man to form the new Ministry, but
the country was passionately aroused in favour of
the measure. At this critical juncture we find Nathan
Rothschild again coming to the fore. On the 12th
May, 1832, when Wellington’s candidature was the
burning subject of the hour, he went to a friend of
the Duke’s, Mr. Arbuthnot, and poured out his heart
to him. Nathan feared that on the fall of Grey’s Liberal
Ministry, which in forcign affairs had always supported
France against the Eastern Powers, a Conservative
Ministry under Wellington would act with the latter, and
possibly give them a free hand against France, This
would have meant the outbreak of the much-dreaded
Continental war. Nathan, therefore, made every cffort to
bring Mr. Arbuthnot to his point of view, and to persuade
him to use his influence with Wellington in the interesis
of peace.


“My pear Duke,” Mr. Arbuthnot wrote,
“ Rothschild has been with me. He caine to tell
me that if you let it be known, as soou as you
mect Parliament. that, whatever may be your
own opinion of Reform, you arc resolved not to
disappoint expectations which are so greatly
raiscd, and that your determination also is to do
ye 1 ‘utmost to preserve the pcact of the world,
you will surmount all your diflicultics. He says


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 65


that among the monied men there is an alarm
lest there should be such an opposition to all
Reform as would cause commotions ; and he adds
that the foreign Ministers—he instanced Talley-
rand, Weissenburg, and Biilow—are in great
anxiety lest the King of Holland should be led to
expect such support from the new Government
as would lead to war.

‘‘W[e assured me that the general feeling was
that you would surmount your difficulties if men’s
minds were tranquillised as above stated, and if,
having the reins in your hand, you were resolved
to keep them.

““He is determined, he said, to keep up the
Funds to his utmost, and he is confident he will
succeed.”


It was, however, a false alarm, and Nathan’s interven-
tion became unnccessary; for the masses the name of
Wellington stood for the collapse of Reform ideas, and
the result was that a storm broke out throughout the
whole -ountry. such as put any possibility of a Welling-
ton Ministry out of the question. King Willian IV was
made personally aware of the bitter feelings of his
people, for mud was thrown at his carriage in the strects of
London. Reluctantly he was forced to yield to the will of
the people, and Grey’s Ministry was recalled to office,
whereby the passuge of the Reform Bill was assured. As
the Ministry remained in office, all fear of a change in the
trend of Britain's foreign policy vanished, and the danger
of war was averted. Nathan could again devote hiinself
to his business ; and he had once more shown himself
capable of dealing with a critical situation.

The Reform Bill was finally passed by the British Par-
liament on the 4th June, a fact which made a profound
ary aa throughout the world. Austria, too, had been


66 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


anxiously following the vicissitudes of western politics,
and Metternich, whose sentiments were very different
from those of the Rothschilds, felt the passage of the
Reform Bill as a personal defeat. But internal problems
soon diverted his attention, especially the eternal finan-
cial embarrassments of the State, The last Metallique
loan of 50,000,000, the interest of which was payable on
a metallic basis, had scarcely been issued when a further
loan was contemplated. Metternich sorely missed Solo-
mon Rothschild. It was impossible to discuss politics and
finance as comfortably with Leopold von Wertheimstein
as with his sympathetic, supple, and experienced friend,
Solomon. Wertheimstein faithfully reported to his master
in Paris what was happening at Vienna. He told him that
Sina and Geymiiller had latterly been selling Metalliques
to an alarming extent, and that he had misgivings as to
their maintaining their price, and was also thinking of
selling. IIe also reported to Solomon regarding Metter-
nich’s wishes for a further similas loan,

Solomon replied at length. His words constituted
practically a rebuke to Austria’s leading statesman :

“ That Sina and Geymiiller are “onstantly selling,” he
wrote, “is a matter of indifference to me. It is better that
these gentlemen should sell out now that we are still in
the month of June, so that the Metalliques will come to
be held more and more by solid people. ... What Ido not
regard with indifference, however, is that Austria should
issue a further Mctalliques loan during the year 1832,
which God forbid. You know that, taking the sum of our
holdings of Mctalliques at Frankfort, Paris, London, and
Viennx —that is, the holdings of the four banks which
really constitute onc bank —the total amounts to several
millions. Now, you cannot ride two horses at once ; if our
firm were forced to sell... what price could we expect
to get? ... We should he forced to realise our Mctalliques,
whether we wished to or not. What would the capitalists


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 67


and the commercial world say to the issue of two Metal-
liques loans in one year, when the payments in respect of
the first loan are not due to be completed until December.
Such action might produce a sharp fall in Mctalliques.
The Government would not be able to get further loans
at a.low rate of interest. A blow would be dealt at the
create of Austria’s finances, and the Government would
fail of achieving its object.

““ I therefore repeat that, if it is essential to get money,
it is much better to issue Treasury bills, and get in
twelve millions of silver for the bank, as on the former
occasion, a procedure which costs the Government
hardly anything and provides it with money for six to
eight months. Moreover, what would the public say to a
new loan? ‘ There will be war—there must be war, as
Austria is issuing another loan.’ Even if we were not
foreed to scll, as we should be, prices would fall sharply,
and Austria’s credit would be severely damaged.

“} instruct you, my dear sirs, to submit the whole
contents of this letter to Prince von Metternich and
Count Kolowrat, as it is my duty to inform them of my
opinion and conviction as to what would happen if there
were to be even 2 whisper of a suggestion that another
loan should be issued this year. ... In any case, tell
Prince von Metternich from me that the Government
here is making every possible effort to maintain peace
and to suppress subversive propaganda. The Govern-
ment hes gained in strength as the result of recent events,
but the Kuropean Powers must endeavour to establish
it more firmly still. ... What are the opposition papers
doing ? On account of the handful of troops which have
been sent to ‘Tirol, on account of the disturbances, they
are daily preaching war between Austria and France in
their papers. The Allgemeine and the -lugsburger Zeitung
are largely to blame for this. Prince Metternich should
rap the Alugsburger Zeitung over the knuckles, and have


68 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the other view presented in the Beobachter. ... The
Austrian Embassy here will report on yesterday’s Review.
The Review was a day of rejoicing for Paris. It is impos-
sible to describe how splendidly the National Guard
co-operated in the manceuvres with the troops of the
line, and the magnificent reception that the King, had
from the men of the National Guard and of the line regi-
ments. Prices on the Bourse would have risen consider-
ably yesterday if several papers had not written so
definitely on the possibility of war with Austria.’’*

Solomon’s warnings were regarded. No further Metal-
lique loan was issued in 1882, and it was not until the
following year that the four banks again subscribed a
similar loan.

The two secretaries, Wertheimstein and Goldschmidt,
to whom Solomon’s letters were addressed, were having
a difficult time. All foreign Jews at Vicnna had to apply
every three years for the renewal of their “ toleration.”
The Rothschilds alone were not merely exempted from
this regulation : their names did not even appear in the
official list of tolerated Jews. In the case of Goldschmidt,
this regulation had been ignored bv the authorities, and
they had allowed him to remain with Solomon Rothschild
without interference. As, however, Solomon Rothschild’s
absence was protracted, the officials began to take up
the question of Goldschmidt. Solomon thereupon sub-
mitted a petition to His Majesty to obtain toleration
for his secretary, and cspccially begged Metternich to
support his request.

“Your Highness,”’ the letter ran," “is in a good posi-
tion to judge how far Goldschmidt may be deserving of
His Majesty’s favour, for you have known him over a
period of years. I would therefore regard it as a
personal favour to myself if His Majesty would be
graciously pl-ased to grant the request of*my secretary,
since I oftea have occasion to be absent from here for


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 69


some time, and to give my manager authority to act on
my behalf... .”

Solomon also emphasised that Metternich would
thereby earn the lifelong gratitude of an honest man, and
the Chancellor did actually support the petition.

The loss of the French Prime Minister, Périer, pro-
foundly affected the political scheme of the House of
Rothschild. In Austria they suffered the loss of a friend
which they felt no less acutely.

Friedrich von Gentz died on 9th June, 1832. It was
to him that the Rothschilds largely owed their position
with Metternich, and therefore in Austria generally.
Since Gentz was venal and easily accepted money from
the whole world, including foreign States, they had
found him easy to deal with. Metternich knew what was
happening, but he turned his blind eye to the situation,
as the master of style whose writings were as distin-
guished for the clarity of their thought as for their
moving pathos was indispensable to him. The older
Gentz grew, the more extravagant he became. Roths-
child fully appreciated the treasure that he had in Gentz,
the Chancellor's right-hand man, who was the first person
to deal with any important despatch. At the beginning
of their association the Rothschilds allowed him to win
in speculations on the Bourse, but they soon dispensed
with this polite fiction, and supplied him with consider-
able sums, finally definitely appointing him agent of the
firm, with an annual salary of ten thousand gulden.™
In return for this, Gentz was required not merely to send
them regular political reports when Solomon was away
from Vicnna, he also frequently wrote long political
memoranda which were circulated to the five brothers.
It was obvious that he used sceret and official informa-
tion for this purpose. Ie also often conveyed news to the
Rothschilds which Metternich wished to become known
in this way. As the years passed, the Gentz-Rothschild


70 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


association had grown more and more intimate, and to-
wards the end of his life the Privy Councillor’s diary
records almost daily that he has been with Rothschild,
dined with him, transacted some profitable business with
him, or sat with him in his box at the theatre. The last
years of Gentz, who, at the age of sixty-seven, was
seized with a violent passion for Fanny Elssler, a girl in
the early twenties, were divided between services to the
Chancery, the Rothschilds, and to the spiritcd actress.
Any payment that he reecived was easily spent, as he
took to Fanny Elssler everything that he could possibly
spare. We constantly find in his diary passages such as
the following :* “I was with Fanny from seven until
eleven ; I brought her substantial presents—a hundred
ducats and four hundred Friedrich d’Ors—and spent an
evening with her that was worth more than ‘ all the gold
of Aurangzeb.’

Gentz’s constant request for cash finally became too
much even for Rothschild, although he was prepared
always to help him out and give him presents. In the
course of time he began to ask for securitics and make
conditions, and on one occasicn he purchased from Gentz
his silver dinner-service in a moment of acute cmbarrass-
ment.” Gentz was also constantly compelled to ask the
Rothschilds to grant him advances on account of his
salary from the Austrian Treasury. In these matters
Gentz showed a supreme contempt for the world in
gencral, setting himself completely above ordinary moral-
ity ; and a remark made by the Emperor Francis about
his rclations with Fanny made no impression on him at
all. since, as be put it, he did not bother about the sov-
ercign.* Specially characteristic is a letter from Gentz”
to Metternich about an advance of Rothschild’s in
respect - ta gratuity which he hoped te receive from
the State. .

“ After Your Highness’s recent kindness to me,” the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 71


letter ran, “I would not venture to trouble you with
further requests if my need were less pressing... .
I have asked Rothschild to advance me 4,500 gulden,
being the amount granted to me by His Majesty
at the beginning of 1829, until such time as Your
Highness may succeed, by your kind recommendation,
in obtaining for me a similar gratuity in respect of the
current year. Rothschild did not either definitely agree
to my request nor did he refuse it, but he gave me to
understand that he could accede to it only with Your
Highness’s concurrence, and therefore asked me to put it
to him in writing. Presumably he intends to submit my
letter to you, and a single word from Your Highness can
determine the success of this step, which I have taken at
a time of extreme pressure, and the failure of which
would deprive me of my last hope.”

Gentz admitted that there was apparently a striking
contrast between his manner of life and his bitter com-
plaints ; and that it might be possible to conclude that
he was cither unforgiveably frivolous or that he had less to
eomplain of than he alleged. Gentz assured the Chan-
ecllor chat the lighter side of his existence was the result
of a deliberat: attempt to dull the sorrows of his spirit
and to conceal from others how ill he was faring.

Gentz begged the Prince not to withhold a helping
hand from him in his difliculties. “ There is only one
more thing I would ask,” he wrote, ‘and that is, that
you wilt not Iet Rothschild know that I have prepared
Your Highness to expect his application. This might
affect his confidence in me, and I shall be delighted for
him to have the eredit of having successfully arranged
this by his own efforts.”

The letter is practically an epitome of Gentz, revcaling
the frivolous hedonist and extravagant spendthrift,
showing how tHis highly gifted nan, with his supple and
sympathetic nature, who at the age of siaty-eight lived


72 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


careless as a child, and loved like a youth, was indispen-
sable both to the mighty Chancellor and to the acute and
powerful financicr.

He was dead now, and the Rothschilds had lost an in-
timate link with Metternich and the Foreign Office, as
well as a priceless source of information. Solomon
observed on a later occasion that it was only after
Gentz’s death that he had been able to appreciate the
inestimable services that Gentz had rendered to him and
to the whole House of Rothschild over a long period of
years.

The Belgian problem was still unsettled. The King of
Holland continued to resist, and maintained the occupa-
tion of the citadel of Antwerp. As no solution was in
prospect, England and France were forced in 1882 to
consider the mcans by which they could bring pressure
to bear upon Holland. The Eastern Powers, however,
would not co-operate. The Tsar, who had repeatedly
helped to emphasise the opposition between Kast and
West in the Belgian problem, was ominously inclined to
support the King of Holland. The French finally decided
on military intervention, and touk possession of Antwerp
on behalf of Belgium, while the British sequestered
Dutch shipping. It was obvious that the King of Holland
definitely intended by some means or other to regain
Belgium. His brother-in-law, the King of Prussia, did not
wish to proceed against him by force of arms, bet neither
did he wish to be drawn into a war of indcfinite duration
on his account. The Tsar was more inclined to contem-
plate war. He was unable to forget that Louis Philippe,
who ruled only by grace of the Revolution, was the
father-in-law and protector of the newly fledged King of
Belgium ; and, besides, he was much inclined to listen to
the supporters of the exiled King Charles X at Prague,
who did all they could to urge Petersburg to war. These
French legitimists were naturally the most bitter enemies


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 78


of the House of Rothschild, which, after the July revolu-
tion, had at once gone over with flying colours to the
camp of Louis Philippe. The Duke of Blacas, who was
staying with his King at Prague, received reports from
all quarters as to the state of the legitimist cause ; his
letters were carefully copied by Metternich’s police, and
thus reached the Chancellor at the same time as the
persons to whom they were addressed. They often con-
tained bitter words about the Rothschilds, who sup-
ported peace, and applied their moncy to maintain it,
whereas the cause of the émigrés could be served only by
the Eastern Powers deciding to let loose the dogs of war.
The British Torics and their bankers, who also favoured
war, and hoped for Russia’s military intervention, sent a
representative to St. Petersburg to offer Russia a loan
for this purpose. While passing through the Hague, the
envoy gave a legitimist agent called Cordier some inter-
esting side-lights on the attitude of the Rothschilds in
political matters. “ They have fallen,” he said, “ to
prodigious extent under revolutionary influences, and the
bonds with which they have bound the monarchs are fatal
to them.’

‘Lhe Englisiiman’s principal source of information was
the Paris banker Ouvrard, who also had legitimist deal-
ings and who was filled with concentrated hostility to the
Rothschilds. Another émigré simultaneously reported
from Frankfort™ that the Russian loan had been con-
cluded with the firm of Hope, although England and
France, and the bankers that supported them, with the
House of Rothschild at their head, had put every pos-
sible obstacle in that firm’s way. The émigré’s report
clearly revealed whither the hopes of such circles were
directed.

“ The object of this loan,” the report ran, “ leaves no
doubt at all as to the firm determination of the Emperor
Nicholas to declare war next spring.’


74 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Cordier also reported as to this £6,000,000 loan,” and
expressed the hope that Russia would now set things
going. It was true that Rothschild, who had been bought
by the two revolutionary Governments, had succeeded
in frustrating the earlicr negotiations, and thereby delay-
ing everything, but in the end their intrigues had been
brought to nought. Cordier stated, indeed, that Roths-
child had had the “‘ shamelessness ”’ to say quite openly
on the London Stock Exchange that he knew how to
bridle the sovereigns, as he controlled them all through
his purse. In the end, the legitimist Tory bankers had
united against him, and carried the loan through in
spite of him.

*“* This coalition,” wrote Cordier, “‘ serves a great poli-
tical idea, its object being to place sufficient funds at
the disposal of the sovereigns to enable them to fight
the revolutionary movement, which is served by all the
Rothschilds, under the leadership of the London one,
and of Talleyrand (French Ambu:sador in London).”

At that time General Count Pozzo, who was in the
service of Russia, was staying in London, and he
supported the Austrian Ambassador, Lieven. Nathan
followed the activitics of these two with grave suspicion,
and wrote to his brother James in Paris about them, in
his comically bad German."


“My pear Brotuer,—I hope that vou are
quite well and happy. I have heard from a
trustworthy source that Holland’s reply is not
satisfactory, and that it is believed that Russia is
behind the King of Holland. You must write to
our brother Solomon, to tell Metternich not to let
himself be bamboozled into war by Russia, for
Pozzo is with the King and was not well received,
anc he and Lieven are intriguing t6 make Austria
and Prussia declare war. I have, however, been


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 75


informed in a reliable quarter that Prussia will not
go to war, and that they are making a great mis-
take, because England and France jointly can do
a great deal. We shall keep peace ; there won’t be
war ; stocks are falling and rising. Write and tell
Solomon that Neumann (Austrian representa-
tive in London) is always spending a great deal
of time with Pozzo, and believes our Government
to be wcak. The man is seven-cighths mistaken
and now Pozzo has not been well received. The
King invited him to Brighton, and he sat six
places from the King. The King asked him how
long he would stay here. THe replied, ‘ Six weeks ’ ;
and now we know that Russia wants war, and
Metternich is being bamboozled by those people.
... Pozzo and those folk are making themselves
ridiculous and do not understand England, so ask
our good brother Solomon to tell Prince Mctter-
nich not to lect himsclf be bamboozled by Russia.
Pozzo is here simply to spy, and I am convinced
that England is stronger than she was in the time
of Wellington. Now, my dear brother, don’t let
yourself be bamboozled by anyone. If England
and France hold together, it will be difficult to
touch them. Write this to brother Solomon.”


The Rothschilds were again on the right side. The
legitimists failed in their object. The money for Russia
had been given to no purpose, and war was again
avoided, although the Belgian problem still remained
unsolved.

In spite of all this, Solomon had sueceeded in main-
taining his good relations with Metternich, although
Metternich wag in the camp of the opponents of the world
policy ot the Western Rothschilds. At times this was
excecdingly difficult, but Solomon was successful in


76 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


maintaining the close relationship undisturbed, so that it
was possible for him, as before, constantly to approach
the Chancellor with petitions. These generally concerned
the protection of his co-religionists in the most various
quarters of the world, but he occasionally put forward
quite remarkable, and indeed comic, requests.

Thus on one occasion James and Solomon commended
to the Chancellor a certain M. Roquirol, who had brought
a fine flock of merino sheep to Vienna for sale. They asked
Metternich to assist this gentleman as far as he could.

“Tam taking the liberty,” Solomon wrote," “‘ humbly
to request Your Highness to put in a word for this man
when there should be an opportunity for doing so, as
there is sure to be in the salons of Your Highness, which
are the meeting-place of brillianve and fashion, for I am
convinced that in no other way can M. Roquirol’s ven-
ture be attended with real success.”

This was really asking rather a lot, and it is difficult to
understand how Solomon imayined that Metternich
would make propaganda in his salons for the sale of
merino sheep.

Meanwhile, monetary conditions throughout the world
had improved; and the Rothschild banks had so far
made good the losses incurred during the July revolution
that they could procced, not merely to conclude fresh
agreements for advances with Rother in Prussia, who
held full authority from his King, but could also arrange
to take up the loan of which they had asked to be relieved
when they were feeling embarrassed. The whole of the &
per cent. public debt was converted to a 4 per cent. basis.
Rother was delighted at the way the Rothschilds met
him, because this would help to advance the credit of
the Scehandlung Bank. The brothers gave this bank
a blank ec -dit, and told Rother that he could, if occasion
should arise, draw through it £500,000 from London, 4
million gulden in Frankfort, two to three million francs


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 77


in Paris, and one to two million gulden Convention
currency in Vienna.*

Rother gave Solomon Rothschild the chief credit for
all these satisfactory transactions, and as Solomon
desired a Prussian order, he asked his King to grant him
one. The Court was glad to take the money, but did not
want to confer an order upon a Jewish business man.
Rother therefore suggested" that, as a mark of good-
will and of satisfaction with the part played by Solomon
in connection with the transactions which had just been
concluded, he should be presented with a handsome
porcelain vase, with a portrait of the King on it.

‘** T have come to the conclusion,” wrote Rother to the
Finance Minister, Count von Lottum, “ that, in view of
the fact that all the Rothschild banks have interested
themselves in the mattcr in question, and that Solomon
incurred the reproaches of his partners for the way in
which he met me over my first proposals, which were pre-
vented by unforeseen and purely external circumstances
from being brought to a successful conclusion, any mark
of ippreciation shown to him alone would tend to widen
the brexch in the family, and that he would not derive the
satisfaction therefrom that His Majesty intends.”

As a result of Rother’s recommendation Solomon
received a vase worth 426 reichsthaler, Nathan in
London a porcelain set of the value of 566 reichsthaler,
and Ainschel Meyer at Frankfort porcelain vases to the
value of 515 reichsthaler, from the Royal Porcelain
Factory at Berlin.

The three brothers each wrote a separate letter of
thanks to the King, expressing their gratitude for the
“high proufs of his most gracious goodwill” and the
“magnificent presents, which they would always trea-
sure,” and which they would always keep in their
families as “‘ previous heirlooms.” Solomon expressed the
hope that he would in future be able to furnish fresh


78 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


proof of his truly disinterested service ; and Nathan
wrote" that the magnificent present would be an
everlasting testimony for him and his to the gracious
kindness of His Royal Majesty.

Rother also expressed his thanks for these tributes to
his business friends,* and took the opportunity of again
calling attention to the fact that they had been able to
show that they had sustained a loss far execeding two
million thaler through their efforts to save the honour of
their firm.

Shortly afterwards Rother secured a distinction for
the only son of Nathan, who so far had no title.

“The eldest sons of Baron Nathan Meyer von Roths-
child in London, Lionel and Anthony,” he wrote to the
King," “ are financial advisers and knights of the Elec-
tor of Iesse’s Order of the Lion ; only the youngest son,
Nathaniel, who has also distinguished himself in his busi-
ness, and has just returned from a business journey to
Constantinople, which he has carried out to the satisfae-
tion of all the Rothschild banks, as yet holds no kind of
title. 1 would beg you to conter upon Nathaniel the
dignity of Privy Commercial Adviser.

“ The considerable sacrifices which all the Rothschild
partners have latterly made in the financial interests of
Prussia may excuse my expressing a wish, the granting
of which they would regard as a special act of grace on
the part of Your Royal Majesty.”

In this matter, too, the wishes of Rother were carried
out, and all parties were satisfied.

The business of the Rothschilds continued to expand.
They were now lending, not only to the great Powers. but
also to smaller States, such as Greece, and the Govern-
ment of the Ionian Islands —these loans, it is true, being
guarantecd by England and France, so that any risk was
practical .y eliminated. The European capitals, however,
still provided them with their main ficld of operations,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 79


Petersburg and Berlin being the only ones from which
they were excluded. Vienna continued their main base
of operations in Eastern Europe. Here they were so
closely bound up with the régime of the Emperor Francis
and ‘his leading statesmen that any sudden change of
personnel, seriously affecting the distribution of power,
might have been a grave matter. Such a position
was threatened when the Emperor Francis, who was
sixty-seven years old, suddenly became seriously ill. On
the 28rd February, 1835, he was in the best of health and
spirits, when he went to the theatre to see a new play
called A Poor Woman’s Will. At a Council next day he
suddenly felt ill, and had to take to his bed at once. The
Court physician diagnosed a slight inflamamtion of the
lungs. But so little importance was attached to it that
Mctternich did not cancel a ball he was giving that even-
ing. During the night of the 26th February, however, the
Emperor’s fever and pain increased, and next day he asked
to be examined. His physician said that this was quite un-
necessary, and would only worry him, but the Emperor
insisted on it. At ten o’clock in the morning the Emperor
wrote out his will in pencil, in a calm and settled frame of
mina, in the presence of Councillor Hess and his con-
fessor, Bishop Wagner. On the 27th February his fever
increased and the lung trouble grew worse. He was bled
three times, the Archduke Johann observing in constern-
ation that the old man would be so weakened by the
letting of blood that he must inevitably succumb.

The Emperor’s brothers—the Archdukes Josef, Carl,
and Ludwig—urged a general consultation, to which the
most famous doctors in the capital be called in, but the
King’s private physician, Baron Stifft, would not hear of
it, and became quite rude. As the Emperor’s condition
grew steadily worse, everybody at the Hofburg abso-
lutely lost their heads, ace ording to the statement of the
Archduke Johann. They wanted to call in Dr. Giinther


80 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


from the hospital, but no carriage was to be found, so the
Emperor’s personal attendant went off on foot to fetch
him, and returned with him on foot, which took two
hours.

On the 28th February he was bled for the fourth time.
Metternich was at first highly perturbed at the news
from the Hofburg, but, after a conversation with Bishop
Wagner, he was quite calm. The Archduke Johann noted
Metternich’s attitude in his diary, observing that
Metternich’s first alarm was duc to the fact that he feared
that the Emperor’s will would mean his fall. When, how-
ever, the Chancellor heard that the will had been made
with the assistance of Bishop Wagner, he felt reassured.
The Archduke Johann was not certain, however, whether
this view, which was generally held in Vienna, was correct.
To-day we know“ that the Viennese were most probably
iight. The Emperor Francis died at a quarter to one on the
morning of the 2nd March. He left a will charging the heir,
Ferdinand, who was physically and intellectually unde-
veloped, to rule, but “ not to miake changes.” In all the
more important matters he was to take counsel with the
youngest brother, the Archduke Ludwig; finally, and this
was the most important point, he bude him place the same
confidence in Metternich, his most loyal servant and
friend, as the Emperor Francis had placed in him, and to
take no decision affecting public affairs or persons without
first consulting him.

It is a significant indication of the Chancellor’s
intentions that the youngest brother should be
recommended as the adviser and representative of the
Emperor Ferdinand, who was incapable of properly per-
forming his duties himself, when the clever and highly
gifted elder brothers, the Archduke Palatine Josef, the
Archduk: Johann, and the Archduke Carl, the victor of
Aspern, were still alive. The fact was that, as Metter-
nich stated, the will was drafted in the Chancellor’s office,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 81


and the Archduke Ludwig was mentioned because he
would do what the Chancellor wished and was easy to
direct. Count Kolowrat, who was the most pronounced
opponent of the Chancellor, and the most notable man
who succeeded him in that office, was unmentioned and
passed over. Metternich actually had the last paragraph
drafted as follows :

“* Thereby name—— as the man whom I most empha-
tically commend to my son as a loyal Counsellor, worthy
of his fullest confidence.”’ He did not, in fact, insert his
own name, for Bishop Wagner was to sce that Mctter-
nich’s name was written by the Emperor in the blank
space, as was, in fact, actually donc.

This meant that, in view of the new Emperor’s incapa-
city to rule, and the insignificant talents possessed by the
Arehduke Ludwig, through the elimination by the will of
all the other Archdukes and statesmen, Metternich was
fully secured in his position.

* It is well known,” Kiibeck* wrote in his diary on the
8rd March, “‘ that the Empcror’s illness has made him
feeble-minded. He understands nothing of what is being
said .o him, and is prepared to sign anything that is put
before him. Vic now have an absolute monarchy without
a monarch.” The confirmation in power of their patron,
Metternich, under a completely insignificant monarch,
was the most satisfactory thing that could have hap-
pened t > the House of Rothschild. The Emperor’s death
produced a panic on the Bourse, which was ccmpletely
uninformed as to the course of events, and the Roths-
childs, well knowing that there would be no change in the
administration, and that there was therefore no cause for
panic, bought heavily. Count Apponyi praised the Tlouse
of Rothschild for their courage and firmness, praise which
was not really deserved, for they were acting merely in
their own interests.

“I must admit,” the Ambassador reported from


82 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Paris, “‘ that the attitude of the House on this occasion
... has contributed in no small measure to maintaining
confidence amongst the public, and to checking un-
grounded and unnecessary panic. The two brothers
Rothschild hastened to calm people’s fears by offcring
to purchase any Austrian securities that anybody wished
to realise, at the top price of the day ; and the enormous
financial influence which this House exercises on the
Paris market did not fail immediately to allay the panic
which had begun to affect hasty and nervous spirits.”
This *‘ patriotic gesture” came easy to the Rothschilds,
as they knew from Metternich that the death of the
Empcror would not produce any prejudicial change, and
that prices would rise again at once. Things happened as
they had foreseen. Securities rose in value, and they
prospered more excecdingly than ever. For now things
actually ran much more smoothly than under the
Empcror Francis, who in many matters—especially in
the case of new discoveries, such as the railway --opposed
even Mctternich’s advice and wislies with a rigid veto.


Cuapter ITI


The Part Played by the Rothschilds in the Early History of
Railways in Europe


THE first application of rails, and therefore the basis of
modern railways, takes us back to the seventeenth century.
At that time, especially in England, wooden rails were
frequently used in mines, in order to bring to the surface
more quickly and easily the trucks that had becn loaded
with coal, but it was not until 1798 that Mr. Outram, an
Englishman, hit on the idea of substituting iron rails for
wood, whereupon the ways came to be known after the
name of the inventor, Outram-ways, and later, tram-
ways. It came to be realised that a horse drawing a load
on such rails was cleven times more effective than on an
ordinary road, and accordingly, as carly as the twenties
of the nineteenth century, such ways were built, especi-
ally in connection with coal-mines, by means of which
heavy loads could be drawn by horses to the nearest
waterway. Since Fulton’s steamer, Clermont, had made
her first successful voyage on the River [fudson in 1807,
the .dea of applying the newly discovered steam-engine
to the proptision of ships had been successfully devel-
oped, and George Stephenson, who was originally a smith
mnaimine, conecived the idea of using the machine which
had hitherto been applied only at sea to the propulsion
of trucks on dry land. He imstalled in his mine the first
stcam-trucks. They were of his own manufacture ; and
then, in 1825, with the assistance of several far-seeing
capitalists, he built the first railway in the world on
which locomotives were run. This was the railway from
Stockton to Darlington, and its main purpose was to
earry coal from the Durham coalfields. Stephenson had
to light against enormous opposition, against petty
private ‘ntcrests, even agaist contempt and ridicule. A
man called Nicholas Weed, who beld a distinguished
83


84 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


position as a “railway expert” at the time, actually
stated: “I should not dream of telling everyone that
the ridiculous expectation, or rather prophecies, of the
enthusiastic speculators could possibly be realised, and
that we shall see steam-coaches travelling at a speed
of twelve, sixteen, eighteen, or twenty miles an hour.
Nobody could do more harm to the prospects of building
or gencrally improving such coaches than by spreading
abroad this kind of nonsense.”

But as early as the 27th September, 1825, when
Stephenson’s railway was opened, a train capable of
drawing cighty tons was running at a speed of ten to
fifteen miles an hour. At first the means of locomotion on
this railway was mixed. Horse-power was used as well,
the horses being harnessed to help on a slope. The speed
of trains was paralysed by the fact that there was a law
enforeed requiring that a postillion should ride fifty yards
in front of the locomotive to warn pr ople of the approach-
ing monster. Nevertheless, unressoning prejudice was
unable to block the advance made by a man of genius.
The achievements of the Stockton-Darlington railway,
considerable for those times, becanie generally known,
and led to no Jess than eighteen new concessions for
railways being granted, including the railway from
Liverpool to Manchester, which was the next toe be
constructed. The only locomotives on it were Stephen-
son’s ; he had won the prize with his “ Rocket * in the
steam-coach campetition of October 1829 at Rainhill.
All doubts were sileneed after the opening, on the
15th September, 1830, of the Liverpool Manchester Rail-
way, which marked the commencement of an cra of
intensive profit and industry for the two sister cities, and
therefore xiso of sucevss for the undertaking itself. The
cnormous .cvelopments opened up by the new discovery
were now first gencrally recognised, and from this year
dates the gener: extension of railways throughout the
world.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 85


Like so many others, Nathan Rothschild had followed
Stephenson’s experiments with interest, but also with a
good deal of scepticism. At any rate, he was determined
not to venture a farthing on an undertaking which not
only the general public, but also highly respected and
competent men, declared to be a wild-cat scheme. He,
too, was of opinion that the horse, which could travel
anywhere, could never be effectively supplanted by 4
machine. He was, therefore, quite pleased to see such
firms as Glyn, Halifax, Mills, and Co.1, as well as the
inexperienced provincial bankers, risking their good
money in such highly speculative ventures. He was act-
ing In exactly the same way as other big banks such as
Baring & Ricardo, who also avoided having anything to
do with them. When, however, Stephenson’s successes
became more and more pronounced, and after the con-
struction of the first and second railway in England, a
positive railway fever seized the country. Innumerable
companies were being formed for new railway schemes,
end Nathan, who had folluwed these developments
close’v, although taking no part in them, came to the
vorelusion that this new discovery offered incalculable
op; ortunitic: for profit, whieh his Tlouse must not be
allowed to miss. In England it was certainly rather late,
as there were already so many people in the field ; but on
the Continent, where bis brothers lived, the situation was
differe: t. Nowhere on the Continent was there a railway
carrying steam-cngines. There were only here and there
a few short sections of horse tramways. Here was a field
for the enormous resources of his House. If his brothers
in Austria, France, and Germany were to take the initia-
tive in the construction of railways before any others
entered the ficld, this might result in an enormous in
crease in the\wealth and power cf the firm. Nathan at
onee communicated these ideas to his brothers, and
found that they were immediately prepared to enter


86 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


into them. His suggestions made a special impression
upon Solomon Rothschild in Vienna. This was partly due
to the fact that another highly gifted man, who might
indeed be called a genius, had called Solomon’s attention
to the tremendous possibilities in railway construction on
a large scale.

This man was Franz Xavicr Riepel, professor at the
Vienna Polytechnic Institute, and special expert in
mining. He had worked for many years in the Witkowitz
iron-works. Witkowitz lics close to the enormous coal-
basin between Moravian-Ostrau and Karwin. The iron-
works had grown up there because of the convenience of
the neighbouring coal-fields, as it was impossible to carry
coal for any distance at that time owing to the inferior
and expensive methods of transport. Riepel’s idea was to
follow Iingland’s example and transport the coal by rail-
way to the vreat waterway of the Danube.t On looking
into the matter further, he thousht it should be practi-
cable also to carry large consignments of salt) from
Wicliczka in Galicia on the railway, and for this purpose
to build a railway from Bochnia, south-east of Cracow,
right in the north-cast of the monarchy, via Moravians
Ostrau and Briinn, to Vienna, a distance of about. sixty
miles. Riepel found a wholesale merchant called Samuel
Wiedermann, who was in close business relation with
Solomon Rothschild, particularly interested tn the idea.
Wiedermann, percciving that Riepel’s schemes could: be
realised only with the help of a great financial power,
introduced Riepel and Solomon Rothschild just at the
happy moment when Solomon had received the encour:
aging reports and suggestions from his brother Nathan
in England. As Ricpel sketched out his ideas, Solomon
got u vision of enormous sums flowing into his coffers,
through vauking all the valuable ores cayily available,
and arranging for their easy transport, and for that of
the important saw matcrial, salt, to the capital. [He took


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 87


up the scheme with enthusiasm, and immediately
decided to take the first tentative step towards putting
it into effect. At the beginning of 1830, Solomon, having
heard what Riepel had to say, sent him and Leopold von
Werthcimstcin to England to find out all they could
about the actual railways there. They were to ascertain
on the spot how they were built and managed, with a
view to applying the experience so gained in building the
projected railway to Galicia.

In later years Solomon Rothschild expressly empha-
sised the fact that the principal credit for the idea of the
Nordbaln was due to Ricpel. “ It is a satisfaction to me,”
he wrote to the ead of the Treasury, Count Mittrowsky,*
“and [ feel Tam but doing my duty in taking this
opportunity of expressly putting on record the fact that
it was err Franz Riepel, professor at the Polytechnic
institute, who, in 1829, first adumbrated the wonderful
idea of the Galician Railway, and discussed it with me,
witt the result. that I decided to have the necessary pre-
liminary work done for forming an adequate estimate of
tne wndertaking from a technical, commercial, and
fins. eial pol. of view, in order that, if it should appear
Lo be adequass for the purposes for which it was intended,
Tinight be in a position iinmediately to proceed with the
exrry ing out of this truly national project.”

The two delegates devoted particular attention to the
Liverpool-Manchester Railway, whieh had just been
finished, and sent a detailed report upon it to Solomon
Rothschild, On this Solomon decided detinitely in favour
of the construction of the big railway in Austria, and
went so far us to suggest the idea of carrying it right
through Austria by extending the railway of Bochnia-
Vienna to Trieste in the south, ic., to the Adriatic Sea.

Solomon Rethschild intended seriously to proceed with
the preparation for the construction of the railway, when
the sudden outbreak of the July revolution in France


88 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


upset all these plans. Solomon himself wrote at a later
date in this connection :* “‘ The political difficulties that
arose in 1830 and the disturbances that followed, with
their exceedingly depressing effect upon trade and indus-
try, foreed me to my great regret to postpone to quicter
times, more favourable to such undertakings, the carry-
ing out of this scheme, although it had been definitely
decided upon.”

This was not unnatural, for during the pcriod immedi-
atcly after the revolution the Iouse was fighting for its
very existence, and it took years for things to settle
down again and recover themselves. It was not until 1832
that the position of the Rothschilds had so far improved
that, jointly with two other firms, they took over the un-
successful business of a horse tramway from the engincer
Zola, father of the famous novelist, which opcrated
between the Danube and the Lake of Gmunden.

Meanwhile, a veritable railway fever had broken out
in England. Everybody was envaging in railway con-
struction, and, as soon as Nathan saw that the position
of the House was becoming consolidated again, he
advised his brother to take up the scheme once nore,
Solomon thereupon arranged to have the whole route
over which the railway was to be constructed examined
by expert engineers under the direction of Ricpel, with a
view to ascertaining the best linc. The result of these in-
vestigations was to establish the fact that by this means
“the greatest and most distant provinces of the Mmpire
could be brought into closer association with one another
and with the capital, and entirely new combinations,
having their effect. upon industry,-commerce, polities
and strategy, would result.’

On the 15th Aprit, 1835, at the suggestion of Mctter-
nich, wh: w.s in a position, in view of the yieffectivencss
of tne new Emperor Ferdinand, to assuré the banker in
advance that Lis application would be granted, Solomon


EES URNA EIN GT GLEE NIN CEN CRGO.ESD TS GEER NG ON TITEEAN EL


, ama at he


Daa a7)


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 89


decided to put forward his official application for permis-
sion to construct a railway, first from Bochnia to Vienna.
The Emperor Francis had been known to be opposed to
any such venture, and, although he had been dead only
six wecks, Solomon hastened to take advantage of the
altered circumstances.

His application: was particularly cleverly worded ; in
accordance with his usual practice, he endeavoured to
bring out the advantages to the State, which in this case
were indced notable, and to keep his own motives and the
material considcrations in the background :


“Most Excellent and most Puissant Emperor !
Most Gracious Emperor and Lord !

“The most loyal and humble bank whose signa~-
ture is subscribed, has for several ycars becn con-
ducting the most careful investigations with
regard to the question of laying down a railway
between Vienna and Boclhnia.

“ The result of these dclibcrations has been that
we have come to the conviction that the achieve-
mentof this great means of communication would
be of Leuefit to the State and the public weal, no
less than to those who join in the undertaking; and
this conviction is shared, after careful considcra-
tion of the various local and connnercial condi-
tons of the territories and provinces concerned,
by other persons who would interest themselves
in this truly great patriotic venture.

“This mature conclusion having been arrived
at. the undersigned, governed by the desire to be
in a high degree useful to the Imperial State of
Austria, ventwe mes! humbly to beg Your
Majesty that you may be gvacionsly pleascd to
giant them ». conesss:on to erect this great rail-
way from Bochnia to Vienna ; and further most


90


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


graciously to permit that the funds neccessary for
this great undertaking may be made available by
means of a Public Company, and finally, having
regard to the great and manifold preparations
that will be necessary, most graciously to fix the
period within which preliminary construction on
the railway shall be completed at three years, and
the period by which the railway shall be com-
pleted, at ten years after Your Majesty’s resolu-
tion.

‘This humble application is based so strongly
upon the interests of the common weal, and it is
so clear that trade and commerce, the revenues
of State and of landed properties, will benefit
through the increased piosperity that will result
from the intensive association of distant pro-
vinees ; finally the motives which have led us,
after the most exhaustive deliberations, to submit
this proposal to Your Majesty’s wise considcra-
tion in your loving care for your country and to
request your most gracious sanction for it, are so
entirely patriotic that the respectful undersigned
fect that they may be permitted to hope that Your
Majesty will graciously accept this, our humble
petition, whereby the opening of your reign will
be marked as one of the most blessed cpochs in
the history of our country’s industry, and that
you will, in your wisdom and your loving care
for your country, be graciously pleased to approve
and sanction it.

4.' In deepest devotion to Your Majesty, I beg
to sign mysclf Your Majesty’s most true and
humble servant,

** nerdoro S. M. v. RorTuscuiiy,

© LeopoLp vow WERTURIMSTEIN.
“Vienna, 15th .{pril, 1835.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 91


This application was sent in the usual way to the
official at the department concerned, Baron von Drohs-
dick—with a hint from the Chancery that Metternich was
favourable to its being granted—for his observations.
Public opinion at Vienna was against railways. The
Vienna newspapers of the period published opinions by
a whole host of ‘‘ experts ’’ showing the madness of such
undertakings. They proved that the human respiratory
system could not stand a speed of fifteen miles an hour.
.. . It would therefore be the maddest recklessness to
venture upon such a journey. Nobody who was in posses-
sion of even half his senses would expose himself to such
a risk. The first travellers would have to take their
doctors with them. These “ experts ” declared that the
travellers would spurt blood from nose, mouth, and ears,
ihat they would be suffocated in passing through a tunnel
more than sixty metres long, and that, not merely were
the passengers in danger themselves, but that the
spectators might go mad “through the terrific specd of the
pissing train. Nevertheless, Drohsdick’s opinion was in
favors of granting the petition.’

“The con. uction of a railway,” he minuted, ‘ to
traverse three provinces from Vienna as the central
point of Austrian commerce ... would be a matter of
such very exceptional service to the State from the com-
mercial point of view, and, through his considerable
persona: resourecs, his vast credit, and his extensive con-
nections, the banker Rothschild is so exceptionally suited
for forming a Public Company, that there could not be
any objection in the general interest against . . . grant-
ing a concession for this new railway undertaking, and
permitting the applicant to form a Company.”

Whatever motives malicious critics may allege to have
produced this favourable opinion, and the support of the
Government machincry hich Metternich controlled, it
was a noteworthy deed sv warmly tu support a sclicme


92 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


which most experts and public opinion generally con-
demned, and which was to be the starting-point of a
system that would revolutionise the world.

The administrative system functioned most readily in
accordance with the wishes of Metternich and Kolowrat,
for the Emperor Ferdinand was nothing but a signing
machine, and in this case these two statesmen were of
one mind, the Archduke Ludwig being as usual more
or less a cipher. His Majesty’s consent was obtained
under date 11th November, 1835, granting Baron von
Rothschild the concession to build the railway from
Bochnia to Vienna ; the postal service, which feared the
competition of the railway, having quickly had a caveat
inserted providing that the State Postal Department
could claim compensation if its interests were damnified
by the concession. Solomon hailed His Majesty’s decision
with joy and ‘the sincerest feelings of gratitude.”
“Hail to the monarch,’* he wrote, ‘‘ who has most
graciously deigned to take this decision in the interests
of the welfare of his people ! ”

However, at the same time he begged that the reserva-
tion in favour of the post should not be incorporated in
the document granting the concession, as this would pro-
duce a struggle of private interests, such as would lead
to constant disputes and complaints, since, if the I. R.
postal contractors were favoured in this way, icnkeepers,
stable proprietors, waggoners, smiths, cte., cstablished
on the line between Vienna and Bochnia, would be
encouraged to make similar applications.

Solomon suggested that the postal administration
should be indemnificd by the payment of a lump sum.
This question was «:lso sent to Baron von Drohsdick for
his opin'cn, but on this occasion he was not so far-secing,
for he minuted as follows :* “ Baron von itothschild has
not expressed the intention in any of his suggestions of
carrying letters on this railway ; this would appear to be


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 98


an entirely different kind of business, and outside the
actual scope of the undertaking. For this reason there is
no occasion for entering into negotiations for compensa-
tion.”

In the end the postal question was settled by a com-
promise limiting the right to carry mails, and the Con-
cession Decree of the 4th March, 1836, was drawn up."
The most important provisions were those laying down
that even after the expiration of fifty years, for which
period the concession was granted, the House of Roths-
child should continue to be assured of absolute owner-
ship in the railway ; and that the concession should cease
to be effective if one mile of the railway should not be
constructed within two years, and if the whole railway
between Vienna and Bochnia should not be completed
within ten years.

Thereupon Riepel and Heinrich Sichrowsky, one of the
most active collaborators in the railway scheme, were
sent on another visit to England to aseertain what pro-
grss had been made there sinee the year 1880. Solomon
Rothe: hild succeeded in obtaining a year’s leave for
Ricyel, who w.:s indispensable to him, from his duties as
professor, undertaking to provide the full salary of a
substitute.

The next step was to raise the capital of twelve million
guidca Convention Currency, which was estimated to be
required for building the sixty-mile railway Twelve
thousand shares at a thousand florins were issued, Roths-
child retaining cight thousand shares, partly for his own
account, and partly for issuing to the numerous appli-
cants who had come to him direct. Only four thousand
shares were offered for public subscription ; amongst the
subscribers were some of the most important financiers
of the day, suck as Biedermenn, iskeles, Geymiller, and
Sina. Werthcimstcin, Riepei, and Sichrowsky, the real
originators of the scheme, also took shares in it.


94 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


The flotation was a brilliant success ; although only
4,000 shares were offered, 27,490 were applied for.
Applicants for small amounts had thcir shares allotted
to them in full, but those who applied for larger amounts
only had a proportion allotted to them. This prodigious
success aroused the envy of the other bankers. Sina had
come into the scheme, but he could not rest until he had
obtained a similar railway concession for himself; Roths-
child had secured the northern line; Sina therefore
decided to try to obtain the concession for connecting
the capital with the Adriatic. On the 17th February,
Baron Georg von Sina asked to be granted an “‘ exclusive
concession ” for constructing a railway from Vienna to
Raab, “ with a view to continuing such railway to the
Adriatic Sea.”

Solomon was secretly informed by the Chancellor that
the application had been sent in, and iminediately recog-
niscd the mistake he had made in not having asked in the
first instance for the concession for the whole railway
from the north to the sea-coast in the south, in accord-
ance with Riepel’s basic scheme. Three days after Sina’s
application had been sent in, Solomon sent in a further
petition to the departments concerned, and to the
Empcror, asking that the priority for constructing a
railway from Brody, through Vienna and Iluugary, to the
Adriatic coast, should be reserved for him.

Rothsehild explained in his applicxtion why the con-
cession for the whole Central Railway from the north to
the sea had not been asked for in the first instance.
“Although it is evident,” Rothschild wrote, ‘“ that the
realisation of this great seheme would be most profitable
for the promoters. and of great benefit to the cominon
weal, if cannot be disputed that it appears to be imprac-
ticable and inadvisable to attempt to carry out the whole
of this enormous work simultaneously. It is inadvisable
to undertake an undue strain even in the achievement of .


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 95


what is useful, and it is only by the prudent application
of sound principles that the good, the right, and the true
is attained. Such was the view of the first proposer with
regard to the matter under consideration, a view in which
your humble servant concurred.”

Sina’s and Rothschild’s applications were now both
lying at the Treasury to be dealt with. It was not as yet
a question of granting the concession, but only of a pro-
visional statement that such would be favourably con-
sidered. The Treasury fully appreciated the commercial
importance of the proposed railway. It was of the
opinion that the preference should be given to Baron von
Sina, since Rothschild’s Nordbahn was a venture of such
importance, and one that required so much capital, and
it did not seem desirable to expand it. The Treasury held
that there was an advantage in making use of several
independent contractors, as the resulting compctition
would be of benefit to the State and the public. “ More-
over,” Baron von Drohsdick minuted,"' ‘“* Baron S. M.
Rothschild, being a partner in the Frankfort firm, who
has ne. definitely settled here as an Austrian wholesale
merchant, sherild still, strictly speaking, be considered
as a foreigner, and aithough there was no objection to
granting him a concession for the Northern Railway in
the absence of any application from our own country-
men, it is not unnaturally a matter of satisfaction to the
Governn. cnt that an Austrian subject of perfectly sound
financial standing should have come forward in connec-
tion with a similar important undertaking in the south.
Public opinion would be gravely offended if, in the case
of two sit.ilar offers. the preference were given to the
foreign candidate. Another consideration in favour of
Baron von Sina is the fact thai he possesses substantial
property in Htngary, that as a baron he is one of the
Hungarian Magnates, and tit the greatcr part of the
Southern Railway will lie within the kingdom of


96 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Hungary, so that through his connections he undoubtedly
seems to be in a much better position to safeguard the
interests of the railway for the important section which
lies with Hungary than is Baron von Rothschild.”

The Treasury therefore proposed that Sina should be
informed that they were prepared, if occasion should
arise, to support his application to the Emperor for a
concession, but that Rothschild should be informed that
his application could not be granted, since another one
had been received. Rothschild recognised that his original
mistake in having failed to apply for the whole of the
northern and southern railway concession could not be
entirely remedied, and he therefore requested that he
should at any rate be permitted to build a branch line to
Pressburg on the left bank of the Danube, connecting
with his Northern Railway.'* Count Mittrowsky wanted
quickly to get Rothschild’s application for the Pressburg
Railway passed, but Kclowrat upposed it this time, and
finally both Rothschild and Sina were merely permitted
to make such preliminary investigations on this scction
as would be required in connection with the granting of
a concession.'*

There was therefore nothing more to be donc. Roths-
child now saw that his work was provoking envy and
malice on all sides. IIe had been kept out of the second
half of the main scheme, and he now had to reckon with
the fact that his respected banking colleagues would
put every difficulty in the way of the constructing of the
Northern Railway, except in so far as they were person-
ally interested in the venture. He racked his brains as to
the most effective way of countering this opposition, and
hit upon the ides of associating the name of the Mmpcrer
and of the leading Ministers with his great scheme. ‘This
would ilatter their vanity, and there would be the further |
advantage that these important persons, having become -
intimately associated with the whole undertaking, would


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 97


be morally compelled, in the case of any crisis or unfore-
seen difficulty, to lend their active assistance, unless they
were prepared to see their names associated with a
possible failure.

His idea was to give the name of the Empcror to the
undertaking as a whole, and also to name the leading
statesmen as patrons. This would have the value of a
kind of insurance policy.

No sooner said than done. He wrote the following
clever letter to the Emperor.* ‘“* The most obedient and
loyal undersigned servant of Your Majesty ventures
respectfully to inform Your Majesty that the main
requirements for successfully carrying out the great
national work, namely, the Vienna-Bochnia Railway, the
construction of which Your Majesty has most graciously
dcigned to authorise, have been met.

“The most obedient and loyal undersigned servant of
Your Majesty feels that he may venture in all humility
most respectfully to request Your Majesty that you may
be graciously pleased to permit that the Vienna-Bochnia
liailw:iy shall be allowed to bear the auspicious name of
Kai ser-Ferdinunds-Nordbahn.

“ Tf a simular means of communication should come to
be established between Vienna and Austrian Italy, the
great Austrian monarchy would also possess an Inperial
Southern Railway, that is, one big railway connecting
Galicia und Austrian Italy, as a remarkable monunient to
Your Majesty’s glorious Government, and the memory
of the benefits which you have conferred would be
handed down to posterity, to your undying fame.”

Solomon Rothschild wrote at the same time a letter to
Metternich that was also cunningly worded."


“Your Hicuness !
* Any great industzial enterprise, being of the
nature of an undertakiag of national importance,


Q


98


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


requires at its inception, and in order to attain to
prosperity, to bear the mark of the approval of
high authority.

“Such is the case with the proposal to con-
struct the great Northern Railway between
Vienna and Bochnia, together with its seven
branch railways, all other conditions for its
success having been satisfied.

“ Appreciating this fact, the humble signatory
to this letter has realised the importance, in the
special interests of those who have ventured their
money in this great undertaking, to take such
steps as may be appropriate for inducing such
statesmen as are the bearers of honourcd names
to place themselves as patrons at the head of
this national undertaking, which promises to
bring the Austrian monarchy as much glory
as it does advantage. The humble signatory
to this letter has ventured in this connection to
consider the names of His Exeellency Count von
Mittrowsky, the Head of the Treasury, and This
Exccllency Count Kolowrst, Lord President of
the Council, and humbly begs that Your Highness
will graciously be pleased to encourige us by
accepting the name of high protector of the
Vienna-Bochnia Railway, whereby the Company
would feel themselves exceptionally honoured,
and suceess would be doubly assured.”


Metternich minuted as follows": ‘f It has for a long


period been in accordance with the practice of the
Austrian monarch, that persons of high position should
appear as patrons at the head of organisations or associa-


tions formed for benevolent and useful purposes. ‘The


high importance of this undertaking from the industrial,


commercial, and economic point of view is beyund


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 99


dispute. The Chancellor, therefore, together with Count
Jxolowrat and Count Mittrowsky, feels no hesitation in
accepting the Patronage, provided that Your Majesty
shall be graciously pleased to express your concurrence.”

The three statesmen also sent forward, with their
approval, the petition for the Emperor’s name. ‘ It is a
well-known fact,” wrote Count Mittrowsky'” on the
petition, “ that the rulers of our Impcrial House, and the
sovereigns of other countrics too, have always given per-
mission that canals and roads which have appeared to be
of especial importance for their country’s welfare should
bear their names... .

“The public itself has taken this view of the under-
taking, as is shown by the fact that within so short a
time not only was the considerable authorised capital
subscribed, but almost double the amount was applied
for. This undertaking is on a colossal scale, such as has
never before been contemplated in Europe, and, to-
gether with all the developments that may result from it,
will remain us an everlasting monument to the first years
ot Your Majesty’s reign.

‘“ Not only. therefore, do I see no objection ; in view
of these considerations I would express the most
emphatic hope that Your Majesty may most graciously
deign to permit that the Vienna-Bochnia Railway may
henecforward be known as the ‘ Kaiser-Ferdinands-
Nordbahn.’ ”’

Solomon Rothschild’s petition was accordingly ac-
cepted by the obedient Empcror Ferdinand on the 9th
April, 1836," and thereby the project was given a sup-
port which in later years was to prove exceedingly useful.

Thus the stage seemed to be splendidly set for the
construction of the Nordhahn. On the 25th April, £836,
the first genezal mecting was called, at: which Solomon
stated that he would hand over the entire concession,
without reserving anything for himself and his House, to


100 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the Company. Rothschild made it a condition that he
should always have full access to any information affect-
ing the Company’s affairs, that he should be indemnified
for the expenses he had incurred, amounting to 12,652
florins, 50 kronen, and that 100 free shares should be
issued to the most deserving of those who had collabor-
ated in bringing the scheme into being. In return he gave
a solemn assurance, as the minutes of the mecting record,
“to devote his future efforts to this great national under-
taking with the same zeal that he had shown for it
hitherto.” At the second general meeting the Articles of
Association were submitted and adopted, and a Pro-
visional Board of Management was appointed, which
Johann Baron von Sina and Daniel Baron von Eskeles
were asked to join. They were anything but friendly to
the undertaking, and really joined the Board to find out
their rival Rothschild’s plans.

Stirred up by these men, a pewerful opposition came
into being ; it soon found support, especially amongst the
comparatively ignorant public. and such business men
whose private interests were tareatened made use of it
for their own ends. The spokesman of this opposition was
Ludwig Baron von Pereira, a partner in the bank of
Arnstcim and liskeles; he was secretly supported by Baron
von Sina, and was acting in the intcrests of those two
banks. He was put up to send in a memorandum pulling
to pieces all the statements, estimates, and proposals of the
Provisional Board of Management of the Nordbahn. In
this elaborate statement, Pereira was at pains to set out
everything that might tend to show that the seheme was
ill-conceived or impracticable. First. he dealt with the
terrible consequcrees that might result from the least
increasing gradient. “ Even though,” wrote Baron
Pereira, © ene appears to be looking at a plain extending
as far as the eye can reach, a plain which at first
sight seems t» be perfectly flat, accurate measurements


TRIS TREP ob VEE FERS 4


ESTEVAN TEAPLW AY. Gith NOVEMBEPIR Psar


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 101


may easily reveal an upward gradient of more than one-
third per cent. In such a case the railway would become
involved in-enormous loss, since running over a slightly
rising gradient would cost a great deal more money... .
It may be imagined how embarrassing it would be, on this
apparently level surface, suddenly to discover a some-
what too steep gradient after the construction had been
begun... . Such an unforeseen difficulty, although not
allowed for in the calculations, would have to be dealt
with in order to make the rail traction possible ; a cutting
would be necessary, and considerably unforeseen ex-
penditure would be entailed, especially as one often
encounters rocky patehes. ...

“ Moreover, sandy districts will cause difficulties such
as will produce positive amazement when they come to
be destt with in practice. The greatest possible degree of
techincal perfection is far from having Leen achieved in
the machine so far discovered and used. The ercatest
difficulty is offered by the construetion of the wheels,
which so far have not been made to revolve independ-
ent! . asin the ease of carringe wheels, but are so con-
structed as. form one pices with the axle, and to
revolve together with if. As the wheels have no individual
movement, any crookedness in the railway is out of the
question... and for this reason only barcly perceptible
bends ¢ re possibie in a railway for steam traction, ... In
the case of the slightest carelessness resultips ino the
locomotiye approaching a bend too quickly, it will either
jump the rails or tear {hem or break the wheels, for some-
thing must yield to the force of the speed. ... H the rail-
way is to attract Galician freight traffie. it must work
cheaper than the horse carriage... . Experience, how-
ever, teaches us that under the stress of competition
these people Will lower theie freight charges. . . . {t is,
therefore, not impossibl: that they will sustain the
competition of the raiisays, for i is just in those


102 TIE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


districts that fodder and other expenses of carriers are
particularly low.

“Only those railways can succeed which depend
mainly on passenger traflic. Hitherto railways have not
becn able to compete with horse traffic.

““Morcover, passengers and freight are only to be
carried in the one direction, from Bochnia to Vienna, and
not in the reverse direction ; for this reason alone the
Bochnia Railway would be at a special disadvantage as
compared with any other, since in no other case do we
find this disparity between the up and down traffic.”

In his detailed memorandum Pereira endeavoured to
show that the goods traffic which was counted upon
would not be obtained.

In his wild attack upon the whole undertaking, Baron
Pereira did suceeed in discovering objections which
actually proved to be well founded. IIe stated, for in-
stance, that it would be absurd to build a single track
railway with sidings. He stated that it was clear on the
face of it that a double track would be needed, and he
could show “ that all railways which have hitherto been
built as single tracks are now being converted into
double tracks. I do not, therefore, see why we should
start with a faulty method of construction.”

This objection was put forward by Percira only in
order to swell the estimate for the cost of construction, as
he wished to show that the estimates were far too low,
on which point he certainly proved in the end to be per-
fectly right. But at this point Pereira overlooked the fact
that he had just endcavoured to show that even a single
track railway would not obtain cnough passengers and
freight to pay. VPcreira closed his statement with the
observe! ion that, as an expenditure of 14,000,000 florins
was far from sufficing for the construction of the railway,
it would be impossible to apply lower farcs than those of
the postal service, and as, moreover, there would not be


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 103


a sufficient quantity of goods to pay, the usefulness of
the railway. became highly problematic."

Rothschild’s powerful enemies, who also had friends
amongst the Empcror’s entourage, saw to it that the
Emperor heard of the difficulties which there was reason
to believe were inherent in the Rothschild-Riepel scheme.
They even succeeded in prevailing upon the weak
Emperor to address ‘“‘ an Impcrial Reseript ” to Metter-
nich, which read as follows:


“Dear Princk METTERNiIcH,—~You have in-
formed me how far the preliminary work in the
construction of the Bochnia Railway, for which I
have granted a concession, and which I have per-
mitted to be identified with my name, has pro-
eceded. Since numerous unfavourable rumours
about it are abroad, you will also report to me
whether difficulties have arisen in the further pro-
gress of the work on this railway, and, in that case,
what these difficulties are.

** FERDINAND,”


Count Mittrowsky thereupon immediately communi-
eated with Leopold von Wertheimstein, who was
authorised by Solomon to deal with all questions affect-
ing railways, and asked him “ to indicate with the frank-
ness and thoroughness that were due to His Majesty any
possible obstacles or difficulties, as well as any means
whereby these might be obviated, cither by the cfforts of
the Company that had been formed for the purpose of
constructing the railway, or otherwise by the help and
support of the administration. tf this were practicable.” "

Rothschild, who was embittered and angry at the
‘*influerces * which had made themsclves felt, had in the
meantime made a statement that if the majority of
the shareholders should really “ unexpectedly come to the


104 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


conclusion that the railway scheme should not be carried
through, he would defray all the expenses incurred up to
that point from his own resources, so that all the share-
holders would recover their original ten per cent. deposit
in full, it being, of course, understood that the concession
for building the Kaiser-Ferdinands-Nordbahn, granted
to him by the Emperor and transferred by him to the
Company, would cease to be their property and would
have to be reconveyed by the Company to himself, who
would then have the free right to dispose of it as he
pleased.”’* Shortly afterwards Solomon Rothschild left for
Paris, whence he informed Count Mittrowsky that he had
made this statement in order to reassure the shareholders
with regard to their ten per cent. deposit, and that he
intended, without hurry or fuss, to have a new accurate
technical and commercial investigation made by the
Board of Management in order te prove conclusively that
the objections raised with regard to the usefulness and
practicability of the railway were unfounded.

Solomon Rothschild proceeded to instruct Riepel to go
through Pereira’s memorandum criticising the schemic,
and to exrmine it in detail to see how far it was Justified.
Riepel’s counter-memorandum™ answered with biting
incisiveness the points made by his opponent. First of all
he dealt with the objection that it would be more sensible
to have a double-gauge railway. “* We also appreciate the
fact,” wrote Riepel, “ that a double gauge is more con-
venient than a single gauge line ; but it appears to us to
be pure madness to propose a double line while doubting
the possibility of carrying freight traflie amounting to
one and a half million hundredweight, for a single line
would be more than suflicient for such an amount.
Robert stephenson in London advised us not to con-
struct the second line until the freight carried should
exceed five million hundredweight per annum.” Riepel’s
reply proceeded to dea) with his opponent’s memorandum!


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 105


point by point, stating : “ One ought not really to con-
descend to reply where it is a matter of the first elements
of the theory of railway construction, but out of a
genuine desire for peace I commend the following
reassuring considcrations to the somewhat hasty novice
in technical matters who has written the memorandum.

“1. The Nordbahn track between Vienna and Briinn
consists of long and straight sections such as do not occur
in any other European railway. If anyone does not be-
lieve this, let him come and sce for himself !

“2. The steepest gradicnt between Vicnna and Tun-
denburg is less than 1/1,000. If anyone docs not believe
this, let him come and try for himself !

“3. The radii of curvature so far applied to the Nord-
buhn are of a length of 1,500 to 1,800 and 4.000 mctres.
It is obvious, therefore, that we are still more cautious
than our technical advisers ! If anyone does not believe
this, let hina come and test the curves for himself !

“4, The critie’s fear that in planning the track we
might come across ‘ unrealised and = insurmountable
hills © is entirely without foundation, as well as what he
suvs with regard to rocks, marshes, ete. None of these
objections have any basis in fact. If anybody doubts
this, let him come and watch the surveying operations.

*§. The sand which our critic so much fears is an
absolutc gift of the gods to the Nordbahn scheme, and we
shall gradually carry it along the whole of the permanent
way for the top-dressing of the track.

“6. We have no intention of using a ground auger,
because we don’t want to be a laughing-stock.

“7, Everyone is agreed that steam-engines have not
yet been perfected ; we must therefore content. ourselves
with what England has so éar achieved. If the technical
adviscr cf the opposition knows anything better, we
shall gratefully accept it. Let bim speak |... With refer-
ence to the offensive doubt expressed lest the gradient at


106 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the Weiskirchen watershed should not have been asccr-
tained, although the gradient is given in the prospectus,
I enclose the particulars regarding the survey of this
gradient, as being the proper method of meeting this
insult with the contempt it deserves.

“10. It is to be regretted that it should be possible to
find persons in Austria, enjoying the reputation of com-
petent experts, who are prepared to assert that it is
necessary to take a survey of the gradients of the Prater,
the Marchfeld, the Thaja-Thallend, cte., before one can
confidently decide that it is possible to Jay down a rail-
way running through these flat, open valleys and plains.
Such a lack of practical imagination deserves no reply.”

Ricpel also endeavoured to defend the financial
estimates, and procecded to deal with ‘the specific
attacks of Baron Pereira, or, rather, of the uninformed
advisers who are at the back of him.” After a detailed
exposition as to the amount of freight that might con-
fidently be relied upon, Riepel observed : “ Particularly
strange is the remark that hitherto railways have not
been able to compete with carriage by road.

“ This statement would deny to all railways such as at
present exist and flourish the possibility of continuing to
lead a healthy existence. This statement would deal a final
blow to all railways for all time, making it ridiculous to
go on wasting thought on railways, as they ai’ have to
compcte with road transport. ... To those partly foolish
and partly malicious enemies of the great national work
which they are calling in question (in tencbris ira et
invidia flagrantibus), I would say—and may my words
follow them to their hiding-places—that there is not, and
never has been, arything great or good or beautiful
which stupidity and malice have not endeavoured to
defame, and that it would be the wiser course to
acquicsce good-temperedly, permitting the duly author-
ised Board of Management of the Nordbahn quictly to


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 107


proceed with its work in accordance with the principles of
common sense, and of commercial wisdom, applying the
results of scientific investigation, whereby we cherish the
hope that the Kaiser-Ferdinands-Nordbahn will suc-
eced in silencing and putting to shame stupid and
malicious tongues. If, however, although I think it un-
likely, we should even then not be left in peace, and
if these mischicf-makers should still refuse to allow
us Austrians to become somewhat more industrious,
more famous, and perhaps happier, the time will
perhaps come to expose these wretched mortals"
and attack them mercilessly with all available means
of publicity, and if necessary with the most unsparing
ridicule.”

Wertheimstcin enclosed this memorandum with his
reply to Count Mittrowsky’s letter asking for further in-
formation to enable him to deal with the Imperial
Rescript. In his covering letter Werthcimstein especially
expressed Solomon’s appreciation of Tlis Majesty's
rescript, as constituting “ a further proof of His Majesty’s
erac’uus concern for the prosperity of the Kaiser-
Ferdinands-Nordbahn,” and of the fact that he con-
tinued to enjoy His Excellency’s confidence.

“With reference to the question,” the letter went on,
“how far the preliminary work for the construction of
the WKaiser-Ferdinands-Nordbahn has advaneed. this has
been exhaustively dealt with by the provisional Board of
Manavement in the enclosed statement, to which the
dutiful undersigned has nothing to add beyond ex-
pressing to Your Iixcelleney his profound regret that,
after the preliminary investigations had been so satis-
factorily completed, an undertaking which is certain to
be of inestimable benefit te the common weal should, at
the very start, be defamed in a passionate spirit of
obvious malice, whereby its speedy progress to a satis-
factory conclusion has been retarded. Our opponents


108 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


have not left untried any means whereby they might
achieve their obvious intention of shattering confidence
in the undertaking, so that the Company might be wound
up. Through every channel of publicity the undertaking
has been represented in the most unfavourable light and
the most highly coloured versions have been given as to
the practical] difficulties connected with it, not to men-
tion the objections that have been put to Government
Departments without any of these noisy critics ever
having investigated the painfully collected data himself.
They have in the most unscrupulous manner misrepre-
sented the honest intentions of the first founder of the
undertaking, and have accused him of being a speculator
intent only on making a quick profit on the Hotation.
Finally, they have aceused the truly public-spirited first
sponsor of the scheme, Professor Ricpel - to whose
honesty, disinterestedness, industry, and expert _know-
ledge the writer feels he cannot testify too strougly—of
the most utter superficiality an wronghcadcd rashness,
besides attributing unworthy motives to him, as the
writings of our critic, Baron Pereira, show. The natural
consequence of all these mischievous activities was that
the shareholders became nervous and suspicious, and
gencral dissatisfaction began to be expressed. whereupon
the Board of Management, as they have tharmsclves duti-
fully reported to Your Execliency, decided cree again
closely to examine the whole scheme before undertgking
the grave responsibility of embarking on the first donnie
work of construction.”

By way of finally refuting the objections of the opposi-
tion party, Werthcimstein called attention to the
recommendations oF Ricpel and Sichrowsky, which be cn-
closed, . -ivising that construction should not commence
unless and until the new commission, which was to be
appointed, had pronounced in favour of it. [He concluded
by requesting Mittrowsky to continue to plead the cause


PARANA UR Ph


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 109


of the great national undertaking at the steps of the
throne.

Such was the heartfelt outburst provoked by the petty
critics and enemics that had appcared on all sides. Lest
public excitement should be increased still further, it was
decided to refrain from publishing the opposition report
and the reply thereto. But Solomon Rothschild and
Wertheimstein perccived that the moment was propi-
tious for obtaining further advantages from the State,
and they desired to exploit Mittrowsky’s friendly feel-
ings. Now that the Emperor’s name and his own were
associated with the undertaking, its non-cotupletion
would have constituted a personal reverse. The clever
move of securing these names was already producing
useful results.

Accordingly leave (from the State Service) was applied
for for engineers, ineluding the well-known Carl Gheya ;
application was made for the import of steam-engines free
of customs duty, and permission was again asked for ex-
tending the railway to Pressburg, which would serve to
consolidate the whole scheme. Then Solomon proceeded
tu raake a definite move against the opposition, who
themselves hud seats on the Provisional Board of Man-
agement, of the Nordbahn, by presenting them with the
alternative of either ceasing their opposition or with-
draving from the association.

On the 19th October, 1886, Solomon summoned a
further general mecting, the third, at which the share-
holders were asked to decide upon the plain issue
whether the construction of the railway should be com-
menceed forthwith, or whether the Company should go
into liquidation, in which ease Baron von Rothschild
would simply repossess himseif of the concession which
he had transferred to the Company, and personally
defray ah expenses incurred up to that date, in so far as
they should execed the nmount of 57,000 florins. The


110 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


vote resulted in a complete victory for Solomon Roths-
child; of the cighty-three qualified voters no less
than seventy-six voted in favour of building the whole
railway.

The opposition on the Provisional Board of Man-
agement ~including Sina, Eskeles, and Pereira—ab-
stained from voting. As a result of the vote, the two
former were also forced to resign from the Provisional
Board of Management. The way had now been cleared for
finally starting with the construction of the railway, but
the rivalry between the two banking firms of Sina and
Rothschild had become still more embittered.

Count Mittrowsky continued to give his active support
to the undertaking. When the Nordbahn Board re-
quested that they afane be lent the Crown Surveyor,
Francesconi, Baron von Baldacci said there were ‘a
thousand reasons against it,” observing that, as the
undertaking had been allowed to bear the name of Ifis
Majesty, there was no reason ‘or granting still further
favours.

In sending this forward, Court Mittrowsky niunuted
with some heat: ‘ Your Majesty has already demon
strated to the Nordbahn, which is privileged to bear
Your Majesty’s name, that you are prepared to grant this
most deserving undertaking Your Majesty's special pro-
tection, to which the very fact that it has been graciously
permitted from the very commencement to bear Your
Majesty’s name gives it a special claim.

“The Nordbahn is the first considerable railway un-
dertaking within the Austrian monarchy constructed
with a view to the application of steam power, and its
success, as being the first example of its kind, is bound fo
be a determining factor with regard to the possibility of
other sutuiar railways being constructed. Their requests
should therefore be granted.”

‘The case ui the Nordbahn therefore clearly shows that


WS. 3
we 4
“ag m ye S  N


-?


- i a
i “x —


OPENING CEREMONY OF TILE KAISER FERDINANDS NORDBATEN,


Tt JEL. Pst


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 111


the higher authorities in the State, which have so con-
stantly and particularly of recent years been subjected
to abuse, took a far more enterprising and farseeing view
shan so-called public opinion and the Press. Had these
orevailed, the great scheme which constituted the first
important picce of railway construction on the Continent
ind introduced an cra of quite uncxampled progress,
would never have come to fruition.

While the construction of the Nordbahn was in full

progress, Baron von Sina received his concession for con-
structing the railway to the south towards Gloggnitz, as
well as on the right bank of the Danube towards Raab,
which finally disposed of any Rothschild hopes of get-
ling the construction of uxe southern portion into their
hands. However, the construction of the Nordbahn fully
xcecupied them financially. The section Vienna-Briinn
was opened in 1839, the outward journey being a trip of
rejoicing and triumph. On the return journcy there was
a collision, which was the first railway accident in
Austria.
Gradually the Government officials became rather
more casy. At first, in order to obtain a ticket. it was
necessary to sceure a permit, or passenger card, from the
police on the previous day ; this had to be v7sé at Deutsch
Wagram, the temporary railway terminus, and person-
uly surrendered to the police after the return Journey.”
On the opening of the section to Briinn these restrictions
were abolished.

The cost of constructing the railway did very substan-
tially exceed the estimates which had been made at the
time. Percira was proved right, for the building of the
railway as far as Leipnik, forty two miles, or about two-
thirds of the total length, alone consumed 2,400,000
more than the 14,000,000 gulden orivinally subscribed,
and it was only the advances made by the House of
Rothschild that enabled the further construction of the


112 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


railway to proceed. In the forties Solomon Rothschild
repeatedly applied to the Government for support and
financial assistance, but he got comparatively little help.
The construction of the railway proceeded slowly, and it
proved to be impossible to finish it in the ten years
provided by the concession. The Government, however,
consented to grant an extension of a further ten years ;
and it was not until 1858 that the railway was fully
completed according to plan.

After the first difficult years of construction, profits
soon began to be realised. The shares, which in 1842
were still under par, rose in 1843 to 103, in 1844 to 129,
and in 1845 to 228. It became increasingly evident that
capital sunk in this manner in railway construction over
a period of years would ultimately prove an inexhaus-
tible source of wealth and prosperity, in which the
districts served by the railway would share.

While the first big steam rvilway to be built on the
Continent had become associated with the name of
Solomon Rothschild, his brother James in Paris had not
been idle. There, too, the public and the Press raised the
most absurd objections to the idea of railways. “ The
fire from the engine,”’ several ‘‘ expert ” articles asserted,
“would set forests and crops on fire. The noise of the
trains would make the neighbouring country houses and
propertics uninhabitable, and drive mad the cattle
pasturing in the vicinity of the railway.”

There were, however, a few progressive and far-seeing
engineers who actively and enthusiastically advocated
the idea of building a passenger railway in France,
which country up to the year 1885 had not had one.
Prominent amougst them was Emil Pereire, who was of
Porturuese origin, having left that country on account of
the persecution of the Jews. He belonged to the school of
thought which had been founded by the philosopher and
first. socialist, Count Saint-Simon, and had started as 4


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 118


journalist in collaboration with his brother Isaac. His
financial articles had attracted James Rothschild’s atten-
tion. Emil Pereire had enthusiastically taken up the idea
of building a local railway from Paris to Saint-Germain.
James Rothschild was favourably disposed to consider
a railway proposition as the result of what his brothers,
Nathan and Solomon, had told him, and he accordingly
lent a sympathetic ear when his co-religionist, Emil
Pereire, approached him with the suggestion that he
should finance such a project. As Pereire’s ideas were
supported by the results of practical expericnce else-
where, James proceeded to negotiate for the local rail-
way. The authorities, however, refused to take the
scheme seriously.

Thiers commented : ‘‘ We must give the Parisians this
as a toy, but it will never carry a passenger or a parcel."
Even the famous French physicist and astronomer,
Dominic Francois Arago, in addressing the Chamber,
declared, as had previously been stated in Austria, that
travellers in passing through a tunnel a few metres long
wot.id be suffocated.

‘The ‘‘ toy ” was, however, sanctioned, and the Paris-
Saint-Germain railway was opened on the 26th August,
1837, Its success soon proved what a good idea it was,
and the Chambers, which had in 1835 rejected a scheme
for bu'tding a railway by the State, were made to look
foolish. Thus in Paris, too, the Rothschilds were taking
the lead in railway construction. In the case of the
second passenger railway, however, they did not have
things all their own way. The railway in question was
that between Paris and Versailles, and the idea of this
railway occurred simultaneously both to Rothschild and
Fould. Emil Pereire, who was in Rothschild’s service,
built the railway on the right bank of the Seine, the
famous Rive Droite, the concession for which was
erented in 1886, while it was completed in 1889 ; Fould


114 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


financed the railway on the left bank of the Seine. The
two railway companies became bitter rivals, and the
rivalry extended to other fields in which the respective
financial powers were engaged.

Finally James Rothschild succeeded in obtaining the
concession for constructing and developing a northern
railway in France, and this gigantic undertaking made
very heavy claims on the financial resources of the Roths-
childs in the forties. On the 21st July, 1845, the opening
of the French Northern Railway became possible.

In the middle thirtics Nathan was keenly engaged in
railway construction in Belgium. That fur-seeing mon-
arch, Leopold of Belgium, had taken a keen interest in
railway schemes ever since he had acceded to the throne.
In collaboration with George Stephenson, he had planned
out a railway system radiating from Brussels ; and the
Belgian Chambers, showing much greater wisdom than
the French, passed the scheme as carly as 1834. In this
case the undertaking, which at its very commencement
required 150,000,000 franes capital, was carried out by
the State. A large proportion o1 this money was raised,
through the Rothschilds, in 1836, 18387, and 1840, with
the result that the small State of Belgium secured a lead
in railway construction, as is even now evidenced by the
fact that, in proportion to her area, Belgium has a con-
siderably greater railway mileage than other states.

These first railway undertakings of the Rothschilds
were succeeded in the years that followed by others
which it would take too long to enumerate. We shall sec
how, later, they retrieved the opportunity they had
missed of getting the Southern Railway of Austria into
their hands.

As iv proved by their attitude to the first railways in
England, it was not prophetic foresight or a love of pro-
gress that led the Rothschilds to embark upon the first
railway ventures on the Continent; the preliminary


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 115


success that had been achieved in England had proved
that substantial profits might reasonably be realised
elsewhere. Yet, although the Rothschilds were guided
in this instance, as always, by business considcrations,
they were indisputably the pioneers on the Continent of
one of the most daring and revolutionary discoveries of
the human spirit, which has contributed more, perhaps,
than any other to the cultural progress of our times, and
has played the most important part in promoting under-
standing between the peoples.


Cuapter IV
Differenc: _ between the Five Brothers with regard to Spain


Tne Rothschild wealth had been preserved intact
throughout the disturbances of the July revolution.
Indeed, the credit of the firm was more firmly established
than ever, and it was seeking investment for the enor-
mous capital sums it had accumulated. While his brothers
in France and Austria were engaged in big railway
schemes, Nathan was looking out for further ¢ xtensive
loan «perations that would be in harmony wit! the main
jines of British policy. Prominent amongst che States
‘hat . eeded financial assistance was Spain, v xich was at
his iime involved in most difficult politicil complica-
tions.

Since the year 1828, when a Bourbon and reactionary
France had intervened in Spain in order to re-establish
the absolute rule of King Ferdiiand VII, who had been
«very helmed b° the Revolution, conditions in the two
cou res had completely changed. When, after the July
~ovolition, © wrles X was exiled, and the constitutional
King, Louis Philippe, was placed upon the throne of
France, Ferdinand VIL found himself deprived of
French support. A further difficulty was the dispute
that, developed in the Royal Family at the beginning of
the thi ties, about the suecession.

King Ferdinand VIT had no children by his first three
wives; his fourth wife, Marie Christine, the beautiful
Neapolitan, presented him with two daughters In
Spain, however, sucecssion was only recognised through
the male line, so that Don Carlos, on absolutist, with
views as Conservative as those of Metternich, was the
heir apparent.

The Queen’ persuaded '». husband to promulgate a
Pragmatic Sanction decla*ing women, and consequent ty
their daughters, entitled to succeed. Don Carlos, however,

117


118 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


did not recognise this measure as valid, thus starting
the long dispute about the succession. As Don Carlos,
the Pretender, was a declared adherent of the old régime,
the young Queen proceeded to look to the Liberal Party
for support on the death of her husband in September
1833. The whole of Kurope took sides in the dispute.

In accordance with their general policy, the more
Liberal Western Powers aligned themselves on the side
of the Queen. They showed considerable reserve, however,
and little inclination to intervene directly. The Absolutist
Eastern Powers, and especially Austria, under Metter-
nich, took the side of Don Carlos. At the beginning of the
year 1835 things did not look too well for Queen Chris-
tine. The Carlists had made progress, and in January
there had actually been a revolution. So great was the
indignation in the capital at Austria’s altitude that the
Court did not even go into meurning when the Emperor
‘Francis died on 11th April. Ministries constantly changed,
and the struggle continued. Both sides engaged in this
internecine struggle needed troons and money. The latter
was generously fortheoming from various Powers, but
it was also wasted in a most lavish manner. Since
1823 loans to the extent of nearly three thousand million
reals* had been issued. Soon official sources no longer
sufficed, and private banks had to intervene. They en-
deavoured, however, to hinder the granting of credits.
according to the political tendencies of their various
Governments, to the party whose cause they did not
favour. Both sides approached the House of Rothschild
for money, and if was particalarly dificult for the Roths-
childs to come to a decision since their activitics ranged
over both the Western and Eastern Powers, and the
countries where their banks operated were in both politi-
tal camps. It is true that the fact that the ‘brothers were
simultaneously settled in the principal capitals of


*A Spanish silver coin, worth about 2} pence.


QUREN MWaAtcrr


CHAISTUING: (yp SPAIN


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 119


Europe, and were able to take concerted action on any
matter, was, as we have seen, one of the principal reasons
for the rise of the House, as one brother always kept the
other informed of what was happening. They were all in
a strong position to obtain reliable information, as they
were able in the course of the business of administering
the property of influential persons in the various coun-
tries to establish connections whereby they were always
able to obtain the most recent and reliable information
without any suspicion of bribery.

Sonictimes, however, this cosmopolitanis: also in-
volved them in difficultics ; and in this particular case
there was a natural difference of opinion between the five
brothers. Nathan was in a particularly awkward position,
since Inngland was most inclined to intervene actively.
Although France had joined the so-called Triple Alliance,
concluded on 22nd April, 1834, between England, France,
Spain, and Portugal ~ the Austrian Ambassador in Paris
had received the first news of its conclusion from James
Rot isehild, to whom: Nathan had sent a couricr?--Louis
Puihppe had no desire to pull the chestnuts out of the
lise and to intervene actively in Spain on behalf of the
Liboral Queen Christine, as Louis XV had done on behalf
of the Absolutist King Ferdinand VII.

The Liberal poliey foreed upon Louis Philippe through
the manner in vhich he had attained power was really
most distasteful fo him. He was not a Constitutionalist
from conviction, and privately felt that it would be
exceedingly dificult to secure his throne in France
against the wishes of the Eastern Powers and without
their support. Moreover, in the strictest secrecy of his
own heart, he cherished the hope of marrying the heir to
the throne, the Duke of Orléans, to an Austrian Arch-
ducness. James Rothsehitd, who was in constant touch
with the monarch and his most intimate advisers. knew
the King’s attitude, and therefore wished as far as


120 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


possible to keep himself financially out of the Spanish
hornets’ nest. It is unnecessary to observe that the
Vienna, Frankfort, and Naples brothers, who were
further from the scene of action, and entirely under the
influence of Metternich, wished to have nothing whatever
to do with Spain. At that time the five brothers consti-
tuted a single firm; the action of any one of them
affected all the rest, and herein lay the possibility of
conflict.

In spite of all considerations against such action,
Nathan had two very good reasons for wishing to make
a loan to Spain, i.e. to the Queen Regent, Marie Christine.
He would be acting in accordance with the wishes of the
British Government, and it would work in conveniently
as part of a large scheme he was planning, which prom-
ised to be an excellent piece of business. There were only
two places on the Continent of Hurope where quicksilver
was produced, while overseas sources were practically
negligible. The two sources were the quicksilver mines
of Idria, which the Tlouse of Rethsehild had purchased
from the Austrian Government and worked, and the
quicksilver mines of Almada in Spain, the products of
which constituted an important revenue for Spain. A
concern possessing both quicksilver mines would establish
a monopoly und would be able to contro! the price
of the metal. Such was Nathan’s scheme, and he was
now endeavouring to obtain the concession of the Al-
mada mines from Spain in return for the financial
assistance she was always needing, with a view to work-
ing them intensively. These mines had been owned by
the Fuygers in the sixteenth century, and the idea
appealed to Nathan of further emphasising the similarity
between the position and influence exercised by that
House and by his own. Nathan sent his son Lionel to
Madrid to carry out his plans. In agreement with the
Quee Regent the Spanish Government had decided to


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 121


auction the right of working the Almada mines, which
at that time yiclded only 16,000 to 18,000 ewts. of quick-
silver at 37 pesctas per ewt., offering a lease of about
five years, in order that the productivity of the mines
might be increased by the expenditure of foreign capital.
Offers were to be sent in to the Finance Minister under
seal, and then examined. The House of Rothschild em-
ployed their old tactics. They offered 5 reals more than
any other offer which should not execed 54 piastres the
hundredweight. The Spanish Government was especially
inclined to give the lease to the House of Ruthschild,
beeause Lionel had come with an offer from Nathan to
lend the Government 15,000,000 francs at a low rate of
interest, and this offer had been gratefully aceepted.
Moreover, the Spanish Government much preferred deal-
ing with the powerful tirm of Rothschild, with its world-
wide connection, than with the small native banks which
were financially weak. The Rothschilds had shown an
incanny instinct in hitting on the figure 54, for the
highsst offer, which was made by the Spanish Bank of
Zi lueta, wee exactly 54 piastres, and the Rothschilds,
having offered 5 reals more, were indicated as the persons
who should get the contract. A solenin agreement was
accordingly signed on 21st February, 1835, by Lionel
Rovhschild, and the Spanish Finance Minister, Count
José Maria Torceno; and the agrecment also bere the
signature of the Queen Regent, Marie Christine. To mark
the ocvasion Lionel was made a member of the Order of
Isabella the Catholic.

Toreio had passed an adventurous life. At the time of
the first Napoleon, in 1808, he had carried through the
memorable alliance between Spain and england against
the mighty Corsican. He was « man of Liberal leanings,
and advocated freedom of tne Press, the «bolition of the
Inquisition, and the dissolution of the inuumerable
spiritual Orders scattered over Spain. He was, therefore,


122 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


forced to leave Spain when the reactionary King Ferdi-
nand VII returned, and lived for a long time in Paris,
where he made the acquaintance of James Rothschild,
but fell out with him, probably owing to the refusal to
grant a loan. On the death of King Ferdinand VII he was
recalled to office by the Queen Regent, and had been
made Finance Minister on 15th June, 1834, thus attain-
ing a position which was of the very greatest importance
to the House of Rothschild, even though it intervened
in Spanish affairs only through Nathan’s branch.

This fact did not at the time prejudice the quicksilver
mine agreement, because Toreno needed the money for
the State. Indeed, Lionel had, on 27th May, in accord-
ance with the usual custom of the House, asked for and
obtained certain modifications of the agreement in their
favour, the most important of which was that the Span-
ish Government should renounce a right to terminate the
agrcement at the end of three years in return for a slight
increase in the price per hundred. The Rothschilds agreed
to pay 55 piastres per cwt., and all alterations in the
contract were agreed upon on 4th June, 1835. the
Rothsenilds having brought pressure to bear on various
important persons, not neglecting the Civ! Lists of the
Queen, to which they are said to have contributed
500,000 francs, the Queen being in very straitened cir:
cumstances at the time.’ The transaction was profitable
to both parties, for, by virtue of the monopoly which
they hud achieved, the Rothschilds were enabled to sell
the mineral, which cost them 55 piastres per ewL., al 76.
and even at 80, in London. This naturally yielded a very
considerable profit, and everything was done to increase
output, a fact from which the Spanish Government also
bencficed, and they took advantage of the position con-
stantly to ask the House of Rothschild for advances on
account of ihe quicksilver royalties.

Nevertheless, Spain’s financial position grew steadily


TIE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 123


worse owing to the interminable civil war and malad-
ministration. Not content with the advance of 15,000,000
franes, and the receipts from the quicksilver mines,
Toreno again approached the French House, i.e., James,
in spite of his previous refusal, for an advance. James,
however, had no political reasons for lending money to
Spain, and the quicksilver business had been satisfac-
torily settled. 'Toreno’s request was, therefore, refused, a
fact which made him indignant, not only with James, but
with the whole House of Rothschild. Meanwhilc, Toreno
succeeded in arranging the loan with Ardouin. another
banker, but on very unfavourable conditions. ‘The course
of the negotiations had further revealed to the Roths-
childs the exceedingly unsatisfactory condition of Spain’s
nuances. The four brothers on the Continent, who had,
anyhow, resented Nathan’s action in advancing
15,000.000. became anxious about their money, and
reproached their brother. It was finally decided to bring
every possible pressure to bear on the Spanish Govern-
raent to ren the money.

his aroused Toreno’s hostility to the full, and he made
every effort io put obstacles in the way of the repayment
of the money by the Spanish Government, In the end,
and at the cost of much effort, the Rothschilds suceeeded
in recovering part of their money in cash, and part. of it
in the very doubtful bonds of the Ardouin Loan. They
managed to do this, however, by the simple process of
buying the obstinate Finance Minister. The man certainly
proved expensive: he got 1,300,000 francs as a first
instalment. and a further 300,000 frances in the course
of the negotiations, that is, a total of 1,600,000 francs.

After thus recovering the money which they had lent
to Spain, the brothers had a discussion in Paris, at which
they exp ressec their rage an-l indignation at the attitude
of the Spanish Government, and particularly at the
contemptible ingratitude and unscrupulous avarice of


124 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Toreno. They decided to take exemplary vengeance on
him, and they succeeded only too well by means of a
bear operation, to which further reference will be made.

In order to scttle these risky Spanish transactions,
which had been far from going through to the satisfac-
tion of all the brothers, James Rothschild went to see
Nathan in London at the end of May 1835, intending to
take advantage of this opportunity for negotiating with
a business friend, Don Juan Alvarez y Mendizabal, in
matters regarding Portugal's public finanees. While he
was there they received the alarming news that
Martinez della Rosa’s Ministry had been foreed to resign
on the question of Franco-British intervention, and that
the new Prime Minister was none other than the
notorious Count Toreno. Nathan was terrified by this
appointment, although the bad news was modilied by
the fact that Toreno meant to ask Mendizabal, who was
friendly to the Rothschilds, to take oflice under him as
Finance Minister.

The appointinent of 'Toreno, and the wretehed condi-
tion of the public finances, as well as the unfavourable
military position with regard to the Pretender, Don
Carlos, made Nathan nervous about all his commitments
in Spain, including the highly profitable quicksilver
mines. If Don Carlos were to come into power, it would
be the death-blow to all the interests in Spam of Nathan
as being the supporter of the Queen Regent and her
Liberal adherents. He, therefore, made great efforts at
this time to sccure the armed intervention of England
and France in Spain. However, all that he was able to
persuade the Governments to do was, in the ease of
France, to place che Voreign Legion at the free disposal
of the Queen, and, in the case of England, to raise 4
volunteer regiment, despite the protest of the Tories.
Nathan actively assisted in recruiting the voluntecrs,
which without his money would have been impossible.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 125


Von Hummelauer, Chargé d’Affaires at the Austrian
Embassy in London, who was anything but well disposed
to Nathan, heard of his activities through Kirchner, a
clerk at the Consulate-General, who had been engaged
by, and drew his salary from, Nathan. This man was
therefore quite definitely acting as a spy for Austria
while being an official of an Austrian Consulate.*
Hummelauer, who distrusted Nathan, and rightly
considered that Nathan did not take his duties as
Austrian Consul-General very seriously, was anxious to
keep a closer eye on the activities of the House of
Rothschild by this means. Nathan was not aware
that he had a powerful enemy in HNummelaucr, who
often reported direct to Vienna in the frequent absence
of the indolent Ambassador, and thus had gained the
ear of Metternich. Nathan generally called at the
Austrian Embassy on Sundays, and would talk to
Jiummelauer if Esterhazy was away. On hearing of the
expected fall of the Spanish Ministry, and that Torcno
wou! probably become President, he called at the
Kr..bassy, showing every sign of alarm and distress. He
stated emphatically that if was clear from a letter his
Paris brother had sent him, that if the Kastern Powers
should prevent France from intervening in Spain, Louis
Phitippe would be finished, and dethroned within a few
weeks, if not days. Ilummelauer’s view was that this
was absolutcly inconsistent with the reports from Paris,
but he felt that Nathan was in a position to speak with
such authority that what he said could not be entirely
ignored. Moreover, the fact that James also was present
in London indicated that the two brothers were taking
important decisions. Prince Metternich had now received
information from the most various sources to the effect
that the Mouse of Rothschild were supporting with
money, not his candidate, “the Legitimist ” and re-
actionary Don Carlos, who was fighting the Queen


126 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Regent, but the Queen Regent Christine herself, who had
been born of the foam of the Revolution, and in addition
to all this he was now told that James had actually
travelled from Paris to London in order to lend consider-
able financial aid in support of England’s military
expenditure on behalf of Queen Christine, in order that
Spanish securities might rise in value. As Metternich
was unable to speak pcrsonally to Solomon, who was
staying in Paris, he decided to instruct his Ambassador
in Paris, Count Apponyi, to do so. He wrote a lettre
particuliére to the Count, explaining his suspicions of the
Brothers Rothschild, and instructing the Ambassador to
find out what the position was.

Count Apponyi took the bull by the horns. Although
he must have realised that he was scarcely likely to get a
complete explanation in this way, he simply called on
Solomon Rothschild to ask him about the matter.
Apponyi’s report on the mecting is exceedingly interest-
ing, although Solomon can scurcely have revealed to the
Ambassador the fond de sa pensér.'

When Apponyi explained to him that Metternich was
uneasy regarding the policy of the House of Rothschild
in Spain, Solomon Rothschild at first. expressed his
painful astonishment at such apparent mistrust regarding
the attitude of his House in relation to the financial
side of the Spanish question. He most solemnly protested
his sincerity and his good faith, and assured Apponyi
that precisely the converse was true, and that the
rumours that were current were entirely unfounded.
He followed this up with the somewhat far-fetched
asscrtion, told to the Count under the “seal of the
strictest secrecy,” and promptly retailed by him to
Metternich, that Nathan, the head of the London
branch, had allowed himself to be persuaded by the
entreaties of his wife Hannah, daughter of the English
banker Cohen, who had herself been brought into the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 127


matter by a complicated process of intrigue, to advance
about 16,000,000 francs to the Spanish Government.
The four brothers had highly disapproved of this
operation and regretted it, but they had inevitably been
involved in the transaction, since they were all partners
and jointly responsible for the actions of any one
member of the House.

Solomon thus endcavoured, by pleading female
influence, to soften the effect of his painful confession
that, in spite of all their assurances to the contrary, his
Jfouse had granted a loan to the Liberal Regent of Spain,
who was fighting against Metternich’s protégé, Don
Carlos. He proceeded to recount the further unfortunate
vicissitudes connected with this loan of fifteen to sixteen
willions, and the ‘ indescribable ” conduct of Toreno in
the matter. “ Here we give Spain,” he said, ‘ our honest
moncy, at a low rate of interest, such as anybody would
have paid, and then we have to pay a bribe to the
Spanish Finance Minister of 1,300,000 franes, and
300,000 franes to other people, and to accept quick-
silver and rubbish (by this he meant the Ardouin bonds)
in place of payment !”

Thereupon the Brothers Rothschild in London and
Paris proceeded to work for a fall in Spanish funds,
applying an amount of £1,800,000 to this purpose ! The
operat'on was completely successful, Spanish Rentes
falling from 70 to 37, and the panic resulting from the
terrible fall in value of Spanish securitics in London was
simply and solely the result of the Rothschilds’ act of
vengeanee, ‘Thousands of holders of Spanish securities
lost two-thirds of their property, but the Rothschilds
madc far more out. of it than the amount of the gratuity
—-en pots de vin, as Apponyi put it—-with which they
had bribed Count Toreno.

“Tell Prince Metternich,” Solomon Rothschild went
on to say to Apponyi, “* the House of Rothschild has done


128 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


all this for vengeance, and if Don Carlos is successful he
will largely have the House of Rothschild to thank for
it. My brother Nathan cannot stand London any longer ;
he is too disgusted with the Spanish business. He wanted,
even without having cleared up his accounts and put his
affairs in order, for which he did not feel sufficiently
calm, immediately to leave for Frankfort. James there-
upon offered to help him to clear things up, and that is
the real reason why James went to London. As soon as
this business is settled my brother Nathan is going to
Frankfort to spend a few months there.

‘““ This is the whole of our sceret, and I am confiding it
to you ; but kindly bear in mind that, if it were to come
out, we might be in personal danger, for how many
there must be who would gladly murder us for the
misfortunes they have suffered ! We have already sent
three couriers to recall my nephew Lionel from Madrid,
as if anything were to leak out he would be in the most
serious danger there.”

Count Apponyi was profoundly moved by this story.
He felt the enormous power wielded by the House of
Rothschild, and what a misfortune and a stupidity it
would be to expose one’s self to the risk of incurring its
vengeance. There were certainly many more innocent
than guilty amongst the victims, but Count Apponyi had
grounds for satisfaction, since the fall in Spauisn securitics
had naturally affected Count Toreno’s prestige, and the
Queen Regent, Marie Christine, and her system, which
was so vigorously opposed by Apponyi’s supreme chief,
the all-powerful Metternich, had suffered a serious blow.

“Ts it possible for a banker,” Apponyi asked, “to
take vengeance in any other way, having regard to the
numerous innocent victims of such an operation ; and
are we justified in complaining of the effcat produced by
this operation upon one of the most important political
questions of our time?”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 129


Meanwhile, Metternich had also received reports from
Hummelauer in England, and Esterhazy had received,
more particularly through the Austrian Ambassador in
London, various items of information compromising the
House of Rothschild with regard to their Spanish policy.
Esterhazy asked Nathan and James to come and see
him, and questioned them on the matter. They naturally
did their best to allay the Ambassador’s fears. James
wrote a letter from London on 28rd June, 1835,
containing the following passage :

“We had a long conversation with Prince Esterhazy,
and it is clear that Pozzo does not love us. We told him
that we are having nothing whatever to do with Spain,
or with the payments to the troops in Kingland ; for
Pozzo spoke as though we were providing the money
for raising the troops here. We told Prince Esterhazy
that he could write to the Prince that we had had
absolutely nothing to do with the matter,”

Such was the position of the Rothschilds, that they
naturally avoided expressing their inmost thoughts in
letters which were destined to be communic: ated to
Prince Metternich or Count Apponyi. One fact was
clearly established, namely that the London Rothschild
stood for the same Liberal views as the British Govern-
ment, and that was the essence of the matter.

Hui imelauer trusted Nathan no further than he could
see him, ‘* For,” he wrote a little later,* “ even if Nathan
had entirely disposed of the Spanish affair, I should not
regard this as any real guarantee for his conduct in the
future. Last year, when he became a partner to all the
intrigues of the Quadruple Alliance, he observed to me
one day, in obvious embarrassment as to what he was to

say : ‘I must grant it (the loan of the moment) because
if I don’t, somebody else will.’ He has joined the ranks
of the revolutionaries simply because he saw his profit
in in doing. He has struck me ever since I have been


180 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


here as so completely disingenuous and so cheap in his
motives that I am convinced that he will always plump
for the side on which there is anything to gain, and that
if offers should be made from the revolutionary party
he would not hesitate to accept them.”

On receiving these complaints from the London
Embassy, Mcttcrnich protested to Werthcimstein, the
Vienna Manager of the Ilouse of Rothschild, and he
duly reported on this to Solomon in Paris and to the two
brothers in London. Thereupon Nathan and James in
London went to the Austrian Embassy, where they
found Hummelauer again in charge, and naively asked
him, of all people, to use his good offices with Prince
Metternich so that he might no longer suffer from these
misconceptions as to their “ real attitude.” Tummelaucr
did not disguise from them that he had been the actual
cause of the alarm at Vienna. He said that he was bound
to report the fact that Nathan had at one time spoken
in favour of intervention in Spain, on the ground of news
which he had received from James in Paris. Nathan was
exceedingly embarrassed, for he was unable to deny this
in front of his Paris brother.

** James’s astonishment at my statement,” Humme-
lauer reported,’ ‘ was no less than my surprise when
James emphatically gave me his word that he had
written in a precisely contrary sense to his brother, that
is to say, against intervention and not in favour of it.
He had actually pointed to the possibility of Louis
Philippe losing his throne as a consequence of interven-
ing, and not of refraining from intervention. Everything
leads me to the conclusion that this statement of Jamis
should be fully believed, since it entircly agrees with
everyti ing that one has heard from Paris, and accords
with the general spirit and well-known public sense of
the Head of the Paris branch, and with the fact of his
exceptional rclations with King Louis Philippe.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 131


Solomon in Paris had also received Wertheimstein’s
letter regarding Metternich’s dissatisfaction and _ his
request for an explanation. As he was normally domi-
ciled at Vienna, and completely dependent upon
Metternich, he was naturally far more sensitive to the
latter’s reproaches than any of his brothers. Solomon,
who was forced to live under the immediate eye of the
Prince, was naturally particularly conecrned to clear
himself, as far as the Vienna Cabinct was concerned, even
if this had to be done at the expense of his brother
Nathan. He did not confine himself to explaining his
position to Count Apponyi, but he also wrote at length
to Wertheimstein, instructing him to communicate his
remarks to Metternich. His faithful seeretary had the
letter copicd and submitted it to Metternich.


“J duly received your valued communica-
tion,”’* Solomon’s Ietter ran, “regarding the
affairs of my brother in London. Before I come to
deal with the matter itself I must remind you,
my dear Leopold, that, as you know, but H. H.
the Prince cannot know, my brother Nathan
Meyer is one of the ablest men as far as the
Ixxchequer and price movements are concerned,
but has no special aptitude in other matters.
You know that [ am a confirmed enemy of
Spain, and that he is no less so, not for political
reasons, of which he has little understanding,
but on account of the fact of 1,300,000 francs
which we had to sacrifice in order to recover our
money, and even then we did not recover the
whole amount, but were foreed to accept 600,000
in Ardouin bonds. We brothers thereupon
accided—this is betuween ourselves—to avenge
ourselyes on Spain and on Toreno, because he
and his Council have caused us an actual loss of


182


THE HOUSE UF RKRULTHSUHILD


1,680,000 francs. We decided to force Toreno
into a position in which he should suffer for every
penny that he had taken from our purse, to repay
the robbery by ruining his schemes, and to
indemnify ourselves for our loss. And that was
done ! Nathan Meyer sold, in addition to £600,000
of stock, a further £1,500,000, on bear account,
as shown by the enclosed copy of the statement,
the original of which I showed to Count Apponyi.
Now you know what happens in a bear operation ;
when the time for delivery comes, if you have not
got the stock you must borrow it, and that is
what my brother did, but in the meantime the
people from whom he had borrowed stock, and
who were forced to take back the stock from him
at the higher price, were not able to meet their
obligations, owing to the excess of £1,500,000
stock which my brother had sold ; instcad of the
Ardouin Loan being £4,500,000 —£5,500,000 had
been sold, and this flooded the market and ruined
the value of Spanish paper. I have had Lionel’s
letters from Madrid copicd to send to you; he
says in them that Ardouin and Mendizabal sent
couriers to Madrid complaining that Nathan
Meyer Rothschild was selling so alarmingly and
depressing the stock. Lioncl naturaily denied
this, and he is back from Spain nuw, and the
robbers in Madrid have had their credit ruined.
Prince de TYalleyrand: is still alive, and, as His
Highness may ascertain we have been to see him
ten times, which between ourselves has also cost
us a little money, and we asked him to remain a
few days longer in Paris so that the King might
adhere to his resolve not to intervene. I would have
you know that we were with Broglic,**and Guizot”
was there; they are both at heart opposed to


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 133


intervention, so, when askcd for our sincere
opinion as to what was best, we replicd that we
were convinced that France’s credit would go to
the devil if they intervened, and that they would
have to face a second and a third revolution. We
have also scen the King and made him tear for
his crown, and he told us that he would rather
take on Manguin"™ than intervene. Thicrs'* is now
bitterly hostile to us ; it seems that the King told
him what we had said, as also did Guizot and
Broglie. As regards Nathan Meyer Rothschild,
he is a child in polities. The fact that, as you
write, he discussed the matter with Esterhazy is
an absolute proof that he believes that the
Powers will be pleased by intervention. There is
no other way of explaining it ; with regard to
Spain itself, I guarantce you by the happiness of
my family and my two only children, if he is
handed clean money all he need do is to change
it. He is so disgusted that he says he is going off
and won't touch Spain again 7f the money is put
in his hands. this I assure you. For the sake of
his health, and te have a little rest, he is going to
Frankfort when his son Lionel arrives in London ;
he will take Lioncl with him for a few months to
the family at Frankfort. Iam prepared to swear
before God to the truth of what [ am writing,
which I want you to pass on to the Prince. I
take my oath upon it that it is all absolutely
true. However, unfortunately the Rothschilds
have broad backs, and there are constant articles
in the papers. In other matters that arc not con-
“erned, with the Bourse, Nathan Meyer Rothschild
is not particularly bright ; he is execedingly com-
petent in his office, but, apart from that, between
ourselves, he can hardly spell his own name.


134


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


This brother of mine, however, is so disgusted
with Spain that he can hardly bear himself, just
like all of us, only perhaps he feels it more because
he realises that he made the advance of 15,000,000
francs without asking any of his partners about
it. You can, therefore, communicate my whole
letter to the Prince, assuring him that there can
be no thought of giving the Spanish Government
a single farthing of credit. I myself do not yet
know when we brothers will meet; whether the
affair of the Spanish Loan will cause a split we
shall see. Tam sixty, my brother at Frankfort is
sixty-two ; I] have only two children, and if I live
very carefully I can live on the interest of my
interest ; I have fortunately only got to provide
for my son, as my Betty is as rich as her father."
I do not mean that J intend to give up business,
but only to sce to it that I can sleep peneetully.
The Spanish affair has completcly ruined my
nerves ; it is not the loss or money, for, even if the
whole 15,000,000 franes had been lost, my share
would have been only 3,000,000, but the un-
pleasantness which we have had with thus
business. Now Nathan Meyer Rothsciitid has four
grown up sons, and Carl has two younger boys, so
they manage on the basis of a dozen heads.
Because my father has so disposed we shall
probably have to remain together, but I must
confess that it has all very much tired and
exhausted
“Your
“S. M. v. Roriscur.p.”


“ T have sent your Ictter of 15th to London, as
James is in London just now to deal with accounts.
Y must beg you to show the Ictter only to the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 135


Prince, as we and N. M. R. (Nathan) are getting
anonymous Ictters threatening our lives for having
so much depressed the Spanish bonds, and I am
afraid to go out at night.”


This letter was characteristic in more than one respect ;
it shows that the Spanish affair did really trouble
Solomon exceedingly, and that the false position it
placed him in with regard to Metternich was so painful
to him that he had even thought for a moment of scpara-
ting from his brothers and withdrawing from business.
Tt is evidence of the conflict of conscience from which
Solomon was suffering, and of the development of a
crisis in his relations to his brothers in the West. This
was, however, ouly a passing move. Fundamentally the
maxim laid down by the old father, Meyer Amschel, still
held: “ All the brothers shall stand together in every-
thing ; all shall be responsible for the actions of each
one’; and the desire for profit and constantly to increase
the power of the House was greater than any misgivings
or any consideration for Metternich. Solomon remem-
beved Psalm exxxil, ve Lb: “ Behold how good and how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity !
... For there the Lord commanded the blessing, even
life for ever more.”

Wlulst the Rothschilds had at first been disappointed
in Spain, they had succeeded in their principal object,
the acquisition of the quicksilver mines, and the loan
affair with Toreno had been dealt with adequately. By
their bear operations in Spanish sceurities they had not
merely recovered the amount spent in bribing Toreno,
but had made a prolit besides. The final result, therefore,
had been, as Solomon himself had to admit, that his
much-abused brother Nathan had achicved a financial
gain to the general benefit of the House of Rothschild.

So far, so good ; but Solomon wanted to ascertain who


136 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


had spread the rumours which had made such an impres-
sion on the Imperial Court of Vienna, or, rather, on
Metternich. It did not take him long to find out, for he
had his confidential agents everywhere ; especially he had
friends whose interest it was immediately to bring in any
news that might be of value. Prominent amongst these
was Count Carl Pozzo di Borgo, the old bitter enemy of
Napoleon, whom he had hated since they were boys
together in Corsica. The Count, who was seventy years
of age, was at that period Russian Ambassador in
London. Notoriously avaricious, this scventy-year-old
diplomatist had amassed a large fortune in the course of
his carecr, but his desire for money was insatiable. Ue
had been connected with the Rothschilds when they had
been engaged in the issue of the Austrian Metalliques.
Two days after he had sent the above Ictter to Vienna,
Solomon received a detailed Jetter from his brother
Nathan, putting him in full possession of the facts
regarding the part which Pozzo had played. He at once
took the Ictter to Count Apporyi, and wrote another
letter to Wertheimstein in Hebrew.


** Paris,
“26th June, 1835.

“ Tenclose a copy of a Jetter from London, the
original of which I showed to Count Apponyi,
requesting him to write to Vienna confirming the
fact that he had scen the original here. You see
that Pozzo is the source of all these slanders. I
may be permitted to explain to my real friends
the origin of Pozzo’s deep and bitter hatred of the
rouse of Rothschild. You will remember that in
connection with the Metalliques Loan, which im-
mediately rose to a premium of five, and then of
ten per cent., my brother James wrote to me at
Vienna stating that Pozzo wanted to be given


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 187


1,000,000 gulden at the issue price. James added
himself that he was counting on Pozzo getting at
least half a million. You will remember that I had
very few Mctalliques left, and why should I make
a present to Pozzo of forty to fifty thousand
florins—to Pozzo, one of the world’s worst misers,
who has had so many profitable dealings in
Rentes with our firm.

* Pozzo’s suggestion was accordingly refused,
James telling him that unfortunatcly I had none.
He has since been our bitterest enemy, and makes
a profitable business out of damaging us. I got
my brother James to go to London to get all these
accounts cleared up ; thereupon Pozzo springs the
yarn that James went to London to pay the
ruffians who were going from there to Spain. In
the enclosed copy of a letter from Nathan regard-
ing part of the account, the original of which has
also been seen by Apponyi, you will find an itcm
of about 1,600,000, of which we bad to allow
Toreny and his gang to rob us, in order to recover
our money. Iam also sending you a Madrid news-
paper, which contains proof that we were against
the intervention, as well as an extract from
Lionel’s letter, which the Count has also read.

‘“‘ It is not interested motives that lead me to
make such efforts to clear myself of suspicion in
the eyes of the Austrian Cabinct. No, as God is my
witness, Lam actuated by love, respect and devo-
tion. Were I dealing only with that miser Pozzo,
who, beeause he did not get his 500,000 florins,
has become our deadly cnemy, he would see how
little his lies worry me.”


Solomon’s intention was that all his remarks should be
duly conveyed to Metternich sv as to re-establish himself


188 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


in Metternich’s good graces, even if he did so at the
expensc of his brother Nathan. Nathan was far away and
outside Mctternich’s range.

Meanwhile, the position in Spain had undergone a pro-
found change, and this was attributable in no small degrec
to the influence of the Rothschilds. His overwhelming
financial difficulties and the vicissitudes of the campaign
against Don Carlos had forced Count Toreno to resign in
favour of Mendizabal, who suceeeded him. This man, who
was a Jew by race and religion, had passed anadventurous
life. Having a highly developed financial sense, he had
been an army contractor early in his career, and had
then entered the service of the rich Madrid banker, Don
Vincente Bertram de Lys, who, as we know, came to be
closely connected with the House of Rothschild. It was
through him that the Rothschilds made the acquaintance
of Mendizabal. Mendizabal suc: ceded in ingratiating him-
self with Don Pedro of Portugal, to whom he was able to
render important financial services. Tn these transactions
Mendizabal worked in close alliance with the House of
Rothschild, which arranged a loan of £2,000,000° to
Portugal in April 1835. Later on Mendizabal was coin-
pelled, for political reasons, to emigrate to London.
where, through Nathan Rothschild, he was brought into
touch with members of the British Government. Ie also
speculated on his own account in Spanish securities, and
made a great deal of money.

He was still heavily involved in these securities when
the Rothschilds decided to bring about the great Spanish
slump. Mendizahal would hav e been ruincd had not
Nathan given hiia previous warning of what was going
to ha, pen. This very man was now Prime Minister in
Spain, a highly satisfactory circumstance for the Roths-
childs, especially as James, as well as Nathan, was on the
most friendly and personal terms with the new Minister.
The financial situation in Spain was certainly extremely


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 139


bad, and the continuing military operations against the
Carlists made it necessary to go on raising money.
Mendizabal made the most generous promises on taking
office, and substantially increased the public debt, in his
efforts to carry them out, He was generally regarded as
the agent of the most insportant bankers in the City of
London.

The Duke of Wellington, who viewed with dissatisfac-
tion the fact that the Liberal English Cabinet supported
the appointment of Mendizabal, went as far as fo say"
that he regarded the man as nothing more than a tool of
Herr von Rothschild, whose duty it was to further the
interests of the speculators in Spanish securities. In this
neatter Wellington was of exactly the same niind as Terr
von HWummiclauer, beeause in the Spanish affair Nathan
had supported the political opponents of the aged Ficld-
Marshal,

“Ts he still your Consul?” Wellington asked Humme-
lever in 1836,

“Yes,” replied Tunimelauer, “ but for many years all
Personal contact between me and Herr von Rothschild
has eeased, so that relations between him and the
Vinbassy are now entirely suspended.?**

Mendizabal’s Government, however, satisfied neither
the Spain of the Queen Regent nor the Rothschilds. He
kept on piling up the debt, and increased the deficit to
an cnormous extent.

It was all very well for the Rothschilds to tell everyone
that they were having nothing more to do with Spain.
That was not the case as long as they were in possession
of the rich quicksilver anines :nd to that extent depen-
dent upon Madrid. Nathan did not wish to endanger the
success of one of his most dating business strokes through
excessive harshness in dealing with bis friend Mendiza-
bal’s constant applications for loans. Tis brothers,
however, took a different attitude, as they were dependent


140 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


upon Metternich, Louis Philippe, and other powerful
persons.

Towards the end of 1885 the Spanish Queen’s Govern-
ment approached England for a loan, and England sug-
gested to France that they should jointly guarantee
£2,000,000. Nathan was asked to take a part in this loan.
He saw that by doing so he would win favour at Madrid,
while the guarantee of the two Powers made the loan a
perfectly safe one, but, in view of the great dissatisfac-
tion that had been caused by the previous loan issued
behind Metternich’s back, he decided on this oecasion
to put his cards on the table so far as his brothers and
Metternich were concerned.

“In view of a statement that has been made to me
by one of our most intimate friends in the Cabinet,” he
wrote to his brother James in Paris on 20th December,
1835,” ““ I am hastening to send you this express letter
to inform you that our Government has proposed to
France that she should join in euarantecing a loan to
Spain of two million pounds sterling,

“Our Government’s proposal is for a joint guarantee,
and they have so far had no reply from the French
Cabinet. If France will not agree to the proposal it is
highly probable that England will give her guarantee
alone, if not for the whole amount, at any rate for a
part.

“Under such an arrangement, my dear brother, we
showld be running no risk at all, in my opinion, for i!
Franee and England give their guarantee it will be like
the ‘ Greek Loan.’ ... Please forward this letter at one
to our brother Solomon at Vienna, as Dam very anxious
to kn w what Uncle thinks of this matter.”

By Cnele he nieant Metternich, It is interesting to note
that Nathen was kept informed by his ‘t most intimate
friend in the British Cabinct.” He was certainly usctul
for such business,


COUNT TORENG


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 141


It was difficult for Solomon at Vienna to persuade
Matternich to acquiesce again in the plan of granting a
loan to the enemy of bis protégé Don Carlos, a loan which,
in any case, was bound to be fruitless. For Metternich
would not change his opinion, especially in a matter
involving the fundamental principles upon which his
policy was based. Solomon represented the matter as
though Nathan wished to ascertain Metternich’s opinion,
but he sent him the extract from the Ictter which has
been given above. The result was, as might have been
expected, one of the Chancellor’s typicai lecturing
tirades. He wrote as follows in a private letter to Solomon
Rothschild © :


“ Vienna,
“99th December, 1835.

“Thave considered the Jetter which you have sent
me with the attention which the subject obviously
deserves. You know me well enough to have
learned that I never engage in speculative tran-
sactions, and it is therefore unnecessary for me to
take cognisance of them. This case raises other
considerations ; and your brother Nathan M.
desires to know my views. These 1 shall express
without beating about the bush, as an honourable
man, who is well disposed to your IHfcuse, should.
The business under discussion has two sides, a
financial and a moral one. The first is no concern
of mine. A loan guaranteed by the two sea-Powers
is undoubtedly a safe financial transaction. You
will appreciete this better than I can. If your
brother wishes to make money, this is an oppor-
tunity for doing so. From: every moral point of
view I consider the business to be one of the most
damnable, as I shall have no difficulty in showing.
Although neither I nor anybody clse. who has


142


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


had expcrience of public affairs, would venture
to prophesy the final outcome of the Spanish
Revolution, the outeome on another field is pain-
fully obvious, I mean the inevitability of Spanish
bankruptcy. Whatever may happen in that un-
fortunate country, its public debt cannot be mct,
and anything that is done in England now with
reference to the Peninsula is simply putting off the
evil day, and also making the ultimate disastcr more
extensive. And who are the people who will be
hit? They are unfortunate fathers of familics, small
capitalists, the value of whose Spanish securities
will dwindle away to nothing; and, in order to put
off the evil day, rivers of blood are being poured
out in Spain, while at the head of the so-called
Administration—for it administers nothing—-is
an agent of the British stock Exchange, and the
country is being systematically robbed of all the
resources which might have iniproved its future!

** Such operations may @:ring blood money, but
that money can bring no happiness ! The loan in
question can serve no other purpose but to meet
obligations due in London for one term; Spain
will reccive not one farthing of the money. All
that Spain can hope from the scheme is an exten-
sion of the deceptive appearance of there still
beine resources where there are no real resources
at all, and this deception will cost much blood. I
am speaking now of the national bankruptcy
which God Ilimself could not prevent.

“Tf your honourable House were to take over
the business it would carn the curscs of those who
will eventually be overwhelmed in bankruptcy.
A House which has won its position by very diff-
erent methods from these should not be a party tu

uch a scheme.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 148


‘“‘ Nathan Meyer may say that such considera-
tions cannot affect a business decision ; this may
be true, where such decisions are admittedly un-
influenced by any moral considerations what-
ever. I am not that type of man, and I am sure
that, on reflection, Nathan Mcyer will feel that
neither is he. However, he wished to know my
opinion, and this I frankly express in the way
with which you are familiar.”


Metternich’s high moralising made but little impres-
sion on the members of the Rothschild family, except
upon Solomon, They knew perfectly well that the Im-
perial Government had backed the absolutist Don Carlos,
and that they were on their side giving him very con-
sidcrable financial support. It was as yet by no means
evident that Don Carlos would not triumph in the end.
If he had only been somewhat more energetic and deci-
sive he might on three occasions easily have succeeded
in Lecoming master of Spain. But even if he were to
stuceced, how could one lose with the guarantee of
Fianee and England ? If things went wrong, well, those
Iwo States would suffer,

Solomon at Vienna could always take refuge in the
fact that he had loyally told Metternich everything,
pointing to the difficulty of opposing the majority of his
brothers. In any case, he let them carry on with their
profitable transactions. At Icast such was the view of
Herr von Wummelauer, the enemy of the Rothschilds at
the Austrian Embassy in London. He was constantly
sending hostile reports about the Rothschilds to Vienna
regarding their Spanish transactions, and keeping every-
body in a state of alarm. Thus he reported on the 15th
April, 1836, that the House of Rothschild was negotia-
ting with the Government of the Queen Regent with
tegard to loans, the payment of interest on old loans,


144 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


etc., that they were planning all kinds of intrigues, and,
more especially, had lately endeavoured to frustrate
the Banker Ouvrard’s efforts to arrange a loan for Don
Carlos.’

Metternich immcdiatcly asked Solomon Rothschild,
who had returned to Vicnna, to come and see him, and
taxed him with Hummelaucer’s accusations. Thereupon
father and son put in a detailed memorandum regarding
the financial arrangements of their Tfouse with Spain.
They described Metternich’s information as false, and as
obviously emanating from an unreliable source. It was
true that Mendizabal had suggested that the House of
Rothschild should grant further advances to an amount
of £200,000 to £250,000 on the security of the royalties
of the quicksilver mines, and a similar amount on the
security of Spanish Rentes. The House of Rothschild had,
however, refused to do so, although the mines in the
south of the country were far from the scene of action in
the civil war, and therefore offcred adequate security for
repayment. In spite of everyth ig, this attractive sug-
gestion had becn turned down. Metternich should have
confidence in Solomon’s character and word, for anyone
familiar with the methods of the House of Rothschild,
and who had occasion to observe the principles which
had for some time governed their transact‘ons would
inevitably come to the conclusion that -they had no
intention of extending the range of their operations, but
wished, rather, gradually to narrow their scope, and
above all, to hold aloof from such venturesome opera-
tions as could only result in unpleasantness and bad
blood. Thus the London branch of the House of Roths-
child had kept entircly aloof from industrial undertak-
ings such as canals and railways, which in England, more
than anywhere else, had been the subject of the most
unrestrained speculation. No sensible man, therefore,
could scriousl believe that the House of Rothschild


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 145


would invest a large portion of its wealth in stocks which,
in the view of even the most zealous partisans of Isabella,
offered only a highly precarious sccurity, and rested on
no solid foundation. The position of the House of Roths-
child was such that it could not absolutely stand apart
from all transactions in Spanish funds ; its relations with
the public and the nature of its business forced it to
engage in them even against its inclination. Such opera-
tions, however, were essentially Stock Lixchange trans-
actions, and did not constitute real investments such
as would bind the House of Rothschild to the interests of
that country.

“Finally I would take the liberty,’ Solomon’s letter
continued,” “to observe to Your Highness that all
the rumours and on difs, current about the House of
Rothschild and its relations with the Spanish Govern-
ment, should be accepted only with the greatest reserve.
They are generally the result of that slandcrous malice
to which anybody who exercises a certain influence is
inevitably exposed. Persons interested in speculating
on the Bourses --and the habit of speculating in negoti-
able securitics is extending to all classes of society —-
frequently make play with the name of the Touse of
Rothschild, and try to interpret its actions in the sense
of their own operations, as this increases their confidence
in making a profit.”

This memorandum, except for one inconsistency, was
very cleverly drafted. The inconsistency lay in the fact
that the opening paragraphs, which stated that Mendi-
zabal’s offers had been refused, described them as being
very attractive and fully puaranteed, whereas two
pages later Spain’s guarantees were described as “highly
precarious and unsound.” ‘he truth was that, in view
of the fact that Spanish securitics were falling away to
nothing owing to the civil war and the maladministra-


tion, the Rothschilds were really not at all anxious to
K


146 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


invest too much money in that country, except under
the guarantee of States such as France and England.
But, having regard to their position in the quicksilver
mines, which they did not wish to sacrifice at any price,
they had to exercise a ccrtain restraint in this matter,
and were, thereforc, compclled to engage in certain
transactions.

Hummelauer in London continued to send Metternich
in Vienna reports hostile to the Rothschilds. He went so
far as to accuse the British Government also of intrigues,
and of “ capable connivence ” with the Rothschilds.

“The Ministry,” he reported on 26th April, 1836," ‘is
to such an extent dependent upon the House of Roths-
child that it will shrink from no sacrifice of honour or
profit to induce that firm to pay the interest duc on the
Spanish Bonds on Ist May, in order thus to prevent the
immediate collapse of Spain's finances, which the
Government could not survive.”

In spite of the pressure of the British Government,
however, the Rothschilds were v. ry much disinclined to
commit themselves too deeply in Spain, especially as
the possibility of intervention in that country was more
remote than ever. Louis Philippe, in particular, declared
that nothing would move him in the attitude he had
taken up with regard to Spain. “ Before Fiance shall
intervene in Spain,” the King said, “ it willbe necessary
to detfrone me... . 7’

“Tt is said that the Rothschilds want to negotiate a
loan in the Peninsula. They will only bring loss and
suffering on others, for they themselves will have sold
the loan before it is issued, and, in any case, Spain
cannot escape ultimate bankruptcy. If Don Carlos is to
be suppresscd, this must be done by the Spaniards
themselves.”

The Rothschilds did, in fact, grant no further loans to
Spain, and this was due in no small degree to the fact


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 147


that the most powerful pillar of the five brothers
suddenly collapsed. The marriage between Nathan’s
eldest son Lionel and his cousin Charlotte, the daughter
of Carl at Naples, had been fixed to take place at
Frankfort in June 1836. This further union between two
blood relations was entirely in accordance with the
scheme of old Meyer Amschel Rothschild, who, in order
to maintain the family unity and to concentrate the
family fortunes, had charged his children to admit as
few foreign families as possible into the most intimate
family circle. All the brothers met at the family home at
Frankfort for the wedding, James being accompanied
by his friend, the great Rossini. The wedding itsclf was
celebrated with unparalleled splendour and magnifi-
cence ; but shortly after the festivities the bridegroom’s
father fell sick. Nathan, the greatest financial genius
of the five brothers, was at that time fifty-nine years old.
His malady grew obviously worse, and the brothers
finally called in Travers, the most eminent English
doctor of the day. But medical skill was of no avail, and
on 28th Jilly, 1836, Nathan Rothschild, the greatest of
five great brothers, died.

Solomon Rothschild, who had stayed at his brother’s
hedside throughout his illness, forgot all that he had ever
said or written about his brother Nathan, in reporting
the cruel loss to Metternich."

“Filled with immeasurable sorrow,” he wrote, ‘‘ and
in the deepest despondency, I have to inform you that
my most deeply loved brother, Nathan Meyer Roths-
child, is no more. It has pleased Almighty God to call
him in the best years of his life, and just at the moment
when he should have Leen taking pleasure in the happi-
ress of his eldest son. having but just pronounced his
paternal blessing upon his marriage with the daughter
of my brother Carl-—-and might have enjoyed the festival
of our family reunion. He has died too soon for our love


148 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


and devotion, too soon to receive all those marks of
respect and gratitude which were his due from his
dependants, in return for the constant and _ tireless
efforts, which he made throughout his whole life, to
place their well-being on a firm and lasting foundation ;
to make his house prosperous and happy ; and to assure
the continued prosperity and honour of his family. .. .
Heaven would have it so. In pious resignation to divine
providence, we hope to find the comfort that we so sadly
need. On the afternoon of 28th July my brother passed
over to a better life, after he had solemnly conveyed,
through us his brothers, his solemn charge to his sons,
who were not all present when he dicd, loyally and firmly
to hold together, and always to keep in view as their aim
the example of unity and affection which we have set.
The London House will continue to operate unchanged
under the name of him, the founder ; it will be managed
by his sons, and there will be no change of any kind.
With regard to property and means, and in its principles
and relations with us other four vrothcrs, there will not
be the slightest modification in previous practice.”

Solomon made the letter an occasion for the following
request :


“That Your Ilighness will transfer all those
feelings of gracious and kindly goodwill which you
entertained for their lamcnted father to his sons.
How greatly it will strengthen and encourage
them in the painful blow that they have suffered,
if they may enjoy the gracious goodwill of a Prince
of a dignity, magnificence, and renown beyond all
vords. May your Highness be graciously pleased
to comfort your loyal and truly devoted servant
with this hope, that it may cheer me in my sorrow,
avd sustain me in my suffering—if there were any-
thing that could assist in bringing comfort in their


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 149


irreparable loss to the deeply sorrowing family in
London, it would be to grant them some public
distinction in the eyes of the world such as would
show that, through the death of their father, the
family had not lost a distinction which he was proud
to possess so long as he breathed. I refer to his
position as Consul-Gencral in London of his I. and
R. Apostolic Majesty. May your Highness be
graciously pleased to use your all-powerful in-
fluence to the end that this office may pass to
Baron Lionel Nathan von Rothschild, the eldest
son of my late brother. Hc, no less than his other
brothers, will certainly fulfil the behests of his
late father, and will consider it his constant duty
to emulate all his father’s virtues.

“My brothers and I,” Solomon continued,
* indeed the whole family of the departed, will
raise to Your Excellency a monument of undying
gratitude that after this inexpressibly sad event
you should be the first to perform a public act,
whereby the world shall Jearn that the honour
and dignity that pertained to the father, having
passed on to his son, still redounds to the
honour and glory of the family. ... Forgive me,
Your ‘Vighness, that in the first violent rush of
gvief and sorrow I should approach you with a
request ; but I count it as my most sacred duty
to the memory of my late brother, whom I can
never honour and lament enough, to do for his
children and for his family all that can bring
them any alleviation of their sorrow, and sccure
for them esteem and regard. And may Your High-
ness rest assured that, in all the circumstances of
life, I shall never c2ase to cherish those feclings of
deep, sincere, profound and unlimited admiration
and regard, and of most unchangeable and loyal


150 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


devotion, with which I have the honour to sub-
scribe myself,
“Your Highness’ most completely humble
servant,
“S. M. von Rornscui.p.
* Frankfort a. M.,
* the 3rd August, 1836.”


Solomon Rothschild had also reported his brother’s
death to Count Kolowrat, and asked his secretary,
Moritz Goldschmidt, « also to make a verbal request that
“almost the last wish expressed by the dying man,” with
regard to the Consulate-General, should be carried out.

Metternich sent a friendly and sympathetic reply,
assuring Solomon that he would favourably consider
the question of appointing Lioncl. Solomon thanked him"
for his gracious letter, assuring Metternich that he set
the highest value on it as a proof of the latter’s sincere
sympathy, and that it would be most carcfully treasured
as a sacred mark of his kindness and friendship.

“Your Highness,” Solomon continued, ‘‘ may easily
judge how deeply this sad death has especially affected
me. Throughout the whole period of the illness I was
almost always the person who was with my late brother ;
day aud night (for I was living in the saine house with
my son Ansclin) I would constantly come at his bidding
to hear any wish that he had to express in his last
moments; and I may say I enjoyed his complete
confidence in all his affairs. Three days before his death
he told me all his thoughts and wishes with regard to the
will which he then drew up, and which I then had
written »sut in accordance with his intentions. We
brothers and the whole family have suffered an irrepar-
able loss in his death. God alone can heal the wound
that has been inflicted upon us. We must scek alleviation
for our sorrows in the consolations of our religion. Your


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 151


Highness will graciously pardon me if, at this time of
uncontrollable sorrow, I cannot refrain from expressing
my feelings ; your kindness and humanity are guarantee
that you will honour my just sorrow.

““In view of the friendly advice Your Highness had
given me I will not conceal from you that I consider it
fortunate that I was able to be present here on this
unhappy occasion, since I enjoyed the confidence,
not only of my late brother, but also of my other
brothers, in everything that was done, and they left
everything to me. I may say with a clear conscience that
they will have no cause to regret this, for ] have acted
with true disinterestcdness as a brother and friend, and
have carried through everything justly.

“The agrcements between us for a further period of
three years had been drawn up, embodying every point,
and they were ready for signature, for we still believed
that our late brother would, with God’s help, recover.
However, this was not to be, fate had decided otherwise.
Jn his death-bed Nathan asked me to have the contract
renewed with his surviving sons, with the provision that
it should not be terminated within a period of five years,
and this has been done, as Your Ifighness will sec on
perusing the contracts which I shall have the honour
to ay before you on my return. The firm of N. M.
Rothschild remains unaltered, the sons together acting
as « unit with one vote in the partnership. The whole
trading capital of the four brothers, and of the late
N. M. R., cannot be touched for the next five years, and
nobody can draw anything out of the working capital,
while we have reduced the interest, that we draw
individually, from four to three per cent., so that the
partoership as a whole will, with God's help, still further
improve its position in the five years ; as the proportion
of the funds which can be spent has been reduced ; and
there is no necessity for the young men to be drawn into


152 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


speculative ventures. ... My brother reckoned that he
had given his children about £800,000 during his life-
time, and he has left an extraordinarily valuable business,
so that, apart from their share in the business, each of
his sons has about one hundred and fifty to two
hundred thousand pounds of his own. On his death-
bed my late brother charged his eldest son, and
through him those who were not present, always to
apply all their efforts to keep the business property
intact, and not to participate in any risky ventures.
He gave them much wise counsel, bade them avoid all
evil company, and always to keep in the way of true
virtue, religion, and righteousness. My late brother told
them that the world would now try to make moncy out
of us, so that it bchoved them to be all the more careful,
and he remarked that, whether any son had £50,000 more
or less, was a matter of indifference to him. All that
mattcred was that they should hold together in unity.
“We diced in the full possession of his faculties, and
ten minutes before his death he said, as he received the
last consolations of rcligion that arc customary with us :
‘It is not necessary that I should pray so much, for,
believe me, according to my convictions, IT have not
sinned.’...To my daughter Betty, as she took leave of


6g


him, he said, in the truly British manner, £ Good-night
for ever.’ Thus peacefully and in full possession of his
faculties our brother passed over into the better life.”
On his brother’s death any resentment or difference
of opinion that Svulomon had ever felt with regard to
Nathan’s actions melted away like snow in the sun.
Everything else was lost in an overwhelming sense of
family vuity, which is especially characteristic of the
Jewish race, and in this case had been inculeated with
particular emphasis by old Meyer Amschcel, the founder
of the bank. Nathan had left four sons, the eldest of
whom, f.tonel, became head of the London bank. Thus


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 158


the third generation since the foundation of the firm
were coming into the saddle. In its patriarchal style, and
in the tender concern that he showed for his children,
Nathan’s will was reminiscent of that of his father. It
was very general in its terms, and particularly refrained
from entering into precise details as to the value of the
property left. It dealt especially with the method of
carrying on the business, and the contractual relation-
ship binding the partners for the periods of three or
five years.

“It is my carnest wish,” Nathan wrote in his will,
“that my sons shall carry on my business m London,
that the association with the other Houses, which my
dear brothers direct, shall be maintained, that they shall
continue to remain partners together, and that to this
end the Articles of Association between my sons and my
brothers shall be renewed for further periods of five
years. At the same time I charge my sons always will-
ine!y to accept the advice of my experienced brothers,
aad to direct their tireless endeavours, through assidu-
ons industry intelligently applicd, to establish on an
ever firmer foundation the welfare and reputation of
the louse... . L would request the exceutors of the will,
ae well as any relations in London and Frankfort
unne med, to confine their efforts simply and solely to
the due execution of this my last will and tesiament, and
—since it does not pertain to their office at all—not to
ask for any further information, or for the production of
any books of accounts.”

It was thus possible again to avoid any unpleasant
scrutiny or public discussica of the enormous Rothschild
wealth which was spread over the whole of Kurope.
The Government. also rfvained trom applying too close
a measure in the case of 2 man who had rendered it such
important services over a period of years, and, even in
the last year of his life, bad succeeded in raising a loan


154 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


of £15,000,000 to indemnify the slave-owners when
slavery was abolished.

The death of Nathan was a very serious loss to the
House. Heyden says of him very justly in his Galerie
beriihmter und merkwiirdiger Vrankfurter” that, although
Nathan was the third son, he was looked upon as the
head of the family, and the other brothers generally
took his advice. He was the controlling spirit in the
application of the enormous fund which they jointly
possessed.

Gutzkow said of him* that he threw himself into all
his undertakings with enormous vigour, and everything
about him was on a large scale. Nathan was a splendid
example of the traditions and wealth of the city. He was
as much respected there as he was feared, and made
upon all who knew him the impression of a man who had
a positive genius for business. He himself had the
greatest possible admiration for industry. He once said
to a friend with reference to his children, “‘ I wish that
they may devote themselves mind, soul, heart, and body
to their business ; that is the way to attain happiness.”™

This remark was absolutely in accordance with his
character, but it simply confirmed the old adage that
work makes a man happy.

Nathan was a very well-known figure in tne City of
London. The pillar against which he was accustomed to
lean is still pointed out on the Stock Exchange. Of
massive build, his head set between thick shoulders, he
would stand there with his hands deep in his trouser-
pockets, apparently indifferent to what was going on
about him, but iu reality observing everything very
closely. Nathan would always reply in monosyllables,
giving short and definite instructions. Ue was fully
conscious of his power and uninfluenced by the flattery
which his riches called forth. He had gradually come to
despise mankind, having been led to this conclusion


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 155


through observing the effect of the gold that flowed
from his hand.”

Nathan’s body was brought from Frankfort to London,
and lay at New Court, his house in St. Swithin’s Lane.
The funeral procession on 8th August, 1836, was an
outward symbol of the enormous position which Nathan
had achieved in the British Empire. The representatives
of the great Powers, the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, and
several Aldermen of the City of London followed the
coffin, which was preceded by a procession of Jewish
orphan children clothed in white. The whole of London
had come to see the funcral procession ; the crowds were
cnormous, and it was difficult to maintain order. Such
was the funeral of the man who forty years before had
emivrated to London as a small Jewish trader from
Frankfort without name or position.

Solomon saw to it that the event was given proper
publicity. James had arranged for an article of extrava-
gant praisc of Nathan to appear in the Journal des
D: bats, and Solomon arranged for it to be printed in
other papers as well. He asked Gutzkow to help him in
this, and Gutzkow wrote the following letter on 12th
August, 1836, to JSolb, the Kditor in Chief of the
Allcemeine Zeitung.”

“The Vienns Rothschild has approached me with a.
view to having the article on his brother, which appeared
on 5th inst. in the Journal des Débats, reproduced in
the Allgemeine Zeitung. T have had the article, which I
enclose, translated, and would be glad if you could have
it printed if possible. I need not remind you of Metter-
nich’s relations with Solomen.”’

Nathan’s death naturally produced important changes
in the nanagement of the Rothschild business. The tacit
leadership which he had held passed to James in Paris ;
in Spanish affairs the House of Rothschild henceforward
paid less attention to British wishes, and confined its


156 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


concessions to the minimum that was necessary in order
to retain their hold over the quicksilver mines, which
they rightly regarded as a highly profitable business.
It was the more desirable that they should cut down
their Spanish commitments since Mendizabal proved a
failure ; he lost all prestige, and Spain came threateningly
near the verge of bankruptcy. To Metternich’s great
satisfaction the Rothschilds withdrew from financial
transactions in Spain in view of the desperate condition
of the country. Nathan’s sons, who wished to stand as
well as possible with Austria, in order to secure the
Consulate, declared to Iferr von Wummelauer* that they
would have nothing further to do with the Spanish
business. ‘‘ All kinds of offers,” they said to him, “* have
been made to induce us to take over the next payment
of Spanish dividends, but we are determined not to do
so, and,’ added one of th: Rothschilds, “it was not we
who paid the earlier divid: nds.”

"The earlier dividends,” Tlummelauer commented on
this, “were always paid oui of the Joans floated by the
House of Rothschild; debts were met by further borrow-
ings without the House of Rothschild advancing its own
cash. As it is now quite impossible to get any more
moncy out of the public, the House of Rothschild’would
have to tind future dividends out of their own resources,
and without any possibility of sccing their money again.”

Meanwhile, important changes were taking place in
Spain, that only served to inake the position more
critical. Mendizabal had resigned in May 1836, and the
surnmer brought further successes to Don Carlos;
indeed, there was a rising in the immediate ncighbour-
he dof the castle of the Queen Regent. The Constitution
of 18i2 was accepted under duress, and the Qucen at
that time even meditated flight. The constituent Cortes
met on vith October, 1836, amidst circumstances of
general confusion.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 157


Don Carlos, however, had failed to turn these favour-
able circumstances to full account, and Espartero, the
General of the Christinos, actually succeeded in Dec-
ember 1836 in inflicting a severe reverse upon him.
In the first half of March however a concentrated attack
by the Christinos failed.

Metternich was constantly watching the attitude of
the Rothschilds to Spain with grave mistrust, and asked
Apponyi to report on it. The latter. instead of referring
to persons who had other sources of information,
generally asked James Rothschild himsclf, or accepted
the statements of a political charlatan and paid informer
ealled Klindworth, whose reports were only too fre-
quently untruc. In March 1837 Apponyi had another
discussion with James Rothschild in which the latter
said that the yield of the quicksilver mines had been
enormously increased, and that the Rothschilds were
being asked for an advance of 2,000,000 francs on
account of royalties. He said that their Madrid agent
was pressing for the acceptance of this proposal, and
begging that James Rothschild, who paid the expenses
of the Spanish Legation in Paris, amounting to 80,000
francs a month, out of his own pocket, without ever
having any of them refunded, should not cease these
payments.

Weisweiller, the Rothschild representative at Madrid,
said that, if that were done, he would be hounded out
of the town and the exceedingly profitable quicksilver
business would be lost. Such statements necessarily
indicated that the House of Rothschild still had schemes
with Spain; but these were connected only with the
quicksilver mines, for the prestige of Spain's finances
hed sunk so low that Rentes were quoted at about only

20 per cent. to 25 per cent.
* June saw a further change in the fortunes of war, and
for a time Don Carlos was actually planning to advance


158 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


on Madrid. In May and June 1837 he had substantial
successes. This produced a panic in the Paris branch of
Rothschilds, where it was feared that “‘ these devils, the
members of the Cortes? would make difficultics about
the Almada mines. However, Rothschild thought he
could come to an understanding with them, but that if
Don Carlos were to be victorious everything would be
lost. At the end of June the French Prime Minister was
dining with the panic-stricken James Rothschild, and
remarked on that occasion to Baron von Hiigel, who was
acting for Count Apponyi,* “ Rothschild is entirely
preoccupied with the losses that he expects to incur, and
he is particularly anxious about his quicksilver mines,
which he says Don Carlos will take from him. These
people are simply after money, and forget everything
else when their interests are at stake.”

A little later Molé repurted, with reference to James,
that since he had got involved in the Spanish affairs he
had not been the “ Rolhschild dautrefois.s Solomon,
who was then again staying in Paris, stated definitely
that no onc, and he least of all, would ever again lend
the Goverment at Madrid a single sou.

Metternich’s resentment against the Rothschilds kept
increasing, although he still handled them with: velvet
gloves. Ifis police intercepted a Icttcr from Lionel in
London to his Uncle." Lionel spoke of the highly
unfavourable impression which had been created by the
news that Don Carlos had crossed the bro, stating that
British Consols and Spanish sccurities had both fallen
sharply, and that the whole outlook was exceedingly
gloomy. The bad news from Spain and Portugal was
er irely to blame for the present panic. It was essential
to be patient, only God could bring everything right.
“ Tam too unhappy,” wrote Lionel, ‘* to write at length ;
the Peers have the upper hand, and political develop-
ments, as well as the stupid mcasures taken by the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 159


Government here, favour their activities. The best thing
is to remain calm in order to act when we see more
clearly. To-day it was stated here too that Don Carlos
had crossed the Ebro, and that disturbances would
break out in Naples. The Belgian Chargé d’Affaires in
fact said to us to-day, that Sir Bowring had left for
Naples on a Government mission. I am afraid that if the
Austrians enter Naples, Louis Philippe will be forced
to intervene in Spain. Prices suddenly fell abruptly
towards the close of the Bourse, and I fcar that the
carrier pigeon service will bring news of a still further
decline. I believe that the English will gradually bring a
lot of Rentes into the market, which is bound to have an
influence. We will hope for the best.”

On receiving the copy of this intercepted Ictter,
Metternich immediately sent it forward to the Austrian
Minister at Naples, telling him to watch the suspicious
Liberal emissary and report as to the alleged revolution
at Naples.

Thereupon the Zemps published an article regarding
possible intervention by Austria in Naples which very
much annoyed Metternich. The Chancellor wrote the
following Iectter to Hiigel for Solomon’s benefit.

“ T request you,” the Ietter ran,” “to read this letter
ty Baron Solomon von Rothschild. I wish this to be
done, since I know his honest nature and genuine
principles.

“Tt is generally known that the Minister Montalivet
and Baron James are on intimate terms, and that the
Miiister has « definite influence on the editorial policy
of the Temps. Now that paper has a great deal to answer
for, in the articles in which it has just published to the
world the lie that Austria contemplates sending troops
to Naples, with the result that political complica-
tions will arise between oursclves and France. Almost
worse is the statement, which appeared very shortly


160 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


afterwards, to the effect that there was no further
question of sending such troops, since Austria would
think twice before exposing herself to the consequences
of such a venture ! These two entircly imaginary state-
ments contain the most dangcrous mattcr for a news-
paper, that is on confidential terms with the French
Ministry, to give forth to the world. They encourage the
spirit of faction and revolt, while they place a quict and
serious Government such as ours in the awkward position
that we don’t know whcthcr to speak or to be silent. If
the Temps were not closely associated with the French
Ministry, there would be nothing in this matter; I
would pass it over as I pass over the daily pack of lies
that issue from the revolutionary Press. But the case
here is entirely different.

“ T want Baron Solomon confidentially to convey these
considerations to his brother, and to request him, on
my behalf, to use his infl:tence to sce that this kind of
thing does not occur again. I want this to be done in the
interests of the TTouse of Pothschild itself, as remarks
from several quarters abroa.i have reached me, attribu-
ting these articles to a speculation by the House in
Neapolitan funds. There is nobody more inclined to
regard this as a slandcr than 1; that is precisely why I
am taking this step.

“Baron Solomon knows my attitudé too well for it to
be necessary for me to say anything more. It will be
enough for you to let him know my wishes and he will
do what is right.”

Hiigel read Metternich’s letter to the two brothers and
thought they had understood, and particularly that
James was beginning to realise that, in intervening in
political rnatters, he had played a sorry part. James was
not as penitent as Wiigel thought, but he pretended to be
while the Charge 2 Affaires was talking to him."

There were in fact no disturbances at Naples, and the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 161


incident simply served to give a glimpse of the way in
which the Rothschilds collaborated with some of the
French Ministers, and to reveal their influence upon
leading Paris papers.

Towards the end of 1837 Spain was again engaging the
anxious attention of the brothcrs, as the Cortes, at the
instigation of the Rothschilds’ rivals, were questioning
the validity of the quicksilver mines contract, and of the
variations which had becn made in it. Weisweiller, the
Rothschild agent at Madrid, made every effort to main-
tain the legal validity of the contract. The firm of
Zulucta, which had competed with the House of Roths-
child for the contract, based its objection on the fact that
the latter had at the time offered only 50, subject to the
proviso that if anybody offered 54 they would pay 55.
Such a procedure had, however, been irregular.

The Rothschild agent also called in the assistance of
the English and French Ministers to the Spanish Govern-
ment, who both made representations on behalf of the
House of Rothschild. The Spanish Ministry also repre-
sented to the Cortes that the quicksilver contract was an
important and uscful one to the Spanish State.

“Tlowever that: may be,” Count Apponyi reported
with reference to the effect of this contretemps on James
Rothschild," “he appears to be in a state of the most
extraordinary excitement at this attempt of the Cortes
to deprive him of a business which at an approximate
estimate must yield him an annual income of from one
anda quarter to two million franes. He will no doubt in the
end be guided by the direction in which his interests lie,
and will find roundabout means, at the sacrifice of a
certain amount of money, to secure a business which is a
scurce of such considerable profit to his House.”

It was also current gossip in Paris that the quicksilver
agreement had not gone through without a certain
apagunt of money having passed under the takle, and


162 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


that the House of Rothschild were now threatening dis-
closures ; so that a friendly solution would appear to be
in the interest of both partics. In the end an agreement
was reached by increasing the amount payable to the
Spanish Government in respect of cach hundredweight of
quicksilver raised, and by granting new advances on
royalties.

Apart from this, after the death of Nathan the Roths-
childs had practically nothing more to do with Spanish
loans except under French and English guarantee, and in
such cases Metternich was always advised.

In March 1838 the seeret agent Klindworth, whom
Count Apponyi was using to an increasing extent, again
stated that the Rothschilds were negotiating for a
further Spanish loan. Metternich again asked Solomon
what this meant, with the result that James went to see
Apponyi in a state of high indignation, asking him to
inform his chicf of the falsity of this rumour about the
loan.

“Baron James von Re chschild,”” Count Apponyi
reported,‘ “ who has undoubtedly foreseen that rumours
of financial transactions would come to my knowledge,
has given me the most formal assurance that he has not
only refused to take part in any loan in favour of the
Spanish Government, but has also declined any financial
operation, the object of which would Te to raise money
for Spain. He most positively denies all imputations of
this nature, and asked me to inform Your Highness of
this most formal declaration by him. Baron Rothschild
has expressly and spontancously instructed me to give
Your Highness his word that he will never engage in a
loan to the Spanish Government without first being
authorised to do so by Your Highness.”

Thus Metternich felt that through his obstinate insist-
ence he had at last succeeded in stopping further pay-
nicnts of money being made at any rate by the House of


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 163


Rothschild to the Government of the Queen Regent,
whilst he himself was constantly supplying Don Carlos
with money, and was also obtaining support for him from
the States allicd to Austria.

All his efforts, however, proved of no avail, for Don
Carlos lacked the personality to establish his position.
The changing vicissitudes of this War of the Spanish
Succession ended by Don Carlos being finally driven out
of the ficld by the Queen Regent’s Gencral, Espartero,
the son of a workman. Ile was forced to flee from
Spain and no longer menaced the Rothschilds in their
possession of the quicksilver mines. Nathan was justi-
fied ; the valuable quicksilver mines remained in the
family’s possession, and became a source of very consid-
erable profit. The Ilouse owned them until the year 1863
when they were again taken over by the Spanish Govern-
ment.

By that time richer mines had been discovered in the
new world and the Rothschild monopoly had been
broken down. This example of their business in Spain
reveals particularly clearly how closely politics and
business were interdependent at that time.


CHaPpTeR V
The Rothschilds’ Peace Efforts in the Crisis of 1840


In the midst of thcir activities in high politics the
brothers Rothschild on the Continent continued to
engage in great industrial and transport undertakings.
They were inevitably driven to do so by the funds that
kept accumulating in their coffers. After railways they
turned their attention to steamshtps, and here again
Solomon Rothschild profited by what could be learnt
in Kngland, and by the British example, calling into
being in other countries such as Austria, the concerns
that he found flourishing in Great Britain. This was
indicated by the very name of the big Austrian Steam-
ship Line in which Solomon interested himself financi-
ally. Lloyd was the name given to the shipping company
by the shipowners and insurers of men and merchandise
who met and did business in the London coffee-house
owned by Mr. Lloyd. The new Austrian undertaking
which esme into being in 1835, largely with the assist-
ance of Rothschild capital, was given the same name.

At that time the possibilities of steamships were
hardly understood, and they were used only for passenger
lraffie. Que of the first memoranda sent in by the
Austrian Lloyd to the Government! contained the
words, “‘ steamers never can and never will become
freight ships’”’; and this view was at that time also shared
by Solomon Rothschild.

Every new undertaking of importance in which
Solomon’s money was a factor served to consolidate his
position in Vienna. Even theagh he might be far away,
as at the time of the cholera. epidemic, Solumon contri-
buted largely to the hospitals and to organisations for
fighting the disease, and thereby, although personally
out of danger, he wou favour with the Austrian officials.

There was scarcely avy undertaking of imporcance in

165


166 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the monarchy in which the Rothschilds were not financi-
ally interested. The Vienna authorities, wishing to com-
memorate through some permanent memorial the new
Empcror’s accession to the throne, hit upon the idea of
constructing a large aqueduct from the Danube to the
upper suburbs of Vicnna,* as the very dry summer had
occasioned a great shortage of water. Rothschild and
Sina were asked to help with this scheme too, the former
contributing an amount of 25,000 florins.

As time passed, the Rothschilds’ wealth became posi-
tively fabulous, and Vienna socicty, otherwise exclusive,
was so dazzled by it that it began to féte Solomon, and
admit him to its circles. Metternich and the next most
powerful man in Austria, Count Kolowrat, were often to
be seen dining with the banker. Kiibeck relates that
many pcople were annoyed with him on that account,
and notes the following incident in his diary :

‘““A few days ago Count Kolowrat was dining with
Rothschild the banker. Some people of his own position
in society told him that this was giving offence. ‘ What
would you have had me do?’ he said. ‘ Rothschild
attached such enormous importance to my coming that
I had to sacrifice myself in the interests of the service, as
the State necds him. Moreover, I have profited by so
doing, in getting Rothschild to make- donation of one
thousand florins Convention Currency to the poor, the
Jew agreeing to this when I asked him, out of sheer
pleasure at my having come.’

“ The actual facts are as follows : when the champagne
was going round for the toast, Rothschild rose to make a
speech to Count Kolowrat in which he said, ‘ Your
Excellency has given me as much pleasure to-day as if I
had been given a thousand florins C.C., or given them
to a poor man.’ Thereupon Count Kolowrat replied,
‘ Very well, give me the thousand florins for a poor man
who needs help, and has applied to me.’ Rothschild


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 167


promised to do so, and after dinner Count Kolowrat was
given the thousand florins.”

An extract from the diary of Mctternich’s wife also
gives some idea of the impression which the Rothschild
wealth made everywhere.' “I was dining at 5 o’clock
with our friend Solomon Rothschild. Count and Countess
Saint Aulaire, the Maltzahn woman, the old Princess
Marie Esterhazy, the Princess ——-, Madame Chorinsky
and Madame Sedlnitzky, Clemens and I were at the
dinner, which was excellent. Rothschild has a famous
French cook, and he, of course, had his own special
dishes. His home in the Romisehe Kaiser is very
pleasant and attractive. Werthcimstcin and Goldschmidt
helped in doing the honours. Rothschild has a magnifi-
cent collection of antiques, which he showed us, and
which he means to leave to his son. We also saw
Rothschild’s safe, which is undoubtedly the most
beautiful part of the house. It contains twelve lovely
millions. It made me feel quite melancholy. Tow much
good one could do with a quarter of this sum ! ”

The Princess Mclanic was constantly in need of Paris
frocks and such things, and got Betty Rothschild in
Paris, and Carl’s wife at Naples, to buy these things for
her, naturally paying for them herself. They were then
sent to Vienna by special courier. On such occasions both
ladics would send little presents as a mark of friendship.
The packages gradually grew so bulky that the courier
sometimes refused to take them.

The Rothschilds had the very greatest interest in
retaining the friendship of the Metternichs, for they
were constantly having to come to the Chancellor on all
kinds of matters. At onc time he would be asked to bring
diplomatic pressure to bear upon the State of Naples in
conncction with a financial claim of Carl Rothschild’s on
Sicily, at another to appoint members of the Rothschild
family as Austrian Consuls-Gencral.


168 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Long before the death of his brother Nathan, Solomon
wanted to obtain some official position for his son
Anselm, who lived at Frankfort ; and his idea was that
Austria should create a Consulate-General at Frankfort,
where none as yet existed. Solomon approached Metter-
nich on the matter, emphasising that the office would be
unpaid, naturally an important consideration. Metter-
nich enquired of Baron von Handcl, the Minister-
Resident at Frankfort, whether it was desirable to
crcate a Consulatce-General there, and whether, in that
case, Solomon’s son would be a suitable person for
the office. Handel answered both questions in the
affirmative.

With regard to the candidate, he wrote: “ Baron
Anselm von Rothschild combines with the riches, eredit
and influence of the House to which he belongs, all the
moral and intellectual qualities that make him a suitable
person for filling this offic. I venture to guarantee that
no objection to such an xppointment will be raiscd by
the Senate of the Free City of Frankfort, especially since
Baron Carl von Rothschild (Anselin’s uncle) has been
appointed Tlis Sicilian Majesty’s Consul-General here.”

He added that “ only such a person could be appointed
to the position as possessed the intellectual qualities and
the necessary means to carry out the cilice with due
dignity, there being no emoluments of any kind
eonnected with it,” and, in view of this consideration,
Anselm was duly appointed.* The Senate of the Free
City of Frankfort, on being officially informed of the
appointment, expressed themsclves satisfied with it,
subject to the following limitations :

The Israclite citizen, Baron Anselm Solomon von
Rothschild, is hereby recognised as Imperial and Royal
Austrian Consul-General, subject to the reservation
that this in uo way affects his position as an Israelite
citizen of this Free City, and that he will continue to be


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 169


in the future as he has been in the past, subject to the
laws and jurisdiction of this Free City, and to the
authorities here.”

Anselm wrote to Metternich in terms of most respectful
gratitude, stating that he was well aware that he owed
the appointment entircly “to Metternich’s gracious
support, and to his powerful influence.’”*

Matters did not proceed so smoothly with regard to
the appointment of Lionel in London, about which
Nathan had expressed such heartfelt wishes on his
death-bed. During the latter part of Nathan’s period of
office various complaints had been received, more
especially from the mercantile authorities at Trieste,
accusing him of indifference in the performance of his
dutics, and suggesting that “ Baron Rothschild finds it
impossible to transact the business of the Austrian
Consulate in addition to his other affairs, or else finds
such business exceedingly irksome.”’*

Such objections were already being made when
Nathan’s death made the problem of the Austrian
Consulate-General a very real one. Solomon’s pathetic
request, sent from his brother’s death-bed, had left
Metternich coniparatively cold, for the Chancellor had
several grievances against Lioncl Rothschild. It had
been he who, acting under his father’s instructions, had
remained at Madrid to carry through financial transac-
tions with the Queen Regent, of whom Metternich so
greatly disapproved, and he who had indeed been the
active agent of the policy of the House of Rothschild in
Spain, where they supported the Libcral Christinos
instcad of supporting Mctternich’s protégé, Don Carlos.
Metternich, thercfore, delayed the appointment and
asked for information regarding the ‘“ personal qualities
of the said Lioncl—as to his age, his knowledge, his
capacity, his morals, his position in the London branch
of the Rothschild Bank, and his future prospects,”


170 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


All that Metternich really wanted to do, however, was
to cause Lionel a certain amount of uneasiness, and he
had madc up his mind to pive the department concerned,
which was considering the appointment of another per-
son, instructions to favour Lioncl.

‘““In view of the important position,” his note to the
department ran,” “which the House of Rothschild
holds in the financial scheme of the civilised world, the
application in question certainly seems to deserve favour-
able consideration, as otherwise that House might
become indifferent, or even hostile, to Austria’s
interests.”

Meanwhile, the report asked for from the London
Embassy arrived, having again been drafted by Terr
von Itummelaucr, who was so ill-disposed to the Roths-
child family.” “ The said Baron Lionel Nathan von
Rothschild,” the report ran, “ seems to me to be rather
old at thirty (he was actually twenty-eight). Nothing
has ever come to my knowledge reflecting in any way
upon his private character. “.5 to the question who shall
actually carry on the bank's business, this point had
apparently not been settled when I left London at the
end of Angust.

“ Such capacities as he may develop in the conduct of
his firm’s business may, in the natural coirse of things,
be expected to be determined by the s¢hool im which he
has grown up. Iis business training has been such as is
acquired through operating on the Stock Exchange, and
the transactions of real international trade are therefore
as forcign to him as they were to his late father. Jlis
connections will also be such as he has formed on the
Stock Exchange. These general considerations . . . which
I have already ventured to aduibrate in previous
reports, tend to the conclusion that an Austrian Con-
sulate-Gencral in London in the hands of the ITouse of
Rothschild, or of any other firm of a similar nature,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 171


could never adequately carry out the requirements of
Austrian trade interests.

““The sons of the late Baron von Rothschild never
held individual positions in the commercial world here
during his lifetime. They shared in the respect which
their father enjoyed on account of his riches, without,
however, having yet given rise to the belicf that they
would also inherit his industry and ability.

“With regard to the delay and negligence which has
repeatedly given our coasting trade anthoritics cause
for complaint, such complaints would speedily cease if
the Consul-General were to devote to these matters the
attention which is due to them. Whether this is to be
expected of a young person for whom the Consulate-
Gencral is only a side issue—-a matter of personal vanity,
and also to a certain extent a means of demonstrating to
the public that his firm’s influence with the I. and R.
court has continued unimpaired —is difficult to state with
any certainty. If, however, the [. and R. State Depart-
ment should be disposed to consider the application
favourably, it seems to me that the only way of securing
greater diligence in dealing with official correspondence
would be to appoint UWerr Kirchner as salaried Vice-
Consul, or Consular Agent. I feel that rt would be neces-
sary to make him a salaried official in order to give him
an Official position, not only with reference to the out-
side world, but more particularly in his relations with
his young principal.

“Tam convinced that the chief motive for the appli-
cation which has been put forward by the House of
Rothschild is the one which I have mentioned last in
the preceding paragraph. The House must be par-
ticularly concerned to convince the public that even
its defection to the ranks of the revolutionary party has
not been able to damage its position with regard to the
I. and R. Government. The surest means for doing so


172 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


would be to secure again the office of Consul-General for
a member of the family ; and would doubtless be re-
garded by every member of the public as a complete
proof of what they wish to demonstrate.

“When M. Mendizabal went to Madrid last year, the
House of Rothschild sent Baron Lionel N. von Roths-
child to that city, and he resided there for a considerable
time as a go-between for carrying out that system of
deception to which his House and the Spanish Govern-
ment had pledged themselves. I am far from wishing to
impute any personal blame to him in this matter. le was
carrying out the instructions of his chief, and was not a
free agent : neverthcless this fact stands against him and
his House.

“In the inevitable course of their development, the
affairs of the Peninsula hay: reached a point where the
State is on the verge of benkruptey. Your Highness is
aware of the speed with which Spanish and Portuguese
public securities have been falling within the last few
weeks. Mendizabal has just formed a Ministry to make
one last infamous effort, which will certainly be fruitless,
We are approaching the point when, threugh the fall in
the public debt created by the combined intrigues of the
English Ministry and MM. Mendizabal and Rothschild,
thousands of familics in England and on the Continent
will find themselves plunged into poverty. The English
Cabinet and M. Mendizabal must undoubtedly bear the
responsibility for originating the general scheme, but
the fact that it was possible to carry it into practice
is attributable entirely to the House of Rothschild, to
whose name, therefore, the deserved reproach will
atta th.”

Things were not to turn out as badly as all that;
Hummelaucr had merely taken another opportunity of
giving free vent to his rage and indignation against the
House of Rothschild. If the appointment were to go


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 178


through after all, Kirchner, the watch-dog at the
Consulate, should have a better position, lest the HIouse
of Rothschild should induce him to give up his réle of
reporter on Rothschild activities, through being drawn
into their service by a better offer. Hummelauer,
therefore, proposed that this man “ should be perma-
nently secured to Austria’s intcrests.”"*

A little later, Hummelauer sent in an addendum to
his philippics against the Rothschilds. He had been
making enquirics amongst sevcral business men about
Nathan’s sons, and naturally did not get a particularly
good account of the Rothschilds from their rivals. He
now hastened to transmit these reports to Vienna.
“The young people’s conduct,” he wrote, ‘ is such that
Nathan’s heirs have created an exceedingly unfavourable
impression. They are so blatantly pursc-proud as to have
offended the old business friends of their father by their
rudeness, and I have heard many of them express
themselves very strongly on this matter. The reputation
of these young people in commercial circles here is,
therefore, just now very much to their disadvantage."

Hummelauer, therefore, proposed that, if it was
desired to appoint a Rothschild as Consul-Gencral in
London, another Consulate should be created at Liver-
pool, to Le independent of London. “ British commercial
circles,” the chargé d’affaires stated, “‘ would regard the
London Consulate as a matter of form, and thus the
unfavourable impression which would undoubtedly be
created through conferring the Consulate on one of the
Rothschild’s sons would be modified.”

This caused the authoritics at Vienna to defer the
appointment, and the Departments consulted as to
what should be dore. The position was rendered more
difficult by the fact that Metternich had often encouraged
Solomon Rothschild to believe that Lionel would be
appointed. When timc passed and nothing was done,


174 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Werthcimstein wrote to Mctternich on Solomon’s behalf,
reminding him of his promise, and suggesting that all
that was necessary was to appoint a consular official to
assist the Consul.

“ Baron Lionel von Rothschild,” Solomon’s secretary
wrote,'* “ would be delighted to pay such a clerk an
annual allowance suitable to the higher cost of living in
London, thereby proving the value which he attaches to
inheriting the confidence which the Austrian Govern-
ment showed in his late father, and which was always a
souree of pride to the Rothschild family.”

The matter was finally dealt with by a compromise.
Lionel was appointed acting unpaid Consul-General,
after he had given a verbal assurance to the chargé
d@affaires in London that he would use his best
endeavours to support the consular official, who was
appointed simultaneously. for the Rothschilds the im-
portant thing was that from the point of view of the
public this solution conveyed the impression that their
bank still enjoyed the confid. nee of Austria,

The Rothschilds were just at this time endeavouring
to improve the position of Jews in general, and therefore
of themselves in particular. In 1833 the Jews had, at the
suggestion of the House of Rothschild, sent in another
petition, asking for the free right of domicile, and to be
allowed to engage in the sciences, arts. and trades, as
well as to acquire and own real property." As the years
passed without anything being donc, a petition was sent
to Metternich on the 17th July, 1835, asking him to use
his influence in favour of this petition. The Rothschilds
felt they mus‘, assist in the endeavour to secure this
general extension of Jewish rights, as special exceptions
to the laws had often been made in their favour. Thus
they had received a special mining concession for the
coal-mines in Dalmatia and Istria, as well as for the
Istrian quicksilver mines, although for nearly three


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 175


hundred years Jews had been excluded from such
activities.

The authoritics continued to delay taking any action
to alleviate the lot of the Jews, and Solomon Rothschild
accordingly sent Metternich a further emphatic request
for assistance.

* Your Highness,” he wrote from Paris, on the 9th
January, 1837,'* “ will forgive my taking the liberty of
making a special appeal to you on a matter which is of
the very deepest conecrn to me.

“This matter, my dcar Prince, is onc that concerns
the destiny of my co-religionists. It concerns the hopes of
so many fathers of families and the highest aspirations of
thousands of human beings. I would commend it with all
my heart, in complete trust and confidence, to the
favourable consideration of my most gracious Prince.
I cherish no more sacred desire than to sec the destiny
of my co-religionists improved.

“T shall not weary Your Highness with many words,
and rely confidently on the gracious assurances that
Your Highness has so often given, that you wish to be a
benevolent protector and a kind helper to my co-re-
ligionists. Knowing Your Highness’s wise and paternal
sentiments, [ hope with full confidence that all our wishes
vill be granted by a Prince to whom the welfare of all
classes of humanity is sacred, and to whom the helpless
have never appcaled in vain.”

On receipt of this letter, Metternich arranged for a
conference of Ministers to be summoned to discuss the
Jewish problem. The Conference registered the following
opinion : “‘ Under the prevailing conditions of the time,
it is undoubtedly in the intcrests of the Government that
the Jews should be accorded some improvement in their
condition, and some extension of their rights. But we
feel that it is absolutely essential that due regard should
be had to the general circumstances of the present day,


176 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


and even for prevailing prejudices, so that the public may
not suddenly draw the conclusion that full eman-
cipation of the Jews is contemplated and that the
Government intends to put them on an equality with
Christians.” It was accordingly decided that the
* toleration ” tax should be maintained, but that the
Emperor should have discretion to grant Jews permis-
sion to own houses in Vienna, but that this discretion
should apply to houses only, and not to any other kind
of real property. Thus the Rothschilds, who were still
living as tenants in the hotel Zum Romischen Kaiser,
were enabled to acquire a house of their own.

But Solomon also used his influence with the Chan-
cellor to secure better conditions for the Jews outside the
boundaries of Austria, more particularly in Italy, where
Metternich was powerful. Modena was a case in point,
where the Duke had, on the 22nd March, 1831, in con-
sequence of certain disturbances that had occurred, um-
posed upon the Jews a contribution of 600,000 lire, and
restrictions on their liberty. Solomon’s manager, Gold-
schmidt, took advantage of one of the Dukc’s visits to
Vienna to ask him, on behalf of Solomon, to rescind
these oppressive and unjust decrees. Even in the ycar
18838 the Papal States again attempted to apply the idea
of completely shutting off the Jews from the Christian
inhabitants in cities ; they were again to live within walls
separated from other inhabitants. At Solomon’s request
Metternich intervencd in this connection, and it was due
to him that this humiliating regulation, as Solomon
called it, was not generally applied.

“‘ Thousands whom you have thereby made happier,”
Sok non wrote to Metternich, “ are praying to Icaven
to bless you for your action.”

In 1888 Solomon again heard from Jewish firms in
Ferrara that further measures of oppression had been
planned there.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 177


“The lament that has gone up from those who are
threatened by such a regulation,” Solomon wrote to
Metternich," “and my natural sympathy for the
oppressed, especially when they are my helpless co-
rcligionists, has led me on this occasion again to venture
most urgently to appeal to Your Tfighness’s clemency
and magnanimity, that you may be graciously pleased,
as you were in 1833, to use your powerful influence,
through the Austrian Embassy at Rome, to induce the
Holy Father to countermand the publication of this
threatened decree against my unfortunate co-rcligionists,
and induce the Papal Government to adopt a milder and
more tolerant attitude. I hope that I may sueceed with
my weak words in touching the heart of Your Iighness,
which is so sensitive to the welfare of humanity.”

Such requests were particularly difficult to refuse,
when Solomon had. just spent large sums on public and
heneficent objects, and this was the case now, for in
March 18388 the towns of Ofen and Pesth had been visited
py a terrible flood. On that occasion Solomon Rothschild
wrote as follows :4 “ Actuated by human, and, I would
venture to say, entirely patriotic feelings for Austria, I
offer to place the services of my Ionse absolutely at your
disposal, in case Your Majesty should be pleased to
command that somewhat more extensive financial
measures should be taken to ameliorate the lot of the
victims.”*

Jn his petition to the Empcror,” Solomon asked him
to accept his loyal offer, “as bearing some slight testi-
mony to the unshakable loyalty and unchangeable devo-
tion which I and all my House feel for the sacred person
of Your Majesty, and the whole of the Imperial Family.”
_ Amschel Meyer at Frankfort also arranged a concert
m favour of the victims, at Solomon’s suggestion, at
which solos were sung by Carl Rothschild’s brilliant and
gharming wife, as well as by the Countess Rossi.


178 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


The position of the Rothschilds in the countries of
their adoption was by now such that they were abso-
lutcly bound up with each country’s weal or woe. Their
political influence was greater in France even than in
Austria. The result of this was naturally that they made
enemies. Amongst their focs in Paris was that arch-spy
Klindworth, who sent Count Apponyi regular reports
regarding the situation in Paris, in return for which he
duly received regular payment.

“A proof,” this man reported on the 20th January,
1838, ‘* of the extent to which the Rothschild influence
in this country gocs, may be found in the fact that last
week, when one of my French friends went to Roths-
child’s oflice, he found General Rumigny there, the
King’s adjutant in matters to do with the Bourse.
Rothschild has his own system. Lacking intelligence
and understanding of alfairs, he uses the compelling
power of money. In all the Ministries and in all the
Departments he has his creatures of all ranks to briny
him every kind of informacion.”

Klindworth denied that’ James had any political
judgment, and expressed the opinion that he was very
fricndly to Austria, but very unfriendly to Prussia, Io
contrast to his position in Paris, he had never-shone in
Berlin society, while some of the memeers of his family
had actually been insulted there.

We know to-day that these opinions were frequently
erroncous, and, like thousands of later reports from the
same man, they showed how little credit is to be given
to such venal informers. Nevertheless, this man’s
reports were enthusiastically accepted at the time, and
until late in the seventies a high price was paid for them
and they were often believed.

Klindworth, who was very avaricious, may have becn
il!-dispesed to the Rothschilds through having had a
request refused, or they may have failed to invite him


fcmaagaraicentarern


a
, Gie\s it ga ot


XS
ae << ee aN
“4 BELLE Way rm RS DX
= au gendin rere re


MBavey By ra) Voth seid


V ROTHSCHILD BALLET DRNIRTE


THE HOUSE OF ROTITSCHILD 179


to their magnificent partics. Invitations to the hotel in
the Rue Laffitte were eagerly sought after, where
everything was done on a scale of unparalleled magnifi-
cenee, which was intended to make up for any Jack of
birth and breeding. After the death of Nathan, to whom
great. display was not congenial, these magnificent
parties became usual with the London Rothschilds too.
hey were given in the beautiful park at Gunnersbury,
and over five hundred invitations would be issued.
The Duke of Sussex, Prince George of Cambridge, the
Duke of Somerset, Wellington, foreign princes and
diplomats, and the most exclusive members of London
society were to be found there. The most famous artistes,
such as the Opera singer, Giula Grisi, and the world-
famous basses, Antonio Tamburini and Lablacha, would
sing, and Rossini often came over from Paris to give
excerpts from his operas, as he did at James’s house in
Paris. Supper would be laid out in special tents in the
huge park, illuminated by about six thousand multi-
coloured lamps, where the choicest dishes from all over
the woild were served.”

The sons were east in a different mould from the
scrious and calewating Nathan, who thought of nothing
but his business, which he extended with such far-seeing
cenius, Nathan had attached no value to externals, and
had never during his life used the title conferred on him
by the Mimperor, since it was a foreign onc. Lionel, on
the other hand, immediately took steps to obtain the
King’s permission to usc the title, which permission he
received in June 1838.

Morcover, times had changed, and the advertisement
which the House of Rothschild had shunned in the past
was now verv useful. The banquets, etc., had their value
from this point of view, and, in addition, illustrations,
propaganda, articles, ete., were brought into play. One
of the cleverest ideas was a handkerchief manufactured


180 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


in enormous numbers, with Nathan’s portrait printed
in colours, and bearing the following inscription in four
languages :* “He was distinguished both for his
business capacity and enterprisc, and also for his
generosity and love of humanity.” On the handkerchief
were also set out the loans made by the House of
Rothschild to the various States, giving the amount
in cach case. The handkerchiefs were made by a manu-
facturing firm in London and sent to the Vienna wholesale
merchants, Josef Boschan, who applied to the Chancel-
lory and to Solomon for permission to sell them in
Austria.

In the midst of their commercial and social activities,
the Rothschilds did not forget to direet their particular
attention to the advances in applied science. The exploita-
tion of new discoveries before they were generally known
gave opportunities for protit quite as important as in the
casc of loans and of financial transactions.

There was, for instance, a M. Fourneyron, “ discoverer
of the turbine, a hydraulic machine,” who succeeded in
getting James interested in his invention, James not only
supported the inventor in France, but also gave him a
letter of 1scommendation tu his brother Solomon in
Vienna, who suceceded in interesting Prince Metternich,
James having written to him that the machine in
question could be most usefully employed in foundries
and factories of all kinds."

Nathan’s sons in England also observed the develop-
ment of steam traffic with the closest attention. “ The
steamship,” Lionel wrote on the 31st May, 1838,* “ will
be of enormous advantage to the commerce between this
country and the United States of America... . Two
at crpts have already been made to cross the Atlantic
Ocean in stcamboats, namely the Sirius and Great
Western of London and Bristol. These attempts have
proved so successful that any doubts which may have


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 181


been entertained as to the possibility of a regular
service between here and New York, have been dissi-
pated. The Sirius met bad weather and contrary winds
on her voyage, but in spite of this only took nincteen
days from Cork to New York. The journey is 3,800 miles,
and was accomplished at an average speed of 84 miles an
hour. The Sirius carrics 700 tons and her engines have a
horse-powcer of 320; 421 tons of coal and 43 barrels of
tar were consumed on the journey. The Great Western
took fifteen days and five hours from Bristol to New
York, covering a distance of 3,220 miles, thus accom-
plishing the journcy at an average speed of about 9 miles
an hour. The latter vessel carries 1,840 tons, and her
engincs develop 450 horse-power ; 450 tons of coal were
consumed on the voyage. The success of these experi-
ments has Jed to the idea of establishing a regular
steamboat service between England and Amcrica ; and
the same company that sent out the Sirius has fitted out
an extraordinarily big ship called the British Queen, with
a tonnage of 1,840 and a horse-power of 500, with a view
to her making a similar voyage. Quite a new company
has also been formed with the object of building six to
cight large steamers for this service. Undoubtedly,
within a very short time the principal traffic between
America and England will be carried out entirely by
steamers, and sailing boats will certainly be gradually
superseded.”

Lionel followed with equal interest the enormous
development of railways, which at the time were already
beginning to carry mails, as he reported with enthu-
siasm. ‘‘ Since the Liverpool-Manchester Railway was
opened in September 1830.” he added in his report, “Sup
to December 1837, 48,716 journeys have been made, and
about three million passengers have been carried, there
having been only two fatal accidents... . The engineer
of the Birmingham Railway is of the opinion that most


182 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


railways will yield a profit of eight to ten per cent. per
annum.”

This last consideration was naturally the most
important.

While the development of steamship traffic in England
was making the most prodigious strides, the Lloyd-
Tricstino, the Austrian Company, was in great difficul-
ties. The Ifouse of Rothschild had invested large sums in
this undertaking, and they wanted to minimise their
risk. Solomon accordingly endeavourcd to induce the
Austrian Government to subsidise the undertaking, and
addressed a skilful letter to the Head of the Treasury on
this point. “‘ I have, on several previous occasions,” he
wrote," “ ventured to draw Your Exccllency’s attention
to this undertaking, which may truly be called a national
one. But in view of the extent to which my Ilouse is
interested in the venture, | can readily believe that what
I have said may appear to have been prompted by self-
interest, and I may, thirefore, have failed to strike
entircly the right note. And perhaps my personal position
made me an unsuitable advocate, sinee it is a well-known
fact that it is in dealing with one’s own affairs that one
often is least effective.

“Any weakness in my presentation of the facts will,
however, be more than compensated for by the strength
of the actual facts and figures themselves. The present
position of the Austrian Steamship Company is such that
there can be no doubt as to its future fate.

“Tf the Lioyd is to continue on the path on which it
began so auspiciously, proving itself of real service to the
most varied interests, this will only be possible if this
institution is immediately granted the pecuniary,
mm: terial, and moral support which the high authorities
in the State have been earnestly begged to render it.

“If such assistance should not be forthcoming, oT
should be granted too late, the failure of the Lloyd will


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 183


be inevitable, and the public auction of the ships will
mark the sad finish of an undertaking which the
authoritics in the State themselves desired, and which
would have certainly been an ornament to the Austrian
monarchy, and would have been a source of great
benefit to the State itself, and to its commerce and
industry.

“Permit me to take this opportunity of reminding
Your Excellency of the fact that before my Wouse
became associated with the undertaking, the Govern-
ment had indicated that they were favourably consider-
ing the idea of themselves acquiring an interest in it as
shareholders. L may perhaps be allowed to confess to
Your Tlighness that it was especially the hope of their
so doing which gave my House confidence in the ven-
ture, and led us to invest such considerable capital in it.

“ T would ask Your Excellency to accede to that which
at that time you may have had the benevolent intention
of doing, for it is not possible that the Lloyd should con-
tinue with private resources and unaided, to aecomplish
all that France has suceeeded in achieving with an
enormous expenditure of State moneys, and is concerned,
at considcrable expenditure, to maintain. The task is, at
any rate during the early period of development, too
difficult. and oncrous, but the undertaking contains the
most excellent promises of ultimate prosperity, if it can
be allowed the time nceeessary to bring them gradually
to fruition.

“His J. and R. Majesty was himself graciously
pleased to state that the maintenance of the Lloyd could
not be a matter of indifference to the country. Your
Excellency has always been good enough to show the
greatest interest in it. For this reason 1 venture again
to-day to raise my voice in supplication on behalf of this
truly national undertaking. It is not in my own personal
interest that I am speaking ; I assure Your Fxcellency


184 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


that my mind is made up and the House is reconciled to
the loss that it may suffer if things go amiss, but it can-
not go any further than it has done, for in this matter, as
in all transactions, the principles which it so consistently
follows prescribe certain limits that it may not pass.

** The fate of the undertaking lies in Your Execllency’s
hands. You are accustomed to look at things not from the
narrow and purely financial point of view, but also as a
statesman and Minister to considcr them in their higher
significance and, with exceptional insight, to grasp their
important relations to the life of the country as a whole.

“IT would most emphatically beg Your Excellency
quickly to pronounce your verdict upon the Lloyd ; its
days are numbered, and if the Board of Directors may
not hope that His Majesty, our most gracious Emperor
will, before he leaves Venice, deign to grant that finan-
cial support which is absolutely essential, the whole
structure will inevitably collapse, after being main-
tained at enormous effort. und sacrifice for the few weeks
during which we may be continuing to hope for a fayour-
able decision.”

At the same time Solomon wrote to Metternich in
similar terrus.*

Von Rothschild proposcd to advance the Lloyd
500,000 florins, on condition that the State should guar-
antee this loan.” Count Kolowrat opposed this proposal,
and made the following comment on the memorandum :
* Baron von Rothschild’s proposals are most skilfully
drafted and capable of the most varicd interpretations ;
they are, in any case, calculated to ensure that Baron
von Rothschild shall be guaranteed against any possi-
bility of loss, and that this shall be transferred to the
St te. The burden of raising the capital would fall upon
the Treasury, as well as the invidious and tiresome task
of levying execution if the Company should be forced to
go into liquidation, whereas Baron von Rothschild


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 185


would, nominally at any rate, stand before the world as
the disinterested provider of the capital.’”™

The problem was finally solved by granting the House
of Rothschild a mortgage on the Company’s ships, put-
ting them in a prior position to all other creditors, in
return for their granting the loan. The Lloyd survived the
crisis, and became a great and prosperous company.

While they were acquiring all these interests in trans-
port concerns, the Rothschilds did not omit to cultivate
their highly profitable loans to Governments. And they
were more and more acquiring the habit of attaching
definite political conditions to such loans.

The self-assurance with which the House of Roths-
child laid down its conditions, especially when dealing
with the smaller States, was particularly apparent just
at this time in the case of Belgium, During the first years
of his rule, King Leopold had governed his country with
intelligence and success. He recognised the value of rail-
ways, which he decided to develop on a large seale, and
also brought the most varied undertakings into exist-
ence. Although such undertakings were ultimately profit-
able, they required the investment of great sums of
money at the start, which Belgium had to endeavour to
obtain in the Paris market.

This was made diffieult by the fact that the Belgo-
Dutch dospute, arising out of the separation of the two
countries, was still not finally settled. The two provinces,
Luxemburg and Limburg, which were meant to be par-
titioned between the two States, remained during the
Whole cight years of the dispute under Belgian adminis-
tration. Their delegates came to Brussels, and, whereas
it had formerly been the King of Holland who opposed
the decisions of the Powers, it was now Belgium that
refused to aceept a partition of the two provinces with
Holland. Feeling ran so high in Belgium that the question
of war with Holland was again on everybody’s lips.


186 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


James was staying in Rome at the time, where, in con-
nection with a loan granted to the Pope in 18387, he was
bringing his influence to bear in favour of his co-reli-
gionists, while Solomon was representing him in Paris.
At this time the Belgian Government approached the
Paris House of Rothschild with a request for an advance
of four million francs on the security of Treasury bills.
The money seemed to be intended for use in Belgium’s
military adventure. The House of Rothschild remained
true to the policy which it had now followed over a long
period of years ; there were a thousand reasons why it
had no use for war. It perceived that, as on the occasion
of the separation of Belgium from Holland, the danger
of a world conflagration might arise, and for this reason
Solomon replied to Belgium with a categorical refusal.
“This disappointment,” Count Apponyi reported,”
“has greatly embarrassca the Belgium Government by
depriving it of the financial resources which are essential
if it wished to pursue its provocative policy.”

The representative of the House of Rothschild in
Brussels informed Solomon that the Belgian Government
was annoyed. “* We do not in the least resent the fact,’™
Solomon replied, “that the Government is somewhat
angry at our refusal with regard to the Treasury bills. It
is not at. all a bad thing that these gentlemen should
realise that they may count on us oly as long as they
mean to follow a policy of wisdom and moderation. We
have certainly given sufficient proof of our intention to
support and help the Belgian Government, but our
goodwill necessarily stops short of the point of providing
the red with which we arc to be beaten, that is to say,
providing the money wanted to make a war, which
wuuld destroy the credit that we are applying all our
encrgies and resources to maintain. You may tell these
gentlenen what I have written freely and frankly and
without rincing words.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 187


Solomon simultancously sent a copy of the above
extract from his lctter to Count Apponyi, so that Mctter-
nich should see how he had acted ; for Metternich had
always had a prejudice against Belgium, and Solomon
wished him to sce how strongly he was supporting his
policy on this occasion. Apponyi speedily reported the
whole affair to Metternich, enclosing the extract, and
adding that the House of Rothschild had thereby ren-
dered a new and remarkable service to the cause of peace
and. order, a service which he was pleased to recognise
and appreciate at its true valuc."

Meanwhile, the Rothschilds’ agent, who was called
Richtenberger, was going from onc Minister to another.
Ie went first to the Finanee Minister, M. de Meérode,
who, however, belonged to the war party. He did not
conceal from the agent that the State was most urgently
in need of money, but he made it apparent that he too
did not approve of the partition of the provinces.
Richtenberger next went to see Count de Lheux, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, who favoured the peace party, and
told him of his conversation with the Finance Minister.
Thereupon de Theux quite definitely asked him not to
give the Finance Minister any money, and just to leave
him in his difficulties, whereat his warlike ardour, and
that of the opposition party, would be considerably
damped. Towards the elose of the conversation de ‘Theux
added that the agent should ask his House for advance
authority inumediately to provide cash if the Chamber
should come to terms, and aecept the twenty-four
articles of the Conference of London, and thereby agree
to the partition of the provinces. He said that he hoped
to be able to induce the Chamber to do this,

The agent was told by a friend of his who knew the
position that the Belgian Treasury was, in point of
fact, at a very low ebb indeed, there being only about
400,000 francs available.


188 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Solomon immediately sent a copy of the letter contain-
ing this information to his House at Vienna.*

““T send you herewith,” he wrote, “for Prince
Metternich’s information, the exact letter which I have
received from my agent in Brussels ; it will show the
Prince just what the Minister for Forcign Affairs and
Count Mérode think. They won’t get a farthing from me
until they give way, and before I go away I shall leave
similar instructions for my brother James.”

Solomon wrote to his secretary and manager to the
same affect: “I hope that Belgium will now sign the
twenty-four articles, especially as they lack the nercus
rerum, and as long as the articles are not aceepted, the
Belgian Government will not get a halfpenny from us,
although they have been begging for money for months.
Difficult though I found it to keep on refusing, T shall feel
compensated if Belgiun: yields and peace is restored,
by the reflection that ! shall have done my best to
contribute to such a result.”

Even the King of Holl nd realised that the lengthy
dispute should be ended. He gave London to understand
that he was prepared to accept the twenty-four articles,
This time Palmerston’s Government in England, and
even King Leopold’s father-in-law in Paris, were deter-
mined to end the business and no lon,rer to encourage
Belgium in her resistance. The Western and Mastern
Powers were, therefore, in agreement, so that the Belgian
Chamber, after having delivered itself of passionate
specches, had no option but to agree to the treaties
with Holland that had been settled in London. This
constituted a complete victory for the Rothschild
policy ; peace had been maintained and the way was now
cwar for safe financial transactions with Belgium.

King Leopold at once approached the Rothschilds
for the considerable loan of 37,000,000 francs, for the
purpose of railway construction on a large scale. This


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 189


loan was granted by the House of Rothschild, but, as
Rothschild told Count Apponyi, subject to three
remarkable conditions.“ In the event of the outbreak of
war all further payments by the House of Rothschild
should cease ; the Belgian Government would undertake
to suppress possible revolutionary movement in Luxem-
burg ; and the 37,000,000 advanced should actually be
spent on railway construction.

The House of Rothschild intended thercby to ensure
against a revival of those ambitions which had just been
renounccd.

Metternich was kept fully informed of all these Belgian
matters, not only by the Ambassador and the Minister
concerned, but also by Amschel Meyer at Frankfort,
who sent the Chancellor a copy of any news he received
at Frankfort. Metternich had asked him also to send
copics to von Rechberg, the former chargé d’affaires, who
had been temporarily recalled from Brussels, so that the
latter might compare them with his own sources of
information, and thus arrive at as accurate a picture as
possible of the position in Belgium.

After the satisfactory conclusion of the Belgian
difficulties, the four brothers on the Continent, and
Nathan’s eldest son, met at Frankfort to discuss the
general situation, take stock of their present business
transactions, and consider their action with regard to
the future. This was in September 1839, just when
Metternich and his wife, the Princess Melanie, were
staying at Schloss Johannisberg, whence they paid’ a
visit to Frankfort. The three brothers, ‘“‘ our Solomon,”
as Princess Melanie called him, Anselm, and James
immediately called on them. The manager, Goldschmidt,
accompanied the Princess, and helped her with her
shopping. Two of the Rothschilds, Solomon and Carl,
also accompanied her, the latter having just arrived
from Naples.


190 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Metternich invited Solomon and his wife to Johannis-
berg, and they promptly accepted the invitation. All
kinds of business was discussed during the visit, conces-
sions were asked for, and the question of intervention
was sounded. Metternich promised, amongst othcr
things, to usc his influence to secure rights of citizenship
in Frankfort for Solomon’s manager, Moritz Gold-
schmidt. On his return, Solomon wrote to thank the
Prince, expressing his delight with their “ most gracious
reception at lovely Johannisberg,”"

Meanwhile, the world situation had not become any
rosicr. No sooner had danger of war been banished in the
West than ominous signs of trouble began to appear in
the East. Mehemet Ali, the Sultan’s Viceroy in Egypt,
had usurped enormous power at the expense of his
sovercign. While still formally subject to the Sultan, he
paid little attention in practice to his authority. Being
at enmity with the Pasha of Akkon, he invaded Syria,
which had been allotted to his sphere of influence in May
1833. Mchemet Ali nexi. turned his attention to Arabia,
but this did not please England at all. Russia and
Austria, in their endeavours to protect the Legitimist
principle, had espoused the cause of the Sultan as
against his insubordinate Viceroy ; their sympathies
were, therefore, on the same side as those of Fengland.
Encouraged by this fact, the Sultan Mahmud endea-
voured, in 1839, to suppress the insubordinate Mehemet
Ali. But the Sultan’s troops were beaten by the Hgyptian,
France alone among the Powers viewing this victory
with satisfaction, for Mchemct Ali was friendly to the
French, and, as France was in possession of Algiers, it
was to her interest to be on good terms with the powerful
vasha of Egypt. The other Powers, however—-England,
Russia, Austria, and Prussia-—wished to help the
Sultan in his difficulties, and signed a treaty on the 15th
July, 18:0-—the Quadruple Alliance—providing that the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 191


Sultan should be assisted if necessary, but that Mehemct
Ali should be allowed to keep Egypt and Southern Syria
only, as a hereditary kingdom under the overlordship of
the Sultan.

That being the position, the Alliance necessarily
appeared in Paris to be directed against France, who
found herself isolated from the whole of the rest of
Europe. The Chambers, the Press, socicty, and the
Palace all felt keen indignation at this slight to France,
and felt that her honour was at stake. Thiers, the Prime
Minister, breathed forth fire and slaughter in his news-
papers against Palmerston, the British Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs, and against the Treaty in
general. Ile took up a particularly aggressive attitude,
but even Louis Philippe, who in his heart wished to
maintain good relations with the Powers, was profoundly
displeased with the ‘Treaty, although at the same time he
stated that he would do everything possible to maintain
peace. In any case, intensive military preparations were
decided upon,

Apponyi wrote in alarm” that the Treaty had becn
taken very scriously in Paris, and that it was regarded as
a matter affecting the national honour, He said that the
King was sincercly anxious to maintain peace, but that
the heir to the throne, the Duke of Orléans, was enor-
mously excited, and in favour of war, and that he would
support Thiers. “ The position is excecdingly serious,”
the Ambassador reported. “If people will play with
fire, as it seems they mean to do here, a general world
conflagration may easily result.”

The Wing of Belgium was also deeply concerned at the
State of affairs. He already had visions of his country,
which was achieving prosperity after much hard work,
becoming a theatre of war over which French and
Prussian armies would fight."

“We is the more alarmed,” Apponyi ironically


192 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


reported, “ since Baron Anselm Rothschild has informed
him that the new loan, which was just ready for signa-
ture, cannot be carried into effect. His Majesty intends to
travel to England on the day after to-morrow, where his
presence, as he said to Herr von Rothschild, will be of
great service at the present time.”

It was, therefore, to be expected that in this quarter
everything would be done to ensure the maintenance
of peace ; and this had been what Anselm had wished to
convey. Ansclm also wrote to his father, Solomon, who
was staying at Frankfort, saying, “It is hoped that
Prince Metternich will modify the agreement of the
15th July in such a way as to save the face of France.” »

At that time James, who was still away, was being
represented in Paris by Ansclm, and Solomon feared
that his young son might not be equal to a situation
which was constantly growing more acute and critical.
Ie therefore urgently asked James to return, and decided
to go to Paris himself and wait there until James came
back. Meanwhile, Jamcs had sect out for Paris post-
haste, and arrived in the French capital on the 8rd
August, 1840, This made it unnecessary for Solomon to
make the journey, as James at once sent him tlic
following letter «© :


“My prear Broturr, J arrived safe and well
this morning, after spending somc nights travel-
ling, because I did not wish to leave Anselm
alone.

“TI do not believe there will be war, and am
convinced that Thicrs mercly wants to show how
sensitive he is for the honour of France, in order
to strengthen his position. The public here are
strongly in favour of war, and the people will be
perfectly content to fight. But it is all only words,
although the alliance between England and


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 198


France which has always existed, is finished, and
I regard this as a misfortune for the future.”


This communication revealed the calm business sense
and strong character of James, who was not to be affected
by any panic. Ansclm was also much relieved that he had
no longer to bear the whole responsibility alone. ‘ Uncle
James,” he wrote home," ‘ arrived back here safely this
morning, the fall in securities having hastened his return.
We is, however, hale and hearty and looks very well.
Matters are, thank God, somewhat better. The tone of
the newspapers is more modcrate. The English papers
are indifferent, and Thiers is trying to climb down.
Meanwhile, the matter is not at an end and may drag on
for some time.”

The next day he added : “ The liquidation is over, but
the brokers have been very much involved, and have lost a
lot of moncy. Belgian securities were unsaleable. There is
litle news, but people are less alarmed and believe that
peace will be maintained. .. . Everything depends on
Priuce Mciternich remaining calm.”

The London Rothschilds were also on their guard.
They reported that prices there were fairly firm, but that
little business was being done, as everybody was anxi-
ously awaiting news. London was talking of a resolution
‘o be moved in the House of Commons, that the navy
and army should be strengthened. Lionel had immedi-
ately gone to Lord Clarendon, Lord Privy Seal, who told
him that he did not believe it, as England saw no reason
why there should be war.”

When James’s reassuring news reached London his
nephews realised with satisfaction that the “ wave of war
fever in Paris? had somewhat abated. “ The British
public,” they reportcd,? “* has no fear at all of a war, as
is very clearly shown by the heavy purchases of securities


that are being made by private persons.”
nN


194 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


The atmosphcre in Paris, however, was far from being
as peaceful and quict as might have been expected in
view of this news. When news was reccived on the 5th
August that Prussia and Austria had just ratified the
hateful Treaty on the 15th July, national sentiment was
again aroused. ‘‘ Our poor Rentes,” Anselm reported,
‘“* have again shown a marked decline to-day ; there is
panic on the Bourse, news having been received that
Prussia’s and Austria’s ratifications of the Treaty have
becn sent in. I believe, however, that it will all come
right, for I can assure you that the Government here is
no longer so aggressive, and has decided for the present
to cease military preparations. Reports from London are
also much more pacific. Uncle James is going to see the
King this evening.”

The King did, in fact, receive James on the evening of
the 5th August in an avdience which lasted more than
two hours. He complained bitterly of the Powers, saying
that not only he, but his son too, the Duke of Orléans,
had been much irritated. Austria should not join with
Russia. Why should everything be done to irritate
France. He still hoped that in the end,“ “ Austria will
deal with this complication as the deus ex machina, and,
through the wisdom and influence of Prince von Metter-
nich, not merely will peace be maintained, but France
will be placed in a position in which she can come out of
the affair with honour.”

“Whatever may now happen,” James concluded his
report on the audience, “I do not believe there will be
war.’

This strained situation was still further complicated by
a perfectly unexpected event. Louis Napoleon, the
ternal pretender to the throne of France, had embarked,
with fifty-five followers, in a boat from England, and had
landed on the night of the 6th August in the ncighbour-
hood of Boulogne, where a few of his supporters were


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 195


awaiting him. He had, no doubt, imagined that as, when
his great-uncle returned to France from Klba, so the
King’s troops would go over to his side now, and bring
him in triumph to the capital. However, nothing of the
kind occurred. The King’s troops marched against him ;
the occasional cries of “ Vive PE'mpereur”’ were soon
heard no more ; the Prince and his trusty followers were
forced to take to the sea, where, after a short swim, they
were all captured. The tragi-comic adventure was over
in a few hours, but it served to increase the general
nervous tension in France.

Nathan’s sons in London strongly condemned this
attempt. “The affair of Louis Buonaparte’s landing,”
they wrote, “is regarded here with gencral disgust, as
being a senseless and rather distasteful adventure. It is
said to have been a Stock Exchange plot, and that there
were brokers on board the steamer.”

The London Rothschilds had received the latest news
from Paris before this event, and they reported that. the
Stock Exehange atmosphere was quite uncanny, since
those who had a earricr pigeon service, and thereby re-
ecived early news of Paris quotations, had spread all sorts
of bad rumours. They said that Palmerston had just
delivered a moderate speech on the foreign situation, and
Lionel observed that Lord Palmerston’s quict and em-
phatic specch had dissipated any idea of war in London,
and that he hoped it would show to the French public
the game that MM. Thicrs and Guizot had been playing.

Every word that any of the Rothschilds wrote
revealed how anxiously they were constantly endeavour-
ing to do everything possible to maintain peace, as
they were always anxious about their great under-
takings and financial commitments. They watched
the political situatinn as they would a barometer,
reporting to one another every oscillation of the needle.
Palmerston’s speech was followed by « speech from the


196 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


throne by Queen Victoria, which, as Lionel reported,“
“was entirely typical of such speeches, that is, had not
much in it.”’ Nevertheless, Lionel and his brothers found
that their “‘ friends,” as they called the Ministers and
persons who had influence, were somewhat worried, as
everybody was wondcring how it would be possible to
allay French passion, after the French had been so terribly
excited by Thiers and the public Press over the Kastern
question. The Qucen’s speech, as James reported,
caused great dissatisfaction in Paris, as it made no
reference to France.

“ Everyone here,” he wrote, “‘ is very indignant, and
in a most belligerent mood, so that Rentcs have fallen
to 80.20. ... This has frightened people, and we must
hope that to-morrow they will be in a quicter frame of
mind.’

James did not fail to frequent the salons and audience
chambers of influential and high personages. Having
heard that the Duke of Orléans was so strongly in
favour of war, he obtain. an audience of him, with a
view to bringing him to his own political point of view.
The Duke actually said to him :** “ We do not want a
war, but if others aim at undermining the King’s
honour and popularity, and weakening him at home,
then u

James saw to it that Metternich heard all this at
once, and he was carcful so to phrase his letters to
Solomon, knowing they would be shown to Metternich,
in such a way that the Chancellor would be influenced
to adopt the Rothschild point of view. The Duke also
told James that new proposals for the solution of the
Kastern crisis had been sent to England, the King of
ieclyinm acting as mediator. Both James and Nathaniel,
Nathan’s third son, who was still in Paris, had in their
letters to Solomon of late been constantly Jamenting
the fact that Prince Esterhazy was not in London,


THIEERS


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 197


since his representative, the Chargé d’Affaires von
Neumann, was a regular war-monger."

Nathanicl actually wrote to his uncle saying :* “I
hear that Baron Neumann is in a great state of excite-
ment, and preaching war.” Solomon saw to it that such
statements were not omitted from the copies of letters
that he laid before Metternich.

The guiding principle of the Rothschilds at critical
times such as these was to go about as much as possible
in society and to seek out every opportunity of meeting
leading statesmen, royalties, and influential society
women, never missing a chance of collecting news.
This is characteristically shown in a letter from Lionel
to his Uncle James and his brother Nathaniel. ““ We
had the pleasure yesterday,” he wrote on the 22nd
August, 1840, “of getting your mail, and we are very
vrateful to you for it, sinee, as I can assure you, we
were distinctly uncasy. Consols opened at 893, it is
said that the owners of carrier pigeons were buying ;
they closed at 894.

“Von saw all our friends, to get news, and heard that
everybody was particularly pleased with King Leopold,
who bad contributed a vreat deal to reconciling Mmneland
and France. We then spoke to another person of im-
portance. and she told us that everything was com-
pletely changed, including France’s tone, which was
quite different fron: what it had been, .. . Everyone
is of opinion that Mehemet Ali, if he does not completely
give way, will, at any rate, make fresh proposals. Bulow
and all the others are dining with us to-morrow, and we
mean to go to Windser too and try to see King Leopold,
Tf there is anything of interest to report we shall send
you a courier toe-worrow night. We have heard that
M. Guizot (the French An:bassador in London) dined
alone with Lord Palmerston and Princess Lieven
yesterday; Hk. Neumann was there, and says that


198 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Guizot was exceedingly cheerful, and this is a much
better sign, expecially as we were told that Guizot and
Lord Palmerston were so furious with one another
when they met at Windsor that they would scarcely
speak.”

King Louis Philippe was at that time undergoing
a sharp mental conflict. On the one hand, it was obvious
to him that he could not fight for Mehcmet Ali against
the whole of Europe. Such action would have been
fraught with disaster for himself and his dynasty. On
the other hand, he did not wish to offend his proud and
sensitive people, or to make himself unpopular by a
public humiliation. On one occasion he gave free
rein to his feelings, to the Austrian Ambassador, ful-
minating against the Powers who had placed him in
such an awkward position, Count Apponyi was quite
affected by the rage with which the King spoke. He
reported that he had never seen him so violent or
resentful, and that he was particularly inecused against
the Tser. “ The Tsar Nicholas,’ he had exclaimed,
“has always aimed at destroying the Franco-British
Alliance, and at last he has succeeded in doing so, All
the rest of you crawl and shiver before him... . Iam,
T must admit, deeply hurt. To be left out in the cold, to
be treated as a pariah and a revohitionary King, as you
all treat me—can 1 be expected to bear that. Do you
think that I have no blood in my veins ¢ You have upset
the whole of Kurope, and spoilt the whole position, which
T have finally managed to achieve after ten years of
extraordinary effort.”

The King went on to say that to have isolated France
through the new Quadruple Alliance was an act of
un_aralleled frivolity, from the point of view of main-
tainiag peacc. He then endeavoured to persuade Apponyi
to urge ‘is Prince to get rid of the unfortunate treaty
of 35th July. When the Ambassador declared that he


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 199


could not possibly take action, the King, having
calmed down somewhat, assured him that he would do
everything to maintain peace as long as peace was con-
sonant with the dignity of France. The monarch pointed
out, however, that circumstances might occur in which
he would be forced, even against his will, to go to
war.

This display of feeling by the King was, no doubt,
not entirely unpremeditated, as he hoped there might
be a chance of breaking up the Quadruple Alliance.
At the same time he exploited the prevailing milit-
aristic -spirit, materially to strengthen his neglected
Army, which it may well have seemed highly desirable
for him to do, quite apart from the danger of war.
Fundamentally, however, he was really anxious to
maintain peace, and in this desire he was entirely at
one with James Rothschild. During this critical period
the monarch relied a great deal on the wise old financier.
He looked to James for sound advice, and relied on him
as an intermediary and a person who could skilfully
bring the right influences into play ; and, as their aims
were identical, the monarch and the Jewish banker were
often in one another’s company. Their conversations
were immediately reported to the brothers in the other
capitals, who would do their best to turn them to go d
i.ccount, both politically and financially.

* Yesterday evening,” Nathaniel reported from Paris
on the 6th September, 1840, “* Unele James was with
the King, who, as usual, was exceedingly cordial to him,
and said that he felt so friendly towards him that he
would warn him to be on his guard, as Ibrahim Pasha
would very probably march across the Taurus, which
would produce such complications that it would be
impossible to say how the matter would end. It seems,
my dear Uncle, that matters are now coming to a head,
and, although it is certain that there won't be a war,


200 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


we shall, as an important person in the British Embassy
here said, get so near to war that the world will be
terrified and sccurities will, of course, fall. Rentes
closed dull, at 79.10, there being very Jitile business.”

The next day the outlook was still worse. ‘“ Rentes
have fallen to 76.20,” Nathaniel wrote that day,”
“there having been an émeute here in Paris in the
Faubourg St. Antoine, where there are a mass of working
people and ten times as many troops. There will probably
be a little fighting, but it is generally believed that the
affair will soon be over. The émeute is unfortunately
not the principal cause of the fall in Rentes, the political
news being very bad. Fighting has begun in the Kast.
... A well-informed friend has just been to see me, and
he said that they had had a mail from Vienna yesterday.
from which it is clear that there is considerable in-
dignation against the French there... . Thiers is also
supposed to be much exvited, and God knows how it
will all end. The news from Spain also seems to be
unsatisfactory.”

The Powers had, indeed, begun to take military
action in the Hast against Mehemct Ali. A joint Angto-
Turkish-Austrian squadron had been ordered to the
coast of Syria. This caused great eaciteieni ta Paris.
“The prospects on the Bourse here” Nathaniel re-
ported on the 9th September,"* “are not at all good.
All securitics have fallen very heavily, and Rentes
closed at 73.60, the 5 per cents. at 105.60... . We
naturally don’t believe everything we hear, but there is
considerable panic, for it is a fact that Admiral Napic?
has taken several Ngyptian ships with troops and
munitions on board, I have seen Thiers, who, in spite
of all this, speaks in a pacifie tone, and both he and the
King hope that Mehemet Ali will have recourse to the
French as mediators to settle this question.”

tL seemed to be a favourable moment for carrying out


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 201


a plan which had long been cherished, namely, to
fortify Paris. This was interpreted as indicating warlike
intentions, but the Rothschilds immediately learnt that
such a belief was unfounded.


** My pear Brotuers,” James wrote with his
usual quict confidence, with reference to the
Governinent’s decision, ‘* Rentecs fell when the
Bourse opened, because it became known that
the newspapers will to-morrow publish the fact
that Paris is to be fortified. The idea of fortes
détachés has been under consideration for several
years, and the King is taking advantage of the
present situation to carry it into effect, as he re-
gards it as a most important measure, not only to
ensure security against foreign enemics, but also
to safeguard the position at home. In point of
fact, both the King and Thiers are more pacific-
ally inclined than ever. The former has had a
most friendly conversation with Count Apponyi,
in which he told him that he should not be misled
by this measure, as they would have had to
carry it out in any case.

* Princess Lieven has had letters from England
to-day that strike the same friendly note, and all
the Ministers that I mect here are of the same
mind. The fall in Rentes has been caused by some
wretched journalists who speculate on the Bourse,
and the public believe they are in the know.””


The London Rothschilds kept besieging the French
Ambassador Guizot and all the other representatives of
foreign Powers, in ordcr to get news; at parties they
always tricd to gel into conversation with a Cabinct
Minister. One of them: succeeded in discovering a friend
who had just spoken to an important personage who


202 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


had returned from Syria, having been sent there by
Palmerston. They heard from a reliable source that
the Prime Minister, Lord Melbourne, and Palmerston had
had a quarrel, and that relations between them were
strained. They also ascertained that everybody in
London complained of the way Louis Philippe talked
about Mnglish Ministers, as he was alleged to have
stated on several occasions that Lord Palmerston had
received a large sum of money from Russia.

Meanwhile, the Syrian campaign procecded. The posi-
tion of Mehemet’s stepson, Ibrahim, became more and
more dangerous. The city and fortress of Beyrout, which
were still held by the Egyptian, were bombarded by the
Allied Powers. Nerves in Paris became more and more
strained. It was now being definitcly stated that Thiers
supported the dangerous war policy. That being so, he
was bound to forfeit completely the sympathy of the
Rothschilds. Nathaniel, who was by now also alarmed
and angry with Thiers, wrote on the zznd September,
1840," saying, “The pos'tion is still confused and
uncertain. God knows how these important questions
will be solved, and how M. Thiers will get us out of the
awkward situation into which his irvesponsibility and
his nationalistic peasant obstinacy have brought us. Our
position is made worse by the fact. that. Thicrs’s political
standing rests upon such a complicated structure, built up
of so many various elements, that. it is almost impossible,
and would indeed be dangerous and altogether unwise,
to overthrow lim; so that we must look on quictly
while this most arrogant of all parvenus plunges. this
country more and more deeply into difficulties, and us all
with him, through his irresponsibility and pscudo-
liberalism. We must hope that things will happen
otherwise and that we may look forward to a happier
future.”

The position grew more and more complicated, aud


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 208


even James, who was generally so wise and calm, did not
know what to make of things.


‘“My pEaR Brotners,” he wrote on the 25th
September," “ I really don’t know what to write
without misleading you. I was with the King
yesterday evening, and spoke to him for over two
hours, and you cannot imagine how excited the
good man was. He said to me ...: ‘ Prince
Metternich acts slowly, but events take their
course, and in the end war will be inevitable.
The Prince is absolutely Iced by Russia, and
believes that Russia will bring peace, but England
and Russia are in agreement. Palmerston wants
to rob France of her honour, and reduce her to
the status of a minor Power. Meanwhile, we are
arming as mtensively as possible, and peace
depends on that country to which Iam attached
heart and soul; if only Mehemet Ali's last: propo-
sals would be aecepted !” In short, 1 found that
the King was as indignant as on the previous
occasion, Count Apponyi, however, to whom I
always tell everything, still believes in peace, and
thinks that the King is only play-acting to
frighten them. Meanwhile, Rentes have gone up
because it is said that a telegram has arrived
reporting that Mehemet Ali has yielded.

“ Treally don’t know what to think.

“ Palmerston’s private seerctary has just been
here. He told me definitely that a conterence of
all Ministers would be held in London on Monday,
to consider whether the proposals should be
accepted. He said that Palmerston was absolutely
opposed to accepting them, but that we should
conic as near to war as possible. | am writing you
all this in detail, my dear brothcrs, that you may


204 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


be in a position to judge the situation. The King
was very angry, too, about a note from England
asking why he was having a chapel built at
Tunis.”

“* Rentes closed at 78.60.”


News came from Syria that Said had been taken by
storm by the Austrians and British on the 26th
September. This naturally increased the indignation
against England in Paris, as far as this was possible.
James became more and more uneasy, and already
believed that in the end war would be inevitable. He
wrote emphatically to his brother Solomon to say that.
he should urge Metternich again to induce Austria to
be more moderate, and to use his influence with England
in the same direction.

“Do tell the Prince, my dear brother,” he wrote to
him on the 5th October, “ not to Iet Palmerston’s hot
temper run away with the situation. Neumann is not
pacific, and, although the Prince certainly only wishes
peace, we must be very carcful, for public opinion here
is becoming so strongly in favour of war thet in the end
no King and no Minister will be able to control the
situation. I beg you, my dear brother, to bring these
considerations home to the Prince.”

Resentment in Paris became fore and more
passionate. The newspapers inflamed the passions of the
people, declaring that the national honour had been
gravely insulted. Thiers added fuel to the flames, and
advised the King to take further military measures to
make a demonstration at sea, and to other actions, most
danerous in their consequences. The heir to the throne,
who was filled with martial ardour, urged his father in
the same direction. Thiers had for some time noted with
displeasure the influence which the House of Rothschild
excreised upon Lhe King. It was diflicult tor him actively


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 205


to oppose the bank because he had debts, and, according
to Count Apponyi, he owed the House of Rothschild,
too, at least 40,000 francs; but the interference of
the Rothschilds had now gone further than he could
stand.

This German Jew from Frankfort had the effrontery to
bamboozle the King into the belief that the honour of
France was really not involved in this distant affair of
Mchemet Ali, Thiers expressed his irritation at this state
of affairs. Immediately the rumour went round Paris that
Baron Rothschild and other rich bankers had threatened
the Ministry with formidable opposition, if it pronounced
in favour of war. The Times commented on this in a Paris
Letter. The matter was quite simple, it said. Rothschild
was a financier, and therefore did not want war ; so far
so good : but Baron Rothschild was an Austrian subject,
and Austria’s Consul-General in Paris, and a question
affecting France’s honour was therefore of precious little
concern to him. The Constitutionnel, Thiers’s paper, com-
mented on this letter on the 12th October, 1840,"
observing that the position was perfectly intelligible, but
asking what Herr von Rothschild, the financier, and
Herr von Rothschild, Metternich’s agent, had to do with
the French Chamber, and its majority.

“With what right,” the paper asked, “ and under
what pretext, does this king of finance intermeddle with
our affairs ? What concern of his are the decisions which
France will take? Is he the arbiter of our honour? Are
his money intcrests to be allowed to outweigh our
naticnal interests ? ”

The Constitutionnel emphasised the fact that it was
publishing these rnmours in order that, if they were true,
the public might frustrate these intrigues. If they were
false, Rothschild wouid have the opportunity of publicly
denying them and of letting the country know that it was
not his intention to dispose of majoritics and Ministries.


206 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


James replied on the 12th October, 1840 :


‘“* Sir,—In spite of my reluctance to bring my
name before the public, I eannot leave un-
answered the article in your current number,
wherein my name figures in a most unfavourable
light. The nature of these attacks imposes a duty
on me to break that silence which I am generally
content to observe. ow, sir, should [ proceed to
refute such aspersions ? I can bul wonder that
men who have scrious matters to attend to will
lend their cars to such assertions. I have never at
any time encouraged opposition to the Govern-
ment, for the simple reason that I have never
wished to play a political rdle. Tam, as you state,
a financier. If I desire peace, T desire it honourably,
not only for France, but for the whole of Kurope,
and in all circumstances. Financiers have the
opportunity of rendering services to the country,
and I think I may say that in this respect I have
never been behindhand. If France is not my
native country, it is the country of my children.
Thave lived in France for thirty years ; my family,
my friends, and all my interests are in that
country.”

The Constitutionnel published this reply, and that
ended the incident. Thiers, however, fclt that, without
having come forward himself, he had given an adequate
warning to Rothschild not to work up an opposition to
the policy of the Ministry.

Nevertheless, events were to show that it was Roths-
child’s, and not Thiers’s, point of view that had come to
be firmly adopted by the King. In his heart the King
heartily disliked Thiers as a revolutionary. Louis
Philippe withstood the warlike proposals of his son and


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 207


his Minister. He also declared himself opposed to any
naval demonstration. The warlike Minister and the
peaceful King finally agrecd upon a kind of ultimatum
to the Powers, which was, however, essentially accom-
modating, as it gave up all claims to Syria, and only
asked that the deposition of Mchemet Ali should be
revoked.

England, too, did not wish to accentuate the crisis, and
replied in a more conciliatory spirit. The popular fecling
which had been aroused by Thicrs was, however, not to
be so quickly pacified, even if the Minister had wished to
do so. An unsuccessful attempt on the King’s life sud-
denly brought home to him the dangers near at hand,
which would necessarily be much accentuated by exten-
sive complications abroad. Its effect upon the King was
to attach him definitely to the Conservative Party,
which favoured peace. This party had lately increased in
numbers, especially amonyst the property-owning classes
who feared for their lives and thcir possessions. The
Journal des Débats, which was friendly to the Roths-
childs, became more emphatic in its warnings. But it was
not so easy for Thicrs to reverse his policy. The Speech
from the Throne provided the occasion for clearing
up the situation between the King and his Ministers.
Thiers proposed that in his speech he should condemn
the Treaty of London, and discuss the deposition of
Mehemet Ali, and the calling up in advance of the 1841
recruits. Louis Philippe refused to make any references
of this kind.

“I want peace,” he exclaimed," “and not war. I
want to promote tranquillity, and not to provoke and
excite the whole of Kurope. My military measures are
precautionary and not aggressive.”

“In that case,” Thiers replied, “ we cannot possibly
agree, and there is nothing for me to do but to
resign.”’


208 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


“* Very well,” replied the monarch, “I shall accept
your resignation.”

Thiers acted in accordance with this hint, and the
King dismissed the Ministry.

After this conversation, which took place on the
20th October, 1840, he observed to Count Apponyi
with some relief, ‘‘ I think I have taken quite the best
moment to rid myself of M. Thiers ; it was a relief to me
that he himself gave me the opportunity of doing so,
He was the only, or, at any rate, the principal, obstacle
in the way of the maintenance of peacc.”

Paris and the whole world regarded this change—
and the appointment of the new Ministry, which was
nominally presided over by Marshal Soult, but in
practice by the former Ambassador in J.ondon, Guizot,
who became Minister for Foreign Affairs—as a most
fortunate solution.

In high enthusiasm the Rothschilds reported from
Paris* that, as a result of the appointment of the new
Ministry, and particularly of the confidence inspired on
the Bourse by the new Finance Minister, M. Hfumann,
Rentes had appreciated considerably. It was high time
for a change of policy, for Mchemet Ali’s stepson had just
lost the powerful Syrian fortress Akka, to the Allies,
being forced to retire on Suez, after losing all his
artillery. The English Admiral appearea with his fleet
before Mehemet’s residence at Alexandria. The Admiral
and the Egyptian Viccroy soon came to an under-
standing. The whole of Syria was to be evacuated, but
Mchemet Ali’s position in Egypt was to be confirmed.
Solomon, who received the news at Frankfort, reported
these satisfactory events with great enthusiasm, as
indicating that the questions in dispute in the East might
be considered as settled. It says much for Solomon’s far-
seeing judgment that he immediately directed his efforts
to making the path for France, who had, after all, already


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 209


reversed her policy, as easy and honourable as possible.
It was still being stated that France was arming, and
wanted to increase her military forces to five hundred
thousand men.

“ Although I do not believe,’ Solomon wrote to
Vienna on the 10th December, 1840," “‘ that France
has any desire to bring war about through an emphatic
demonstration of this kind, war being entirely opposed
to her interests, yet in my humble opinion [ consider
it to be highly desirable, by satisfying French national
vanity, to find some way of persuading her Cabinet to
cease all further military preparations, and thus to bring
the tension and differences with forcign Governments to
a speedy conclusion. Would not such a solution be found
by inviting France to attend the Conference in order to
settle the Hastern problem jointly with the other
Powers? ... If France is an integral part of the Confer-
ence, and it seems to me that those in power in that
country are merely concerned to convince the noisy
clement that she has again been received with honour
into the European comity of nations, all reasons for
further military preparations automatically cease, and
general peace will be morc lastingly and firmly
cstablished.”

‘Have the goodness,” Solomon bade Wertheimstein
end Goldschmidt in Vienna, ‘‘ to give Ilis Highness the
Prince a hint to this effect, when an opportunity occurs ;
if he approves my suggestion, and is inclined to act
on it, I have no doubt that it will produce satisfactory
results,”’

The advice was most timely, for Prince Mettcrnich had
just suggested that France should be asked, through diplo-
matic channels, to reduce her considerable armaments.

James proceeded to advance arguments against so
doing. He wrote a letter-—which, as usual, was meant for
Meterrtiich’s perusal—in which he endeavoured cleverly


210 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


to persuade him out of his intention to demand a reduc-
tion in French armaments.


“My pear Brotuers,” he wrote," “ don’t
think there is any question of a war. The Prince
is too clever not to understand the position here.
If the Minister here were to say anything about
reducing the Army of five hundred thousand men,
which is regarded as a peace army, he would
not remain in power for one moment ; but this will
happen automatically as soon as the Chambers
begin to discuss expenditure. Proof of this is to be
found in the fact that a considerable party is
already being formed in the Chambers who are
opposed to the fortifications, and that the Min-
istry have to-day decided not to make this a Gov-
ernment question, and to let the matter drop.
People here do not want war, and they do not
want expenditure, but, if Germany brings pres-
sure to bear, the populace here will regard it as
intentional, and this would make a bad impres-
sion. I am convinced that they will demobilise a
hundred thousand infantry, but this must not
appear to have been forced upon them, for, after
all that has happened in the Chamber, the
Ministry is as unable as the King to send the
Army away at once, as unable dfs they would have
been to take part in coercive measures against
the Pasha of Egypt.

‘““ Be easy, therefore, as to the position here,
and assure the Prince that J see too many people
here to have occasion to fear that anything should
occur which I could not, and would not, tell him
of, as it is my duty to do.”


As James and his brothers had hoped, no further com-
plications arose in the Eastern problem. The Sultan and


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 211


Mehemet Ali were reconciled ; the Powers of the Quad-
ruple Alliance declared that the Treaty of the 15th July
had expired, having achieved the object for which it was
formed. And they made the way as smooth as possible
for France to take her place again amongst them.

The previous ten years had seen three highly critical
problems arise, each of which brought Europe to the
verge of a devastating war. On each occasion the Tlouse
of Rothschild had seen the policy of peace triumph, that
policy which was so absolutely essential to the mainten-
ance and preservation of their enormous wealth. It was
not surprising that their self-confidence, as well as their
property, continued to increase to a prodigious degree.


Cnapter VI
The Rothschilds Before and During the Revolution of 1848


WuiLE the Rothschilds were engaged in these great
financial and political questions, their command of
money and their increasing social prestige brought them
into touch with the great men of the day in painting,
literature, and music. This was espccially so in Paris,
whither the most remarkable spirits of the time were
attracted from abroad by the relative freedom of the
Press and the censorship.

The great Italian, Rossini, had given up his home in
Italy and then left Vienna for the city on the Scine. He
had made the acquaintance of the Rothschilds as early
as the Congress of Verona, and he was a frequent visitor
at James’s house, being invited to the intimate family
circle as well as to the bankcr’s splendid receptions. If
an artist, in addition to being famous, was also of Jewish
origin, he was particularly welcome at the House of
Rothschild in Paris. Meyerbeer was amongst those who
were actively assisted and cordially welcomed.

After the July Revolution, and the severe measures
which Metternich thereupon applied in Germany and
Prussia against all ‘liberal’ tendencies, a number of
refugees from political oppression and the censorship
came to Paris ; amongst them was Heinrich Heine, whose
great ambition at the time was to become a protagonist
of popular rights, and to rise against the “ censors of
thought and the oppressors of the most sacred rights of
humanity.” + He felt himself to be a son of the revolu-
tion, broke all links with Germany, and took up his per-
mancnt residence in Paris, on the Ist May, 1831. Ludwig
Borne, a relation of Heine of similar views, but who later
became bitterly hostile to him, left Germany for Paris
at the same time. Heine soon succecded in arousing
great interest in Paris, a portion of his Harzreise appearing

213


214 ' ,E HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


in the Revue des deux Mondes, and two other books
of his being published in French translations. [lis fame
grew until he was treated on equal terms, as a poct of
the first rank, by the most famous of the great men in
Paris. As a character he was less adm’ d, owing to his
eccentric, paradoxical, and unba d nature. The
diplomats in Metternich’s service, were constantly
engaged in smelling out revolutionarics, regarded him
as a complete outcast. A report’ written from this pre-
judiced point of view calls Heine, on account of his un-
reliability, “‘ a moral and political chameleon,” saying
that he had no opinions of his own, and might affect
constitutional opinions to-day, ‘‘ whereas to-morrow he
will, with cqual skill, plead the cause of absolutism or
of radicalism.” “ Te is of a cowardly nature,” this bitter
report continued, “a liar and a man who would be dis-
loyal to his best friend. Changeable as a cocotte, he is
utterly unsteadfast ; spitetr' as a serpent, he has all the
beauty and glitter of that creature, and all its poison ;
without any really noble or genuine instincts, he is in-
capable of a sincere emotion. His vanity js such that he
would like to play a conspicuous réle, but he has played
out his part, he is no longer taken scriouslyv — though
his talents remain.”

It was only natural that Heine should soon make the
acquaintance of James Rothschild, especially as Heine’s
father had known the Rothschilds well, the latter being
constantly associated with the Touse in financial mat-
ters. It was, therefore, casy for Heine to establish rela-
tions with the House, whereas Borne remained aloof,
having always been in opposition to the Rothschilds.
In his seventy-second letter, sent from Paris on the
22ud January, 1832, Borne expressed himself in no
measured terms about the banking firm. In that letter
he made play with the relations between Rothschild
and the Pope, saying that Louis Philippe weuld be


1


WHINE


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 215


crowned in Paris, in Notre Dame de la Bourse, with
Rothschild functioning as archbishop. He imagined a
turtle-dove flying to St. Helena, perching on Napoleon’s
grave, and laughingly narrating that it had yesterday
seen his successor crowned, not by the Pope, but by a
Jew. With biting irony Borne suggested that it might
be to the greatest bencfit of the world if the kings were
got rid of and the Rothschild family were sct upon the
throne. Such a dynasty would never have recourse to a
loan, for they would have the best reason to know how
dearly such loans would have to be paid for. Moreover,
peace would be assured, since the Rothschilds would be
on the most excellent terms with the House of Hapsburg.
Borne next proceeded to show how dearly Austria had
had to pay for their friendship. Truc, no Rothschild yet
occupied a throne, but when a throne became vacant
they were asked to advise as to who should oceupy it.
It was morc bitter that all the crowns should be at the
feet of the Rothschilds than that they should be wearing
them on their heads, for in the latter case they would at
any rate have to shoulder the responsibility of kingship.
The majority of the Huropean peoples, Borne suggested,
would long ago have attained their freedom, had not the
Rothschilds and other financiers applied their wealth to
the support of absolutism. Bitterly Borne desenbed the
‘oan operations of the Rothschilds, showing how they
would depress Rentes just before underwriting a loan,
and then artificially raise the price, immediatcly after
the agrecment for the new loan had been signed. Such
was the “ game” that the Rothschilds always played,
to enrich themselves at the expense of the country
that they exploited.

In such circumstances there was naturally no room
for Borne in James’s house. Heine, too, occasionally
turned his biting satire on the House of Rothschild.
But h® would also often write favourably about them,


216 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


although not without having occasion to be grateful
to James for services of a financial nature. The “ great
baron ”’ not only frequently invited him to a family meal
in the private rooms of his office, but also, as [eine
himself tells us, invited him to take part in “ almost
all of his more important transactions, often quite
spontaneously.’”*

Nevertheless, Heine was invariably short of money,
which always melted through his fingers, and, against
Rothschild’s advice, he embarked on other speculations
which involved him in serious loss. He did not receive
regular remittances from Rothschild, but would often
give him to understand that he was in need of this or
that, whereupon James, who admired his genius and
feared his pen, would send him something under the
ingenious pretext that Heine had made a profit in a share
transaction ; sometimes he would deliberately ignore
the disguised request, and this would produce ill feeling.
When the money was not forthcoming, Heine would
ponder more deeply on the part played i the world


by Rothschild; he would come to sce ! . as onc
of the greatest revolutionarics—a founder modern


democracy. Richelicu had undermined the sovercignty
of the feudal nobility ; when it had become lazy and
degenerate, Robespierre had completed its destruction ;
but the private ownership of land haa survived, and
property-owners had merely usurped the pretensions of
the old nobility, under a new guise. Thereupon the
Rothschilds had arrived, having abolished the dominion
of land-ownership by creating the system of state bonds
as the greatest power, and investing money which any-
one could possess at any place, with the prerogatives that
laid had previously enjoyed.*

Heine evolved these ideas after a conversation with
James, “that Nero of finance who has built himself a
golden palace in the Rue Laffitte,” as he strolled with


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 217


him arm-in-arm, through the streets of Paris, “in a
quite famillionary way,” as Karl Kraus‘ wittily re-
marked.

IIeine held that James was the man in whom, “ since
the death of his distinguished brother in England, all
the political significance of the House of Rothschild ”
was concentrated. Heine particularly admired James’s
ability in discovering any persons of talent, even in
provinces quite forcign to him where he was not qualified
to form a judgment. “‘ For his gifts in this direction,”
Heine wrote, “* he has been compared with Louis XIV,
and he certainly —_. contrast to his colleavucs here, who
like to surround themselves with a gencral staff of
mediocrity. James von Rothschild may always be seen
in intimate association with the notabilities of every walk
of life. He might be entirely unversed in a subject, but
he always knew who was the best man in it. IIe probably
docs not understand a single note of music, but Rossini
has always been an intimate family friend. Ary Scheffer
is his court painter; Caréme was his cook. Herr von
Rothschild certainly knows as little Greek as Demoiselle
Rachel, but Letronne is the scholar whom he most
values. The brilliant Dupuytren was his physician, and
between the two there was the most brotherly affection.
Herr von Rothschild was one of the first to perceive
tre worth of Cremieux, the great and noble-hearted
lawyer, who became his loyal advocate. Similarly, he
at once appreciated Louis Philippe’s political capacity,
and he was always on the most confidential terms with
that great master of statecraft. Herr von Rothschild
alone discovered Emil Percire, the Pontifex Maximus
of railways, and he immediately made him his chief
engincer, entrusting to him the construction of the
railway to Versailles on the right bank of the Seine, on
which there has never been an accident. Poctry alone,
that of France as well as of Germany, is represented by


218 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


no living genius in the favour of Herr von Rothschild ;
he loves only Shakespeare, Racine, Gocthe, dead poets
all, and disembodied spirits, remote from all carthly
financial cares.’”?

This was a gentle hint that Rothschild might do more
for living German pocts, including Heine. Heine gave
recognition where it was due, although he was frequently
ironical at Jamces’s expense, and reproached him for his
meanness and avarice.

The outbreak of cholera in Paris in 1882 produced a
real panic. There was a rumour curreut in the capital
that the disease was produced by certain mixcrs of
poisons, who poisoned the people with a white powder.
Two hapless persons who had bought a white cough
powder at a chemist’s, and were quictly walking out of
the shop with it, were torn in pieces by a crowd which
collected in an instant, en an old woman shouting,
“There are the murderers and poisoners!” Their
bloody remains were carried in triumph through the
streets, the crowd shouting, ‘‘ Voild le cholera morbus !”
People died in tens of thousands, and Paris was anything
but gay. Those who could, and who had the money, fled
the city. IIcine tells us that 120,000 passports were
issued at the Mairie. “‘ The pcople coniplained bitterly,”
he states, “‘ when they saw rich folk flecing the city and
making for the healthier districts, -aeceompanicd by
doctors and bottles. The poor man noticed that money
was a protection even against death. The majority of
the Justemilieu and of high finance have also left, and
are living in their country houses. ‘The representatives of
wealth par excellence, the Ilerren von Rothschild, have,
however, remained quietly in Paris, thereby demon-
stri.ting that it is not only in finance that they are
courageous and magnificent.” *

According to Heine’s mood and finances, such praise
would alternate with ironical remarks referring to


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 219


Rothschild’s meanness. Heine can scarcely have been
thinking of himself when he wrote in Gedanken und
Einfallen, “The main army of Rothschild’s enemies is
made up of the have-nots ; they all say to themselves,
* What we have not, Rothschild has.’ As soon as a man’s
money is gone, he becomes Rothschild’s cnemy.’* This
was certainly true of Heine himself. Ile was, however,
impressed by the splendour and wealth of the envied
bankers. ‘‘ For the beau monde of Paris,”’ he wrote on the
Ist March, 1836, ‘‘ yesterday was a remarkable day :
we had the first performance of Meyerbeer’s long-
awaited Huguenots at the Opera, followed by Roths-
child’s first ball in his new house. As I did not leave
until four o’clock this morning, and have not been
asleep yet, I am too tired to give you an account of the
scene of this festival, and of the magnificent new palace
built entirely in the style of the Renaissance, in which the
guests wander, expressing their admiration and astonish-
ment. As at all Rothschild’s receptions, the guests were
chosen strictly for their social rank, the men being
distinguished for their great aristocratic names or
position, the women for their beauty and elegance. As
for the palace itself and its decorations, it unites every-
thing which the spirit of the sixteenth century could
conceive and the money of the ninctcenth century
van pay for. In it the genius of art competes with the
genius of Rothschild. Wo years have been spent in
constant work on this palace and its decorations, and
the sums that have been expended are said to be enor-
mous. Herr von Rothschild smiles when he is asked.
It is the Versailles of a financial potentate. Onc is forced
to admire the taste no less than the lavishness of the
exccution. M. Duponchel bas been responsible for the
decorations, and everything bears witness to his good
taste. The whole, and each individual part also, is
expressive of the fine artistic sense of the lady of the


220 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


house, who is not merely one of the prettiest women in
Paris, but is also distinguished for intelligence and
knowledge, and practises painting with much success.”

This last remark was not a mere phrase, but expressed
Heine’s sincere feelings, for, although he had little use
for James Rothschild as a human being, he was very
much under the influence of his charming and accom-
plished wife, the daughter of Solomon at Vienna. She
showed intelligent appreciation of Heine’s poetry, which
did not make the same appcal to her husband. She
constantly expressed her admiration for Ieine’s work,
and by flattering the poct’s vanity, inercased his
devotion to her, and she was not entirely displeased
when Heine ventured to suggest that such a rare soul
should not be married to a dull calculating machine.
The poet constantly, indeed regularly, sent her his
works, not excepting those which made fun of her
husband, and counted on obliterating any unfavourable
impression by a casual expression of apology. Heine
well knew what he was about when he emphasised the
contrast in the characters of the husband and wife.
Baroness Betty constantly invited him, and on suck
occasions he was able to put forward requests and to
ask for favours for friends, such as Ludwig Mareus, who
was living at that time in dire poverty. Baroness Betty
would plead Heine’s cause with her hushand, and would
also help personally, and Heine would express his
gratitude in one of his next writings, in which he would
speak of “the angelic help of a beautiful woman, the
wife of one of the richest bankers in the world, who
is justly faruous for her wit and her knowledge.”
Later, when he lay ill in his attic, he actually wrote
to Frau Betty: ‘As I lie cut off from the world,
the picture of you often comforts and cheers me.
It is one of the most treasured works in the gallery of
my memory.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 221


Since his first meeting with the Baroness at Boulogne-
sur-Mer in September 1833, Heine had always felt in
complete sympathy with her. His gratitude for many a
kindness, and his admiration for Betty as a woman and a
lady, found poetical expression in the poem to which he
gave the name “ The Angel.””™

It was in the years 1835 and 1836 that Heine spent
most time at Rothschild’s house. Grillparzer met him
there when, during a short visit to Paris, he was dining
at James Rothschild’s, Rossini being also present.
** Much as I had liked [Jeine, when I was alone with
him,” Grillparzer wrote,'* “I did not like him at all a
few days later when we were dining at the Rothschild’s.
It was apparent that his hosts were afraid of Heine, and
he exploited their fear by slyly poking fun at them at
every opportunity. But it is not admissible to dine with
people whom you don’t care for. If you despise a person
you should not dine with him. In point of fact, our
acquaintance did not progress after this.”

About this time Heine was actually considering the
question of dealing with the history of the origin and
development of the Ilouse of Rothschild, but the re-
current tension in his relations with the Ifouse since
1837 probably caused him to give up the idea. In spite
of such occasional help as he received, Heine’s financial
affairs were in constant confusion, and James Rothschild
refused tu intervene in Heine’s pecuniary wrangles with
his rich uncle, Solomon Heine. James had for a long
time had intimate financial dealings with that banker,
and may well have suffered a rebuff on trying to say a
good word for Heine. He did not feel inclined to intro-
duce an unpleasant element into his relations with a
business friend by unduly pressing the point. Various
tucrative dealings, including a participation in profits
on the issue of capital for the Northern Railway of
France, seem to have assisted in producing a more


222 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


genial atmosphere between Heine and James; and at
this time Heine quite unexpectedly found an opportunity
of making himself useful to the House of Rothschild.

In 1843, Heine’s publisher, Campe, had received from
a certain Friedrich Stcinmann of Minster, a manuscript
entitled The House of Rothschild ; its History and its
Transactions. The book dealt with the House in a spite-
ful and hostile way. Campe paid the author the fee which
he asked, and happened to mention the matter to Heine.
Ileine asked to see the manuscript, and Campe post-
poned printing it, giving it to Heinc to take to Paris in
order that he might discuss the matter with Rothschild.

In a Ietter dated 29th Decembcr, 1843, Heine wrote
to Campe saying, “‘ I confess I should be glad of an op-
portunity of requiting the great kindness that Rothschild
has shown me for twelve years [i.c. ever since he can
to Paris], if I have an opportunity for doing so in an
honest manner.”

The pamphlet remained for the time being at Ieine’s
house, and was not published until 1858—that is, fifteer
years later—by V. Kober at Prague.

By this action Heine had certainly earned the grati-
tude of the House of Rothschild, and it may fairly be
assumed that it was not bad business for Campc.

In April 1840 an incident occurred at Damascus whict
caused the most intense excitement in the Christian and
the Jewish world. A Jesuit pricst and his servant hac
been murdered in that city, and the Jews were accusec
of having perpetrated a ritual murder upon these vic:
tims. The suspected pcrsons were arrested, and, as tor:
ture was at that time applied in examining such persons
the whole of Jewry throughout the world declared that
the admissions had been wrung by force, and that the
accused were guiltless. The Christians were even mort
passionate in their assertion that the Jews were guilty
The incident, therefore, acquired a significance that fai


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 228


transcended any similar local murders. Innumerable
Jews sent their petitions to members of the House of
Rothschild, whose influence with the various Govern-
ments of the great Powers was well known, asking them
to intervene on behalf of their co-religionists. In the
case of James and Solomon these prayers fell upon fruit-
ful ground. James took up the matter with the French
Government, and Solomon tried to induce Metternich
to take action.

Solomon was in so far successful with the Austrian
officials that the Austrian Consul, von Laurin, did actu-
ally take steps on behalf of the arrested persons. This
man also persuaded Mehemet Ali to order that torture
should be discarded in the further course of the case
against the Jews at Damascus, and Laurin wrote direct
to Solomon to inform him of this, as well as keeping
James, in Paris, informed of the course of the whole
alfair.

The French Consul at Damascus, on the other hand,
had taken up an attitude hostile to the Jews. The Vicnna
Rothschild asked his brother James to use his influence
in Paris, but just at this time the Austro-French differ-
ence in the Mastern question was most acute, and Louis
Philippe’s Government feared that the people would
regard any action in the sense desired by James as a
fumiliation of France before Austria, and as unwar-
ranted support of Jewish as opposed to Christian in-
terests. or these reasons any action in favour of the
accused Jews was delayed.

“My efforts,” Jamies wrote to Solomon," “ have un-
fortunately not yet produced the desired result. The
Government are acting very slowly in this matter; in
spite of the praiseworthy action of the Austrian Consul,
tuey do not wish immediately to recall our Consul, be-
cause the matter is too remote, so that public interest
has not been sufficiently roused about it. All that I have


224 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


so far succeeded in doing has been as briefly stated in
the Moniteur to-day, to arrange that the Vice-Consul at
Alexandria should be instructed to investigate the con-
duct of the Consul at Damascus ; this is, however, only
a temporising measure, since the Vice-Consul is under
the Consul, so that he has no authority to call the latter
to account for his actions. In such circumstances, the
only means we have left is the all-powerful method here
of calling in the newspapers to our assistance, and we
have accordingly to-day had a detailed account, based
on the report of the Austrian Consul, sent in to the
Débats and other papers, and have also arranged that
this account shall appear in similar detail in the Allge-
meine Zeitung of Augsburg. We should certainly have
published Herr von Laurin’s letters to me on this mat-
ter had we not felt that this should only be done after
previously obtaining the permission of His Lighness
Prince von Metternich.

“For this reason, my dear brother, convineed as J
am that you will gladly do your utmost in defence of the
just cause, I would beg you to request the Prince in his
kindness to authorise the publication of these Ictters.
The gracious sentiments of human feeling which the
Prince has expressed with regard to this sad episode
causes us confidently to entertain the hope that this
request will not be refused. When you have received the
desired permission I would beg you, my dear Solomon,
not immediately to publish the letters in the Oster-
reichische Beobachter alone, but also to be so good as to
send them at once, with a short covering letter, to the
Augsburger Zeitung, so that they may reach the public
through that medium also.”

The Rothschilds’ intervention on behalf of their
afflicted fellows in a distant country soon became
generally known in Jewish circles, and led to Heine's
commenting on the fact in Lutetia. “‘ We must give the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 225


Chief Rabbi of the Rive Droite,’”? Heine wrote, with a
playful reference to the Versailles railway on the right
bank of the Seine, “‘ the credit of having shown a nobler
spirit in his sympathies for the House of Israel than his
learned rival, the Chief Rabbi of the Rive Gauche, M.
Benoit Fould, who, while his co-religionists were being
tortured in Syria at the instigation of a French Consul,
delivered some excellent speeches in the Chamber of
Deputies on the subject of the conversion of Rentcs and
the bank rate, with the imperturbable calm of a [hillel.”’

For Austria, however, in spite of Metternich’s inter-
vention on behalf of the Jews, Heine had not a good
word to say, for he regarded that State as a hotbed of
reaction, where the written word was subject to restric-
tions to an extent unknown elsewhere. The financial
problems of the Imperial State had at that time again
grown acute, as the war rumours of 1840 had resulted
in further considerable military expenditure. There were
many hard cases in private business too. Towards the
middlc of the year 1841, one of the four banks with which
the Government had constant financial dealings was
actually in difliculties. This was the bank of Geymiiller.
Metternich wanted at any price to prevent the firm from
going bankrupt, and carried on prolonged negotiations
to this end with the House of Rothschild and the other
yankers, put they either could not or would not support
that bank. On the 10th July it was foreed to suspend
payment. There were now only three banks, Rothschild,
Sina, and Arnstein and Eskeles, that did business with
the State. Although the State’s need of moncy was great,
its credit stood high, and on the 14th July, 1841, the
three banks actually underwrote 88,500,000 florins of
5 per cent. bonds at 104 per cent., Rothschild’s taking
over 14,000,000.

Immediately after the conclusion of this agreement
es connection between the events can hardly be


226 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


doubted), Solomon Rothschild sent in another petition
asking for a dispensation from one of the numerous
regulations limiting the rights of the Jews.

The ironworks at Witkowitz had originally belonged
to the Archduke Rudolph, and had latcr been inherited
by the Archduke Reiner. As the latter had not attained
his majority, it was intended to lease the ironworks to
Solomon Rothschild. The petition necessary to effect
this had been submitted in September 1833, but at the
last moment Witkowitz was purchased by the Arch-
bishop of Olmiitz, Count Chotck. When the construction
of the Nordbahn began, and Rothschild wanted to make
himself independent of foreign iron, the Archbishop
leased the ironworks in equal shares to Rothschild and
Baron von Geymiller. In the meantime the ironworks
had developed cnormously, and, as Solomon said in his
petition to the court, it had by 1841 “ grown into one of
the most splendid and productive establishments in the
monarchy,” and one that provided employment for
fifteen hundred men.

When Geymiiller got into difficulties, and the Arch-
bishop was also in need of capital, Rothschild sought to
take advantaye of the favourable opportunity for bring-
ing the whole concern into his own possession. The
difficulty was that Jews in Austria were not permitted
to build factories, or to acquire the real property
necessary for the purpose,” or evea to engage in mining.
Rothschild therefore requested that an exception should
be made '* in his favour with regard to these regulations.
In view of the fact that they had just received a loan,
the authorities at Vienna could not but aecede to his
request, and Solomon was accordingly permitted to
purchase Witkowitz, lock, stock, and barrel, and to
proceed with coal-mining and ironworks.

The moment had been happily chosen. The Roths-
childs were exceedingly clever at making Governments


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 227


feel under an obligation to them, and had a genius for
striking while the iron was hot. They sometimes made it
almost morally impossible for a Government to refuse
their requests, and not to give them the monopoly of
banking business.

Within his own sphere, Amschel Meyer, at Frankfort,
acted on precisely similar lines. The Bethmann bank had
long been overshadowed. As Schwemcr says, Amschel
had his finger in every pie; he dealt with the business
of the Kcderation as well as with that of the individual
German Governments, and supplied the moncy for the
railways that were being constructed everywhere at that
time. He continued in close relations with the Court of
Hesse, to which bis Elouse had owed its rise.

When, in 1831, the son of the old Klector Wilhelm IT
had left the capital on account of his mistress, the heir
to the throne, who was later to be the Elector Friedrich
Wilhelm I, bad been appointed joint regent at Cassel.
He was morganatically married to Gertrud Falkenstein,
the divorced wife of a Prussian licutenant, Lehmann ;
in 1831 he raised her to the rank of Countess von
Schaumburg, and Jater created her Princess of Hanau.
In 1846 the Klector already had five children by this
marriage. Amschel Meyer gave the Mlector financial
assistance in starting them in life, and the Prince and his
countess would often “take their midday meal quite
en famille with their business friend.”™

Not only the Elector, but most of the other German
Princes, would apply to Rothschild for money. Roths-
child would often make the conclusion of other agrce-
ments with banks subject to the condition that the bank
should take over a portion of the liabilities of these
numerous loans to petty German Rulers. Just as he
thoroughly understood how to keep up the price of such
securities as he felt inclined to favour, he also knew how
to depress a loan.


228 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


In a report of Baron von Mensshengen we read*:
“ Baron Rothschild has given a proof of his power in
the case of the Russo-Polish Lottery loan of the year
1835. He persistently depreciated this very safe and
profitable security because the principal underwriter,
the banker Frankl of Warsaw, refused to allow him to
participate in it, and because the Russian Government,
being annoyed with the London Rothschild about the
loan which he had granted, suddenly broke off rela-
tions with his House, and has since dealt with Hope of
Amsterdam.

“In these circumstances it is not surprising that many
of the smaller German Governments, and more par-
ticularly that of Nassau, should have recourse exclusively
to the House of Rothschild, and should refuse to be
influenced by the dissatisfaction frequently expressed
by their subjects, especially in the Grand Duchy of
Hesse.”

Metternich had for a long time fully appreciated the
power of the House of Rothschild, but he would not
tolerate an obvious divergence between himself and the
Rothschilds in matters affecting foreign policy. When,
during the discussions on the loan of 1841, Solomon
wanted to put in a clause providing for the possible
outbreak of war, Metternich replied that as Minister for
Foreign Affairs he would fecl compelled to protest
against any such clause being admitted,™ “since I
could never concur in allowing a decision affecting the
question of war or peace to be influenced by the attitude
of the banks.”’ Solomon replied that he fully appreciated
Metternich’s point, and nothing further was heard of this
suggestion. Fundamentally the Rothschilds were the
only House in which the Chancellor had real confidence,
the following circumstance being a remarkable instance
of this fact.

Several businesses in Vienna and Trieste being in


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 229


difficulties in August 1841, the Government decided
that the three big banks should be allowed to apply
4,000,000 for their relief in Vienna, and 1,000,000 in
Trieste. Strangely enough, the three banks were allowed
to decide to whom such assistance should be granted.
This provision soon resulted in considerable discontent,
and complaints were made to the Treasury as to the
manner in which the money was allotted. Two banks,
that of Sina and that of Arnstcin and Eskeles, were
more particularly accused of having favoured those
persons with whom they had close busiiess relations in
the allocation of the Government moncys.*

Metternich carefully went into this complaint, and
decided that the best way of dealing with the complaint
would be for the State secretly to give Solomon Roths-
child the control in this matter, over the heads of the
other two banks.

* In view of the conduct of the threc firms,’”’ he wrote,"
“in allocating the commercial subsidies, the question
naturally suggests itself whether the Government [which
is providing the means] has the right to control the
operations of the three firms. By control I mean that
the three firms should be required to render a regular
account of the moneys expended by them. Solomon is
bound to feel himself crippled in dealing with this matter,
because he dreads arousing the hostility of his cnviron-
ment, and has the most profound contempt for the
banking community of Vienna ; morcover, as a business
man, he regards his position as that of a foreigner in
Vienna, and so he will only deal with the Governments.
As, however, he is one of the persons entrusted with the
disposal of the moncys of the reserve fund, he must be
retained here, and I advise Baron Wiibeck to tell
Solomon frankly tiat he relies on him. but to tell him
as a confidential friend. This is the line which is most
effective in influencing him.”


280 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


This was a great mark of the confidence which Metter-
nich reposed in Solomon ; it being entircly in accordance
with their personal relations. Solomon surpassed himself
in attentions to the Metternich family. “‘ Our friend
Solomon’s devotion always touches me,” the Princess
wrote just after he had paid her a visit.» During the
summer, when the Metternichs were at their estate
near Frankfort, they received constant attentions, such
as American deer for their park,” and members of the
banker’s family often came to call on them ; “‘ amongst
others,” the Princess Melanie noted in her diary* on
the 5th September, 1841, ‘ were the Rothschilds, five
in number. There were Solomon and James, their
nephew Anthony, Solomon’s son, and finally Amschel,
who made a great point of our coming to dine with him
at Frankfort next Tuesday. James brought me a pretty
mother-of-pearl and bronze box from Paris, filled with
swects, which was all to the good.”

When, as in 1843, the Metternichs stayed at Ischl,
Solomon was there, and not unnaturally, for Maric
Louise of Parma and her suite were there too. At Christ-
mas Rothschild would send “ lovely things to the Met-
ternich children, such as tempted their mother to play
with them herself.”

For his part, Solomon Rothschild had no occasion to
complain that such friendly turns were not reciprocated,
there being plenty of occasion for doing so, in view of
the strict régime to which the Jews were still subject in
Austria.

The question of the Jews’ right to hold real property
had not yet been settled. In order to get over this difli-
culty. Solomon, having prepared the way by numerous
bencfactions, applied to be granted the rights and _pri-
vileges of a citizen of Vienna ; for as a Viennese citizen
he would automatically acquire the right to own real
property. In order, however, to achieve his purpose, he


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 2381


had to apply to the Emperor for a dispensation with
regard to this concession.» The Emperor granted the
dispensation, and the town accordingly admitted him
as a citizen. Solomon thereupon proceeded to purchase
the house of the Romische Kaiser, which was situated
within the Ring at Vienna, in the Renngasse, together
with the house immediately adjoining, which he pulled
down, building another house specially adapted to his
purpose on the site.

For this favour Solomon expressed his gratitude when-
ever opportunity offered. A terrible fire having broken
out in Hamburg in 1842, which destroyed a large pro-
portion of the town, Solomon not only offered Metternich
a large personal subscription, but also offered to trans-
mit any sums to Hamburg free of charge.

* T shall avail myself,” he wrote to Metternich," “ of
the services of my old business friend, Iferr Solomon
Heine, who is well known for his philanthropic feelings,
knowing that I may assume that he will dispense with
any bank charges, and remit to the civil authorities at
Hainburg the exact equivalent of the sums paid in here.”

Such actions as these always made a good impression,
and served to consolidate Solomon's position at Vienna.
The State was in constant need of further loans, In 1843
the three banks offered a 40,000,000 loan in return for
bonds to the amount of 48,000,000 florins, Rothschild
taking up one third.

In addition to these State loans, numerous private
loans were contracted with the most distinguished mem-
bers of the Austrian and Hungarian nobility. Prince
Esterhazy, for instance, who had not even repaid his
loan of 1829, was, in 1844, negotiating a loan of no less
than 6,400,000 florins with Rothschild and Sina.

The activities of the House of Rothschild were, how-
ever, by no means confined to financial transactions.
Any opportunity of doing business in other directions


282 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


was eagerly seized. Austrian smokers at that time were
suffering acutely from the fact that the State tobacco
monopoly had forbidden the import of genuine Havana
cigars, in order to protect the home industry. The House
of Rothschild, who fully realised how many cigars were
smuggled into the country, made a contract with a firm
in Havana to supply 10,000,000 cigars at 33 gulden per
thousand, delivered free in Vienna, Rothschild under-
taking to obtain the necessary permission to import
them from Kiibeck, the Minister concerned. Kiibeck
immediatcly agreed, since, when the cigars were retailed
to the public at 70 gulden per thousand, the State made
a profit of 112 per cent., as Count Hartig pointed out."
Kiibeck did not even wait for the Kmperor’s assent,
although the papers came to him in due course for sig-
nature, the Emperor being regarded simply as a signing
machine. The cigars sold like hot cakes ; a repeat order
for 17,500,000 was sent off almost at once, and all con-
cerned made a very good busincss out of it, the smokers
themselves gladly paying the hcavy price for a pleasure
that they had been so long denicd.* The smokers, in-
deed, were exccedingly grateful to Solomon Rothschild,
and this import of Havana cigars, besides being good
business, inercased Solomon’s popularity.

Having succeeded in establishing himeclf in Vienna,
Solomon also felt the desire to acquire landed property,
to invest his spare cash in real estate, and to create an
entailed estate for his family, in the manner of the great
nobles of the country. For this purpose he had to peti-
tion the Empcror, since foreign Jews were also not per-
mitted to acquire landed property. Solomon set out in
his petition® that he had long ago come to regard
Austria as his second fatherland. Hc recited all the ser-
vices he had rendered to the State of Austria : ‘‘ It has
always becn my constant endeavour to improve and con-
soiidate Austria’s credit, which is now so splendidly


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 288


established ; and in these honourable efforts I have al-
ways enjoyed the active support of all our Houses on the
Continent. I have always welcomed every opportunity,
and done anything in my power to promote the interests
of industry and undertakings of public utility in Austria.

“The great railway through Moravia, which will soon
connect Austria with the Eastern and Northern Seas,
could have been achieved only through the expenditure
of large sums of money, and by dint of patient waiting ;
sacrifices that I was called upon to make, to the amount
of several hundred thousand, at a time of acute financial
crisis, when confidence was at a very low ebb.”

Solomon mentioned his expenditure of 500,000 florins
on the purchase and installations at Witkowitz, as well
as his annual expenditure of 400,000 to 500,000 florins
in wages, and, finally, the 700,000 florins expended on
the coal-mines in Dalmatia, as though all this money had
been expended simply in order to provide a means of
livelihood to ‘‘ many thousands of persons who would
otherwise be entirely poor and destitute,’”’ pointing out
that up to the present he had derived no profit for him-
self.

“Your most humble petitioner,” Solomon continued,
“has always been an active and zealous supporter of all
other kinds of public institutions as well, and in this con-
jection he feels that he can confidently rely upon the
witness of the higher authorities, as well as upon the
recognition of public opinion, since he does not wish to
appear to blow his own trumpct, or to weary Your
Majesty with a narration of individual cxamples.

““The most humble undersigned believes that these
acts, and his general conduct during his stay of nearly
a quarter of a century iu your capital city, have furnished
adequate proof of his unshakable devotion to the
Austrian monarchy, and it is therefore natural that he
should most ardently desire to own property in a country


234 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


whose rulers have shown him so many signal marks of
their favour, a country which has so many dear relations
for him, and to which your humble and loyal petitioner’s
posterity, living entirely in accordance with his example,
desires to be bound with similar bonds of love and
loyalty. This desire would be satisfied by the possession
of a demesne in Moravia ; for that is the province which
should, in the future, most especially yicld the fruits of
the well-intentioned efforts which your loyal and humble
petitioner has made, and will not fail to continue to
make, in order to secure its advantage and prosperity.
That is also the province in which a substantial part of
his wealth has already been invested, in the coal-mincs
of Witkowitz.”

Solomon wound up this memorial by saying that he
confined himself to the most humble request : “ That
Your I. and R. Majesty may be graciously pleased to
confer upon your most humble and loyal petitioner,
the right for him and his descendants to own one or
other of the demesnes in the province of Moravia, if
your humble petitioner should find an opportunity for
acquiring such demesne.”

The petition was first transmitted to Count Ugarte,
the provincial Governor of Moravia and Silesia, for his
observations. Ife emphasised the fact » that the con-
cession with regard to Witkowitz in no way implied that
the subject-matter of the petition shonld be granted,
‘since it is essentially distinct from the actual owner-
ship of landed property, carrying rights of jurisdiction
which, in these provinees at any rate, have never been
granted to a person of the Jewish persuasion ; moreover,
it is necessary to call attention to the fact that if in the
case of Baron von Rothschild the right to own real estate
were to pass to his heirs, he would be placed in a more
favourable position even than Christian landed pro-
prictors who are not domiciled in these provinces.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 285


Count Ugarte went on to state that, in view of these
considerations, it was clear that to accede to Baron
Rothschild’s petition would be to confer a quite excep-
tional favour upon an individual, such as had never been
granted in his part of the country, being contrary to the
constitution and to the law. Such a remarkable act of
grace on the part of the Empcror could be justified only
by the most important services and the most highly
exceptional personal qualities.

As to the services rendered by Baron von Rothschild
to the State in general, the Governor observed that it
was not within his province to comment upon them, and
that such comment must be reserved for higher authority.
The fact of their importance could not be doubted, since
the Empcror had scen fil to raise Rothschild to the dig-
nity of an Austrian baron, to confer upon him the free-
dom of the capital, and to grant him the necessary dis-
pensation for engaging in mining opcrations. As to the
question how far the province of Moravia was specially
associated with the serviecs in return for which Baron
Rothsehild had reeeived these signal honours, Count
Ugarte felt that he was merely dog his duty in stating
his complete conviction that, through exercising his
determining influence in favour of the construction of
the Kaiser-Ferdinands-Nordbahn, the petitioner had par-
teularly carned the gratitude of the province of Meravia.

Ug urte further suggested that the large-minded enter-
prise which Rothschild had shown in “establishing the
ironworks at Witkowitz sccmed to indicate that he in-
tended to make them a model and a blessing for the
whole country—a second Scraing, indeed--and that
these works would constitute an enormously important
element in the further industrial development of the
province.

Further, Rothschild was particularly to be com-
mended for the fact that, immediately after taking over


286 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


these important works, he had instituted schools for the
children of the workpeople, thereby showing a concern
for the moral and intellectual welfare of the workers that
was rare in the world of industry, and constituted a not-
able example for others to follow.

After observing that the concessions for mining and
establishing ironworks which had been granted to
Rothschild were of the greatest importance to the
province, Count Ugarte concluded his report with the
following general remarks : ‘‘ As to Baron Rothschild’s
personal qualities, his position in Socicty is so exceptional
that he has been entirely removed from the ordinary
circumstances of his co-religionists; his remarkable
qualities and rare intelligence make it entirely inappro-
priate to apply strictly in his case the rcgulations in force
with regard to other Israelites.”

While leaving it to the judgment of higher authority
to decide whether the very exceptional circumstances
which he had enumerated justified or did not justify the
granting of the petition, Count Ugarte expressed the
view that if, in spite of all objections, an exception to the
general rule were at all permissible, the case of Baron von
Rothschild would certainly, and perhaps exclusively,
justify such an exception being made.

The head of the Treasury, Count Inzaghy, minuted on
this opinion that, “in view of the very exceptional
position held by the House of Rothschild in European
commerce,”’ he felt bound to recommend the granting of
the petition. The fact that no Jew owned landed property
in Moravia did not matter, since in Lowcr Austria, where
Jews are actually forbidden to stay in the country at all,
a Jew had purchased a demesne, and the Emperor had
actually allowed the estate to pass to his son. It was
certainly a fact that it was usual to grant such a right to
own land to the petitioner only, without allowing the
right to become heritable ; ‘ but,’”’ the count continued,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 287


“it seems to me that in this particular case we should
have regard to the special circumstances of the petitioner,
Baron Rothschild ; at his advanced age of seventy years
it would be almost insulting for the Emperor to grant the
right to own land to him alone, and such a privilege
would be practically useless if it were not made to cover,
at any rate his two children, the I. and R. Consul-
General at Frankfort, Ansclm, Baron Rothschild, and
his daughter, who is married to his younger brother,
James, Baron Rothschild, the I. and R. Consul-General
in Paris.

“The services rendered by Baron von Rothschild are
so well known, he is so famous for his philanthropy and
public spirit, that it would be redundant for me to
enumerate his many individual good deeds.

“ Having regard to the further consideration that it is
highly desirable that Baron Rothschild should be more
closely bound to the Imperial State of Austria by the
investment of his moncy in real property in this country ;
and in view of the fact that it would create a very strange
impression abroad if his particular wish to settle per-
manently in that country, where he has been so actively
engaged for a long period of years, and has been as-
sociated with the Government in more extensive and
important transactions than has ever been the case
Lefore with a private individual, were to be refused after
the special distinctions that have been conferred upon
him, I feel it to be my duty to support the petition which
has been graciously sent to me by my colleague for my
observations.”

The Emperor gave his decision, acceding to all the
requests put forward in Solomon Rothschild’s petition.
By way of showing his gratitude, Rothschild gave a sum
of 40,000 florins for erecting a building in the town of
Brinn for the purpose of scientific research.

Although, as has been shown, the higher authorities


238 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


in the State fully supported Rothschild, the Moravian
Estates were of a wholly contrary opinion. As the Em.
peror’s decision had already been promulgated, it was
impossible for them, in the circumstances of the time,
openly to resist it,’ but they determined at any rate
to address “‘the most humble request to His Majesty
that no extension of any kind whatever to the exception
in question should be accorded, and that the concession
graciously granted to Baron von Rothschild should be
strictly limited in application to a single demesne.”

This petition was duly sent forward to the Empcror,
but Count Inzaghy made the observation thereon that
“ this petition of the Moravian Isixtes docs not appear
to be entirely consonant with their proper attitude to
Your Majesty.”

The papers were finally presented to the Emperor, to
be disposed of by the following sentence; * I concur
in your opinion, and it is my wish that this uncalled-for
suggestion by the Moravi:n Mstates should be put by
without reply ” ; and the Iamperor duly signed.

Although Baron Rothschild had obtained His Imperial
Majesty’s blessing, at an expenditure of 40,000 florins
for public benefit in the province of Moravia, the
Moravian Kstates decided as a protest not to accept his
offer. Rothschild, however, determined that the 40,000
florins should be applicd to the purpose he had intended,
leaving it “ entircly to the decision of Lis Majesty as to
how the money should be applicd, my wish being that
the province of Moravia should benefit.”

Baron von Pillersdorf, of the Empcror’s scerctariat,
recommended that “the Empcror should note with
approval Baron Rothschild’s renewed offer, and should
grant that he should be informed of the manner in which
the moncy should be spent. This would appear to be in
accordance with the dignity of the Imperial Government,
and would also convey a hint to the Moravian Estates that


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 239


their conduct in the matter has not been quite seemly,
or shown that consideration for the decisions of their
Sovereign which was his due.”

Count Kolowrat was of the same opinion, and the
matter was disposed of by the following minute, which
the Emperor signed, as usual, on its being laid before
him :

“I am pleased to accept Baron von Roth-child’s
proposal, and leave it to the President of thi hancery
to indicate some way of applying the «i! in some
manner approximating to the purpose vur:ginally in-
dicated by the donor.”

This cnded the matter, and Solomon Rothschild
was free to purchase estates and demesnes. During
1844 he bought the estate of Oderberg from Count
Yenckel, as well as the property of Ludzierzowitz in
Prussia; and in 1845 he bought the [iultschin estate.
Since 1843 Solomon had owned the Schillersdorf
demesne in Prussia, near the Austrian fronticr. In
-ne direction this cstate consisted of a magnificent
castle, complete with fountains, moats, waterfalls,
swans, grottos, keunels, and game preserves. In the
other direction, there was a foundry and other in-
dustrial works. Solomon Rothschild had now suddenly
become one of the largest landed proprietors in the
country,

The resentment aroused by the growing power of the
House of Rothschild, which had manifested itself in their
purchase of real estate, beeame especially evident in con-
nection with the preliminary discussions regarding the
construction of a central railway through Hungary, in
which Solomon Rothschild meant to play a leading part.
Sina’s rivalry was also a factor in this matter, and he had
succeeded in securing che support of Count Szcchény, the
great Hungarian.

And, indeed, the magnificent display in which Solomon


240 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothschild had latterly indulged, as, for instance, when
on a journey, was such as could not fail to arouse resent-
ment. His progress from place to place was almost regal.
A meeting of the Central Hungarian Railway Company
had been called to be held at Pressburg on the 28th June,
1844. Solomon Rothschild arrived by steamer the even-
ing before, and an unpleasant sensation was caused by
the fact that the boat on his account stopped at the
Konigsplatz, instead of at the usual landing-stage. The
occupants of some of the rooms at the Hotel zur Sonne,
where the Baron stayed, had been forced to vacate them,
so that they might be placed at his disposal. It leaked
out that two coaches and four, with outriders, had been
ordered for the baron’s return to Vienna on the evening
of the 29th. Rothschild’s co-rcligionists also wished to
give him a special welcome. “ A large number of Jews
here,” the police report stated, ‘‘ waited for him on the
banks of the Danube ; Count Esterhazy frustrated their
intention of according the Baron a spccial welcome, as
he would not allow the Jews to carry out their scheme
of letting off forty rockets. They were restrained even
from shouting their welcome, which in view of the iJ)
feeling between the citizens and the Jews here, might
easily have led to a breach of the peace ; as it was, people
were complaining because the ship landed at the Kénigs-
platz on account of Rothschild, instead of at the usual
landing-place. When he disembarked, a varriage and four
that had been waiting for him took him to his hotel.
Soon after his arrival he went to the Hollinger Café,
where he had an ice. As he left, some young people
shouted at him from the upper story. Rothschild is
lunching to-day with His Excellency Herr Perzonale,
and the commissioners of the opposition party will be
there too. At four o’clock, when they break up, Roths-
child will immediately proceed home. It was originally
intended to hold the meeting of the Central Railway


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 241


Company in the Council Hall; but when it was heard
that some of the young people of the Diet were excited,
and that Count Stephan Széchény, who is in league with
Sina, had also taken part in the agitation against the
Central Railway, the meeting was called in the shooting
gallery.”

At the Mayor’s banquet, the vice-Palatine, Counts
Car] Esterhazy and Andrassy, the military commander
at Pressburg, and numerous county magnates, members
of the most important families in the country, such as
Gabriel, Lonyay, Iertelendy, Raday, ete., were present.
These people were particularly friendly and agreeable
to Rothschild, and one of them proposed his health in
the most flattering terms, e — essing the hope that the
Baron and his brothers resiucaut in the various capitals
of Europe would come to Hungary and devote their
wealth and their moral resources exclusively to that
country. Rothschild thanked him very pleasantly, say-
ing that, flattcring as the suggestion was, it was not
practicable, since fate and circumstances decided the
matter, but that he would always devote his special at-
tention to the beautiful country of Hungary. This remark
was received with great applause. As he left, Solomon
observed that he would have to follow the example of
the schoolmaster who, as he went away, said to his
pupils : ‘* Tam going, but Iam leaving my cloak bchind,
and it will tell me what everybody has done, and how
they have behaved in my absence.” This remark was
taken very good humouredly by those present, although
it was variously commented upon afterwards.

The priesthood were {frequently displeased to observe
the growing powcr ci the Jewish banker, and they
sought, wherever possible, to put difficulties in the way
of the House of Rothschild. Thus, in connection with
his coal and asphalte works in Dalmatia, Solomon was
compelled, on the 6ti February, 1845, to request the


242 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Emperor that steps might be taken to induce the Arch-
bishop of Zara to instruct the priests, who were putting
all kinds of obstacles in the way of the undertaking, to
cease doing so.*° His requests were almost always
granted, for Solomon had succeeded in making himself
indispensable. Ile was just considering another highly
important business with the Statc, namely a contract
regarding the setting up of a saltworks for producing
salt in the Venice lagoon, with a view to supplying the
necds of almost the whole of Lombardy.”

When, as frequently occurred, Solomon was away
from Vienna, and staying at Frankfort, the authorities
in the monarchy who were responsible for its finances
felt quite uncomfortable. This was especially the case
when there was a sudden slump in railway securities,
and a crisis on the Bourse in Vienna in October 1845,
there having been much speculation in these stocks there,
as everywhere clse in Hurepe, Alarmist rumours regard-
ing disturbances in Italy so fur accentuated the crisis
that the three State bankers, Sina, Eskeles, and the
manager for Rothschild, who was absent, requested the
State to come to their immediate assistance with a loan
of two million florins on their joint security, that a
calamity might be averted. Metternich instructed the
Austrian Minister at Frankfort to request Solomon, in
view of the state of the money market, either to come
to Vienna himsclf, or to send another member of his
House. He stated that he felt it to be essential in the
interests of the State’s finances that one member of the
Rothschild family should reside permanently in Vienna."

Solomon replied evasively, as he had urgent business
in Frankfort, where there were also financial difficulties ;
but the incident served to show how, as soon as Austria
was financially embarrassed, Metternich cried out for
Rothschild.

In France, too, the direction of the State’s finances


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 248


was to a large extent dependent upon the House of
Rothschild. In 1841, when Jamcs Rothschild was taking
the cure at Gastein, the French Finance Minister,
Wumann, asked him to be in Paris without fail by the
7th or 9th September, as he was anxious that the con-
clusion of a loan should not be postponed beyond that
date.* In point of fact, a loan of 150,000,000 francs
3 per cent. Rentcs was underwritten in October 1841 at
78.52, by a company of which James Rothschild was
chairman, without anyone else having been asked to
bid for it. There was great dissatisfaction over the loan
in Paris ; it was not considered to have done justice to
the country’s credit, and the feeling was that Humann
had been cheated. There were, in fact, dealings on the
Bourse in the loan, directly after it had been under-
written by the House of Rothschild, at 81 per cent.«
The House of Rothschild was constantly employed
by Louis Philippe’s Government in diplomatic as well
as in financial matters. When General Espartero, after
defeating Don Carlos, had forced the Queen Mother to
flee the country, and had made himself Regent of Spain,
Guizot decided that it was desirable to establish better
terms with him. As the French Government was In
general in favour of Marie Christine, France’s diplo-
matic representative at Madrid would have nothing to
do with Mspartero. It was decided to make advances to
him through the House of Rothschild, and Guizot asked
James to convey the wishes of the French Government
in a letter to his represcntative Weisweiller, through
whom General Espartero had invested his private money,
so that through this channel the gencral might be in-
formed of them. Wcisweiller demurred at the sugges-
tion, because he feared thereby to endanger the financial
and commercial interests of the House of Rothschild
in Spain. However, the messages were ultimately con-
veyed, although further events in Spain, ending with


ror | £4218 MVUSL VE NVITSUNMILLY


the fall of Espartero, brought the affair to a negative
conclusion.“

Although he had been unable to prevent the ultimate
defeat of his protégé, Don Carlos, Metternich still hoped
partly to modify its results. His idea was to marry the
young queen, Isabella, daughter of Marie Christine, who
was fourteen in 1844, to Don Carlos’s son, in order
thus indirectly to place the heir of his protégé upon the
throne of Spain. The London Rothschilds had written
to Solomon in Vienna on the 29th March telling him
that the British Ministry would do everything possible
to promote the success of this plan. Solomon immedi-
ately passcd this on to Metternich, who cxpressed the
opinion that the consummation of such a marriage would
be a really happy event for the whole of Europe, and
would serve to bring the policy of isolation, pursued by
France and England with regard to Spanish affairs, in-
to line with the policies of the other three Governments.
For the sake of his own personal prestige, apart from
other considerations, Metternich did attach great im-
portance to this, for he had personally made every pos-
sible effort at the Courts of Berlin and Petersburg on
behalf of the cause of Don Carlos. Solomon Rothschild
also perccived that such an event would provide all
kinds of possibilities for his House.

“Tf this event, so fraught with benefit for the future
of Spain, should come to pass,” he wrote to the Roths-
child Houses in Paris, London, and Frankfort, “ the
moment would have arrived for our House to render
effective financial aid to the consolidated Government
of that country. Our honoured Prince would himself
advise us confidently to come forward and demonstrate
our wvillingness to set about putting into operation an
extensive financial arrangement for Spain, in which
endeavours we should be able to count upon the fullest
support from His Highness in every possible way.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 245


“‘ Having been authorised by His Highness, my dear
brothers, to inform you of his sentiments exactly as they
were communicated to me, remembering that they are
the views of him whom we are accustomed to regard as
our oracle, I need not request you to make them the
guiding principle of your actions, as soon as events take
such a course that we may give up the attitude of mere
contemplation and embark on a course of action suit-
able to these highly important circumstances.”

Events, however, were to fall out otherwisc. Isabella
was married to her cousin, and not to the son of Don
Carlos, and Metternich’s whole dream of cstablishing
his policy in Spain as well was brought to naught.
Metternich was excecdingly indignant about this, and,
although generally so lenient in his attitude to the
House of Rothschild, in the case of the Spanish affair
he was inclined to lay all the blame upon the Puris
and the London Ifouses.

In Paris, too, there was a strong party that was much
inclined to look askance at the position of special con-
fidence enjoyed by the House of Rothschild. This was
especially the case with those whom the Rothschilds
had not associated with themselves in the Northern
Railway undertaking. To have brought in all those who
wanted to make money would of course have been im-
possible, und those who werc left out said to an:7body
they could get to listen to them that Louis Philippe had
simply resigned in favour of the Jews. Metternich, in a
moment of ill temper, once expressed himself rather
strongly with regard to the position of the Rothschilds
in France. After emphasising the difference between
conditions in Austria and France, he said : ‘* By reason
of natural causes which I cannot regard as good or as
moral, the House of Rothschild is a much more impor-
tant influence in French affairs than the Foreign Office
of any country, cxcept perhaps England. The great


246 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


motive force is their money. People who hope for phil-
anthropy, and who have to suppress all criticism under
the weight of gold, necd a great deal of it. The fact of
corruption—that practical element, in the fullest sense
of the word—in the modern representative system, is
recognised quite openly.” «

Von Arnim, the German Minister in Paris, described
the House of Rothschild as one of the great powers of
the day, and suggested that few Governments were in
a position to say that they did not bear the golden chains
of that ILouse.*

This was, naturally, more likely to be the case in a
country where the fever of speculation had laid hold of
all classes of the population, and where even the em-
ployees of the Government speculated shamelessly on
the Bourse. James Rothschild did not perceive the dis-
satisfaction that this state of affairs was arousing in the
country. Ife imagined that. just because everybody was
now engaged in speculation and money-making, there
would be no desire to overthrow the existing Govern-
ment, for fear of losing money. ‘ The Départements,”
James Rothschild said to Count Apponvyi at this time,
“that have got railways, want to keep them, in order
to make as much profit out of them as possible. Those
which have not yet got them, hope and wish to have
them in the near future. As both these aims can be
realised only by the maintenance of peace and order,
everybody is now declaring themselves to be conscr-
vative and pro-Government.” James’s judgment was
too much affected by the attitude of those cireles with
whom he had most to do. He left the fourth estate—
that of the workmen and peasants—ont of the account,
becattse he came so little into touch with them. His at-
tention was principally engaged by the enormous work
of railway construction. In order to silence such opposi-
tion us invariably arises in Parliament and in the Press


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 247


in connection with any important undertaking, he did
his utmost to give opposing clements a financial interest
in the concern. The only organ that refused to accept
shares was the opposition paper, National, which con-
tinued actively to oppose the Northern Railway. On
the 15th June, 1846, sections of the Northern Railway
were opencd with great festivities. On the 8th July of
that year there was a railway accident. This produced
a sudden storm of pamphlets and attacks in the Press.
The accident was, indced, a very serious one. Near
Fampoux, close to Arras, the train had run off the lines
on to an embankment which curved sharply, running
into a stretch of water at the foot of the embankment.
Thirty-seven people were killed, and the accident pro-
duced violent attacks upon the builders of the railway,
and especially upon the most important factor, the
House of Rothschild. The Nativnal started a positive
campaign against them, and James Rothschild was at-
tacked in pamphlets on all sides. There bad been similar
attacks before in Germany, where a certain Alexander
Weil, who was known as a Socialist and Communist, had
launciiid malicious attacks, in a pamphiet called Roths-
child and the European States, against the financial des-
potism and cgotism of the House of Rothschild.” He
endeavoured to show that there was only one power
in Kurope, namely Rothschild; his officers were a
dozen other banking firms, his men were all honour-
able tradesmen and workpcople, and his sword was
speculation.

This effusion was extraordinarily tame compared to
the storm that now broke out in France. The outstand-
ing attack was contained in a pamphlet called Histoire
édifiante et curieuse de Keothschild I, roi des juifs, which
contained a deserision of the railway accident of the
8th July. This most unsavoury production, which laid
all the blame on Jan:¢s and his louse, was anonymously


248 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


circulated in large quantities. There were, on the other
hand, people who endeavoured to spread the impression
abroad that they had been authorised by James to issue
a counter-pamphlet in reply to this.

A man who had not the faintest connection with James
Rothschild published a pamphlet under the title : Baron
James von Rothschild’s official reply to the pamphlet en-
titled ‘* Histoire édifiante,” etc. Another person produced
a pamphlet entitled Reply by Rothschild, the First King
of the Jews, to Satan the Last King of Slanderers.

Such persons then tried to extract a cash reward from
James, but they were not successful in this, for James
meant to ignore all pamphletcers equally, whether they
were for or against him. He found it impossible, how-
ever, to adhere to this, for, poor though their composi-
tion was, the pamphlets were circulated in tens of thou-
sands, and Amschel Meyer, at Frankfort, did not remain
as calm as his brother James when these scurrilous at-
tacks began to appear in Prussia, in German transla-
tions. It was therefore decided to take active steps, and
Solomon’s son Amschel applied direct to the Prussian
Government. “‘ Your Excellency,” he wrote, ‘ will, I
am sure, forgive me, with your usual kindness, for asking
for your attention, although the most important matters
of the State have such a claim upon it, to my letter in
which I deal with a matter of great concern to our family.
Your Excellency is no doubt aware that after the un-
fortunate accident on the Northern Railway of France,
several scurrilous attacks were published against my
uncle, Baron James, as representing the Paris House ;
the pamphlietecrs did not merely attribute the respon-
sibility for the accident to my uncle, but also did not
scruple to make the foulest and entircly unfounded im-
putations upon the character and morality of our busi-
ness with an impudence such as I have never before
experienced. We felt that it was beneath our dignity to


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 249


defend ourselves against such vulgar abuse, especially
as it emanated principally from a despicable person, to
whom our Paris House had quite rightly refused a loan.
Our view was that the rabble, which is more inclined to
listen to abuse than to truth and right, is difficult to
convince, but that the impartial, thoughtful section of
the public, which has had an opportunity of observing
our manner of acting over a period of years, does not
need to be convinced.

“Tt is true that shortly afterwards several counter-
pamphlets appeared, defending our House against these
scurrilous attacks, but this was donc entirely without
our collaboration, and, indeed, without our knowledge.
As long as our enemies confined their activitics to French
soil, we did not feel that any uscful purpose would be
served by taking any action to prevent them, as France
is the hunting-ground of the most unrestrained Press,
and nobody who occupies any prominent position is
spared its poisonous attacks. In Germany, however, and
especially in Prussia, this is not, or should not be, the
case. All the more painful, therefore, was the impres-
sion made when we found that similar scurrilous pam-
phlets were being published in Berlin and Breslau.

*T will not disguise from Your Excellency that at
their advanced time of life my father and my uncle have
fi lt these attacks very keenly, and perceive with regret
that under the rule of one of the justest of monarchs,
and in spite of the control of the strict censorship,
it should be possible, in a country to which they
have rendered such important services over such a


long period of years, for these foul abortions to see
the light of day.


“For and on behalf of all the members of our House,
I therefore apply with confidence to Your Excellency,
with the request that ou will allow the attached peti-
tion, which humbly scts out our just complaint, to reach


250 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the hands of His Majesty the King. My family believe
that they have a special claim upon the influential co-
operation of Your Excellency on this occasion, and that
you will see that steps are speedily and effectively taken
to prevent any recurrence of this nuisance, since what
has occurred cannot now be undone. By granting this
our request Your Excellency would, if possible, still
further increase our sincere feclings of gratitude, especi-
ally in the case of my father and my uncle, who are so
complictely devoted to you, and who would be put under
an everlasting debt of gratitude.”

The House of Rothschild set particular hopes on this
petition, because Anselm had been in close negotiation
in the summer of that year with the Prussian Finance
Minister regarding the general rcorganisation of Prussia’s
public finances. The attacks, however, alfeeted the House
of Rothschild to an extraordinarily small degree ; the
financial requirements of the great States with whom
the Rothschilds were in touch were so pressing, and the
Rothschild monopoly in finanee was so marked, that it
was impossible to dispense with them, and all these
unpleasant attacks were ignored.

Amschel Meyer was the Treasurer of the German
Federation ; Austria and Prussia had repaid the money
for the fortress construction into the Federal Treasury ;
and when, in February 1846, Rothschild rendered
statement, it appeared that the Federation had an
amount of 7,000,000 to 8,000,600 lying at interest in
that account.

Even the Pope again entered into negotiations with
the House of Rothschild, through the intermediary of -
Metternich, in order to obtain money for constructing
rainways. Since June 1846 the liberal-minded Pius IX
had occupied the Papal Chair, and he immediately as-
sented te the construction of the railways, which had not
Leen allowed under his predecessor. In this connection


Plus EN


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 251


the Chancellor forwarded, on the 13th August, 1846,
a report of a conversation between Anselm and the
Papal Nuncio at Franzenshad."

Austria required a further loan in 1847, and the three
banks, including Rothschild’s, undertook, in return for
80,000,000 florins of bonds, to pay 84,000,000 florins
cash in sixty-five monthly instalments, commencing on
the Ist June, 1847, This condition was to prove of vital
importance, in view of what occurred in the following
year. The loan had scareely been agreed when a further
request was sent into the Chanccellor’s office asking that
a dispensation should be granted,** so that bis faith
should not be a bar to Sulomon’s son Anselm rec eiving
the expected grant of the freedom of the City of Vienna.
Count Kolowrat minuted on this that, quite apart from
he fact that Anselm, who was no less public-spirited
than his father, might be expected to contribute gener-
ously to philanthropic institutions in matters of public
interest to the City of Vienna, it must also be noted that

it isin the interests of the State that this dispensation
shonld {© granted, sinee it would be an unpleasant posi-
tion if the pee banks at Vienna, to which recourse
shad for loans and other financial operations, were to
be reduced by one on the death of Solomon, Baron von
Rothselild, so that we should be practically confined to
dealing witiy the House of Sina.’

Anselm was, in point of fact, entered in the Golden
Book of the City of Vienna. A further petition was sent
in not Jong after the first-—on the 11th June, 1847. In
it, Solomon requested that his estate at Koritschau, in
Moravia, and three town houses in Vienna, might be
amalgamated into an cntailed estate, to the value of
2,000,000 florins. He esked that the value of 2,000,000
florins should be specially considered, as the law did not
contemplate such an arrangement in the ease of estates
exceeding in value the maximum amount of 400,000


252 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


florins, His Majesty alone having power to authorise
any exception to this regulation.

The Emperor referred this petition to the departments
for their observation, and important events which oc-
curred shortly afterwards prevented Solomon’s request
from being speedily granted.

In England, too, the position of the House was un-
impaired. Lionel, Nathan’s eldest son, was exception-
ally active and industrious. The younger brothers,
Anthony and Nathaniel and Meycr Nathan, became
famous sportsmen and owners of racehorses. Nathaniel
lived in Paris. He was an invalid, but he took an interest
in art and science and in the political events that were
taking place around him. The third generation of the
House was already producing persons that did not de-
vote themselves to financial work, but attached greater
value to their social position, to art and sport. Lionel
achieved a particularly honoured position in the financial
life of Great Britain when, in March 1847, he offered to
the English Parliament, which was cndeavouring to deal
with the unfortunate condition of Ircland, his financial
assistance for carrying the reforms that had been planned
for that country. The Chancellor of the Exchequer actu-
ally arranged a loan of £8,000,000 through Rothschild
and Baring, a loan which later became famous under
the name of the Irish Famine Loan.

Whereas Nathan had always sought to avoid any
political dignity or position under the Government,
Lionel wanted to get into the House of Commons. Now,
according to established custom, no Jew could hold civil
or military oflice in England. He was not clected to
Parliament, and he could not vote at clections. The
Jews in England lived in a kind of political and social
Ghetto, and nobody excepting the Rothschilds and a
few families who had succecded in achieving a very
special position would have thought of attempting to


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 258


escape from it. Only the two Houses of Parliament
would have been able to make exceptions or alter these
conditions. Lionel, however, thought that his House
had rendered such considerable services to England in
financial matters that he ought to be able to get over
these difficultics. In August 1847 Lionel Rothschild
stood as Liberal candidate for the City of London, and
he was actually elected, together with Lord John Russell.
Now each member of the House of Commons, before
taking his seat, had to take an oath containing the words
“on the true faith of a Christian.”’ Naturally this oath
was not one that Lionel could take. It. was proposed in
the House of Commons that the form of oath should be
changed, but the Upper House rejected this motion.
Lionel therefore could not take his seat ; however, he
stood again as a candidate, and was always re-elected
by the City, although he never exercised his functions
as a Member of Parliament.

As in the critical year 1830, so on the eve of 1848,
the Rothschilds were engaged in enormous Joan opera-
tions. In addition to the Irish Famine Loan, they were
handling a French 3 per cent. loan of 250,000,000 francs,
which the Rothschilds had underwritten at 72.48,
having, as in the case of the Austrian loan, taken the
precaution of arranging that it should be paid only in
monthly instalments. Austria had also indicated a wish
to arrarge an issue of certain bonds which was to be kept
most strictly secret, and which was to be in addition to
the ordinary loans, this issue being required to provide
the funds necessary to strengthen the military forces in
the kingdom of Venice and Lombardy, ominous signs
of trouble having appeared there in December 1847. In
this connection, Count Kolowrat expressed his opinion
generally on the position at the time, showing consider-
‘able foresight with regard to future developments.

“* The money market,” he wrote,"* ‘ is very depressed,


254 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


and there is no reason to hope for any early improve-:
ment. Indeed, political developments generally give
reason to fear a turn for the worse. After careful con-
sideration of the money market, Baron Kiibeck feels
that he can confidently count on the securities in ques-
tion, if not wholly, at any rate to a great extent, being
kept by Rothschild in his own safe, and that he will be
content with interest at the rate of 43 per cent.—a very
moderate rate of interest for commercial capital, especi-
ally as it has to cover all the risks of the present
unsettled conditions.

* Baron Kibeck therefore brings forward the House
of Rothschild’s proposal, with the urgent request that
Your Majesty will accept it and that your authorisation
may be phrased in such a manner as to permit the matter
to be kept strictly secret.

“The most important consideration lies in the urgent
necessity of giving the financial administration the
widest possible scope in its efforts to extricate itself
from the embarrassments consequent upon heavy and
unforeseen military expenditure. The reserve fund to
which I have referred is the last sheet-anchor to which
the Head of Treasury, who spares himsclf no efforts. can
cling. Unfortunately, when this sum is spent there will
be nothing left to deal with any new misfortune that
may arise. Yet States must necessarily reckon with the
possibility of such misfortune, even if they take the form
of events that lie beyond the control of humanity, such
as the death of the head of a State, the outbreak of an
epidemic, the failure of a harvest, etc. I feel it to be my,
duty at the present moment to put forward these con-
siderations without reserve, and as emphatically as 1]
ean, while it is still possible to place a limit to the exces-
sive military preparations in Italy, and to the expen-
diture of our last resources; and to call attention to
the iact, which will otherwise be made evident by the.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 255


‘complete breakdown of our finances, that the Austrian
Government has sacrificed too much to its position
abroad, and has paid too little heed to conditions at
home.

“TI feel it my duty to make the grave statement that
we are on the verge of an abyss, and the increasing de-
mands on the Treasury arising out of the measures neces-
sary to combat foreign revolutionary clements have led
to increased disturbances within the country, as is in-
dicated by the attitude of the provincial Estates, and
by the literary outbursts in the Press of our neighbours,

“ Baron Kiibeck’s proposal cannot well sustain. criti-
cism of a strictly cconomie kind. According to his own
account, it has arisen out of the hard necessities of the
ease, and it only remains for me to add that Rothschild’s
offer seems to me to be a fairly reasonable one, although
to-day, the 13th of February, 4 per cent. Bonds were
sold on the Bourse at 93 per cent.

* Baron Rothschild himself makes the condition that
the arrangement shal] be kept secret, although, of course,
this is even more important for the financial administra-
tion, which must avoid anything that might arouse any
uncasiness with regard to Austria’s credit.”

Kolowrat’s remarks were certainly justified ; there was
marked dissatisfaction in the country with the régime
of the aged Chancellor Metternich, who was now in his
seventy-seventh year, and with his paladins, especially
the inexorable Minister of Police, Count Sedlnitzky. In
Italy the measures directed against the movements to-
Wards national unity were particularly oppressive, and
'Metternich’s influence made itself felt with especial
severity, so that the other blessings conferred by the
Austrian Government on the Kingdom of Venice and
Lombardy were entirely forgotten, During the middle
forties further truubles had broken out in the neigh-
bouring country of Switzerland, where the population


256 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


had divided into two camps of Radicals and Conser-
vatives. The seven Catholic cantons had united to form
a separate federation, and had declared open hostilities
upon the Radicals.

In November 1847 the Moderates were forced to re-
tire by the federal army. Austria, France, and Prussia,
whose sympathies were naturally with the Conservative
federation, regarded the events in Switzerland as a per-
sonal defeat. Metternich considered that what had hap-
pened constituted a direct menace to Austria’s position
in Lombardy.

Solomon Rothschild, too, who followed the Chancel-
lor’s policy through thick and thin, was deeply affected
by these events ; he hastened to Mctternich in conster-
nation on 20th November, 1847, to ask for information
regarding the general position of affairs.

Metternich bricfly outlined the situation, and then
asked Solomon whcther he believed ‘“ that it would be
better for the Emperor to sacrifice his Italian States to
the revolution, and concentrate his forces on this side
of the Alps, or whether he should assert his position in
the Kingdom of Venice and Lombardy.”

“Not that!” exclaimed Rothschild; “in that case
all would be lost.”

“That is also my view,” Mcttcrnich replied, “ and
that must be the view of all sensible people. Between
thought and action, however, there is a yreat difference.”

Action, however, called for means to action, and the
means had to be estimated. Metternich went on to say
to Rothschild that he would suggest to the Emperor
that he should command reinforcements for the Italian
army. This would require money, and it was essential
that the money should be raised without disturbing the
regular course of the State’s finances. They had just
got over one crisis successfully ; a further crisis would
be very dangerous, and must at all costs be avoided.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 257


The Chancellor declared that an exceptionai situation
required exceptional methods for dealing with it, and
asked Solomon whether such exceptional assistance
would be forthcoming.

“As much as you want,” Solomon promptly replied,
“is at your service. And it shall not damage your credit ;
indeed, it shall improve it. Tell me what you want and
Pi pay it over at once.”

Metternich replied that he did not want anything ; if
the Head of the Treasury needed money, he would know
where to go for it. All that he needed was to know that,
if Baron Kiibeck should need to get money without
upsetting his plans, he could come to Rothschild for it.
Beyond this, the matter did not concern him.

“As much as Baron Kibeck wants,” Rothschild
exclaimed. “ I will go to him at once, and he can leave
the money market to me. I have just sent prices up, and
do you know how? I sent them up 2 per cent. by
buying Mctalliques on the Bourse to the amount of
80,000,000 florins ! ”’

** T forbid you,” Metternich concluded, “ to make any
proposal to Baron Kibeck. If he needs you he will be
able to apply to you; and if he does apply to you do
what he tells you!”

The Bourse was keenly sensitive to the situation.
Unrest was in the air, and waves of excitement passed
over Italy, in which country the serics of the 1848
revolutions began with a rising in Sicily, in January
of that year. The Vienna Bourse reacted with extreme
nervousness to this news, and the Liberals of all countries"
assiduously exaggerated the bad state of the public
finances in that Empire, which was regarded as the
stronghold of reaction. The populace were already
beginning to go to the banks in order to change their
paper into coin, and Metternich became seriously


concerned,
R


258 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


He was not dissatisfied with the general situation in
the second half of January 1848, for Milan was still
completely tranquil, though anxious about the financial
position. When Solomon visited the Chancellor on the
23rd January, the latter, as he himself says, spoke to
him very seriously, and ‘‘ took a very firm line.”

** Politically,” he said to Solomon, “‘ things are going
well, but the Bourse is in a bad way; I am doing my
duty, but you are not doing yours. If the devil fetches
me, he will fetch you too ; I am looking hell in the face ;
you are sleeping instead of fighting ; your fate is therefore
sealed !”’

To this attack Rothschild replied with the most
passionate apologies, and said, “‘ I shall buy to-morrow.
I have already scttled that with Baron Kiibeck ; he
and you may count on me!”

“J,” Metternich replied, “ judge by actions. You may
buy to-morrow, but I shall not know why you did not
buy yesterday. If it was in order to buy morc cheaply,
I have no occasion to be grateful to you.”

This conversation shows particularly clearly how
closely Metternich and Solomon were bound together
for weal or woe. The critical events of the year 1848 were
to furnish remarkable provf of this fact.

The revolution in Sicily rapidly extended to Naples,
where Carl Rothschild was staying. but, as the Liberal
Ministry in power there made concessions, it did not
assume dangerous proportions there. The Grand Duke
of Tuscany, and King Carl Albert of Piedmont, whose
dearest dream it was to unite Italy under one sceptre,
followed this example.

The sparks of these troubles were carried from the
Apennine Peninsula to France, where they started a
-tigantic conflagration, the flames of which were to spread
over the whole of Europe. Louis Philippe’s rule had
become more and more oppressive ; he had ended by


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 259


refusing essential reforms, with the result that a power-
ful opposition was formed in the capital against Guizot’s
Ministry. The first disturbances that brought out the
workmen and students occurred on the 22nd February,
1848. As even the National Guard wished the Ministry
to be dismissed, the King, who had become uneasy,
accepted the resignation of Guizot. The troops that had
been called up came into conflict with the rebels, and
the first shots produced terrible excitement.

On the 24th February, barricades were erected in all
the main streets of the city; the National Guard and
line regiments went over to the rebcls, and it was soon
obvious that things stood very ill with the King’s cause.
Louis Philippe was becoming an old man ; in his seventy-
fifth year he was scarcely equal to dealing with this
sudden and unexpected storm. According to Count
Apponyi, he showed a lack of decision at the moment of
danger, and completely lost his head. As carly as the
24th February he fied, leaving his capital and his country
to the rebels. The dear old Austrian Ambassador himself
had no idea of what was really happening ; he had sent
out nine hundred invitations to a ball for the 23rd
February, and on that very morning he made enquiries
of the Municipal Authorities as to whether he should
eancel the arrangements.

To James Rothschild, who during the last few years
had arhieved a position of perfectly unique influence,
both with the King and his Ministers, this event was like
lightning out of a clear sky. He could not credit the fact
that overnight changes had occurred that suddenly
drew away from under his fect the whole basis upon
which his business and his House rested. The banker,
who had been perliaps more intimately associated with
the régime that had been overthrown than anybody
else, was bound to feel that, in the way things were
shaping, his position was exceedingly dangerous. His


260 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


first thought was to quit Paris, and Prosper Meniére
tells us that he was actually seen at the Nord station,
on the point of taking a train to the frontier. At the last
moment, however, he appears to have been advised not
to leave Paris, as this would permanently undermine
his position and his honour.

He therefore remained, while his wife and daughter,
in a state of grcat panic and excitement, fled to their
relations in London, arriving at Lionel’s house un-
expected and unannounced. With the terror of thcir
experiences still vivid in their minds, they gave a
heartrending account of how they had suddenly fallen
from the heights of human happiness into the depths of
woe and horror."

James Rothschild’s principal reason for deciding to
remain in the capital was that Lamartine and Arago had
gone to the Jewish banker, Michel Goudehaux, who was
also financial editor of the opposition paper, the National,
and had asked him to take the portfolio for Finance.
Michel Goudchaux, who was a friend of Rothschild,
agreed, and this so far calmed James that he decided to
remain in Paris. Meanwhile Caussidi¢re, the new Prefect
of Police who had been thrown out by the Revolution,
having been a journalist on La Réforme, and having
fought on the barricades, heard that Rothschild was
meditating flight. Now the new provisional Government
had an interest in trying to prevent the great financiers
and bankers from leaving the city, for, like the Kings
before them, they necded money and the services of
financiers. It was also generally said in Paris that
Rothschild was smuggling his bullion out of the country
in dung-carts, intending afterwards to go formally
bankrupt. Caussiditre accordingly had James watched
ty a detective, and, when the rumours regarding his
intended flight grew more persistent, he ordered the
banker to appear at the Prefecture of Police. James was


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 261


then informed why he had been placed under surveillance,
and was told that he was suspected of intending flight.«
James replied : “ Sir, I am believed to be buried in gold,
whereas, in point of fact, I have nothing but paper. My
wealth and capital consist of securities which at this
moment are of no value. I have no intention of going
bankrupt, and if I must die I shall resign myself, but I
would regard flight as cowardly. I have written to my
family to send me cash so that I may mect my obliga-
tions. To-morrow I shall introduce my nephew to you,
who has just come from London for this purpose.”

Caussidiére replied that he was happy to be able to
assist in reassuring Rothschild’s family, and he assured
him that he had nothing to fear from the people of Paris.
They were poor, but they were honest, and, even if the
workman’s blouse was sometimes worn by criminals,
the new Government would know how to deal with such
people.

“ Tout en causant,’ as Caussiditre observes in his
Memoirs, he “‘ then asked Rothschild for a loan to be
applied,” as he said, “ to printing works and other insti-
tutions.” On the following day James Rothschild again
appeared at the Prefecture, bringing with him his
nephew, who had arrived from England, and he de-
posited a sum of money, which was divided between the
families of the February combatants who had protected
the Prefecture without receiving anv regular py. James
left in a very much calmer state of mind, and hoping to
be able successfully to get through this dillicult period
too.

The general financial situation was certainly desperate.
As had been the case in 1830, the House of Rothschild
was saddled with an enormous number of loan securities
of every kind. The 250,000,000-franc loan, in respect of
which the Rothschilds had made a preliminary payment
of 82,000,000 francs, had to be given up in view of


262 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


recent events at the sacrifice of the guarantee sum.
James declared that the revolution constituted force
majeure, relieving him of the obligation to find the
remaining 168,000,000 francs.

Rothschild also held an enormous quantity of Nord
Railway shares, which, owing to the panic on the Bourse,
had fallen enormously, like all the other securities.

In spite of the extensive support given by the London
House, which was entirely unaffected by these events,
James had to make the most prodigious efforts in order
to meet his most pressing obligations, being foreed to
sell large holdings of 3 per cent. Rentes at the ridiculous
price of 33 francs, and there was worse to come.

The Republic was proclaimed ; and the destruction
wrought in the Tuilerics and the Palais Royal, which
the mob plundered, throwing the most valuable furniture
into the streets, where it was burnt, gave reason to fear
that further outrages would occur. The National Guard
and other troops succecded with difficulty in restoring
order in the centre of the town, whereupon the rabble
proceeded to attack the unprotected buildings in the
outskirts. The mob’s rage now vented itself upon all
railway works, such as stations, bridges, ete., these
being completely destroyed and burnt down within a
radius of thirty miles of Paris. The people regarded
these structures as a means by which they were specu-
Jatively exploited. Coachmen, and such persons as feared
the competition of the railways, played a prominent
part in these episodes.

On this occasion the Royal Castle at Neuilly was also
destroyed, and the Rothschild villa at Suresnes was
completely looted and then set on fire. The revolutionary
Prefect of Police had promised more than he could do
s,Ith regard to James Rothschild.

Count Apponyi was quite unable to recover his
equanimity. On 10th March when comparative quict


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 268


had supervened, he wrote*': ‘‘ We still feel that we are
dreaming. It is impossible to believe in the reality of
what has been going on around us. There is no question
of any lack of foresight, or of a concerted attack, or of a
carefully prepared conspiracy. There has been nothing
of the kind. A sudden thunder-clap, a tempest, in which
everything has been torn down; it is Providence, God
has willed it so.”

James did not get off at all cheaply. Caussidiére had
taken moncy from him, and Suresnes was destroyed,
while his hopes of the Jewish Finance Minister, Goud-
chaux, were to prove vain. Ledru-Rollin, Minister of the
Interior in the provisional Government, who was setting
up national workshops, kept sending in fresh demands
for money to the Finance Minister*s under every
conceivable pretext, unti] the latter resigned in disgust
after holding office for a few days.

According to the statements of a Russian secret
agent, who was an eye-witness of the revolution in Paris,
Ledru-Rollin, firmly determined to stop at nothing in
order to get money, went to James Rothschild. He told
the banker that if he did not give him 250,000 francs,
required for patriotic purposes, he would send 10,000
workmen into the Rue Laffitte the next day to destroy
the Palais Rothschild and take vengeance on him.
James is stated in his panic to have paid the money,
which was thus practically extorted at the pcint of the
pistol. The Russian related that a tew days later Ledru-
Rollin repeated the experiment, and succeeded under
further threats in extorting an additional 500,000 francs,

Whatever may be the actual truth of this story, there
is no doubt that James had to pay heavily in order to
secure his personal safety.

The revolution soon affected the whole of Europe.
With the fall of Louis Philippe, the Rothschilds had lost
one of the most. essential supports on which their power


264 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


in Europe was based. Their Paris House, which had
lately been so flourishing and powerful, overshadowing
all the others, had overnight been plunged into the most
serious embarrassments ; it had to proceed to recon-
struct its position from the start with the new Powers,
making use of such connections as it might already have
formed with any of those who had now seized power.
It was only a matter of days, however, before a still
more powerful and important support of the gigantic
structure erected by the five brothers gave way.

The news from Paris produced the greatest conster-
nation in the Austrian Empire. Metternich received the
first news of Guizot’s fall from Solomon Rothschild who
had had a telegram from his brother. He would not
believe it, and when, shortly afterwards, the Russian
Chargé d’ Affaires called “ and confirmed it, he exclaimed
in dismay, “‘ Kh bien, mon cher, tout est fint.” He still
hoped that the monarchy would survive ; but when he
received from Solomon ihe further dismal news that the
Republic had been proclaimed in France, the aged
Chancellor is said to have collapsed in his armchair in
despair.

The populace in Vienna and Austria generally became
wildly excited. The Imperial Government was inun-
dated on all sides with petitions, programnics of reform,
and urgent appeals of every kind. There were instances
of paper moncy not being accepted. Trade and industry
were at a standstill, and everybody had the feeling that a
terrible storm was about to burst. Nothing had as yet
occurred when news was received abroad that Prince
Metternich had retired. It is interesting to note that it
was some members of the Rothschild family who spread
the news, at a reception given by Lady Palmerston on
4°h March, 1848, that they had heard from Vienna that
Prince Metternich had made up his mind to resign his
office. The Austrian representative, who was present,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 265


was overwhelmed with questions, but he gave it as his
opinion that it was a mere Stock Exchange manccuvre. *
Yet when the Charge d’Affaire’s report on this incident
arrived at Vienna, Metternich had actually ceased to be
Chancellor.

The Estates were to mect on Monday, 13th March.
The wording of a petition was being discussed when a
deputation of students rushed in, tore it up, and an-
nounced the extensive wishes of the people. Groups
collected in the streets, where orators harangued them.
“Down with Metternich!” was the universal cry.

A crowd of people passes before the Chancellor’s office
shouting that the Prince must be dismissed. Stones are
thrown at the Archduke Albrecht ; the military open
fire. The first victims fall ; the excitement spreads more
and more. Barricades are put up close to the Rothschild’s
house, which is not far from the arsenal. Solomon
anxiously watches the growing disturbances from the
windows of his house. The Citizen Guard sound the alarm
and fly to arms. ‘The excesses of the populace in the
strecls inercase. In the Palace there is anxious indeci-
sion. The Emperor Ferdinand cannot understand what
is happening. The cautious Archduke John alone keeps
his head. He realises that Metternich must be urged to
resign, and undertakes this hard duty. ‘The Chancellor
resigns at half-past eight on the evening of the 18th
March. Houses are lit up. Here there are festival ihimi-
nations, while others are fighting on the barricades. Here
men are being shot down, and there people are rejoicing
over the proclamation of the freedom of the Press.

At six o’clock in the evening of the 14th March Prince
Metternich and his family fled from the city. Solonion
Rothschild had not ventured to leave his house. A nics-
sengcr from Metternich called on his loyal friend and
banker to inform. him of Metternich’s decision to leave
Austria. But, as was generally the casc, Metternich was


266 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


short of ready money. Another man would have used
his boundless power, and his autocratic control, which
extended also to the State’s finances, to his own advan-
tage, so that he would not have been forced to borrow
his journey moncy now that he was forced to fiee. Roths-
child was glad to do the fallen statesman a friendly turn,
and sent him a thousand ducats through the architect
Romano." As soon as he received the money, the man
who a few hours before had been the most powerful
person in the Imperial dominion, left the city in dis-
guise, carrying money for his journey and a Rothschild
letter of credit.

Things had already gone so far that on his journey
through Germany Metternich was forced, for the sake
of his personal safety, to disguise his identity as far as
possible. On 20th March, for instance, there was a
rumour in Frankfort that the Chancellor had arrived,
and was staying at the house of the Austrian General
Count Nobili. Thousands of people immediately collected
outside the General’s house shouting, ‘‘ Pereat Metter-
nich!’ The General came boldly to the window, an-
nounced that the Prince was not staying with him, and
then drove quite alone at a walking pace through the
crowds to a reception at Baron Amsche] M. Rothschild’s.
The crowd then went to the Hotel “ zura Romische
Kaiser,”’ where similar scenes were enacted. When they
had convinced themselves that Metternich was not there
either, they proceeded to the house «.f the aged Baron
Amschel Meyer Rothschild, who lived close by, and de-
manded money. Amschel Meyer, however, was not at
home, and the crowd dispersed.

Solomon Rothschild had remained at Vienna, where,
after the exciting days of the 13th and 14th March, things
hd somewhat quietened down, but Solomon was terribly
upset by these events. Apart from being so intimately
connected with him in all the affairs of life, his personal


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 267


friendship with Metternich had been so close that he felt
not only the threat to the welfare of his House, but per-
haps still more keenly the hurt to his personal feelings.
Melancholy and disheartened, he decided to wait awhile
and sec how matters would develop.

Meanwhile, the revolutionary movement spread
throughout the capitals of Europe. On 18th March there
was a rising in Berlin. There was strect fighting, barri-
cades, and general panic. When the news of these hap-
penings reached Frankfort, where there had also been
unrest, and where demands for equal] citizenship with-
out distinction of erced had been pul forward, the mob
smashed the windows of the Prussi:zn Minister, and of
oid Amschel Meyer Rothschild, as the Consul-General
of the King of Prussia, who had had his people shot
down. Amschel Meycr Rothschild was therefore also at
the centre of a danger-zone, and at a place of consider-
able political importance, for the forerunner of the
National Assembly, which was to provide a new unifying
ecntral authority for the whole of Germany, met at
Frankfort. This fact necessarily suggested all kinds of
p' ssibilities to the official banker of the German Fe Jera-
tion if the new authorities were cleverly handled, and if
the game were not spoilt with them at the start.

Nathan’s sons in England, and the fortunate country
where they were living, were alone spared the revolu-
tions and the confusion that followed upon tiem. They
were affected only indirectly by the gencral collapse of
the Bourses, and were therefore able to render most
effective assistance to the Rothschild firms that were
threatened on the Continent.

Carl Rothschild at Naples was at the centre of the
revolutionary disturbances that had overwhelmed Italy.
He had some time previously done his best to sever those
intimate links with Austria, through which he had actu-
ally come to Napics, but he had clung to his association


268 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


with the conservative Kingdom of Naples, and accord-
ingly suffered from the difficulties which the revolu-
tion caused to that kingdom. In the North of Italy
Venice revolted against the dominion of Austria directly
after the revolution in Vienna, with the result that the
Austrian officials resigned, and a republic was pro-
claimed. This was a serious blow to Solomon Rothschild,
who had so recently conchided an important agreement
for salt works with that city. Lombardy also revolted,
a fact which made Solomon seriously anxious about the
capital amounting to 400,000 florins -which he had in-
vested in Venice, in full confidence that Lombardy would
continue under Austrian dominion."

The Rothschild undertakings were threatened through-
out the length and breadth of the monarchy, and Solo-
mon applied his efforts to saving what could be saved.
Ve therefore begged the Minister for Foreign Affairs on
L5th June, 1848, in view of the rumour that there was
every prospect of Lombardy being pacified within a
short time, to see that be did not suffer loss, having re-
gard to Austria’s well-known care for the interests of
her subjects, and of important industrial undertakings.

Tle was reassured and given all kinds of nromises, but
the authoritics had other things to attend to than Solo-
mon’s busmess, and Metternich’s obsence made itself
noticeably felt, as at the most critical moments he had
always had time for Solomon and considered his wishes
and suggestions. Solomon became painfully aware of
the fundamental change in his position, which had been
so dependent upon his excellent relations with the
mighty at Vienna. He had suffered, in fact, just as his
brother James had suffered in Paris.

The latter had now no easy task. The terrible collapse
6. February had eliminated the King, who was so
friendly to him, and the Ministers, with whom he was
on suci: good terms. Other friends, too, had Iecft the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 269


capital, including the Austrian Ambassador Count
Apponyi, with his half million florins of debts, and
Hubner, the provisional substitute, who temporarily
occupied his position, was far from congenial to James.
His was a reserved and unfriendly nature ; he had pro-
nounced anti-Semitic tendencies, and was not at all in-
clined to accord Rothschild that position with regard to
the Austrian Embassy that he had enjoyed in the time
of Apponyi.

It is true that amongst new persons in authority James
found a few friends of former days, and, as he knew how
to adapt himself to the new régime, and in spite of his
fundamentally Orléanist sympathies, he carefully re-
frained from provoking it in any way. His opportunist
nature provided occasion for arriving at a conciliatory
understanding.

Meanwhile, Solomon in Austria had again been ex-
pericncing disturbances. The empire was in sad straits
in Wungary and Italy, in Bohemia and in the capital,
reocllion was in the air. The defeat of the army of Carl
Albert, King of Sardinia, on 25th July at Custozza, by
the aged Field-Marshal Count Radetzky, relieved the
situation. Italy’s hope during these times of stress was
that France would intervene, and that Sardinia would
assist her against Austria.

There was considerable fear at Vienna lest republican
France should take such a step, and the Austiian tem-
porary Charge d’Affaires, Thom, who had served under
Apponyi and held office until Iftibner’s arrival, and who
knew James Rothschild well, was instructed to report
on France’s attitude. The foreign Kmbassics, particu-
larly those of the conservative Powers, had, however,
practically no influence in Paris at this time, and they
got no news. James, on the other hand, was already on
such gooa terms with the new Finance Minister, Garnier
Pagés, that he frequently went to see him, and was then


270 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


able to report to Thom that the Minister had told him
that the Government had no intention whatever of inter-
vening in Italy, and that he himself would do everything
possible to prevent such a step from being taken."

In this matter Rothschild continued to be Thom’s
source of information. James Rothschild’s position in
Paris became somewhat more secure, but there was no
prospect of a return of political tranquillity. The Radicals
and Socialists had established the so-called “ national
workshops,” in which politics were much more popular
than work, and which soon became an_ intolcrable
financial burden as well as a political danger.

Serious disturbances again broke out on the Govern-
ment’s attempting to resign. After three days’ strect
fighting in June the cnergetic War Minister, Eugéne
Cavaignac, who was sincerely attached to the republican
cause, emerged victorious.

Ile assumed the position of a dictator, and was nomi-
nated President of the Council of Ministers by the
National Assembly. James had been on execlient terms
with him of old, and he succeeded, at the expense of con-
siderable sums of money, in making himsclf useful to the
General, and to the rept.ulican cause, so that he was soon
as good a republican as be had been a monarchist.

James’s skill in adjusting himscl€ to aiy conceivable
circumstances impressed even the catreme Left, and
several attempts were made to claim hin ior the ends
of the workers’ purty.

“ You are a wonder, sir,”? wrote she editor of the ultra
Radical T'ocsin des travailleurs ; “in spite of his legal
majority Louis Philippe has fallen, Guizot has dis-
appeared, the constitutional monarchy and_ pariia-
mentary methods have gone by the board ; you, however,
are uninvved! ... Where are Arago and Lamartine ?
They are finished, but you have survived. The banking
princes are going into liquidation and their offices are


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 271


closed. The great captains of industry and the railway
companies totter. Shareholders, merchants, manu-
facturcrs, and bankers are ruincd en masse ; big men and
little men are alike overwhelmed ; you alone amongst all
these ruins remain unaffected. Although your House felt
the first violence of the shock in Paris, although the effects
of revolution pursue you from Naples to Vienna and
Berlin, you remain unmoved in the face of a movement
that has affected the whole of Europe. Wealth fades
away, glory is humbled, and dominion is broker, but
the Jew, the monarch of our time, has held his throne,
but that is not all. You might heve fled from this
country where, in the language «i your Bible, the
mountains skip about like rams. You remain, announc-
ing that your power is independent of the ancient
dynasties, and you courageously extend your hand to
the young republics. Undismayed you adhere to France.
... You are more than a statesman, you are the symbol
of credit. Is it not time that the bank, that powerful
instrument of the middle classes, should assist in the
fulfilment of the pcople’s destinies ? Withcut becoming
a Minister, you remain simply the great man of business
of cur time. Your work might be more extensive, your
faiae-—and you are not indifferent to fame—might be
even more glorious. After gaining the crown of money
you would achieve ihe apotheosis. Does that not appeal
to you? Confess that it would be a worthy occasion if
one day the French Republic should offer you a place
in the Pantheon ! ”

James had, therefore, succeeded in gaining to a large
extent the respect of the circles of the extreme Left.
Moreover, Cavaignac had recalled from Algiers General
Théodule Changarnicr, who was an old friend of the Ho.ise
of Rothschild, and appointed him Commander in Chief
of the whole National Guard, who were responsible for
maintaining thc safety of the capital. He was not so


272 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


whole-hearted a republican as Cavaignac, and swayed
between Orlcanists and a party which was intended to
combine Legitimists and Orléanists, his main aim being
to secure a prominent position for himself. Rothschild
was, therefore, in a position to carry on comfortably
either with the republic or with the restored monarchy,
but what actually happened was something quite
different.

On receiving news of the outbreak of the revolution
of 28th February, Louis Napoleon had hurried to Paris
“to place himself under the flag of the republic,” but,
Jater on, he had returned to London without offering
himself as a candidate for the suffrages of the National
Assembly. At the final clections in September, however,
the Prince was elected in three Departments, and also
in Corsica. His name was a programme in itself, In the
gencral confusion his name, with its associations with
the most splendid period of French history—-Watcrloo
had been forgotten-—gave hope ; for thousands and tens
of thousands the name of Napoleon was the symbol of
streneth, splendour, order, authority and—gloire.

After the June fighting considerable sections of the
populace became influenced politically by the sentiments
of the Right. There was a keen desire for peace and
order, and suddenly the immortal name of “ Napoleon ”
became the idol of the people.

James had watched this development with mixed
feclings. He remembered the part he and his brother had
played under Napoleon I, and he could not but reflect
that the great man’s nephew knew perfectly well how
the Frankfort Jews had shown the game they were
playing after the fall of the Kmpcror, and had gone with
flying colours into the camp of the victors and of the
returning Bourbons, thereafter pursuing their business
happily and magnificently under high protection, while
the great IEmpcror was pining away at St. Helena.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 278


Louis Napoleon would not have been a man, he would
certainly not have been a Napolconid, had he not wished
to take just vengeance on those men or their descend-
ants ; at any ratc, he could not be expected to show them
any marked friendliness.

James had left Paris immediately after Napoleon’s
election to the National Assembly, and just at this time
General Cavaignac was discussing how true republicans
should meet the new danger which had ariscn in the
person of Napoleon. James had arrived in Brussels,
which he was visiting on matters of business, in a state
of great anxicty. He discussed the position with the
Austrian Minister Count Woyna. who wrote home
reporting that, having lent such considerable sums to
the republic, Baron Rothschild was as republican as he
had been monarchist.

“At the present moment,” the Count reported,
“* decent people in France sec their only hope of salvation
in freely and unreservedly supporting the present head
of the Government (Cavaignac). He alone practically
in the whole of France treats the affairs of the republic
seriously and conscientiously. As far as Palmerston
is coneerned,” the Minister continued, “the clever
banker does not understand, however republican he may
say he is at the moment, that he is really as blind as all
that. He said to me that in the present state of mind of
France, with Bonapartism making progress on all
sides, if England does not prevent Vrance from possible
intervention in Italy, on war being actually declared
Louis Napoleon will forthwith be carricd shoulder
high. Then Italy would also be drawn into the war,
and the first mcasure both of republican and Impcrial
Bonapartists will be again to declare the Continental
blockade against England.”

James Rothsehild next called on the King of the
Belgians, Louis Philippe’s son-in-law, who also looked


274 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


askance at Louis Napoleon’s rise. When the revolution
broke out in Paris, King Leopold had thought for a time
that he might incur a similar fate to that of his father-
in-law, and be compelled to leave the country. In order,
therefore, to be secure against all eventualities he had
remitted a sum of 5,000,000 francs to the House of
Rothschild, which was to be placed at his disposal if he
werc actually compelled to leave the country. It was on
this matter that James had gone to Brussels. When the
country settled down, and matters did not happen as
was feared, the King left this sum with the House of
Rothschild, and in the course of years, at compound
interest, it increased by 1866 to the prodigious sum of
20,000,000 frances, which formed the basis of the enor-
mous inheritance which was to come to the unfortunate
Empress Charlotte of Mexico. James returned from
Brussels to Paris ‘‘ to phinge again courageously into
the source of all the troubles that are making Europe
unhappy,” as Count Woyna stated. He was greatly
dismayed to sce that his friends, the Dictator Cavaignac
and Gencral Changarnicr, were losing more and more
ground to Louis Napolcon. At the beginning of November
1848 the situation in Paris was again exccedingly
strained, and, as Herr von ‘Thom reported, ” the general
opinion in Paris was that another big revolution was
imminent.

** Fear and unrest,” the Charge d’Affaires reported,
*‘ are general ; business and economic interests are suffer-
ing acutely. The slump in securities has assumed alarm-
ing proportions, and yesterday there was actually 2
rumour to the effect that the House of Rothschild was
going into liquidation.”

Things were not nearly as bad as all that, but it made
Rothschild exceedingly uneasy to see how the cause of
Prince Louis Napoleon was advancing with enormous
strides throughout the country. He was bitterly dismayed


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 275


to receive the news on 10th December that Louis
Napoleon had been elected President of the Republic
by a vote of five and a half millions, whereas Cavaignac
had polled only one and a half million, and Changarnier
only fifty thousand votes.

He decided to make the best of the situation, and to
use great restraint and caution in expressing any political
opinions. Louis Napoleon’s position was not by any
means secure yet, but he had made considerable pro-
gress in that direction.

While the Paris House was gravely concerned with
regard to its future, and the future of the country in
which it was established, affairs in ‘he Austrian Empire
were becoming more and more chaotic. Whilst Austria
had been victorious in Italy, Hungary was now in com-
plete revolt, and Kossuth was speaking to his country-
men, who were drunk with nationalist ideas, of the
complete independence and liberty of Lfungary. Most
of the troops had Ieft Vienna for Italy and Hungary,
only a weak garrison being left behind in the capital
itself. Instigated by Hungary, the democrats in Vienna
exploited these conditions to make another bloody rising.

On 6th October. 1848, other troops and men of the
National Guard who did not wish to go to Hungary
mutinied and joined the rebcls. The shouting mob, drunk
with victory, proceeded to the War Office building, where
the Ministry was meeting, and threatened to lynch the
Ministers. They, however, all escaped, with the excep-
tion of the unfortunate War Minister, Count Latour,
who was cruelly murdered, his corpse being hung stark
naked to a lamppost, where the mob continucd to insult
and beat it. After this murder the crowd, which was
quite out of hand, proceeded to the arsenal, which is
now the centra! fire station, and which then had its front-
age on the Wipplingerstrasse and Renngassc, being there-
fore quite close to the Rothschild House.


276 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


At 7 o’clock in the evening they began to lay siege to
it. The mob ransacked and occupied the Windischgractz
Palace and the Rothschilds’ house in the Renngassce.
From the roof of the latter they shot at the Grenadicrs’
quarters inside the arsenal." This fighting went on
throughout the night, the arsenal being handed over on
the following day to a commission appointed by the
Reichstag.

The whole of Vienna was in a panic. The Court left
the Residence and fled to Olmitz. The further disturb-
ances had surprised Solomon Rothschild in his house in
the Renngasse, and he fled. He now sorrowfully recalled
Metternich’s words: “If the devil fetches me, he will
fetch vou too!” During the last few months he had
imagined that the Chancellor would prove mistaken,
for Metternich had fallen and he had remained.

Now, however, that his own house had been looted,
and had been made a base of opcrations for an attack
on the arsenal clos. by, he felt completely broken
down, and desired only one thing—to get away from
Vienna.”

He first proceeded to conceal himself in the neigh-
bourhood of Vienna until he should have brought his
secretary, Goldschmidt, his family, and the most im-
portant papers and moneys into u place of safety.

The Goldschmidts had fled by boat to Stein, near
Krems, but the father of the famil’ returned to Vienna,
so as to be able to help if Solonion Rothschild needed
him on the journey, and to assist in getting the money
and securities away. But it was no longer so simple to
enter Vienna without being attacked. Goldschmidt hit
upon the idea* of hiring a small cart and milk-cans
from his landlord at Débling, who had a dairy, and
entered the town disguised as a milkman. Ile was closely
examined at the Nussdorfer Linie and at the Schottentor,
but he managed to reach Rothschild’s office safely, where


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 277


he found almost everything intact in huge, well-locked,
and hidden coffers.

Rothschild’s books, his cash and securities, were
packed up in a moment, and sent to the National Bank,
where they were taken over and brought into sccurity.
This was on 10th October, 1848. Goldschmidt had not
met Solomon again. The Baron had availed himself of
an opportunity of travelling to Frankfort-on-Main. He
was never to see Vienna again.


Cuaprer VII


Fighting for Position with Louis Napoleon, Cavour, and
Bismarck


Tne February revolution in France, which started a
general revolutionary movement throughout Europe,
was to terminate in a surprising manner. After the fall
of the first Napoleon, France had first tried the elder
and then the younger linc of the Bourbons. The majority
of the people, however, felt uneasy under the form of
government introduced in 1848, for memories of the
terror and excesses of the first republic that followed
the great revolution had not entir!. died out, and they
werc revived by the June rising of 1848, which was sup-
pressed, after sanguinary conflicts, by Kugéne Cavaignac,
War Minister of the Republic.

It was only natural in these circumstances that the
French people should respond to the magic name of
Napoleon, which, in spite of the tragic end of the man
who had made it famous, had remained a symbol of
genius and glory. On the outbreak of the revolution,
Louis Napoleon had hastened to Paris to spy out his
ebances 3 at first he remained in the backerounc, but
when in June he was clected to represent Paris and three
Departments, he felt that his moment was at hand, The
aura surrounding the name of Napoleon, with its peculiar
psychological appeal, was successfully exploited by a
powerful agitation, so that at the Presidenti:.! elections
of the 10th December, 1848, no Jess than five and a
half million, out of seven and a quarter million
votes, were cast in favour of the Prince.

The Rothschild fumily watched these developments
with no little dismay. They had not, as in the case of
Louis XVIII, eased with their gold the progress of the
Regent from Loudon to his throne in Paris. The reaction
had occurred far teo suddenly, and they were too

279


280 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


intimately associated with the dynasty that had given
them such an extraordinary position in Paris to be able
to effect so abrupt a readjustment of their whole
position, the expediency of which, at first at any rate,
was far from certain. Moreover, there were historical
reasons why they should fecl embarrassed in tendering
their support to a Napoleon, since they were bound to
reflect that thcir attitude, after the fall of the first
Napoleon, had made it obvious to everyone that they
had always been secretly in opposition.

If a successor of that great man were actually to
attain to powcr, the members of the Rothschild family
could hardly expect him to look upon them with favour
and confidence. In the absence of any possibility of
Louis Philippe coming back, the House of Rothschild
was inclined to favour a republic. The men at the helm
seemed to provide a sufficient guarantce against such a
republic being too extreme; and the Rothschilds had
succeeded through their earlier connections in establish-
ing good, and, in some cases, even intimate relations
with these men.

They were exceedingly friendly with Cavaignac,
and on the best possible terms with Gencral Nicolas
Changarnier, who had been recalled from Algiers to
the National Assembly, and had been appointed to the
command of the National Guard. Changarnicr paid
gallant attentions to James Rothschild’s wife, the
beautiful and intelligent Baroness Betty. Politically
the General was also in sympathy with the House of
Rothschild, since, if he could not achieve the Presidency
himself, he was inclined to support the Bourbons, his
only difficulty being to decide as between the older and
the younger line.

Changarnier and the Rothschilds were, therefore,
alike dismayed at the defeat of Cavaignac and Ledru-
Rollin in the Presidential clections. The General,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 281


however, retained his high military office, since, for the
moment, he was indispensable to the new President,
Louis Napoleon, the problem in 1849 being to repel
further attacks by the radicals ; in this matter, although
otherwise opposed, their interests were identical. Chan-
garnicr, who secretly still cherished a hope of attaining
to the Presidency himself, noted with displeasure, as
also did James, that the entourage of the Prince President
consisting, as many of their friends stated, of greedy
adventurers, although it certainly included Persigny,
a man of blameless character who was blindly devoted
to the Napoleonic cause, were constantly urging Louis
Napoleon to make himself absolutc inaster of the State.
They werc also displeased to observe that Louis Napolcon
showed no small skill in enlisting the support of
philanthropic and socialistic movements.

The result was that while, on the surface, Louis
Napoleon’s attitude to the House of Rothsehild was
polite, the opposition between them increasei. The
President felt that the bank was an international power
and that his own position was not so sccure that he
could afford to make enemies unnecessarily. Financially,
kewever, he had Ute need of the Rothschilds. The
rich Jewish banker, Achille Fould, a member of the
Paris bank of Fould and Oppenheim, had attached him-
self to him some time ago, and he not only lent the
Prince the money he so sorely necded to consolidate
his position, but also, as a financial expert, vecame his
confidential adviser in all money matters.

In order to cut the ground from under the feet of
his great rival, Achille Fould had been particularly
active in confirming Louis Napoleon in the belief that
no help could be expected of a House which had been
so intitnately associated with the fate of the Bourbons,
and had been se detinitely hostile to the first Napoleon,

In this way Pould hoped to secure the position with


the powers in the State that the Rothschilds had en joved
Fould backed Louis Napoleon, who was leading in the
race for the throne of France; if he were to come in first
there was no saying how much the perspicacious banker
might not win. On the 31st October, 1849, Achille Fould
was actually appointed Finance Minister to the Republic.

Such being the state of affairs, it must have been
with mixed feeling that Louis Napoleon, President of
the Republic, and James Rothschild, sat next to one
another in the coach of honour at the opening of the
Northern Railway of France line to St. Quentin. The
shouts of “ Vive l’Empereur! ”’ with which the President
was acclaimed by the crowds, were music to his cars, but
they roused bitter feelings in the breast of James. There
was a third in this company, Jacques Kmil Pereire, the
Portuguese Jew who had attracted James’s attention in
connection with the foundation of the railway com-
panies, and who had achieved riches and honour in his
service. He had for some time been in touch with Fould,
and, when he saw the new star rising in the French
firmament, he decided that the time had come to sever
his connection with his old chief and to make an ind: -
pendent bid for wealth and power by placing himself
at the service of the new lord of the land. He, too,
heard with satisfaction the cloquent plaudits of the
multitude, reminiscent of a glorious past.

Externally, things seemed to be zomg on as before,
and it would have been difficult for the uninitiated to
guess what was happening behind the scenes.

The President’s representative and James Rothschild
walked side by side behind Honoré de Balzac’s coffin on
20th August, 1850. During the years of his growing
success Balzac had been a constant visitor and friend of
the House of Rothschild. He had never been able to
get out of the habit of contracting debts, and, having
made James’s acquaintance at Aix les Bains,' he naturally


Pe Oot SUPT N


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 288


borrowed money from him. The novelist described his
creditors in an amusing story, Roueries d’un créancier,
which he dedicated, as well as Un homme d affaires,
to James Rothschild. To the Baroness Betty, who often
invited him to the house, he dedicated L’enfant maudit.
After meeting Heine and Rothschild on the boulevard
one day, Balzac remarked, “‘ There go all the wealth and
all the intelligence of the Jews, arm in arm.”

Politics were too acute to leave much time for funcrals.
The opposition between Changarnier, who controlled the
military forces in Paris, and the President became more
and more pronounced. The General over-estimated his
influence and his position in the National Assembly ; his
popularity in the capital was declining, whilst that of the
Prince was increasing. Herr von Hiibner, the new
Austrian representative, whose predecessor James con-
linued to lament, attributed this fact partly to the fact
that the General’s relations with the House of Rottischild
were no secret. ‘‘ The feeling of popular resentment from
which the Gencral is suffering just now,”’ he reported on
the 13th June,* “is largely attributable to his intimate
relations with the Rothschild family, arising out of a
seuciment de ceeur for Madame James Rothsehild. ‘The
Prince, whom Changarnier has on several occasions pro-
voked by holding reviews of the troops without even ad-
vising him previously, learnt that the said lady was
present at them in a magnificent cquipage, and that the
gallant gencral saluted her before the whole army of
Paris.” Louis Napolcon finally decided, at the instiga-
tion of his entourage, to take steps to relieve General
Changaruier of his command.

The decree of dismissal had lain for four days on the
President’s desk, when he changed his nnd again ; tre
insincere and shortlived reconciliation being marked by
a magnificent re jew, at which the Gencral marched the
troops past the Prince.


284 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


During this period the enthusiastic Bonapartists were
working zealously for the re-establishinent of the Empire.
Jean Persigny played a prominent part in this move-
ment ; he had become a friend of Louis Napoleon during
the latter’s exile at Arenenberg in Switzerland, and had
taken part in the Strassburg adventure at the end of
October 1836, as well as in Louis Napoleon’s unsuccess-
ful landing at Boulogne. The latter attempt had resulted
in a sentence of twenty years’ imprisonment, and he did
not regain his liberty until the February revolution of
1848. Inspired with a burning hatred of the Bourbons,
he now became the most zealous champion of the Empire.

Louis Napoleon had at once taken him into bis con-
fidence and employed him on important diplomatic mis-
sions ; from December 1849 until April 1850 he was at
Berlin.

Foreign countries, and especially Germany, were dis-
turbed to observe the iisternal developments in France,
as that country appeared to be moving Lowards a second
Napoleonic Empire, with all the unfortunate associations
connected with that name.

Meyer Amschel at Frankfort and his brother Solomon,
who had also been staying at Frankfort since he had fled
from Vienna on the outbreak of the revolution, shared
these misgivings ; they asked their brother James to let
them know the truth as to the state of affairs in Paris,
and how far they had real cause to feet alarmed. During
James’s temporary absence, his eldest son Alphonse Roths-
child answered their letter. We admitted that the con-
flicting and cxaygerated reports in the newspapers gave
distinct ground for aiarm. Ie therefore wished his uncle
to know the opinions of well-informed persons who, by
reason of Lheir position in the State, exercised a direct
and powerful influence upon the course of events. In
that category Changarnier was obviously included by
itapheation. Alphonse Rothschild expressed the view that


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 285


there was a unanimous desire to maintain peace and
order. The only cause of alarm was connected with
Persigny and the Imperialist clements.

““M. de Persigny,” he wrote, “ the representative of
France in Berlin, is to return to his post in the near
future. IIc is still of a very warlike turn of mind. He
means to induce Prussia to declare war on Austria with
the idea that France shall intervene in this fratricidal
strife. He hopes thoroughly to confuse the issuc in Ger-
many, so that certain ambitious schemes in France (the
Empire) may be brought to fruition, which have no
chance of success without a foreign war, You may assure
your friends that these schemes in no way enjoy the ap-
proval of our Government, of influential members of the
Chamber, or of the country itself. France has no desire
at all to sce Prussia and Austria at war. The idea of
German blood being shed by Germans seems criminal,
and if the Elysées (the President, Louis Napoleon) should
really embark upon such an eccentric policy, our states-
menand parliamentarians would certainly refuse to adopt
it or carry it through. You may therefore set your
minds at rest... . The Government will follow an
entirely conservative policy.”

Changarnier was sanguine too; he said of Persigny,
who was somewhat short of stature, that he was busily
cngaged in “ turning the little man’s head.” + But the
Gencral was mistaken. Louis Napoleon pursued his
course unswervingly.

On the 5th January, 1851, the President relieved
Gencral Changarnier of his military command, although
he had failed to carry a vote of censure on the Gencral
in the National Assembly. The result was that Louis
Napoleon broke with the Assembly, but the Assembly
itself was split by this event, and its majority became
divided.

Meanwhile the Fresidcnt, who was determined to cut


286 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the Gordian knot, had completed his preliminary pre-
parations. By the coup d’état of the 2nd December, 1851,
whereby he dissolved the National Assembly, he laid the
foundations of his personal power.

Louis Napoleon’s most important opponents, num-
bering almost twenty-seven thousand persons, were
arrested and deported or otherwise dealt with. In this
number were included Thiers, Cavaignac, and Chan-
garnier. The President said to the people: “* Your con-
stitution and your National Assembly are detestable ;
I liberate you from them.” Up to the last moment the
Ministry had no suspicion of what was in the air. The
leading positions were mostly occupicd by persons whose
names were closely associated with the First Empire, the
new men being Morny, Flahault, Persigny and Fould.

These events caused consternation in the house of
James Rothschild. Changarnier’s fall made an end of all
the hopes which he had set on him.

‘“* The arrest of the tseneral,” Hiibner reported,’ “ has
brought sorrow into the home of the Rothschilds, but
it must be admitted that Baron James is bearing the
blow with great resignation. All things considered, the
position is exceedingly serious.”

Louis Napoleon submitted the draft of the new con-
stitution to the people, and took a plebiscite on his
measures which resulted in his obtaining an enormous
majority, seven and a half million votes being cast in
favour of his measure and six hundred and fifty thousand
against. The people wanted peace, and for them the name
of Napoleon symbolised a happy future.

By way of encountering any misgivings, lest as in the
time of the First Empire, the calm which every one
longed for should be shattered by war, Louis Napoleon
made the statement at Bordeaux: “The Empire is
peace,” thereby giving open expression to his intention
of acsuming the Impcrial crown. James had to make the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 287


best of a bad job and adjust himself to the course of
events.

Louis Napoleon had not shown any overt hostility to
James ; he had even, in accordance with his policy of
securing the support of the Catholics, induced him to
grant a loan to the Pope. Moreover, at the beginning of
1852 he had granted a syndicate of bankers, operating
under the leadership of the House of Rothschild, the con-
cession for constructing the railway from Paris to Lyons.

Nevertheless, James had lost his position of financial
supremacy in Paris ; he would not be able to retain his
footing at all without a struggle, and. having regard to
the persons now in power, that struggle was bound to
be a hard one. The Paris House had scarcely recovered
somewhat from the consequences of the February revolu-
tion of 1848, when it was faced with these further serious
problems.

At this time an event occurred that profoundly affected
all the members of the Rothschild family, Frau Gudula,
widow since 1812 of Meycr Amschel, the founder of
the bank, and mother of the five Frankforters who had
witnessed the rise of the House from its beginning, died
on the 7th May, 1849, at the age of ninety-six. She had
scen the passage of the law of the 20th February, 1849,
conferring civil and political equality on all members of
the State, including the Jews, an event which her hus-
band and her sons had done so much to help bring about.
In spite of all the wealth that had come to her family,
she had never left the little family house in the Jewish
quarter, for she feared that fortune would desert the
House if she were to forsake the spot where it had first
come upon them, during the lifetime of her beloved hus-
band. She had kept her health up to an advanced age,
and then, when the first sign of trouble occurred, she was
angry with the ductors for not being able to assist her
more effectively. When Doctor Stiebel replied that it was


288 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


unfortunately impossible for him to make her younger,
she answered in the words that have since become
famous : “I do not want you to make me younger; all
I want is to be made older.”

Until the end of her life the venerable woman remained
saving, simple, unassuming, and deeply religious. Her
bridal wreath, carefully preserved undcr glass, and still
occupying its place of honour at Frankfort, was a symbol
of the pious life of this fine old woman, so true to her
traditions. While the old mother of the House was dying
at Frankfort, her sons and grandsons throughout the
world were fighting to maintain the position of power
which they had won. The financial supremacy of the
House in England had scarcely been affeeted by the de-
velopment of events on the Continent. In England they
were rather concerned to raise themselves socially, for
the Ifouse of Lords was strongly opposed to the idea of
Jewish emancipation.

Anthony, Nathan’s sceond son and the younger
brother of Lionel, who was now head of the English
Tlouse, had, on Sir Robert Peel’s recommendation, been
created a baronet on the 12th January, 1847, with the
special provision that if he had no heirs male, the title
should devolve upon the heirs of his elder brother, Lionel.
He lived the life of a wealthy country gentleman, and
kept open house at his place, Aston Clinton in Bucking
hamshire. Meanwhile Lionel, whom the City of London
kept electing to Parliament, did not cease his efforts to
secure admission to the House, in spite of the obstacles
of the Christian oath and the opposition of the House of
Lords. Ilis case raised the important question of prin-
ciple, as to whether Jews should be admittcd to the
House of Commons or not. On the 25th July, 1850, a
mecting of clectors of the City, which had been ealled at
a London tavern, decided that Lionel should go to the
House of Commons on the following day and claim his


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 289


seat. He duly appeared and asked to take the oath on
the Old Testament. Sir Robert Inglis, however, the
leader of the Tories and the opponent of Jewish emanci-
pation, opposed the suggestion. Lionel was asked to with-
draw, and the matter was postponed until the 29th July.

On that day he again appeared in the House of Com-
mons and took the oath of loyalty to the Queen, as well
as the oath of supremacy, which recognises the sovereign
as the only head of the Church, these two oaths being
quite unobjectionable, since they closed with the words,
** So help me God.” In the ease of the third oath required
by law, however, the oath of abjuration. which deals with
the descendants of James the Second,’ and is still re-
quired, and which closes with the words, ‘“‘ on the true
faith of a Christian,” Nathan substituted the formula,
““So help me God,” adding that these words were more
binding on his conscience than any other.

He had taken up the pen to sign his name in the
register of admitted members, when the Speaker told
him to withdraw. A fresh election was demanded, on
the ground that Baron Rothschild had refused to take
the oath in the prescribed form. An amendment that
he should be regarded as an actual member of the House
was lost by a majority of 104 votes. The matter aroused
great excitement, and there was keen public discussion.
The position was that any change in the formula in the
oath of abjuration could be brought about only by an
Act of Parliament passed by both Houses, although the
oath was quite redundant and had a purely historical
significance. If, however, the House of Commons had
agrecd, alter all that had occurred, in nis taking his
seat, Rothschild could have sat in it from that day.
By doing so, however, he would have made himsvlf
liable to an activa by any person in any one of the three
principal courts of justice, and to a penalty of five
hundred pounds for cach day that he had sat in the


290 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


House, the fine being payable to the person who brought
the action.‘

Although at a later date a majority of the House of
Commons actually voted that Lionel should be admitted,
the Bill was rejected by the House of Lords, and some
years passed before the mattcr was finally settled.

Through his brother Nathaniel and through occasional
visits, Lionel kept in close touch with his uncle James in
Paris. In view of the development of events in France,
James felt that he ought to discuss the situation with
his other brothers and nephews in’ Frankfort and
Vienna, and accordingly set out on a journey to these
cities in August 1852.

At Vienna James was received in audience by the
Emperor Francis Joseph, who asked him what was
happening in France. The Emperor informed James,
as Austrian Consul-General in Paris, that he cherished
the most. friendly feelings for Louis Napoleon, and asked
him to pass this on. ‘the duty of communicating this
message, non-committal though it might be, was a wel-
come one to James, since he: would be coming to the
President, who was on the verge of achieving the
Imperial dignity, with pleasant words from a “legiti-
mate” potentate, and would thereby be enabled to
improve his unfortunate position in Parir.

After Solomon’s flight, the Vienna branch of the
House of Rothschild was without a real head, being
earricd on by managers and seeretarics, Later on,
Solomon’s eldest son, Anselm, who was forty-nine years
old at the time, frequently visited Vienna, and although
he was Austrian Consul-General at Frankfort he took
over the control of the business. constantly coming
and going between the two towns. When the reaction
sct in in Austria and the aged Metternich returned, it
became easicr for the House of Rothschild to regam
theirs footing in Vienna. The family wealth was


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 291


unimpaired. Society and the State still wanted their
money ; the aristocracy returned to power, and closely
guarded the throne. Old connections, from the time of
Metternich, which had been only temporarily severed,
were resumed, and the House in Vienna was soon
re-established in its former respected position.

When James returned to Paris from Vienna, there
was an unpleasant surprise awaiting him. His opponents
had succeeded in entirely winning over to their side
Louis Napoleon, who had very little understanding of
financial matters, and they were already venturing
upon a move which should take the financial power in
Trance entirely out of the hands of the Rothschilds.
They had planned to found a great rival bank, which
should receive extensive support from the State, and
in which—this was the essential point—l ould, Percire
and their retainers should play the leading parts. The
roles had been cleverly allotted. The highly gifted and
assiduous Pereires with their tireless energy, who had
been schooled by Rothschild, were ostensibly to be the
founders. Achille Fould was to stand aloof, so as to be
able to hold office under the State, but his intimacy
and influence with the new ruler would be his highly
Iniportant contribution to the capital of the new ven-
ture. With the support of the ruler and of the State,
they hoped that their business would succeed. There
was an element of St. Simonism and socialism for
decorative effeet, and indeed this was not a matter
entirely of phrases and theories such as the democratisa-
tion of banking, for some new ideas of real value were
certainly developed.

The fundamental idea was that the State should be
made independent of rich individual bankers, and that
even the smallest savings of its citizens should be
canalisedl into a migantic reservoir, the new bank, which
would distribute them as and where capital wes required.’


292 THE WOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Fould won over his sovercign by the pleasing prospect
of being able to makc himsclf independent of Rothschild,
who at heart was an Orléanist, by the proposal that any
Joan for which the necessity should arise should be issued
in small quantities direct to the public, and thus escape
the Rothschilds.

The phrase souscription nationale coupled with the
idea of independence of the anti-Napoleonic Rothschilds
entirely won over Louis Napoleon, and Fould and
Pereire’s hopes soared so high that they already saw
themselves in control of a monopoly for the whole credit
organisation of France. Thus they hoped to drive the
Rothschilds entirely out of the field.

When James perceived this danger he did everything
he could to warn the President of the Republie and to
open his eyes. Ife sent Louis Napoleon a memorandum
written in his own hand, in which he sct out the dangers
of all these innovaticus and prophesicd that the new
venture would come to a bad end.

It was an casy matter for Fould to make it clear to
Louis Napoleon that this could all be explained by
James’s hostility to the formation of a new Napoleonic
Empire. On the 20th November, 1852, the memorandum
constituting the new Company was actually published in
the Moniteur. It was given the name Crédii Mobilier. The
two brothers Percire and the Foulds held the majority ot
the shares, each couple holding over cleven thousand,
out of the original capital of forty thousand shares. The
name of Louis Napoleon’s confidential adviser, Achille
Fould, did not appear, the shares standing in the name
of his brother Benoite, who was head of the bank B. L.
Fould & Fould-Oppenhcim. Associated with the founders
were the names of decorative personages belonging to the
aristocracy, such as the Princess von Leuchtenberg and
the Duke of Galliera, and also the Bank of Torlonia in
Rome and Sulomon Heine of Hamburg, [einrich Heine’s


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 298


uncle. Altogether a total of 120,000 shares at 500 francs a
share were issued, so that even the smallest capitalist
could take part in the venture, which indeed they
proceeded to do.

France was at the time living in a kind of fever evoked
by the name of Napoleon. Everyone hoped that, in
accordance with the promises of the new ruler, peace and
tranquillity were assured for a long period and that it
would therefore be easy to growrich without much effort.
The share which anyone could easily take in the new
venture seemed the obvious way of achieving the desired
result.

One day after the publication of the memorandum
which called the Crédit Mobilier into existence, a plebis-
cite yiclded almost 8,000,000 votes in favour of an
Imperial constitution, against 250,000 votes on the
other side. On the 23rd November, the first day on which
the shares of the Crédit Mobilier were quoted on the
Bourse, the securitics, whose nominal valuc was five
hundred francs, were quoted at eleven hundred, rising
to sixteen hundred four days later. James Rothschild
watched these developments ironically, but with a
certain amount of concealed fear. His warnings passed
unheeded. He naturally took no part whatever in the
undertaking, and in his heart deelared relentless war
upon it. The contest, he now realised, would be no easy
one, for behind the new undertaking stood tue name
of the head of the State who, on the 2nd December, 1852,
was proclaimed Napoleon I1I by the grace of God and
the will of the people, Emperor of the French.

James was able to derive a certain secret satisfaction
from the fact that, as carly as the 31st December of
that year, the shares of the Crédit Mobilier were quoted
at only 875 francs. The shares had become as dangerous
as any securities on the Boursc, and were the sport of
unsound speculation,


294 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Noteveryone had been dazzled by these developments.
There were other contemporaries of James who perceived
the dangers lurking behind these financial experiments.
“Thanks to the new concern,” one such sceptic wrote
sarcastically to Vienna, “the more favoured people
on the Paris Bourse at any rate will be enabled for a
time to speculate with every prospect of success, with-
out touching a sou.”

Thus, owing to the support of the authorities, new
men had come into the control of financial affairs. Not
only Fould and Pereire had come into the foreground,
but some highly unsavoury elements as well, which
sought to make hay by a skilful combination of busi-
ness and journalism. There was in particular a certain
Jules Mires, originally a poor wretch from the lowest
class in Bordeaux, where he hit upon the idea of pub-
lishing a paper which, in addition to certain items of
news, should contain a daily list of persons who had
died in the town. In cach case the illness of which they
had died was stated, as well as the name of the doctor
who had attended them. This caused annoyance to
the younger members of the profession, and they paid
Mirés a sum of twenty-five thousand francs to cease
publishing the paper.

With this money Mires migrated to Paris, where he
founded a railway paper on the same system, calling
it the Journal des Chemins-de-fers. Ry means of both true
and fabricated disclosures he alarmed the public and
produced consternation among the companies, which
were forced Lo pay for his silence. In addition he acquired
so much wealth by speculation that he soon achieved
a place amongst the leading Paris financiers, who
associated with so many important persons.

The new powers and enterprises had not yet reached
the stage of being able to compete with the Rothschilds
ouiside France. Everyone, even including the Papal


NAPOLEON Ul


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 295


States, still applied to the Rothschilds when in need of
money. During Napoleon’s Presidency Rome had been
the scene of dramatic events. It was hoped in Italy that
the nationalist and liberal Pope Pius EX would join
the gencral movement against Austria. He, however,
feared the spirit of anarchy fomented by the revolution,
and any too great extension of democracy, while he
also hesitated to cnter upon open hostilities against
Catholic Austria. The result was to produce the exciting
November days in Rome, when the Pope’s Palace was
besieged by the mob, and the Holy Father was compelled
under threats to appoint a Radical Ministry. ‘Thereupon
the Head of Christendom fled in disguise to Gaéta in
Neapolitan territory, whence he protested against any
deeds of violenee in Rome while the Roman Republic
was being sct up in the Residenec of the Papal States.
On the 20th February, 1849, Pius EX applicd to the
Catholic powers-—France, Austria, Spain, and Naples
and Sicily---begging them to assist him with their arms
to regain his temporal power. Louis Napoleon, who at
that Lime wished to win the support of Catholics through-
out the world with a view to his wtimate Imperial
schemes, did actually Jand troops in April 1849 to
march on Rome. After various vicissitudes the French
occupicd the city on the 8rd July and reinstated the
Papal Government. Meanwhile the Pope was living
at Gaéla in wretched circumstances, and was in great
need of money. This was particularly necessary for his
return, since he could not re-enter his capital with empty
hands, The Pope accordingly entered into negotiations
with a company of French capitalists, but it soon tran-
spired that the bank which was backing these people
had not the necessary funds at its disposal. Pius 1X
was therefore adviscii to apply again to the House of
Rothschild, whose international connections were such
that, even so scon after the revolutionary events that


296 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


had occurred throughout Europe, they controlled the
necessary amount of money.

The Papal envoy at Naples accordingly got into
touch with Carl Rothschild, but the terms offered by
the latter seemed to him to be wholly unacceptable.
As has already been pointed out, there could be no
question of the Pope returning to Rome until the loan
was settled. Carl made it a condition for granting the
loan that the gates and walls of the Ghetto should be
abolished, that Jews should be allowed to live where
they pleased in the Papal States, and that all special
taxes and separate forms of procedure for dealing with
Jews in the courts should be abolished. The Secretary
of the Jewish Community at Rome had come to Naples
to discuss these requests. Carl also demanded a mortgage
on the ecclesiastical estates as security since, as his son
put it to the Austrian Ministcr at Naples, Count Moritz
Ksterhazy, it was “ditficult, in view of the complete
absence of any material or moral guarantce offered by
the present Papal Government, to enter into a trans-
action involving such a Jarge sum of money without a
mortgage.”

The first conditions were at once definitely rejected
by the Pope, who refused even to consider such demands
as conditions. Ile stated that he would prefer to suffer
an indefinite amount of financial misery rather than
incur the reproach of having subordinated higher to
temporal interests. The second set of conditions seemed
to Carl Rothschild to have a greater chance of being
accepted. The negotiations proceeded actively at Naples,
but finally Carl declared, since the ecclesiastical
authorities were strongly opposing the mortgage as well,
that he had exceeded the instructions of his House, and
that James Rothschild in Paris should be approached
with a view to continuing the negotiations.

Pius IX accordingly sent a request direct to the


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 297


French Government, asking them to use their influence
with the House of Rothschild. When the Papal Nuncio
transmitted this request, both Louis Napoleon _per-
sonally, and the Paris Cabinet, approached James with
the request that he would offer the Pope acceptable
conditions." James decided that the House did not
stand to lose much, since the Papal Government was
just about to be reinstated, and its continuance in
office would be guaranteed by the Catholic powers.
James also mentioned the wishes of the Jews in Rome,
and referred to the abolition of the Ghetto walls and
the question of extraordinary taxes and restrictions
on their liberty of movement.

Such conditions affected the Pope unpleasantly, as
they constituted an obvious interference in the internal
affairs of his State. However, the Pope did not wish
the negotiations to break down on account of these
demands. James was accordingly informed that the
concessions which he was asking for his co-religionists
were to a large extent already in force, and that His
Holiness could not expose himself to the suspicion of
having granted concessions affecting questions of religion
on account of the financial difficulties from which he
was suffering. He then gave a written assurance to
James, through Monsignor Fornarini, the Papal Nuncio
in Paris, to the effect that the Holy Father had the
best intentions with regard to the Jews in his States
and that the Nuncio was authorised to repeat to him
that the Holy Father would not withdraw his promises
in that matter. This also involved an edict regarding
the abolition of the Ghetto.

The final difficulties had thus been disposed of, and
the money was paid by the Rothschilds into the Papal
Treasury on very favourable terms.'* The final obstacle
to the return of His Holiness to Rome was removed.

After the satisfactory conclusion of these difficult


298 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


matters, the Pope took his leave of the King of Naples,
who had offered him a refuge in these trying times, and
on the 12th April, 1850, he made his entry into Rome.

The Rothschilds had therefore provided the money for
the return of the Pope, without having secured a formal
assurance regarding the betterment of the lot of their
co-religionists in anything but the most general terms.
Carl Rothschild went to Rome shortly afterwards, and
on this occasion he again heard the most painful lamenta-
tions about the lot of the Jews, which, in spite of every-
thing, had not been improved. Ie therefore decided to
ask Prince Schwartzenberg to intervene with the Holy
See.

“ During my last stay in Rome,” he wrote to the Prime
Minister, “I was brought, both by personal observa-
tion and by hearing the representations of the Icaders
of the Jewish Community there, to the conviction that
their lot is a very hard onc, and in view of their pressing
requests I was unable to refrain from promising that I
would use such fechle influence as J might possess, with
any influential persons who may be willing to listen to me
favourably, to secure the betterment of their lot.”

He went on to state that he and his whole family had
the most keen and lively sympathy for the sufferings of
that community, and he begged the Imperial Govern-
ment, which offered such a moving example in the way
it granted its equal paternal protection to all confessions
alike, to use its ascendancy and its powerful influence
with the Holy See on their behalf. Schwartzenberg in-
structed Count Esterhazy to make representations in
Rome, but it was a long time before the matter was
settled.

On receiving a letter of complaint from the Jewish
Community in Rome, James also applied to the
Austrian Government.” He suggested that the Pope
was not aware that the Jews had again been confined to


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 299


the Ghetto and subjected to every possible kind of re-
striction. Esterhazy was again instructed to discuss the
matter in a friendly way with the Pope, and this was
done on several further occasions; the reason being
that the Austrian Government were just at that time
negotiating with the Rothschilds for a sterling loan.

In spite of having resumed its good relations with
Austria, the House of Rothschild was constantly engaged
in loan negotiations with Sardinia, the enemy of the
Papal Government. That State was suffering acutely
from the consequences of the unfortunate war with
Austria which, after Radetzky’s successes at Mortara
and Novara, had cost King Albert his crown. As the
King felt that fortune was against him, his son Victor
Emanuel had to go the hard road of concluding a peace
with Austria which was signed in Milan on the 6th
August. He succeeded in avoiding any surrender of terti-
tory, but Austria demanded a substantial war indemnity
for the payment of which the State of Sardinia had to
incur a heavy load of debt and enter the international
financial markets as an applicant for loans.

At that time the banker Giovanni Nigra was Sardinia’s
Finance Minister; although only moderately endowed
with financial gifts, he had dared at this difficult moment
to take over the direction of the State finances. He was
at that time on friendly terms with Count Camillo
Cavour, who did not then hold any public office, although
he was already a Member of Parliament. It was with him,
his authority in such matters being already recognised,
that Nigra mostly discussed economic questions.

Even before the conclusion of peace, the Finance
Minister had got into Louch with Rothschild, who had
asked him what would be the amount of the war indem-
nity demanded by Austria. But it was not until after the
conclusion of peace that. serious negotiations were started.
James came from Paris to Turin to conduct them with


800 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Nigra, and also came into touch with Cavour. Rothschild
and Cavour once dined together with Nigra.'* James was
at first somewhat suspicious ; he asked for information re-
garding the internal arrangements of Sardinia’s finances,
and it was not until he had been convinced that the State
of Sardinia had achieved clarity and order in its own
affairs that he became more amenable.

Cavour expressed the following opinion on Roths-
child»: ‘‘He is really most anxious to have serious
dealings with this country, and he has repeatedly told
me that in spite of everything he regards the State of
Piedmont as established on a firmer basis than that of
Austria.”

James had been brought to this opinion by the ex-
periences of his brother Solomon at Vienna and by events
in Hungary. Nigra also carried on negotiations with
James Rothschild independently of Cavour, who wished
to leave as small a share as possible of the loan to the
Italian bankers. Cavour had hoped that ten to twelve
millions would be allotted to the Turin and Geneva
bankers, part of which amount he had wished to be
reserved for the Swiss banker, de la Ruc, who was a
friend of his and in close business relations with him.
On the evening of the 4th October, 1849, Nigra had a
long conference with Rothschild, in the course of which
he allowed himself to be pcersuadea to reserve for the
Italian bankers only 8,000,000 out of the 62,000,000-
franc loan. Cavour, who knew nothing of this, went to
Rothschild the same evening to ask him for 600,000
francs worth of bonds for de la Rue, or rather to inform
him that the banker would underwrite that amount.

“ The old Jew,’’ Cavour wrote to de la Rue, “ replied
with a smile that you were acting very wiscly, and that
it would be better for you to buy Rentcs in Turin and
Genoa than in Paris. I thought that everything was going
through splendidly, for it was not until afterwards that


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 801


Bombrini" informed me of Nigra’s defection. Under
these conditions I cannot ask Rothschild for any favours,
for that would make me an accessory to an operation
which I consider to be opposed to the best interests of
the country. I will accept no bonds from him that he
does not offer freely to all the houses that wish to apply
for them.”

“Tam furious,” Cavour continued, “ and I have every
reason to believe that Nigra has allowed himself to be
bamboozled by that cunning old rascal Rothschild. ...
Nigra left me out of the negotiations, only calling me
in when the agreement was to be signed. I flatter my-
self that if I had been in his place I should have got better
terms. I had worked out a scheme through which it
would have been possible to dispense with Rothschild.
I used this scheme to counter some of his demands, but
could not alter the basis of the agreement, which had
been definitely fixed. Nigra’s great mistake has been that
he has not had enough confidence in the capacity of our
own banks to take up the loan. . . . This morning a Herr
von Landau * called to offer me on behalf of Rothschild
as many Rentes au prix cottant as I wanted. As you
may imagine, I refused this offer, but it gave me some
idea of the way business is done in most of the European
Cabinets.”

A few days later, the loan had been fully subscribed.
It was so popular with the Italian people that the
Finance Ministry was besieged by a mob who positively
fought to get rid of their money. Turin alone could have
absorbed far more than nine millions.

“Nigra is being roundly abused (on jetle les hauts
cris),”” wrote Cavour ; “ the poor fellow had the best in-
tentions in the world and honestly believed that the
country would he satisfied with eight millions. I am con-
vinced that if the loan had been opened on the first of
this month, and if, as I suggested, bills on Londun and


302 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Paris had been accepted in payment, we could have dis-
pensed with the Rothschilds.”

We sce, although he had no official position, how great
an interest Cavour was already taking in the financial
business of the State and how much he resented the fact
that his country had come to be so dependent on the
House of Rothschild. He had already made up his mind,
if he should ever have anything to say in the matter, to
make a radical change from this state of affairs.

Nevertheless, the loan was a great success for Sardinia,
and the country had no reason but to congratulate itself
on its relations with the Rothschild bank.

The loan, however, did not suffice to relieve Sardinia
of all her pressing obligations, or to cover the deficit in
the Budget. Nigra, therefore, had to look about for a
further loan ; but on this oceasion his unofficial financial
adviser Cavour meant to keep a closer watch over his
inexperienced friend ind fellow-countryman. “ Nigra is
constantly corresponding with Rothschild,” Cavour
wrote at the beginning of the year 1850.” “I shall sce to
it that he is not bamboozled.”

Rothschild, who had already made up his mind to
underwrite the second loan, assumed an attitude of in-
difference towards Nigra, in order to secure better con-
ditions, and he made every effort to ensure that the first
loan should be quoted as low as posvible on the Bourse,
so that he would not have to offer too high a rate for the
second.

The slump in the bonds, and Rothschild’s apparent
reluctance, greatly disconcerted Nigra. It never even
occurred to him that an cffort might be made to raise
the loan through another House.

** If the bonds refuse to rise in value,’’* Cavour wrote,
‘it is Nigra who is to blame, since, as he owes Rothschild
21 millions he cannot make up his mind to enter into
negotiations for the new loan. You will understand that,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 303


until the Baron has definitely secured it, he will continue
to depress the market. Only an ingenuous person would
fail to appreciate this fact.”

In the end James was afraid that he might fail to
secure the handling of the loan, and he decided to go to
Turin again himself.

“*T have been definitely informed,” Cavour wrote on
the 21st September, 1850,” “that the great Baron will
shortly arrive at Turin. Nigra is extraordinarily nervous,
and I cannot understand why ; for if Rothschild takes
the trouble to come here, he will certainly not leave
without having concluded his loan, even if it costs him
one per cent. more to do so.”

Cavour was at the time keeping away from Turin,
although he was already generally regarded as a candi-
date for the Ministry and had had occasion to enter into
lengthy discussions on this matter. That being the posi-
tion, if he had taken a personal part in the loan negotia-
tions, he would have given the impression of already acting
as Finance Minister, without actually being a Minister.

“J have prolonged my absence from Turin,” Cavour
stated, “in order not to have to associate with Roths-
child. I felt that it would have been hardly fitting for
me, in view of my present abnormal position, to inter-
fere in the loan negotiations.”

On the very day on which Cavour wrote this letter,
the Marchese d’Azeglio, Sardinia’s Prime Minister and
Minister for Forcign Affairs, summoned Cavour, and
asked him to accept the portfolio for Agriculture, ‘Trade,
and Shipping. Cavour assented, although, as he himself
said,* he knew nothing about shipping. Having now,
as a Minister, become a member of the Cabinct, this
brilliant man hesitated no longer to intervene in matters
of finance and in Nigra’s department, although he was
naturally unable as yet to exercise a determining
influence in financial matters.


804 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


The second loan, annuities of 6,000,000, representing
a capital value of 120,000,000, was concluded by Nigra
with Rothschild. Four millions of annuities were left to
Rothschild to sell, Nigra retaining 2,000,000 to be dis-
posed of at his discretion. The result was that the public
finances of the State of Sardinia became very closely
bound up with the House of Rothschild, and Cavour was
not at all pleased to see his country falling so entirely
under the financial influence of that House.

On Parliament authorising the Ministry of Finance
to issue 18,000 bonds in order fully to repay the debt
to Austria, Cavour was determined to try and find a way
of making his country independent of the Rothschilds,
at any rate in this matter. Cavour conceived the plan
of selling these securities in Vienna and Frankfort, and
he asked de la Rue to discuss this suggestion with his
business friends in those towns, Goldschmidt and Sina.
“It is a business,” tie Minister wrote, ‘that ought
to appcal to them. I believe that they would be very
pleased to steal a march on Rothschild, and it would
delight me to put a speke in the whecl of that Jew who
is cutting our throats.”

Cavour’s influence, however, was not as great as he
could have wished. Nigra was stiJl Minister of Imance.
and the bonds were not immediately issued. Nigra was
not equal to his task ; the burden of debt and the deficit
continued to increase, and the State’s finances fell
more and more under the influence of the Rothschilds.

‘Tam greatly concerned about the financial position,”
Cavour wrote to the Prime Minister at the end of March,
1851" ; ‘* Nigra is shockingly incompetent.”

After he had taken office, Cavour’s opposition to the
Finance Minister became more and more pronounccd ;
it culminated in Cavour offering to resign during the
discussion of commercial agreements with England and
Belgium, it Nigra should insist upon adhering to his


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 805


scheme. As Nigra himself felt the burden of office, the
result was that he, and not Cavour, resigned.

In April 1851 Cavour was accordingly appointed
Minister of Finance, and obtained the opportunity of
demonstrating that he did not merely know how to
criticise, but was also competent to act. It was certainly
no cheerful task that he took over. Only rather more
than half of the 4,000,000 annuities underwritten by
James Rothschild had been sold, while Nigra had
accepted advances from the House of Rothschild, so
that Sardinia owed that House 25,000,000. There were
still balances on account of the war indemnity due to
Austria, and the budget deficit amounted to 68,000,000.

In spite of the unfavourable conditions obtaining in
the Paris markct which made it difficult to dispose of
the 4,000,000 which the Rothschilds had underwritten,
they wished to get into their own hands the remaining
2,000,000 which Nigra had reserved, and they made
proposals to the new Finance Minister to this end.
Cavour now had his reward for having maintained his
personal freedom and independence with regard to the
Rothschilds. He fully realised that the only way of
obtaining favourable terms in the future was to prove
to the Rothschilds that they had no monopoly of State
loans, and that the State was not so entircly dependent
upon them as they had been able to assume under
Nigra’s administration.

Cavour meant to avail himself of the English market,
and for this purpose he applied as carly as the 25th
April, 1851, six days after his appointment as Minister
of Finance, to Sardinia’s Minister in London, the
Marchese Kmanuel d’Azcvlio.

“We must,” be wrote," “ at all costs extricate our-
selves from the painful position in which we are placed
with regard to the House of Rothschild. A loan concluded
in gengland is the only means whereby we can regain


806 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


our independence. ... It is not my intention im-
mediately to break with Rothschild, but merely to
show him that we can do without him. It is possible,
it is indeed probable, that when he realises that our
minds are firmly made up he will try to take his share
in the operation which we want to carry through on
the London Stock Exchange. In such a case I would
have no objection to negotiating with him, if he were
only in agreement with other English bankers. If we
do not speedily succeed in concluding a loan in London,
we shall find ourselves compelled again to pass through
the Caudine Forks of the Rothschilds.”

“This financial operation,” Cavour wrote at the same
time to the Deputy, Count Revel, “is of an import-
ance that cannot possibly be over-estimated ; it alone
can liberate us from our dependence upon the House
of Rothschild, which for some time has had such a
devastating effect upen our credit.”

Having obtained powers from Parliament to conclude
the loan, Cavour was particularly inclined to consider
the Ilouse of C. J. Hainbro & Son, originally a Danish
firm from Copenhagen, which had settled in England
after the 1848 revolutions, the family becoming natura-
lised. In July of that year Cavour aid in fact succeed in
concluding the loan with Hambro. Te noted this success
with satisfaction, adding,« “If we had not succeeded
in obtaining money in England the Government would
have been compelled again to fall into the hands of the
Rothschilds and to accept such terms as they might have
been pleased to force upon the State, terms which would
have been all the harder, after the Ministry had made
such intense efforts to escape from their domination.
Moreover, my personal prestige, as the new Finance
Minister, would have suffered a severe blow.”

The various branches of the Rothschilds had observed
Cavour’s manceuvre with the greatest dissatisfaction, and


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 807


had done everything possible to upset the negotiations.

“The loan,” Cavour wrote to Count Revel," ‘‘ was
concluded in the nick of time, for it seems to me that our
enemics had all but united the whole of public opinion
against us. I believe the article in The Times“ was in-
spired by the Rothschilds. Baron James stated publicly
that we should fail. Indeed, he made a pun about it:
‘Vemprunt était ouvert, mais non couvert.’”’

This was indeed true, for of the £3,600,000 nominal
Joan at 85, £1,400,000 at first remained unsold. However,
everything ended well, for it was possible later on, when
times were better, to dispose of the remaining securitics
at a better price. The terms on which Hambro had con-
cluded the loan were more favourable than those granted
by Rothschild in the case of the earlier loan. Cavour was
enabled to pay Austria the last instalments of the war
indemnity, and show Rothschild that he was not as
indispensable as Rothschild had hitherto imagined.

Cavour now felt more friendly to the House of Roths-
child, and allowed them to transfer to Vienna the six
million of war indemnity which were still payable to
Austria, “for,” he wrote, “it has hitherto been the
Rothschilds who have paid for us and collected for
Austria. I think it will be well, in order not eutircly to
alienate that great financial power, to pay this last
instalment of our misfortunes through them.” ”

But the Rothschilds were exceedingly angry at
Cavour’s action, and they meant to show that they could
not be easily trifled with. They did everything possible
to deprcss the price of earlier loans, which they had got
rid of, and, at the beginning of September, Sardinian
Rentes were in fact quoted at a very hcavy discount on
the Paris Bourse. Although this development was not
entirely unexpected, Cavour was not pleased.

““T was more annoyed than alarmed,’? Cavour wrote
to Revel, “‘ at the slump in our bonds. I know that this


808 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


is certainly mainly attributable to the efforts of Roths-
child. He has, it is truce, not attempted to deal in the
script directly, as he is too cunning for that, but he has
directed his efforts to depressing our earlier 5 per cent.
loan, and in that he has succeeded. In fact he has had
large blocks of securitics sold in Turin, not through one
of his own agents, but through a IIouse which is not
known to be associated with him. ... This operation has
been kept very secret, and has caused the serious slump
which we have experienced, and which has reacted upon
the Paris market, that market being unfortunately only
too sensitive to any downward movement. But this
manoeuvre must come to a natural end; Rothschild, who
has now been selling for six months without acquiring
any of the bonds himself, will soon find his power of
action exhausted, and then the reaction will set in. I
therefore beg you, my dear Count, to tell Mr. Hambro
to be of good courage, und point out to him that this war-
to-the-knife which the great baron has declared, does not
frighten us. ... I am told that there is a certain Corti ™
at the Sardinian Embassy in London and that he is a
highly gifted and intelligent man ; he might be instructed
to act as our intermediary with Mr. Hambro.”
Cavour was proved right; the Rentes did not fare so
badly. The rate improved, and, ian January 1852, they
were quoted at a very fair price on the Paris Bourse.
The House of Rothschild thereupon again approached the
Piedmont Government, James sending his son Alphonse
to Turin to offer Count Cavour a loan of 40,000,000 frances
(2,000,000 Rentes) at the extraordinarily favourable
rate of 92. Cavour did not intend yet to issue a further
loan, but he was delighted by the high figure offered by
the House of Rothschild, which he rightly regarded as
attributable to the success of his move in England.« He
laid the proposal before the Chamber with the observa-
tion that he would be able to carry on until the carly


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 809


months of 1858 without a loan, The Chamber accord-
ingly, not wishing the country’s debt to be prematurely
increased, rejected the offer in spite of all its advantages.

Meanwhile, after a short interval of retirement, Cavour
became Prime Minister on the 4th November, 1852, re-
taining the portfolio of Finance. During the carly days
of January 1853, the Piedmont Treasury, as had been
expected, again felt the need of money, and Cavour
decided to sell the 2,000,000 Rentes which Nigra had
reserved out of the loan of 1851.

James, who had always wanted to underwrite this
portion of the loan which he had handled, did not hesi-
tate to travel to Turin. Ie offered 88, whereas Cavour
asked 95, and in the end he agreed to 94.50, that is, four
points above the highest price that Hambro had ever
reached,“

This money, however, did not suffice, and Cavour was
foreed to consider a new loan which this time he intended
to be a 8 per cent. one. Cavour had no objection to
the Tlouse of Rothschild in principle ; he merely wanted
to get the best possible conditions for his country. and
contrived skilfully to play off one financier against
another. Hambro felt that he was too weak to under-
take a sccond loan on a large scale, and Count Corti re-
ported accordingly to Cavour. Cavour instructed him
to go to Paris and negotiate with Fould and sve whether
the Crédit Mobilier, who were in keen rivalry with the
Rothschilds, would not be prepared to underwrite
the loan. He sent Corti an introductory letter, which the
latter handed to Fould on the 21st January, 1853. Corti
stated to Fould that Cavour was absolutely free to neyo-
tiate the loan where the interests of his country would
be best served, and that he would therefore conclude it
where he could get the best terms.

“I believe,” Fould replied, “that you will find
the market in Paris and London well-disposed to your


310 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


country. The slump which has again occurred lately is
a consequence of the deliberate manceuvres of Roths-
child, and of the fact that everybody is sure that you
intend to issue a further loan.”

Corti’s view was that Fould had the highest opinion
of Sardinia and was very much inclined to underwrite
the loan en bloc. On the following day, Corti again called
on Fould, who talked to him about his syndicate (the
Crédit Mobilter), saying how marvellous it was, and that
its hke could not be found anywhere else. He then asked
about terms, and Corti mentioned the figure 70; Fould
said that was too dear, and that he must insist upon
better terms. Nevertheless, it was apparent that he was
most keenly anxious to underwrite the loan.

Meanwhile Cavour had reecived Corti’s lettcr.

““ My dear Count,” he replicd, “ IT have read with great
interest the report of your conversation with M. Ben-
jamin Fould ; you have skilfully carried out. the instruc-
tions that I gave you. I request you to call on M. Fould
again before you leave, and to do everything possible to
induce him to name a price. You may tell him that I am
expecting him to make a move, but you must give him
clearly to understand that I am not in the least in a
hurry, and that I am determined to follow his advice
and wait until the storm that is raging on the Bourses
of Paris and London is over.” «

Corti further reported from Paris* that Fould was
still very jealous of Rothschild. Fould had once said tc
him with somc heat, ‘“‘ Cavour must choose between me
and him.” The French financier was particularly excited
when he heard that Alphonse Rothschild had again set out
for Turin; and he had every reason to be, for while
Cavour was instructing his envoy Corti to negotiate
with Benjamin Fould and the firm of Fould-Oppenheim,
the Minister himself was negotiating in Turin with
Rothschild.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 311


At the beginning of February, statements appeared
in several Paris papers to the effect that the new Sar-
dinian loan had already been concluded with the House
of Rothschild. In a state of high excitement, Fould asked
Corti the meaning of this, and the latter truthfully
replied that he had no knowledge of it. Fould’s
information, however, was not derived solely from the
Rothschild himself who, without suspecting that Fould
was also negotiating with Sardinia, asked him whcthcr he
would care to have a share in a Sardinian loan, saying
that in that case he would be prepared to transfer a por-
tion to him. Fould declined the offer, stating that he
wished to retain his freedom of action in that matter, in
order to be able to act on his own account." In dealing
with Corti he showed a growing kecnness to take over
the loan. About this time Fould rashly said to Roths-
child, when the latter again proposed that he should take
part in the loan, in a rather self-satisfied and patronising
manner, that he was sorry, but he was himself engaged
in similar negotiations. Rothschild was much taken
aback, and asked him several questions, amongst others
enjuiring as to the price. Fould naturally did not reply,
but he was to pay dearly for having given hiniself away.
Rothschild still endeavoured, through the Finance
Minister, M. Bincau, to ascertain the price that Fould
had asked, and the price that he had been offered, and
then immediately sent his son to Turin. Luigi Corti
called on Fould on the 27th February, informing him
that Cavour’s price was 73, whereupon Fould pretended
to be highly disconcerted, and made his first counter
offer of $6.66.« Luigi Corti thereupon said that that
figure was quite impossible, and that he ought to mike
a reasonable offer, as Rothschild was in Turin, and pre-
pared to snap the busicss up under his nose. Young
Rothschild had indeed actually arrived at Turin on the
evening of the 26th February, 1853, although Cavour


812 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


had not invited his visit in any way. The Minister,
Cavour, was advised of his arrival by the representative
of the House of Rothschild, G. Landau. The news
stiffened Cavour’s resistance to an extraordinary
degree.

“My dear Count,’ the Prime Minister wrote to
Luigi Corti the same day, ““M. Fould wants to take our
loan by storm and to profit by the panic which has over-
whelmed the Bourses of Paris and London to compel
us to capitulate on unfavourable terms. We cannot,
however, nor should we, hurry unduly. You must
therefore play for time.”

Corti accordingly had to stay in Paris, and Cavour
wrote him a jocular letter saying that he ought to find
a young and rich heiress to pay his attentions to.‘

Meanwhile, negotiations proceeded between Luigi
Corti and Fould. The latter, and the banks which he
represented, were unwilling to offer substantially better
terms. The young diplomat used the greatest precaution
in keeping Cavour informed, Jest the correspondence
should be intercepted. Just at the critical moment
telegraphic communications between Paris and Turin
were broken.

Thercupon Alphonse Rothschild at Turin offered Cavour
on his own responsibility 70, subject to 2 per cent.
commission, and Cavour aceepted. “1 bclieve,” he wrote
to his banker friend, “that it would not have’ been
possible to get better terms. You will appreciate the fact
that Fould’s compctition has been worth some millions
to us.”

Cavour thereupon telegraphed to Corti on the 3rd
March that he had come to terms with Rothschild as
the latter had offered so much better terms than Fould.
Corti broke off the negotiations and Icft Paris without
having had time to follow out Cavour’s playful sug-
gestion. In later years he often enjoyed saying how


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 818


cleverly Cavour had played the various greedy finan-
ciers off against one another. The great statesman in
later years, too, was guarded and cynical in his dealings
with the House of Rothschild, and was always afraid
“ Pétre juivé par Rothschild,” as he put it.»

Corti’s services were warmly recognised by Cavour. “I
thank you, my dear Count,” he wrote to him, “for the
manner in which you have carried through the task
with which you were entrusted. Although the agreement
was not concluded through you, you contributed very
largely to its success.”

Through the skilful manner in which he had handled
the problem, Cavour, the new star on the political
horizon, and the genius of the unification of Italy,
had proved himself the financial equal, nay, the superior,
in his contest with the Rothschilds.

At about the same time, Bismarck, the statesman of
the unification of Germany, came into contact with
the Frankfort Rothschild through his appointment as
Prussian Minister to the Dict at Frankfort, since the
Rothsehilds, as bankers to the Federation, looked efter
its iinancial affairs.

As long as Metternich had been at the helm, the Ger-
man Jederation, and its organ, the Diet at Frankfort,
worked harmoniously, since Prussia and Austria fol-
lowed similar aims. It is true that the nation \.as by no
means satisfied with the ineffectiveness of the Dict in
internal affairs, while it was disgusted with its impotence
abroad. The revolutions that convulsed Kurope in 1848
and 1849 at once upset the tranquil working of the Dict.
The idea of national nnity took a strong hold upon
Germany, and after the episode of the National Assembly
Prussia and Austria cach came forward with the in-
tention of assuniing the leadership of Germany. Wluist
the Prussian Government summoned its supporters to
Erfurt, Austria called upon all German States to restore


314 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


and reopen the Frankfort Diet, as it had been consti-
tuted before the revolution. Austria had triumphantly
dealt with therisings in Italy, in Hungary, and in Vienna,
the heart of the monarchy ; and her new leader, Prince
Schwartzenberg, proceeded to turn his whole attention
to regaining Austria’s old dominating position in Ger-
many. In this he could count on the support of Russia,
who had shown, in thecase of Hungary, that she was
prepared to come to the reseue with armed force in
suppressing revolution. At that time Prussia’s military
strength was not sufficient to enable her to put a
recovered Austria in her place. She was therefore
compelled on the 29th March, 1850, to yicld to the
humiliating demands of Schwartzenberg.

One year later, the German Diet of 1815 was restored,
and Prussia also notified her intention of re-entering
the Diet in May 1851.

Amschel Meyer Rothschild had maintained an attitude
of cautious reserve as he watched the vicissitudes of
the struggle for the settlement of the German consti-
tution that was being carried on in his native town.
Although he was banker to the Federation, and there-
fore intimately concerned in its destiny, he did his utmost
to remain aloof from all complications, being in 1850
already seventy-seven years old. Ifforts were constantly
being made to draw him into politics. He was gsked,
for instance, to finance political newspapers, but the
House of Rothschild refused to have anything to do with
such proposals. If they nceded papers they always had
recourse to individual editors, who had the desired
articles published, but they were never tempted to pub-
lish a paper themsclves, in which they would have had
to identify themselves with a definite political point of
view and a clearly defined programme. Amschel Meyer
accordingly replied on the 20th March, 1849, to a,
proposal of this nature, that his House had “ always


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 315


objected to taking part in the foundation of political
papers,” and he therefore sincerely regretted that he
was unable to fall in with the suggestion.

Prussia’s re-entry into the Dict called for the appoint-
ment of a representative. On the 10th May, Otto von
Bismarck, who was appointed to this office at the age of
barely thirty-six, arrived at Frankfort. Although per-
sonally heshared the conservative sentiments of Austria,
he was inspired by a presentiment of the future great-
ness of his country, and detcrmined, in spite of all that
had occurred, to secure for Prussia the place in Germany
that was her due, and if necessary to fight for it.

Bismarck’s first impression of Frankfort was not a
favourable onc; he found it ‘‘ deadly dull,’ and his
new profession of diplomacy was anything but congenial
to him. He described the social life of the delegates as
consisting of nothing but “ suspicious spying on one
another”; “no one,” he wrote, ‘‘ would believe how
much charlatanism and sclf-importance there is about
this diplomacy.”

Bismarek was looking for lodgings, and meanwhile
Was secing callers in a plain furnished room in the town.
One of the first to call on him was old Amschel Meyer
Rothschild, who wished to get on good terms both with
the representative of Prussia, and with Count Thun, the
representative of Austria. Bismarck regarded Rothschild
as a curiosity, for he was little impressed with exclusive
society in Frankfort.

“You need not be afraid of high socicty here,’
Bismarck wrote to his wife. “‘ As far as money goes,
Rothschild stands highest, and if you were to take
all their money away from the others, they would
not stand particularly high. After all, money doesn’t
really count, and—may the Lord keep me humble, for
the temptation tu become self-satisfied here is very
great,”’


316 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD i


Rothschild’s call was followed up with several invita- j
tions to the house of the aged banker. In order to give
Bismarck no chance of refusal, Rothschild’s first invita-
tion to dinner was for a very long time ahead. Bismarck
replicd that he would come if he were still alive. “ My
answer,’”” Bismarck wrote to his wife, ‘‘ affected
Amschel so profoundly that he has told everybody
about it, and goes about saying, ‘Why shouldn’t he
live? Why should he die? The man is young and
strong’ !”

The impression which old Rothschild made upon
Bismarck is described in a letter which he wrote shortly
afterwards to his wife : ‘‘ I picked the enclosed Icaves for
you in old Amschel Rothschild’s garden; I like him
because he’s a real old Jew pedlar, and does not pretend
to be anything else ; he is strictly orthodox and refuses
to touch anything bul. kosher food at his dinners. ‘ Take
thome bread with you for the deer,’ he said to his
servant, as he went out to show me his garden, in which
he keeps tame deer. ‘ Terr Beraun [Baron] thith plan!
cotht me two thouthand gulden—on my honour it
cotht me two thouthand gulden cash. You can have
it for a thouthand ; or if you’d like it ath a prethent,
he'll bring it to your houthe. God knowth I like you,
Beraun, you’re a fine, handthome fellow.’ He is a short,
thin little man, and quite grey. The eldest of has line,
but a poor man in his palace ; he is a childless widower,
who is cheated by his servants and despised by con-
eeited Frenchified and Anglicised nephews and nieccs
who will inherit his wealth without any love or
gratitude.”

When on the 18th August, 1851, Bismarck was finally
appointed Prussian Envoy to the Dict, Rothschild
made still greater efforts to ingratiate himself with the
pew powcr. Bismarck had still failed to find lodgings
that would be within his means. Amschel offered him


SOU POSTE


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 317


an elegant Rothschild villa some way out, on the
Bockenheim Road."

On the 1st October Bismarck moved into the house
at 40 Bockenheimer Landstrasse, which, as a matter
of fact, did not belong to the Rothschilds, but the first
two floors of which had been used by Carl Meyer
von Rothschild on the occasion of his sccond visit to
Frankfort.

No sooner had these personal matters been settled
when politics engaged Bismarck’s full attention. The
defeat of Prussia at Olmutz burnt in his soul. He and
the Ieading men at Berlin were at heart convineed that
Prussia had the right to seize the leadership of Germany ;
to cstablish her ascendaney over Germany. The fact
that Austria indisputably enjoyed the formal Jeadership
at Frankfort made Bismarck all the more determined
to watch over Prussia’s interests.

It became apparent that Vienna intended to use the
Diet, the majority of whose States were in favour of
Austria, for the purpose of outvoting Prussia, but
Bistuarck meant at once to contest Austria’s leading
pos:'ion as far as this was possible. The following remark
which he made shortly after his appointment was
characteristic of the man: Let him but have his way,
he said, and he would return with Austria’s scalp.
Bisniarck was reserved and somewhat suspicious in
his atlitude towards the lLouse of Rothschild, since he
felt that he had reason to believe that the bank was more
attached to Austria than to any other Federal State.

The Rothschilds had at that time been in Berlin on
financial matters," and had expressed a wish to be
granted the title of ‘‘ Bankers to the Prussian Court.”
The Government at Berlin asked Bismarck to express
his opinion on +! is request, and the latter replicd that
in his view th. Rothschilds were adequately rewarded
by their pecuniary profit for any possible efforts uney


818 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


might have made in the interests of Prussia. Thereupon
the proposal was dropped.

Bismarck was annoyed because Austria took the
chair at the Dict, and her representative carricd the
title, Presiding Envoy. The opposition between Prussia
and Austria was constantly making itself felt, and
questions of minor importance were often the occasion
for a struggle for prestige. Such a question arose on
the subject of the fleet. The central authority at Frank-
fort had created a German ficet in 1848, to which Prussia
contributed financially, while Austria did not. It had
become necessary to find further funds, and it fell to
the Presiding Envoy, Count Thun, to bring the matter
before the Assembly. An assessment of the States was
to be made, but Prussia protested against any further
expenditure as long as certain States were in arrears
in respect of the carlicr instalments duc. The matter
dragged on until the requirements of the fleet became so
pressing that something bad to be done. Towards the
end of the year, Bisinarck had almost made up his mind
to agree to the assessr:ent, when he received peremptory
instructions from Mantcuffel to protest against it and
immediately to return to Berlin. The Prussian Envoy
left for Berlin on the 3rd January. 1852, and in accord-
ance with the established practice he asked his opponent,
Count Thun, who was exceedingly angry at the attitude
of the Prussian Government and the dilliculthes which
it was constantly making, 1o represent him in his absence,
anomalous though the position would be. Now the
officers and men of the fleet required their pay. “ It
was essential,” as Thun observed," “as speedily as
possibie to see that the deficit was covered, unless we
were prepared to face a mutiny on the ships.”

Thun accordingly summoned a mecting of the Diet
for the 7th January, when the Prussian Envoy, Bis-
marck, would be absent; and after a lively debate it


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 819


was decided to ask the Rothschilds for a loan of 260,000
guiden to meet these requirements, on the security of
the Federal moneys deposited with the bank. Thun,
who proposed the motion, had simultaneously to vote
against it as representative of Prussia. Bismarck and
the Prussian Government were kept telegraphically
informed of what was happening by the Counsellor of
Legation, Wetzel.

The day after the resolution was carried Count Thun
proceeded to enter into confidential negotiations with
Rothschild,** to determine the conditions on which
the necessary money could be advanced. The banker
was prepared to grant the loan for six months, at 4 per
eent., without charging commission, merely expressing
the wish that he should not be required to put the terms
into writing, as this might convey the impression that
he wanted to take advantage of the unfortunate position
in which the fleet was placed.

The Dict therefore immediatcly agreed to the neces-
sary advance of 60,000 gulden, and addressed a letter
to the House of Rothschild, asking them to pay this
amount. Meanwhile Bismarck telegraphed on the 9th
January to Wetzel, instructing him to protest to
Amschel Meyer, and on the 10th he confirmed these
instructions in detail in the following message : “ Prussia
does not regard the contemplated payment of money
as a Federal loan; the Fedcral moneys deposited with
Rothschild cannot legitimately be diverted from the
object to which they had been originally assigned.
Register your protest with Rothschild against this
money bcing spent or appropriated. We maintain our
right of action against the House of Rothschild for any
damage that we or the Federation may suffer through
such payment. Rothschild is not required to obey the
President’s instructions in loan matters.”

When, on the evening of the 10th, Wetzel met Count


820 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Thun, who was “ taking a breath of air aftcr a hard and
trying day,’ Wetzel told him that he had intended to
come and see him“ in order confidentially to inform
him that he had reccived instructions from Berlin to
bring pressure to bear upon Rothschild to refuse to
advance moncy for the flect. Thun replied to him that
this was Wetzel’s affair, and that, although he had the
highly unpleasant duty of representing Prussia in the
Diet at that time, he was not responsible for her actions,
but only her mouthpiece. He added that he was doubtful
whether Rothschild would listen to Prussia’s views,
since he had received his instructions from the Presid-
ing Officer in the prescribed form, in accordance with a
resolution of the Diet, and he was not to take cognisance
of the negotiations at the meeting of the Dict, or of
differences of opinion between the various members.
Wetzel said to Thun that this was his opinion also and
that for this reason it was all the more painful for him
to carry out his instructions. Whereupon they parted.
As Thun expected that such action on the part of the
Prussian Delegation could not fail to produce some effect
upon Rothschild, he asked one of his attachés, the Baron
von Nell, to call on Rothschild on some pretext or
another on the morning of the 10th, and endeavour to
ascertain his attitude. Herr von Nell reported to Count
Thun in due course that he had found Rothschild entirely
changed in his attitude, and that Rothschild had sai.!
to him that he could not afford to make an enemy of
Prussia. Finally Rothschild had stated that he wanted
to give the matter further consideration, and that he
wished to request Count Thun to fix a time for the fol-
lowing day, the 11th, that he could come and discuss the
matter with him. Thun invited him to come at 12 o’clock.
The position was exceedingly painful for Rothschild. He
did not in the least wish to annoy either Austria or
Prussia, und he wanted to remain banker to the Diet


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 821


and carry on his business in peace ; and now he suddenly
found himself faced with the conflicting claims of two
of the most important States of the Federation and was
compelled to take sides with one of them. He described
the difficulties of his position in eloquent language to
Count Thun, during their conversation on the 11th
January. According to his report, Thun put the following
points to Rothschild: ‘‘ Who has to decide questions
affecting the business of the Federation? The Federal
Assembly. What is the official means by which the
Federal Assembly communicates its wishes to third
persons such as yourself? Through the Delegate who
presides over the Diet. The demand which you have
reccived has therefore fulfilled all the conditions neces-
sary to make it in order. In my opinion Prussia has no
reply at all if you say to her: ‘I have no knowledge of
what occurs within the Federal Assembly. My legal
authority is the Presiding Delegate, who has sent me
his instructions in accordance with a resolution of the
Dict, and I have carried out these instructions as in my
position I am required to do.” Thun also gave Roths-
child to understand that if he refused to make the desired
payment Thun would be compelled to call a further
mecting of the Diet upon the following day. It would be
impossible for the majority of the Assembly to allow an
individual Government to prevent the exccution of a
resolution which it had passed, so that in ail probability
it would pass a resolution that the Diet’s business should
be transferred to another bank at Frankfort, which
would be prepared to pay the money when it was wanted,

The aged Amschel Meyer followed what the Count had
to say in a condition of great excitement. Ie sugyested,
as a way out of the difficulty, that he should be authorised
to pay the 69,000 guiden to Austria’s account. Thun,
however, stated that he could not agree to this. In the
ae. Amschl Meyer yielded to the pressure brought to


822 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


bear by the Count and the combined endeavours of his
entourage, and promised to make the payment. As the
old man left Count Thun’s antechamber, he met the
Prussian Counsellor Wetzel, who had called to discuss
the same matter with the Presiding Delegate.

Thun reported as follows with regard to the dramatic
discussion with the Prussian diplomat, which resulted :
“ IT could not refrain from telling him just exactly what
I thought. I began by explaining that I felt so indignant
about Prussia’s last actions that it would be impossible
for me completely to restrain myself ; I found this all the
more difficult since, in accordance with my conceptions
of duty and honour, I had never permitted myself to
give third persons the slightest inkling of the constant
differences and divisions of opinion that had occurred
at the meetings of the Dict, and I had accordingly applied
the greatest self-control in my recent discussions with
the Rothschilds. I siid I must therefore ask him not to
regard any expressions I used as official. I felt that I
must honestly say that it had never occurred to me as
conceivable that a Gevernment of the Federation could
ever be moved so far to degrade the Federation’s
authority as to protest to a banker against a resolution
passed by the Federation, leaviny it open to him to Jet
the whole town and the whole of Gerinany know what
was happening. If Prussia had been concerned only to
maintain her principles, a forma! protest at th& mecting
of the Diet would have sufficed; the incident, however,
revealed the fact that Prussia was not concerned with
achieving this trivial object, but wished to establish
what, in my view, was an entirely unreasonable and
inadmissible principle, namely that Prussia alone should
lay down the law to the Federation ; and if this were so,
the very existence of the Federation would be at stake,
for those questions which we have conscientiously en-
deavoured to keep in the background would be forced


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 828


to an issue, and that the decision in their case might
easily lead to consequences of the gravest nature.”

Thun also gave the Counsellor to understand that in
such circumstances it would be exceedingly painful, and
indeed impossible, for him to take the place of the
Prussian delegate.

The Presiding Delegate was indeed enraged to the
utmost by Prussia’s action. “It had not occurred to
anybody,” he wrote to his Government," ‘that it would
be possible, even for Prussia, to have recourse to such a
disgustingly contemptible means as to appeal to a Jew
against the Diet. I fecl that their action has made the
position so acute that an understanding and reconcilia-
tion will no longer be possible. The Dict naturally could
not accept the position, and if Rothschild had not agreed
to pay the money, I could not have left the matter in
suspense for another twenty-four hours, even if war
would have been the inevitable result. The failure of this
attempt will merely serve to make Prussia feel humili-
ated ; she will be more irritable than ever, and I myself
do not perceive how she can reverse her policy.”

He went on to state that his success in inducing Roths-
child to pay had produced a few days’ peace, but that
Prussia’s aim was still merely to humiliate the Diet. “ As
T have said,’ Thun’s letter continued, “‘ I am convinced
that Prussia will not allow matters to procecd to ex-
tremes, that is, to a breach, if she sees in others the firm
determination not to be intimidated by the idea of pro-
ceeding to extremes. And it scems to me that matters
have now reached the point where such a firm attitude
is an absolute necessity.”

Amschel Meycr Rothschild, having yielded to Thun’s
pressure, had replied to the Counsellor, Wetzel, stating
that he would be excceding the bounds of his business
duties in an unwarrantable manner if he were to take
account of a difference obtaining in the High Federal


824 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Assembly and were to refuse to grant an advance which
he had been required to make by the High Federal
Assembly through the recognised channel of its Presiding
Delegate. He was unable to take cognisance of the
protest and was compelled to make the moncy
available.

Wetzel accordingly reported * that Amschel Meyer
was paying the money in spite of any representations
that had been made. He said that the banker would
rather sacrifice the money than fall out with Austria ;
and that Count Thun was highly indignant, as he re-
garded the protest as an insult to the whole Dict, and
wished therefore to be relieved from the representation
of Prussia.

Thun was not content with leaving it to Wetzel to
report, but himself wrote direct to his Prussian colleague,
Bismarck, at Berlin. In this letter he also stated that he
would never have belicved * that a German Govern-
ment belonging to the Diet could so far have degraded
the authority and prestige of the German Dict as to
protest to a Jew agiinst the resolution of the Diet. ...
** T confess,” wrote Thun, “ that so long as I live I shall
blush to think of it. The evening wher. Counsellor Wetzel
showed me the protest, I could have cried like a child at
the disgrace to our common fatherland.”

Bismarck replied very sharply’ : “ It is not our fault
if, as you say, the Diet has been dragged id the mud
through arguments with a Jew; it is the fault of those
who have exploited the Dict’s business connection with
a Jew in order, in an unconstitutional manner, to divert
moneys that were in the Jew’s kecping from the object
to which they had been assigned.”

Thun still further embittered the dispute by declaring
the Prussian official of the Federal Treasury, Criiger,
who had protested against moncy being paid by Roths-
child, dismissed from his office.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 825


Meanwhile, a telegram was received from Vienna,
where the Government was horrified at the entirely un-
expected dispute with Prussia. Thun was severely repri-
manded, Schwartzenberg giving him to understand that
he was not prepared to run the risk of suddenly one day
learning by telegram from Frankfort that Austria would
have to march against Prussia. This cold douche from
Vienna had a very damping effect on the gravely offended
Thun. But his first interview with Bismarck, who re-
turned to Frankfort on the 28rd January, was of a highly
emotional nature. Bismarck took a very firm tone, and,
amongst other things, referred to the matter of Criiger,
giving Thun to understand that his Government would
“‘ never recognise the right of the Presiding Delegate to
dismiss an official of the kingdom of Prussia.”

Thun endeavoured to maintain his point of view
against Bismarck’s ‘‘ schoolmaster’s tone,”’ as he called
it. When Bismarck, on taking his Icave, stated for the
sccond time that he expected to pack his trunks in a few
days, Thun replied that he could but congratulate him
on getting out of a position which must have been a
highly painful and unsavoury one for a man of honour,
since the Governments themselves attached so little im-
portance to the maintenance of the honour and prestige
of an assembly in which they were jointly represented,
that they were prepared to protest to a Jew against this
resolution."

Bismarck showed the Rothschilds very plainly how
angry he was with them. He did not accept any of their
invitations, and showed them in every possible way how
strongly he disapproved of their conduct in this matter.
All the Rothschilds’ efforts to conciliate him availed
nothing for the time being, and Bismarck did not con-
fine himself to a social boycott, but, in his wrath at the
Rothschilds having placed money at the disposal of the
Diet in spite of Prussia’s protest, he endeavoured also


826 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


to secure that his Government should break off all busi-
ness dealings with the House.

“ As your Excellency is aware,” Bismarck wrote on the
11th March to the Prussian Prime Minister, Manteuffel,”
“the firm of Meyer Amschel von Rothschild and sons
here has completely ignored the protest . . . and
paid the sum of 60,000 gulden at its own peril, as
the head of the firm himself stated, in order not to spoil
its relations with the Impcrial Government of Austria.
The protest did have the result that it was decided not
completely to carry out the resolution, authorising the
military sub-committee to take up a loan of over 260,000
gulden ; but it would have been easy for the House of
Rothschild to find reasons for withholding the 60,000
gulden, or for paying the moncy in some other way,
without excessive collusion with the Austrian Govern-
ment. Your Excellency may infer the cxtent to which that
House is anxious to please the Austrian Government in
every possible way from the fact that he immediately
informs the Austrian Delegate of every remittance
that he receives tor the Prussian Delegation to the
Diet. On one occasion Count Thun actually informed
me that the House of Rothschild had decn instructed to
make such a payment before I had reecived any official
intimation to that effect. The couduct of the House of
Rothschild in connection with tL's protest has caused
me to ignore all invitations from the Herr von Roths-
child resident here, and in general to give him to under-
stand that his action has been highly displeasing to the
Prussian Government.

“T cannot but also regard it as desirable that the
busincss relationship in which the Prussian Delegation
to the Diet has hitherto stood with the House of Roths-
child should be broken off, and that the business should
be transferred to another firm here. Your Excellency
will agree with me that a continuance of this relationship


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 327


would be liable to be misinterpreted and might be
represented as indicating that the Prussian Government
had convinced itself that the House of Rothschild could
not have acted otherwise.”

Bismarck accordingly proposed the House of Moritz
Bethmann as being a suitable House to be entrusted with
the business instead of the Rothschild bank. It trans-
pired, however, that the Rothschilds had a supporter
in the President of the Sechandlung Bank, whose
name was Bloch. Mantcuffel had referred Bismarck’s
proposal to the Prussian Finance Minister Bodelschwingh,
and he had consulted Bloch. Prussia had concluded
loans with the House of Rothschild both in 1850 and in
1852 and, although Bloch expressed the opinion that the
House of Bethmann was perfectly sound and reliable,
he suggested that there were “other considerations of a
general nature, especially in the interests of the Sechand-
lung, against the change.” " He mentioned that the See-
handlung had very considerable sums on deposit with
the Rothschilds, which they could at any moment deal
with as they pleased, and the important question arose
‘whether, having regard to the substantial amounts
that are involved in this ease, another firm would be in
a position to offer the same security as the Rothschilds
undoubtedly afford.”

Bloch further pointed out that whereas the Iecrren
Bethmann, in spite of the invitation they had received
from him, had taken no share in the loan of 1850 or in
the loan of 1852, the Rothschilds had invested very
considcrable sums in both these loans, and had always
co-operated most readily with the state of Prussia in
other financial operations. They must therefore obviously
feel themselves slighted by the sudden withdrawal of the
business in question ; and besides, it was possible that on
a future occasion the success of similar financial operations
might be frustrated through the opposition of these


828 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


bankers who, through their extensive means, exercised
a determining influence on the money market, and
that, in any case, without their assistance the success of
such operaticns would be made much more difficult.

Bloch further stated that he was “ far from holding a
brief for the Herren von Rothschild, or from wishing
to give them any advantage inconsistent with the
public interest,’ and expressed the opinion that they
were hardly likely to favour Austria as against Prussia,
since their attitude in financial transactions was affected
by purely business considerations.

Having regard, therefore, to the business relationship
between the Seehandlung and the Rothschilds, he
was in favour of ignoring Bismarck’s proposal.

Manteuffel thereupon decided that Prussia’s business
relationship with the Rothschilds should not be broken
off. They, on their side, did not weary in their endea-
vours to obtain Bismarck’s forgiveness and re-establish
themselves in his favour.

Carl Rothschild, Solomon’s son Anselm, and indeed
Solomon himself, wh: was at the time on a short visit
to Frankfort, called, one after the other, on Bismarck,
to express their regret at what had happened. Young
Anselm went so far as to attribuis the incident entirely
to the senility of his uncle, who was already seventy-
seven years old, saying that he bad been go fiercely
threatened by Thun that he had finally acquiesced in
the payment.

Meanwhile the question of the fleet had been settled
by agrecing that Prussia should not have to make any
further claim and the fleet itsclf should be put up to
auction. Indeed, Prussia was indemnified for having paid
more at the beginning by having two ships ceded to her.

The rapprochement between the Rothschilds and
Bismarck was promoted by the fact that Count Thun,
who was not particularly well-disposed to the Jews,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 829


supported a protest brought forward by twelve Catholic
citizens of Frankfort against the cxtension to the Jews
of the rights of citizenship granted on the 8th October,
1848, and 20th February, 1849, which were decried as
“revolutionary legislation.”

The Senate of Frankfort sent forward this protest to
the Diet, and on the 5th August, 1852, the Dict resolved
that the law of the 20th February, 1849, conferring
on the Jews equal civil and political rights, was to be
regarded as “ not legally enacted,’ and that the Free
City of Frankfort should be requested to announce
accordingly that the law was not valid.

As this proposal had emanated from the Austrian
Catholic party, it was opposed by Bismarck, with the
result that the Prussian delegate found himself on
the same side as the Rothschilds, who were watching the
further development. of the matter with deep anxicty.
Anselm Rothschild appealed to Vienna with an urgent
request to Schwartzenberg that the Imperial Court
should use its influence to censure that the resolution of
the Diet should not result in the Frankfort Jews sus-
iaining a reverse which would be unjust and not in ac-
cordance with the general good. He pointed out that out
of 57,550 citizens, only 6 per cent., that is, 3,500, were
Jews ; so that it was ridiculous to {car being outvoted.

When, in the middle of November 1852, Count Thun
was recalled from Frankfort, Bismarck felt that he had
completely carried the day, and he was prepared to take
the blame for the incident of the Rothschild advance.
He again accepted invitations to the Rothschilds, and
his attitude implied, not merely that he had been recon-
ciled to the House of Rothschild, but that his feclings
had changed completely in their favour.

When later on Mantcuffel again asked Bismarck for
his opinion in the matter of appointing Rothschild Court
Banker to Prussia, he no longer found him oppose! to the


880 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


idea. Manteuffel emphasised that it would’ “not be
exactly easy to call such an important bank to account
with reference to any profits it might make,” and wished
to be told whether he could grant the Rothschilds the
title they desired or whether their sympathics were still
predominantly anti-Prussian.

“My interest in the matter,” wrote Manteuffel, ‘ I
would tell you in the strictest confidence, is somewhat
to divert Herr von Rothschild from the efforts he is
making here to improve the Vienna cxchange, and to
induce him favourably to consider the construction of
a railway which we may wish to have built.”

Bismarck replicd * that he had no objections to raise
against the title being granted, and that in his opinion
there was reason to believe that the persons concerned
would highly appreciate the honour which it was in-
intended to confer upon them. ‘“ The Rothschilds,”
Bismarck wrote, “ ave never been really guilty of anti-
Prussian sympathies ; all that happened was that on the
occasion of a dispute that occurred between ourselves
and Austria about a scar ago on the question of whethcr
certain deposits shouid be made available for the fleet,
they were more afraid of Austria than of us. Now, since
the Rothschilds cannot properly be expected to show
such courage as would lead the justum ae tenacem pro-
positt virum to resist such ardoren eivium prava juben-
ttm as Count Thun developed on that occasion, and as
the other members of the family have since apologised
for the attitude of Baron Amschcl, whom they described
as senile (he died in 1855), I feel that, in view of the
services which this financial powcr is able to render, their
mistake on this occasion may be consigned to oblivion.”

Of his own initiative Bismarck went even further. He
repeatedly recommended, both in conversation and in
writing, that the banking house which, with the excep-
tion of the single instance in January of the preceding


?


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 831


year, had always shown its willingness, in its financial
dealings with the Prussian Delegation, to be of service
to his Government, should be granted some distinction.
The blame in that instance was, as stated by members
of the House of Rothschild themselves, attributable to
the senility of Amschel Rothschild, who had allowed
himself to be intimidated by the threats of Count Thun.

“The conviction has repeatedly been forced upon me,”’
Bismarck wrote, “that the leaders of this financial
power would value a distinction conferred upon them
by Prussia, since they do not mcrely value personally
honours conferred upon them. They also regard official
marks of the good will of Governments, especially of
those Governments whose financial house is in order, as
an important element in their credit. That there are
oceasions when other but purely business considcrations
are a determining factor on the attitude of the House of
Rothschild in financial operations seems to me to be
indicated by the success with which Austria has secured
the financial services of the House, since I am convinced
that, apart from the financial profit to be gained by such
‘ransactions, the influence which the Imperial Govern-
ment was able to bring to bear upon the Jewish problem
at Frankfort profoundly affected the House of Roths-
child. The efforts ... which Austria made in the course
of the summer to secure the emancipation of the Jews
scem to be attributable to the efforts of the Rothschilds.
... The present senior partner of the House here, Meyer
Carl von Rothschild, has repeatedly given me to under-
stand how greatly he desires to receive the Red Eagle
of the Third Class, which Order has been conferred upon
two of his subordinates, one of them, whose name is
Goldschmidt, being at Vienna, and, as was particularly
emphasised by Herr von Rothschild, upon the eldest of
the brothers von Bethmann, who is Prussian Consul here.

“I would regard the conferring of such an order on


882 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Meyer Carl von Rothschild as being wholly in the
interests of the State, and I am willing to recommend
to Your Excellency that, in addition to this order, the
honourable distinction of Royal Court Banker to His
Majesty the King should, for the reasons above indicated,
also be conferred upon all the members of the Ilouse of
Rothschild.”

The Prussian Finance Minister, however, unlike
Manteuffel, was not well-disposed to the Rothschilds.
He ignored the opinion expressed by the President of
the Seehandlung, and informed Manteuffel that in his
view “the firm of the brothers von Rothschild has of
recent years shown itself less disposed to act in the
interests of our Government than previously.” He there-
fore held that neither the Order of the Red Eagle nor the
title of Court Banker should be conferred upon them.
The Finance Minister’s aim apparently was, by this
refusal, to induce tle Rothschilds to prove themselves
more amenable to the wishes of the Prussian Govern-
ment in financial matters, in order that they might he
deemed worthy of such distinction,

“His Majesty the King,” Manteuffel wrote to Bis-
marck,’* “ has no objection if, when a suitable oecasion
offers, it should be indicated to the members of the firm
that it is greatly regretted that in the cireumstances it is
not possible to confer the mark o1 favour COUT ace
but that it is hoped that the House will find another
opportunity of enabling the Government to do so.”

Bismarck informed the Rothschilds that Manteuffel
was not averse from the idea of conferring a distinction
upon them,” but that the Finance Minister had “‘ com-
plainea to the King regarding the attitude of the Iouse
in recent times.” The Rothschilds protested that they
were exceedingly hurt at this suggestion, and that they
had no idea at all what could be the basis for it. The
newspkpers put forward the idea that, since the Order


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 333


of the Red Eagle was in the form of a cross, a special
form of it would have to be designed for the Jews.

“If this view is correct,’ Bismarck wrote to Man-
teuffel, ‘‘ any more or less emancipated Jews, such as
the Rothschilds are, with the exception of the very aged
Amschel, will lose any inclination to adorn themselves
with a decoration which will have become a stamp of
Judaism.”

A conflict arose in Berlin betwecn Mantcuffel, who was
on the side of the Rothschilds, and the Finance Minister,
who was against them, the conflict ending in the victory
of the Prime Minister. On the 12th February, 1853, the
bankers Meyer Amschel von Rothschild were appointed
Court Bankers, after all, “as a mark of His Majesty’s
satisfaction,”? and Mantcuffel hastened to inform Bis-
marck of this fact, having reason to believe that the
latter would be pleased to be the first to bring this
information to the Rothschilds."

Bismarck reported that he had done so, adding some
items of financial news which he had heard at the Roths-
childs. There was such a superabundance of money in
‘he Frankfort market at that time that Rothschild had
terminated and repaid a deposit of one million thaler,
which the Government of Saxony had deposited with
him, stating that it could not afford to pay more than
14 per cent. without loss.

“ This superabundance of money,” Bismarck wrote,”
“is attributed by Rothschild to the fact that, partly
through the fear of war, and partly through the un-
certainty regarding the future of the Customs Union,
the spirit of enterprise has vanished, so that money is
flowing back from business without being reinvested.
Rothschild said that he would be exceedingly grateful
if he could be shown a possibility of placing his money
at 34 per cent. If the Prussian Government should at
the moment enter into any business transacticn with


884 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the House of Rothschild which would give the latter
some opportunity of showing their personal good wiil,
I would venture dutifully to repeat my suggestion that
the mark of royal favour already given should be fol-
lowed up by conferring the Order of the Red Eagle of
the Third Class on Baron Meyer Carl. He is at the
moment the most influential member of the family, and
I have had further proof of the high value which he
attaches to the conferring of such a distinction upon him-
self, and of the eagerness with which he is secking it. It
was impossible for him to understand how he or his
House could, as I recently gave him to understand, have
given the Finance Minister any occasion for dissatis-
faction.”

Bethmann, who had been cherishing the hope that
he might himself become Court Banker to Prussia, and
thereby win a victory over his old rival Rothschild,
was exceedingly disconcerted when he heard that the
latter had succecded in obtaining the appointment. He
hastened to Bismarck and told him that the rebuff which
he had sustained could be compensated for only by
conferring a personal distinction on himself. Bismarck’s
attitude was not encouraging. “I fail to see any neces-
sity for this,” he commented, “‘ and regard his attitude
as being merely a pretext for having his vanity satisfied
by being granted the order of St. John, which he
indicated as being a reason»ble compensation. I
cannot regard him as being a suitable person to bear
this Order... . If, as he threatened, he were to resign
his consulate out of pique at the distinction conferred
upon the Rothschilds, we should find plenty of others
willing to undertake the office.”

Bismarck’s attitude towards Austria had remained
unaltered. Whenever the Diet showed any sign of
activity, he attributed some secret or crooked motive to
the Austrian Government and its new representative,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 885


Baron von Prokesch-Osten. Similarly, in their treatment
of the Jewish problem. The protest of the Catholic
citizens of Frankfort had still not been disposed of, and
Bismarck expressed the suspicion” that Austria herself
had deliberately tried to make this an important issue,
so that, if it depended upon the President of the Diet
to retard or expcdite it, this fact could be used to bring
pressure to bear on the House of Rothschild in financial
negotiations. Bismarck meant to suggest that Austria
would vote on the question of the retention of the
constitutional liberty of the Jews according as the
House of Rothschild should prove obliging to her in
financial matters or not.

“The effect of such pressure,” Bismarck wrote,"
“ean be justly estimated only when one bears in mind
the exceptionally high importance that all members of
the Rothschild family attach to the attainment of better
political and social conditions, in their native town of
Frankfort especially. The chief of the House here, C. M.
von Rothschild, who, one gathers, has a decisive influence
in the family affairs, is especially sensitive on this point,
by reason of the rivalry of Christian bankers.”

‘Chere was no way of pleasing Bismarck in this matter.
If Austria opposed any altcration in the Constitution
that would damage the Jews, this proved her servility
to the Rothschilds and her dependence on the Jews.
If, on the other hand, she supported such a change,
this amounted to" “the resumption of her former
paramount position in the governance of the City”;

‘and this would be a dangerous development. Bismarck

demained true to his policy of opposing Austria’s

influence with the Diet whenever he could. The Prussian
elegate, thercfore, opposed the protest, and supported
he yetention of Jewish liberties in Frankfort, thereby
inning the gratitude of the House of Rothschild.

The personal relationship between the old bank and


836 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the delegate, who was still to play such an important
part in the history of Germany, remained a very
satisfactory one until Bismarck’s official duties at
Frankfort came to an end in 1859.

It was not affected by such temporary difficulties
as arose during his period of office at Frankfort between
Prussia and the [louse of Rothschild. There were two
opposing partics in the Prussian Government. The party
to which Manteuffel and the Cabinct’s adviser Niebuhr
belonged were favourable to the Rothschilds, whereas
the finance Minister Bodelschwingh did not attempt to
conceal his dislike of them.

When in the spring of 1854, just after the Western
Powers and Turkey had declared war on Russia, the
Prussian Government was faced with the possibility
of being forecd to take military measures, Manteuffel
persuaded the King that Niebuhr should be commis-
sioned to sound the House of Rothschild regarding
a possible loan of 15 million thaler, without the Finance
Minister being told anything about this.** Niebuhr fixed
on neutral Heidelberg as a place for the discussions,
which were attended by Meyer Carl and Nathanicl, who,
already an invalid, came from London for the purpose.
Even the aged James was asked to come from Paris to
Heidelberg, a fact which cicarly showed Niebuhr the
great importance that the House attached to the con-
clusion of this business. We ‘therefore hoped to obtain
favourable terms, but the Rothschilds Moceded with
extreme caution and kept on excusing themselves from
any definite statement, on the ground that James was
still absent, until, after three hours of negotiations, -
Niebuhr asked them with some heat whether they
warted to do the business or not; if not, would they
kindly say no. It was not a matter of politeness but of
business, and he and his Government wanted to know _
where they stood." Niebuhr got a decided “ yes” by


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 887


way of answer, and they proceeded to argue as to the
price at which the loan should be underwritten. The
Rothschilds offered.90, but Niebuhr replied that this
was an impossible figure, and he must have 93, which
had been offered elsewhere. The Rothschilds declared
that it was impossible that such an offer should have
been made by people who seriously meant business.
Niebuhr thereupon provisionally broke off negotiations
and returned to Frankfort with Meyer Carl, where he
told him that the Minister, Manteulfel, would gladly
have concluded the loan with him out of respect for the
House of Rothschild and owing to his feeling that he
would then be carrying through a plain and reliable
transaction, but that this required a certain amount of
courage, as public opinion in Prussia was prejudiced
against doing business with his House.

On the 8th June, the negotiations were resumed at
Hanover with the Paris and Frankfort Rothschilds.
These both repeated the previous offer made, but
appeared very disturbed regarding the political situa-
tion, and asked that, until the loan was fully subscribed,
no Prussian mobilisation should be ordered, as_ this
would inevitably bring about a fall in quotations.
Agreement on many points had alrcady been reached,
when the Finance Minister, von Bodelschwingh, sud-
denly heard of the negotiations which had been carried
on behind his back, and protested emphatically. He
bitterly reproached Manteuffel and Niebuhr, stating
that the Rothschilds had offered “the most worthless
conditions.” Bodelschwingh secured the breaking off
of discussions with the Rothschilds, and had the loan
subscribed privately, with a fair measure of success.

Meyer Carl returned to Frankfort very much dis-
appointed, and poured out his soul to Bismarck, who
found food for thought in the differences of opinion in
his own Guvernment.


838 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


At about this time, the President of the governing
body at Trier asked Bismarck to use his influence with
Rothschild on behalf of the Jewish Community at
Cologne. Bismarck felt compelled to reply that, while
he was prepared to use his personal and private influence
with the family, he was unable to ask a favour on behalf
of the Prussian Government, since, as he said, ‘ the
conduct of the House of Rothschild in connection with
the last Prussian loan has not been such as to make it
desirable to ask these gentlemen a favour on behalf of
the Prussian Government.”

This rift in the lute was a matter of some concern to
the Prussian Delegate, since, it being his constant aim
to restrict the sphere of Austria’s influence, he had
intended to make use of the Rothschilds in connection
with a scheme that he had planned, the object of which
was to check the circulation of Austrian securities in
the South of Germany. In the South, and particularly in
Frankfort, many persons held Austrian investments ;
and they were led to place their political support where
their financial interest lay. Bismarck meant to counter
this by facilitating dealings in Prussian securities in
every way possible. When Mcyer Carl asked him to
have the interest on all Prussian State Bonds paid
through him, an arrangement which would substantially
facilitate dealing with these securities in South Germany,
Bismarck immediately agreed. He reported accordingly
to Manteuffel, adding that Rothschild had\offered very
favourable terms, “‘ since he looks at the arrangement
from the point of view that it increases his busincss.”

* Hf, therefore,” Bismarck wrote,* “‘ higher quarters
should be disposed to accede to the request whicli
Rothschild has so frequently made to me, I believe that
the greater convenience and security against loss thereby
offered would be an inducement to Jewish investors
to increase their holdings of such securities.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 839


This proposal, however, again met with strong
opposition on the part of the Rothschilds’ bitter enemy,
the Finance Minister, Bodclschwingh. He pointed out
that the Rothschilds had already been entrusted with
the interest payment on the loan of 1850 and 1852, as
well as on the premium loan of 1855. ‘ Had this firm,”
he continued, “taken a proper share in the loan of
1854, which was concluded in exceptionally diffieult
circumstances, the same arrangement might have been
made.

““ That it would be exceedingly agrecable to the House
of Rothschild to be granted the same advantages with
regard to the 43 per cent. loans of 1854, 1855, and 1856,
although it had nothing to do with their issue, is readily
intelligible. Such action, however, would not be in
accordance with the interests of the Treasury.”

Manteuffel held that Bodelschwingh had been largely
responsible for the fact that Rothschild had not taken
part in the loan of 1854, but for the time bcing Bis-
marck’s proposal was not accepted. The Rothschilds,
however, persisted in their request, and Bismarck was
not the man easily to aceept a refusal.

Meyer Carl addressed two urgent. letters to Bismarck
at a short interval" reminding Bismarck that he
desired all the Prussian 4} per cent. loans, including
that of 1856, to be “ domiciled ” with his bank.

“Your Excellency is aware,’ he wrote, “that my
House, which has been devoting itself as always with
the greatest zeal to strengthening and extending the
financial credit of the State of Prussia, has succeeded,
not only in obtaining a market here for the most recent
loan issued by the Bank of Prussia, but also in obtaining
such an extensive market for this loan throughout the
whole of Southern Germany, that securitics to the
amount of seven millions have already been sold.”

Thereupon Bismarck wrote a letter to Manteuffel,~*


840 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


strongly urging that the Rothschilds’ wishes should be
carried into effect.

“I do not know,” he wrote, “‘ the reasons which pre-
vented the House of Rothschild from taking a proper
share in the loan concluded in 1854 under diflicult con-
ditions. In raising this matter, I did not procecd from
the assumption that there was any question of punishing
or rewarding a bank for its business methods ; my sole
aim was to discover an arrangement which would favour
a larger sale of Prussian securities abroad, and would
attract foreign capital for our needs. ‘That such an ar-
rangement as has been suggested would assist in achicv-
ing this end, appears not to be disputed by the Finance
Minister, only he does not regard the advantages as so
considcrable as has been stated. I do not gather from the
arguments advanced by the Iinance Minister that he
fears that we should suffer any disadvantage from such
an arrangement, especially as the House of Rothschild
is prepared to forgo even the small amount which they
had asked to cover expenses. We may, of course, assume
that the bank has its own reasons for making such a
proposal, for it is not going to undertake all the work
involved out of devotion to Prussia. The fact, however,
that its advantage is identical with ours, does not seem
to me to furnish any reason why we should ignore ours.”

Bismarck further developed his argument against
Bodelschwingh and concludea by suggegting with all
deference that the matter should be diseusted once more
with the Finance Minister. This was done, but without
producing the desired result. Bodelschwingh held that
there was no reason for further considering the Roths-
child proposals. ** Indeed, in a letter to Manteuffel, he
made a counter-attack upon Bismarck, and endeavoured
to show that the latter had “ failed clearly to grasp the
proposal,”? *

On still failing to obtain a favourable decision, Meyer


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 841


Carl applied direct to Manteuffel ; he said that he would
accept any indemnification for the work involved that
might be considered reasonable, as he was solely con-
cerned ‘to demonstrate again the sincere devotion of
his House, and thcir desire to serve the interests of
Prussia’s finances.”

The matter was not decided until Bodelschwingh re-
signed and a new Finance Minister, von Patou, was ap-
pointed. Although Bismarck had left Frankfort by then,
he urged the new Finance Minister to accede to the
Rothschilds’ request, but this was not done" until
Bismarck’s successor, Herr von Usedom, had also sup-
ported the proposal, and Rothschild had appealed to
the President, von Camphausen, pointing out that he
had recently sold Prussian securities to investors to the
value of several millions and had “‘ thus assisted in con-
solidating the financial interests with those of South
Germany.”

This matter, too, had clearly revealed the excellent
understanding that had subsisted between Bismarck and
the Rothschilds during the later years of his stay at
Frankfort. Neither did their pleasant relations suffer
through the following tragi-comice incident, which origin-
ated in Berlin and was exccedingly painful to the Mouse
of Rothschild, but for which Bismarck, as they well
knew, was in no way responsible.

Bismarck’s suggestion that Baron Meyer Carl von
Rothsehild, who lived at Frankfort, and was the eldest
son of Carl Meyer Rothschild of Naples, should be given
the Order of the Red Eagle as well the title of Court
Banker, was accepted, but a special order of the Red
Eagle was designed for non-Christians, being of an oval
shape instead of in the shape of a cross. At the Leginning
of July 1853, Bismarck handed Meyer Carl this Order,
which he considered to be very tastefully designed. *
bRothschild appeared grateful, but he accepted the


842 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


decoration with mixed feelings, since, as he already held,
amongst others, the Order of the Redeemer of Greece,
he would clearly have felt himself more at home amongst
the cross-wearers. The House of Rothschild did, in fact,
regard it as a slight rather than as a distinction, and this
decoration was a constant source of irritation to Meyer
Carl Rothschild. He felt it all the more keenly when, on
the 14th August, 1857, just after Prince William of
Prussia had taken over the Government, from King
Frederick William IV, who was ill, he received the
Order of the Red Eagle of the Second Class, also in the
form designed for non-Christians.

Meyer Carl, as far as possible, avoided wearing the
Order, as he felt that it marked him out in an unpleasant
way, but persons who were ill-disposed to the Rothschilds
whispered to the new Regent that Rothschild wore the
Order of the Red Eagle in the form of a cross. One day,
to his surprise, Bismarck received the following com-
munication from Mantcuffel: ‘It has been brought
to the notice of His Royal Highness, the Prince of Prussia,
that the Court Banker, Baron von Rothschild at Frank-
fort-on-Main, upoti whom the Order of the Red Kagle
of the Second Class was conferred by royal decree on the
lth August, in the form appointed for non-Christians,
is wearing the Order in the fori of a cross, and I have
been instructed to enquire into this matter.”

The Prime Minister requested Bismarck to state in
confidence whether the Prince had been correctly in-
formed. Bismarck hastened to send the following reply :
“In accordance with the Royal Command of the 27th
instant, I have the honour dutifully to inform Your
Excellency that I have not seen the Court Banker, Carl
Meycr von Rothschild (who should properly be called
Meyer Carl), wearing such a decoration, since he does
not go to big functions, and when he does wear Orders,
prefers to wear the Greek Order of the Redecmer, or the


MEYER CARI, BVRON ROTHSCHILD


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 848


Spanish Order of Isabella the Catholic. On the occasion
of the official reception which I myself gave on the 25th
ultimo, to celebrate the marriage of H.R.H. Prince
Frederick William, which he would have had to attend
in uniform, he excused himself on the grounds of ill-
health, it being painful to him to wear the Red Kagle
decoration for non-Christians, as he would have had to
do on that occasion. I draw a similar inference from the
fact that whenever he comes to dine with me, he merely
wears the Ribbon of the Order of the Red Kagle in his
buttonhole. I have never heard that Herr von Rothschild
. .. has worn the decoration appointed for Christians,
although the Frankforters love making the most of such
incidents, and in view of the keen rivalry between the
various financial powers, the Christian bankers have
derived no small satisfaction from the fact that Herr
von Rothschild may not wear the regular decoration.

“TY shall not fail to give this matter my most careful

‘attention and shall report further if I should learn of any
facts of the nature indicated in the Royal Command of
the 25th ultimo.” * This report disposed of the matter,
and nothing more was heard about it.

In later years Bismarck once told" of the only specu-
lation that he engaged in, as the result of information
which he owed to his diplomatic position. Prussia meant,
if necessary, to use force to end the everlasting dispute
to what country the Canton of Neuchate! should belong.
his might have meant war with Switzerland, which,
however, would have been possible only if the Emperor
Napoleon, whom Prussia would have had on her flank,
had raised no obstacle to her action. Bismarck was sent
to Paris in order to ask the Imperor personally what
his attitude was in the matter. He knew that Napoleon
would raise no objection and that it was therefore highly
probable that Prussia would go to war with Switzerland.
Bismarck wished, accordingly, to dispose of securities


844 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


which would have been adversely affected, and went to
see Rothschild for this purpose. Rothschild advised
against selling, as the securities in question had good
prospects. ‘‘ Yes,” replied Bismarck, “‘ but if you knew
the object of my journey you would think otherwise.”

Rothschild replied that that might be so, but he could
not advise him to sell. Bismarck, however, got rid of his
securities and left for Paris. Louis Napoleon was very
amenable and would not have been likely to raise any
difficulties about the action against Ncuchatcl.

Meanwhile, without telling Bismarck anything about
it, the King of Prussia had changed his mind, and decided
to have nothing more to do with the matter. The war
which had been expected, therefore, did not occur, and
the securities in question continued to rise in value.
Rothschild was proved right, and the great statesman
lost a considerable amount of moncy through the prema-
ture sale.

Bismarck was in Frankfort when old Amschel Meyer,
so delightfully described by him, died ; he continued to
be on the best of terms with all the members of the House
living there. When, in 1859, he left Frankfort to take
up his new post at Petersburg, the Rothschilds hoped
that they had established themselves in the favour of
the man who, their instinct may well have told them,
was destined to great things.


CuarTer VIII
From the Crimean War to the Italian War of 1859


AFTER being directed for several years by temporary
managers, the Vienna House of Rothschild acquired in
Solomon’s son, Anselm, a chief who endeavoured to
restore the prestige of the House of Rothschild in the
Imperial dominions, after it had been almost destroyed
by the revolution and Metternich’s flight. Thus in
Vienna, as in London, the third generation since the
foundation of the bank had come into power. Just
as Nathan’s sons, although they did not inherit his
financial genius to the full, were distinguished from
their father by a remarkably good education, so Anselm
Rothschild also was a highly cultured man who, unlike
his father, had fully mastered the German language,
and also spoke French and English very well. He was
naturally modest and quiet; and his studies in Berlin,
his activities in the Paris House, and his extensive
journcys throughout the world had developed his
personality and social poise. In Vienna, however, he
was an absolute stranger, since, even after he had
completed his studics, he had been living at Frankfort,
and his duties as Austrian Consul-General in that city
were not an essential part of his activities. It would
mean hard work to restore his House to its firm
position under the new and entirely altered conditions.
His task was made somewhat easier by the fact that
Metternich had returned from Vienna at the end of
the year 1851, and Kiibeck of the Finance Ministry,
an old acquaintance of the family, still possessed great
influence. Metternich’s return was a clear indication of
the change in the internal political situation, After the
stormy years in which the pendulum had swung so far
to the left, the forces of reaction were again asserting
themselves. Single individuals were again assuming
B45


846 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


control in the State, and financiers were beginning to
feel that conditions were returning under which they
could regain their political influence. Ansclm availed
himself of every opportunity of drawing attention to
himself by munificent gifts. The return of the Emperor
Francis Joseph from a lengthy journey through his
Northern States furnished a welcome opportunity for
such expenditure.

** After a long absence,” Anselm wrote to the Minister
of the Interior, “and having accomplished a journey
full of benefit to the monarchy, the honoured father of
our country is returning to his capital. All hearts go
out to meet him, and Vienna celebrates a day of festivity.
From palace and cottage shouts of welcome echo to
greet our beloved sovereign. Sharing profoundly, as I
do, in this universal rejoicing, I would like, my dear
Minister, as some satisfaction to my feclings, to make
a small contribution to the relief of the sufferings of the
needy in Vienna, and I venture humbly to transmit to
Your Excellency the enclosed 5,000 florins C.C., with
the humble request that you will graciously make such
use of this sum as may scem best to you.”

All the papers commented on Anselm’s gift, and he
received an official letter of thanks. The young Eempcror,
however, remained very unapproachable, and none of
the new Ministers were as disposed as were Metternich
or Kolowrat to allow Anselin ty have polgical influence ;
and even if they had been, it would not have had the
same effect, for none of them, not even Schwartzenberg,
who died all too soon, had anything like as much
power as Metternich.

Austria’s finances were certainly in a very bad way,
and it was through this fact that the Rothschilds were
to recover their influence in Austria. At the beginning
of the year 1852, von Baumgartner, a former professor
of physics, had been appoipted Finance Minister, and


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 847


he was not equal to carrying out the duties of his posi-
tion. Anselm succeeded in getting a loan floated for him
in London in May 1852, a considerable portion being
underwritten by the Frankfort House as well, but this
did not help much, and the accounts for the year 1853
still showed a deficit, although externally everything
remained quiet.

Moreover, the Government and its departments were
by no means well disposed to the Jews in Austria,
although they occupied most of the principal places in
banking and finance, and werc able, through their inter-
national conncctions, favourably or unfavourably, to
affect the State’s credit.

The veto on the purchase of real estate by the Jews
was actually reimposed in the autumn of 1853. There-
upon, according to reports from Paris,’ a kind of coali-
tion was formed on the Bourses of Paris and London,
its object being to damage Austrian credit.

The measure made a highly unfavourable impression
on the Rothschilds, and Anselm was reproached by
James for having failed to oppose the deerce carlier
and more emphatically. James spoke to the Austrian
Ambassador Hiibner in the greatest dismay; he said
that the excitement on the Bourse was intense, and as
Austrian Consul-General he did not dare to show him-
self lest he should expose himself to the attacks of his
co-religionists, who were reproaching him for his devo-
tion to the Austrian Government. He said that his posi-
tion was an excecdingly painful one; Austria’s credit
had been profoundly shaken both in France and in
England by the measure ; no one wanted to hear any-
thing more about the Metalliques, and it was impossible
even to think of a loan. “ In a word,” Hubner reported,
“he is beside himself.”

Hiibner suggested that it would be well for the Govern-
ment to “ soothe the children of Israel,” as he put it ;


848 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


for, apart from the Oriental question, this Austrian
measure against the Jews was the sole topic of conver-
sation in Paris.

Meanwhile a new storm centre had formed in the East
of Europe. Russia was the only State that had remained
untouched by the revolutions of the preceding years ;
she had indecd assisted materially in suppressing them
beyond her fronticrs. The 'sar wanted to satisfy his
sense of power at the expense of a completely dis-
organised ‘Turkey, which he called “a sick man.”? An
agreement regarding the partition of Turkey broke down
owing to England’s suspicious attitude, and all the other
States, too, were afraid of Russia becoming too power-
ful in the Balkans. The occupation of Moldavia and
Wallachia by Russian troops in May 1858 could not
but be regarded as a particular menace to Austria at
a time when she especially wished to avoid foreign
complications, since her finances were in a very bad
way.

Metternich refused to tolerate being left out in the
cold. The aged statesman had resumed his traditional
relations with the House of Rothschild, as represented
by the son of his old friend Solomon, and from time to
tine he had recourse to Kiibeck, who was still friendly
to him, and who had the car of the IEmpcror, with a
view to bringing pressure to bear quictly. On the 2nd
December, 1853, Metternich informed BRgibeck of what
had been said at a visit which Anselm had paid him.
“Herr A. von Rothschild,” he wrote, ‘* whom I had not
seen for several wecks, called on me and discussed tlic
gencral situation which has taken such a dangerous turn
owing to the unfortunate state of affairs between Russia
and Turkey. Passing from this topic to Austria’s financial
condition, he stated that this was inevitably approaching
a crisis, unless we set upon the right method of avoiding
it. I observed that if the prospects for the future were


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 849


as Rothschild had stated, I was not the man who could
render any assistance, and that I had no doubt that
Herr Baumgartner, whose intelligence Rothschild him-
self has often praised highly, would be able to deal with
the danger.

“ Rothschild declared that he had expected better things
of Herr Baumgartner, but that Baumgartner had no
sense of reality and was not equal to his task. I replied
that I could not venture an opinion on this matter, since
I was unacquainted with the position and with the per-
sonality of Herr Baumgartner. The conversation at this
stage was interruptcd by a visit from the Nuncio. Roths-
child took his leave, and as I went with him to the door
he said to me, ‘ You mark my words, we are on the eve
of a crisis ; if something is not done to avert it, it will
be upon us before the new year !’

‘These words made an impression on me, and I am
therefore communicating them to you as being the only
person to whom I may properly tell them. You will be
able to judge bettcr than anyone clse what value should
be attached to them.”

Rothschild was then not at all satisfied with the con-
duct of affairs in Austria, not only on account of Baum-
gartner’s incompetence, but also because he was not
asked for his advice in financial and political matters.
Russia’s conduct produced even more violent reactions
in the West of Europe, in Kngland and France, than in
the Impcrial city on the Danube. England feared Russia’s
advance towards the Mediterranean, while in France
the new and therefore particularly sensitive Emperor
was deeply wounded by the manner in which he was
treated by the Tsar, who did not concede him the manner
of addvess commonly used between monarchs, namely,
“mon frére,” but addressed him simply “ Sire et bon
ami.” This question of form showed only too clearly
how little the Tsar was pleased with the new régime in


850 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


France. Napoleon had no success either in his endeavours
to marry a princess of royal birth. In January 1853 he
replied to the rebuffs which he had suffered in Stockholm
and Berlin by ostentatiously marrying a girl of lower
rank. Kugénie de Montijo, who had come to Paris with
her mother in 1852, was a member of the brilliant society
of the French Court, and fascinated the Emperor with
her charm and intelligence. She was, moreover, the
daughter of a Spanish nobleman who had once fought
for Napoleon I.

James Rothschild knew the ladies very well, for the
Countess Montijo, whose means were limited, while her
expenditure was lavish, constantly came to him for
advice, and often attended his parties with her daughter.
He closely followed Louis Napolcon’s growing interest
in the Spanish girl, and was onc of the first who conceived
the possibility that the radiantly beautiful girl would
one day be Empress. When Napoleon invited the Montijo
ladies to Compi¢gne with other guests, James took care
to be accurately informed of the former’s conduct.

On hunting and other expeditions the Emperor had
frequent opportunities of conversation with Eugénie.
She speedily gave him to understand that she was not
the type to consent to a casual laison. Soon everyone
in Paris was discussing the l:mperor’s interest in the
young lady, and the rumour was already becoming
current that the Emperor icant to merry her. Two
parties were immediately formed, the one favouring
and the other being opposed to the match. James Roths-
child belonged to the formcr party, and although
ministerial circles were keenly opposed to the idea,
James, who had a very reliable source of information,
felt convinced that the marriage would take place. On
the 81st December, 1852, Napoleon summoned a Council
of Ministers at which, under the seal of secrecy, he pro-
claimed his intention of marrying the young countess.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 351


All the Ministers endeavoured to dissuade him, and
Napoleon is said to have replied as follows :*

‘“* Well, gentlemen, in spite of all the honest efforts
that my Government has made to establish a genuine
solidarity in support of the cause of peace and order
between itself and the other States of Europe, it has not
succeeded in prevailing upon the old diplomacy to re-
gard me as other than a ‘ Parvenu,’ although eight mil-
lions of Frenchmen, that is, the whole country, have
placed me upon the throne. The ‘ Parvenu,’ therefore,
may not hope to conclude a royal marriage unless, like
the late Duke of Orléans, after begging at all the Courts,
he brings home a princess of whom nobody has ever
heard. In order to safeguard his dignity and that of the
nation which has conferred upon him the Imperial
crown, the ‘ Parvenu,’ that is, the son of the people,
will be forced to choose a parvenue as his bride. If the
monarchs of Europe should take umbrage at this, let
them remember that the fault lies, not with me, but
with their own diplomatists, who leave me no choice in
the matter. If I am to be debarred from contracting a
‘ political’ marriage, I shall at any rate have the com-
tort of being able to contract a mariage d inclination.
As, however, I am accountable for my actions and omis-
sions to nobody but the nation that has set me upon the
throne, I shall appeal to them in this matter too, by a
special message which, as the Chambers are no longer
sittmg, I shall address to the Bar of the Senate and of
the Legislative Corps.”

Ministerial circles were very much inclined to regard
the suggestion of this marriage as being at bottom only
a political demonstration against foreign diplomacy,
which hed succeeded in frustrating the efforts of the
Emperor of the French to obtain the hand of the Princess
Wasa, and, us Louis Napoleon stated he had been de-
finitely informed, which was determined to bring to


852 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


naught any efforts of a similar nature, including those
for the hand of the Princess von Hohenzollern, who was
a cousin of the Princess Wasa.

The ministers concealed Napoleon’s intentions, even
from their wives, because they kept hoping that
Napoleon would not give effect to his decision.

James was especially assiduous in his attentions to the
Montijo ladies. The ball at the Tuileries of the 12th
January, 1853, finally removed any doubts that he
might have felt as to the correctness of his surmise.
Hiibner relates the following illuminating episode in his
Memoirs : Only privileged persons were allowed to enter
the Marshal’s Room at a ball. James Rothschild was
escorting the Andalusian, Mlle. de Montijo, while her
mother was on the arm of one of his sons. The latter
thought that he could find room for the two ladies on
some settees. The wife of a Minister, who wanted the
seat in question, and who thought it was impossible, in
spite of all the current gossip, that the Emperor should
marry Mlle. de Montijo, remarked quite shortly to
Eugenie, who was just going to sit down, that those
places were reserved for the wives of Ministers. ‘The two
Spanish ladics were painfully embarrassed. They looked
helplessly at their escorts, who were also excecdingly
uncomfortable. Thereupon Napoleon saw what was
happening, and hurried over to the ladies, taking them
to tabourcts which were just by the members of his
family. This action could not be misinterpreted, and
caused a sensation; everybody recognised it as sig-
nifying that the Emperor was actually determined to
marry the young lady. The future was to show that..
James Rothschild’s wise behaviour, at a time when
Eugénie had not yet attained the height of her good
fortune, was to bear good fruit. The future Empress
never liked the banker, Fould, her husband’s protégé,
and she therefore prevented a complete breach with


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD B58


James, who seemed to have been forced into the back-
ground by Fould, the Crédit Mobilier, and the Pereires.
It was not until the 22nd January, 1853, that Napoleon
proclaimed the message, announced on New Year’s
Day, in which he informed the people that his decision
to marry Kugénie de Montijo had been definitely taken.
On the same evening Solomon Rothschild, who was
staying in Paris with his daughter-in-law, gave a dinner.
At this dinner the Emperor’s marriage was the sole topic
of conversation. It was naturally a matter of particular
interest that Napoleon had paid a public tribute to his
bride’s virtue, by saying of her, in the message ': “I
have chosen a woman whom I love and honour.”

Baroness Charlotte, Anselm von Rothschild’s wife,
remarked : ‘‘ One can love a woman without esteeming
her, but it is only when onc honours and respects her
that one takes her as a life companion.” As this state-
ment indicated, the House of Rothschild at this dinner
took the side of the Emperor without reserve; and they
arranged that he should soon hear about it.

The Austrian Minister, Htibner, was, as we know, not
well disposed to the Rothschilds ; their feelings in this
matter were certainly mutual. James said that he would
prefer again to sce a “ grandscigneur”’ as Austria’s
representative in Paris, who would have a proper re-
sidence and live in style. Hiibner was a little jealous of
the Austrian Consul-General for other rea: ons, and also
because his position at the Imperial Court had now been
somewhat improved through the Montijo ladics. In
accordance with the traditions of Austrian diplomacy,
he regarded a Consul-General a priori as a person in a
subordinate position, and James’s peculiar standing in

ociety and in the State worried him. The result was that
fact tried to give the other petty pinpricks. James en-
eavoured to undermine Hiibner’s position at Vienna by
bending in coloured reports of third parties, while Hiibner


854 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


prevented James from being present at the Emperor’s
betrothal at Nétre Dame Cathedral on the 80th January.
In accordance with the express wish of the Emperor, his
chief Master of Ceremonies, the Duke of Cambacérées,
had sent James Rothschild an invitation card and, in
accordance with the usual practice, this had been sent
through the office of the Austrian Legation. Herr von
Hiibner, however, kept the invitation back. The Em-
peror, hearing that James had not been present, asked
the Duke why, and discovered that the Austrian
Minister had prevented the Baron from accepting the
invitation. This made the Emperor exceedingly angry,
and when, on the evening of the 8rd March, he saw
Rothschild at the Court Ball at the Tuilerics, he
went up to him and shook him warmly by the hand,
although he did not say a word to any of the forcign
representatives.

Kiibeck’s secret correspondent in Paris, who was
also hostile to Hiibner and was a friend of Rothschild,
made the following report on the incident: ‘ As
unfortunately nothing in Paris remains secrct for long,
Napoleon III knows that there is friction between
Herr Hiibner and Baron Rothschild, and that Herr
Hiibner wishes to exclude Baron Rothschild from the
Diplomatic Circle on public occasions, although it has
always been the custom in France that Consuls should
appear at Court, together with cheir respective Ministers
or Ambassadors. Napoleon II, who has been told about
this, is profuse in showing marks of good will to Baron
Rothschild, just in order to let Herr Hiibner see how
distasteful the latter’s personality is to him.”

This was not literally true, the statement having been
coloured by the fact that the journalist Debraux, who
was temporarily cmployed at the Austrian Consulate-
General, was intriguing against Hiibner. Relatiors be- ,
‘tween Napoleon and James were far from being as


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 855


cordial as all that; but the Emperor felt grateful to
James because he had been friendly to the Montijo
ladies, and because of his attitude in the marriage ques-
tion. In financial matters he continued to place his un-
restricted confidence in Rothschild’s rivals, Fould and
Pereire, and their Crédit Mobilier, although the latter was
already being severely criticised. Hiibner had no sym-
pathy with financiers who wanted to play an important
part. “In other countries,” he observed contemptuously,'
“where everything has not yet been levelled by sixty
years of revolution, as it has here in France, there are
still, thank God, separate classes; but here money is
everything, and in the sentiments of the nation, the
Rothschilds and the Foulds have the preccdence of the
Montmorencys and the Rohans.” The tension between
Hiibner and his Consul-General had the unfortunate
result that the Minister was deprived of an important
and abundant source of information; for Rothschild
had achieved an exceptional position amongst all classes
of the population of Paris. Through his connections he
always had the best possible informatiun on all matters ;
that such information should not reach the Minister was
particularly regrettable at a time when the position
in foreign affairs was becoming critical. The Kmperor
Napoleon, ‘who had been offended by the Tsar, was
making approaches to England with a view to taking
sides against Russia on behalf of menaced Turkcy.
After the sensation of the Emperor’s marriage had
somewhat subsided, the question of peace or war domin-
ated the Ministries, the salons, the clubs and the streets.
People were already beginning to talk about an inevit-
able war, words which struck terror into the heart of
James Rothschild. Hiibner found James Rothschild at
this time “ positively demoralised ”’* by fear of war.
The actual facts, however, were not quite so bad ; for
James had been told by his nephew in England that


856 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


that country, too, would proceed against Russia, and
he heard from Anselm in Vienna that, even if Austria
did not intervene actively, she was inclined to withdraw
herself from Russia, and would in no circumstances fight
on her side. Although the House of Rothschild was bound
to regard a war as a scrious interference with its activities
to which peace was essential, it found some comfort in
the fact that all the Rothschild Houses were on the same
side. They were, however, keenly aware of the extent to
which their influence had sunk since the year 1840, for
they could not seriously think of countering Napoleon’s
war policy, and scarcely attempted to do so,

On the 12th March, 1854, Kngland and France con-
cluded an alliance with Turkey, and when the Tsar failed
to reply to their demand that the Danube principalities
should be evacuated, the war broke out, which came to
be called the Crimean war, after the country where it
was fought.

Now that the die was cast, the Rothschilds completely
identified themselves with the countrics in which they
were living. Duke Ernest of Coburg actually states in
his Memoirs ’ that Rothschild said to him as carly as the
4th March that he would place any amount of money at
his disposal for war against Russia. This attitude was
certainly partly attributable to the fact that the Jews
were severely oppressed in Russia.

As the war proceeded the mvalry intensified between
the Rothschilds and the Crédit Mobilier which, with the
assistance of the Government, was achieving a very
powerful position, engaging in undertakings of the most
varied nature, and already extending its activities
beyond the boundaries of France. It made advances to
the Vienna Cabinet, whose policy at that time was
particularly nebulous and uncertain, and which required
large sums for military preparations. Austria threatened.
Russia without actually attacking her, and allied herself


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD B57


platonically to the Western Powers, without assisting
them. This policy alienated both sides, and proved
expensive in addition. When the financial embarrass-
ments of the State had become extremely acute the
government proceeded to consider the sale of the State
Railways. In 1852, the Austrian State owned all the
railways in the monarchy, with the exception of the
Nordbahn, which was the province of the Rothschilds,
and the Vienna-Raadbahn, which belonged to the Sinas.
The Rothschilds’ rivals in Vienna, Sina, Eskeles and
Pereira, energetically sponsored the plan of getting the
State Railways into the hands of the Crédit Mobilier,
with themselves as sharcholders, and to the exclusion
of the Rothschilds. Such a scheme was naturally ex-
ceedingly distasteful to the Rothschilds, for if all the
other railways in Austria, including the Northern State
Railways, were to come into the possession of a rival
undertaking, this might have serious consequences for
the Nordbahn. The Rothschilds accordingly at once
started a campaign against the scheme, which had
already made considerable advance, but they were not
able to prevent its being carried into effect.

The board of directors of the new undertaking, which
assumcd the name I. and RR, Chartered Austrian State
Railway Company, contained the two Percires, Adolph
Fould, Napoleon’s half-brother the Duke of Morny, and
the Barons Georg Sina, Daniel Eskeles, and Ludwig
Pereira, the most bitter enemies of the Ilouse of Roths-
child. Baron Eskeles went to Paris and got an introduc-
tion to the French Government from the Ambassador
Hubner, who avoided saying anything to the Rothschilds
about the matter. The Government had two cxcellent
reasons for wishing the scheme to go through. Ii wished
to assist the Crédit Mobilier, which enjoyed the Emperor’s
- patronage, t9 obtain a good business and also to induce
Austria to intervene actively on the side of the Western


858 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Powers ; only the authorities in Paris wanted to wait
awhile lest the considerable French loan which had just
been issued should suffer from the diversion of the large
amount of capital required by the new railway company.

The Prussian Prime Minister decided to take advant-
age of this delay in order if possible to secure the Austrian
railways for a Prussian syndicate under the leadership
of the Seehandlung. This idea, however, did not appeal
to Vienna, as they felt it would humiliate them in the
eyes of the other States of the Federation. They preferred
to remain with powerful France,* even if she should
postpone the final decision for a few months.

The House of Rothschild put every possible obstacle
in its power in the way of the scheme going through.
Anselm in Vienna discussed the matter with all the
persons in authority in the Government, including
Metternich and Kiibeck, the latter most strongly con-
demning this selling off of the State Railways.’ His
uncle James took similar steps in Paris, but without
avail. They were simply regarded as competitors who
were left high and dry and wanted to deprive their
rivals of their success.

On the Ist January, 1855, part of the railways belong-
ing to the State were actually sold to the Credit Mobilier
for 200,000,000 francs (about 77,000,000 gulden C.C.)
whereas the cost of constructing the railway had
amounted to 94,000,000 gulden.* The Siidbahn and
the Lombard-Venetian Railway remained in possession
of the State. It is intercsting to note that the conclusion
of this agreement was kept secret from the public until
it had been actually signed. It was a bitter blow to the
Rothschilds ; they who had laid the foundations of the
Austrian monarchy’s railway system, and who had been
so anxious to get under their own control the railways
from the extreme north to the extreme south, now had
to see their Nordbahn being threatened by hostile rivals.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 859


Anselm Rothschild gave Baron von Kiibeck the most
detailed explanations regarding the nature of the agree-
ment that had been concluded, showing how unfavour-
able it had been to the State of Austria. ‘They both con-
demned the affair as a ‘“ disgraceful business.” »

A keen rivalry between the Crédit Mobilier and the
Rothschilds had now arisen in Austria too: the former
did all it could to depress Nordbahn shares on the Vienna
Bourse, while the lattcr endeavoured to do the same
with regard to the shares of the new State Railway
Company. Both sides soon made attempts to obtain
possession of the other railways belonging to the State,
and the House of Rothschild, remembcring the op-
portunity that it had missed, tried particularly hard to
get the Siidbahn into its hands.

As far as the authorities of the State were concerned,
Ansclm did not reveal any sign of his displeasure and
when, in February 1855, the Empress Elisabeth was
expecting her first child, he joined with the other bankers
in generous contributions to philanthropic objects, in
commemoration of the joyful event. There was one,
possibly accidental, fact indicating that during the last
year Baron Sina had done more profitable business with
the State, in that he expended 5,000 gulden C.C., whereas
Anselm devoted only 4,000 gulden to similar objects."*
Secretly, however, Anselm, spurred on by his uncle
James in Paris, was planning a counter campaign
against the menacing extension of the Crédit Mobilier
for which, with the assistance of Kiibeck and Metternich,
he soon secured the support of the Finance Minister,
and which he was soon able to put into operation.

Meanwhile the Crimean war continued. The Roths-
child Houses in the West supported the combatants in
every way; they underwrote the British war loan of
£16,000,600, while James took a large share in the great
French Septcmber war loan of 750,000,000 francs. The


860 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothschild Houses also joined in granting a loan to
Turkey, although it should be added that this was
guaranteed by England and France.

By their actions the Rothschilds demonstrated their
faith in the final victory of the Allics, whose campaign
in such a distant theatre of war was necessarily some-
thing of an adventure. As, in England especially, large
numbers of people had lost their confidence in State
securitics owing to the war, the Rothschilds were able
to acquire such bonds cheaply, and also to underwrite
the loan at an advantageous rate. They were not mis-
taken in having confidence in any venture which England
undertakes. After battles of varying success, the fortress
of Sebastopol fell in September, and the death of the
Tsar Nicholas, as well as the war weariness in Russia,
gave the Western Powers ground for hoping that the
campaign would terminate specdily and victoriously.
The Rothschilds had again backed the right horse,
although it is truc that in their position it was impos-
sible for them to consider any other. They could, how-
ever, have remained aloof from any financial participa-
tion, and as we have seen, they did not do so. As soon
as they realised that they could not prevent the war,
they placed themselves at the service of their countrics’
interests ; and as the Crimean war ended successfully,
it also served to increase the cnormous wealth, and to
raise the reputation, of their House.

In this respect the year 1855 was a particularly satis-
factory one for the House of Rothschild. But for the
family it was destined to be a year of mourning, for no
less than three of the five brothers died in that year.
The first was Carl, who died on the 10th March, 1855,
at the age of sixty-seven, after surviving for only two
years the death of his gifted and witty wife, Adelheid.
He left three sons. The eldest of them, Meyer Carl, was
destined to take over the important position at Frankfort,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 361


as Amschcl had had no children. The youngest one,
Adolf, who was then twenty-seven years old, took over
the direction of the Naples House, which even then had
a very restricted importance, and the continuance of
which was dependent upon the Bourbons remaining in
power at Naples. The business with Sardinia and the
Pope had a long time ago passed out of the control of
Naples into that of the Paris House. Adolf had married
Julie, the daughter of Anselm of Vienna.

The next after Carl to die was the old friend and
associate of Mctternich, Solomon Rothschild, who had
been driven out of Vienna on the Chancellor’s fall. After
a short period at Frankfort, he had finally settled in
Paris, where his dear daughter Betty was marricd to
his brother James. Since he had vanished from the scene
at Vienna, he had had no further influence on the busi-
ness of his Flouse, and had been left out of account since
1849 because the other members of his House did not
agree with his attitude during and aftcr the revolu-
tion. Now at last his eldest son Anselm formally took
charge of the Vienna House. Anselm endeavoured to
save what he could of the old position of his House ;
indeed, a long time before his father’s death he had
already succeeded in delivering the first counter attack
upon the Crédit Mobilier. With the support of the
Austrian Ambassador in Paris, Isaac Percire bad made
proposals to the Government of the Impcvial State for
founding a concern in Vienna on similar lines to the
Crédit Mobilicr. He had, however, been anticipated by
Rothschild, who had brought together a group of highly
influential aristocrats, such as the Princes Fiirstenberg,
Schwartzenberg and Auersperg, and Count Chotek ; the
Austrian Finance Ministry having granted permission
to the group, that was led by Rothschild and Lamel, to
found a Creditanstall fiir Mandel und Getwerbe (Credit
Unstitute for Trade and Industry) which was to have


862 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


many of the essential characteristics of the Crédit
Mobilier although it was conceived by the founders
solely as a means of keeping the Crédit Mobilier out of
Austria. Of the 500,000 shares at 200 gulden, two-fifths
were reserved for the promoters of the company, the
Articles of Association providing that they should pay
up one-third of the nominal value of these shares. After
clever propaganda, the remainder were specdily taken
up by the public. The shares soon rose extraordinarily
in value, rising to double their nominal value at later
periods, in the so-called founders’ years. The policy of
the Creditanstalt was, however, more cautious and con-
servative than that of the Crédit Mobilier, a fact which
was soon to be painfully obvious.

Meanwhile Amschel Meyer, the Head of the Frankfort
House, who was eighty-two and the eldest of the five
brothers, had fallen seriously ill. On the 6th December,
1855, he drew his last breath. In his old age his markedly
Oriental features were sharply defined, and snow-white
hair covered his head. In accordance with ancient Jewish
usage, he always wore the long open caftan. Me was
always thinking of his work and his business. In his later
years Bismarck was fond of telling a story in which
Amschel Meyer made fun of himself. Having called in
the doctor, at the age of eighty-cne, when he was ill,
Amschel Meycr thought that his end was near. The
doctor examined him and replied, ‘* What are you
thinking of, Baron? You may live to be a hundred.”
Thereupon Amschel Meyer replied with a smile, “* What
are you talking about? If God can get me for 81, He
won’t take me at a hundred!”

Throughout his life Amschel kept as aloof as possible
from politics. A conservative by instinct, he was friendly
to Austria and did not wish to have anything to do with
extravagant schemes such as Zionism. He expressed
his views strongly in 1845, explaining to Bernhardt


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 868


Behrend that the redemption of the Jews could be
brought about only by the will of God, and that he re-
garded the idea of purchasing a particular area of land
in North America for the settlement of the Jews as a
Stuss (stunt) with which hewould have nothing to do."*

Old Amschel Meyer was remarkable for his keen under-
standing and his wide knowledge of human nature, and
was always ready to treat intelligent and genuine persons
al pari. Iie regarded personal interest as the main in-
centive to human action. He remained true to his religion
until he died, ate nothing but kosher food, and enjoyed
discussing theological subjects. Meyer Carl, the eldest
son of the Naples Rothschild, who had for some time
assisted him in the management of the Frankfort bank,
was indicated as his natural successor. The Frankfort
firm thus acquired a capable and businesslike chief.
Unlike his late uncle, Meyer Carl took part in politics
and was elected to the North German Reichstag in 1866.
As the heir to the dead man’s private property, he came
into a rich inheritance which he largely devoted to the
extension of his art collections.

Of the five brothers who had been scattered over
Europe, only one now survived. This was the youngest,
James Rothschild of Paris, who was now more than
sixty-three ycars old and was tacitly regarded as the
chief by all members of the House.

He had followed with no little concert: the develop-
ment of the Crimcan war, but when the allicd armies
returned victorious he congratulated himself and his
brother on the attitude which they had adopted during
the campaign. The new Tsar was more ready to con-
clude peace than his predecessor Nicholas had been. At
the end of February 1856 the Peace Conference met on
the Seine, and a month later peace was concluded.
‘France thercby acquired a dominating positioa on the
Gentinent, and this increase in her prestige reacted


864 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


favourably upon her finances. This time the Crédit
Mobilier achieved the climax of its career ; French Rentes
stood very high, and the shares in that undertaking,
which yielded 10 per cent in 1852, yiclded 44 per cent.
in 1855, the shares being quoted on the Bourse at the
highest point which they ever touched, namely 2,000.
They were destined thereafter constantly to decline
until the inevitable collapse of a concern with such
extensive aims. At that time, however, after the vic-
torious conclusion of the Crimean war, France was per-
vaded with the spirit of courage and enterprise.

Austria, who had not been able to make up her mind
as to what she wanted during the whole of the Crimean
war, had substantially increased her financial difliculties
without achieving any conerete political advantage. She
therefore had to consider how she could get ready money
by disposing of the remainder of her State railways. It
was in this connection that the Creditanstalt, founded
by the Rothschild group, won its first spurs. To the great
annoyance of the newly founded State Railway Company
patronised by the Crédit Mobilier, it sueeeeded in
registcring the considerable success implied by the
acquisition of the Lombard-Venctian railway system.
On the 14th May, 1856, the agreement with the Credit-
anstalt was completed, the Englishmen, Talbot and
Laing, as well as the French Duke of Galliera, being
parties to it. Austria reccived the sum of 100,000,000
Austrian lire, payable in convenient yearly instalments,
and partly out of the realised profits of the concern.

This success showed the Crédit Mobilicr that the
Rothschilds were able to stand up to them in Austria.
The London, Paris, and Vienna banks were represented
in the concern, as well as the Princes Schwartzenberg
and Fiirstenberg, who had joined in the foundation of
the Creditanstalt.

The Rothschilds having now acquired a substantial


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 365


proportion of the railways in Austria, they proceeded
to think out further extensive schemes. In September
1856 they planned to construct railways in Moldavia
and Wallachia, as an extension to the Austrian railways
in Siebenbiirgen, and to carry these on to the Black Sea
via Bucharest.

The Austrian authorities took a friendly attitude with
regard to the grant of a concession to construct those
portions of the railway which would lead to the
Wallachian frontier.

While these extensive schemes were under considera-
tion, an incident occurred which seriously affected the
Paris House and created a considerable sensation. People
had grown accustomed to regard the Rothschild banks
and all their undertakings as thoroughly efficiently
managed and their officials as being absolutely reliable ;
it therefore came as a great shock when, in September
1856, the Rothschild principal accountant of the
Northern Railway of France, whose name was Car-
pentier, disappeared, together with another official,
after having embezzled millions. The thieves fled to
America, and it was not until a considerable proportion
of the money had been irrevocably lost that their arrest
was effected.

The Paris House assumed full responsibility for the
loss, and did not allow the others to share it. No one
derived greater satisfaction from this incident than the
two brothers Percire. 'Their own success was at this time
beginning to wear somewhat thin, and althcugh they
extended their operations over an ever-widening field,
even bringing Mexico within their range, they were con-
stantly losing ground with their more solid business
associates,

The news which Anselm received at Vienna regarding
the way things were going encouraged him to a more
@geressive competition with the Crédii Mobilicr. He did


866 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


not fail, however, to follow his father’s example and,
when necessary, to intervene on behalf of his Jewish
co-religionists. On the 8th August he begged Count Buol-
Schauenstein™ for a ‘‘ warm and timely word ” on be-
half of the Jews in Vienna. He made a similar appeal«
to the Austrian Envoy to the Vatican, as he had received
a heart-rending petition from the Israelite Community
in Rome.

Lionel, the head of the British House, was at that
time also fighting for the emancipation of the Jews in
England. His brilliant social position, which was rein-
forced by the skill with which his brothers Meyer and
Anthony had made themselves popular in English
society, through their love of art and sport, marked him
out as a redoubtable protagonist of the cause. His dinners
and parties were masterpieces of taste and magnificence.
In March 1867 he had married his daughter Leonore to
Alphonse Rothschild, James’s son, and the heir to the
Paris bank.

By acquiring Gunnersbury House, which had formerly
been the country place of Princess Amélic, the aunt of
King George III, Lionel had established himself in a
magnificent residence. If there was anyone who could
intervene effectively on behalf of the emancipation of
the Jews it was he. So far, however, although he had
been elected three times to the House of Commons, he
had not been allowed to take his seat on “he ground that
he refused to take the prescribed oath, in which he would
have had to confess himself a Christian. Lionel meant
to remain a Jew, and to force his way into the House of
Commons. All England took an interest in this strugg!:,:
which was the actual occasion for raising the question
of Jewish emancipation.

Lionel found a powerful ally in Benjamin Disraeli,
the friend of his House, who, although he had himself,
become a Christian, warmly supported Lionel in his


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 867


endeavours. In 1857 Lionel was elected to the House of
Commons for the fourth time, but the House of Lords
still refused to accept the alteration in the formula of
che oath, although the House of Commons had voted in
‘avour of changing the oath. Lord Derby, who in 1858
secame Prime Minister for the second time, and in whose
Ministry Disraeli held office as Chancellor of the
Exchequer, had so far always proclaimed himsclf an
ypponent of Jewish emancipation. Now, however, he
and his colleagues in the Cabinet were persuaded, by
Disraeli’s tircless efforts, to agree to a compromise,
samely that the nature of the oxth to be taken by its
members should be left by each House to decide. The
House of Commons was therefore free if it wished to
Jevise a special formula for Jews, while the House of
Lords could say that it was not concerned with the con-
jitions under which members should be admitted to the
sther House.

The motion was speedily carried through both Houses,
ind Rothschild was thereby enabled to take the oath
under the altered formula, on the 26th July, 1858. When
re centered the House it was packed. In deep siience he
was led to the table by Lord John Russell, who had
always supported the principle of equal rights for all
titizens. He bowed to the Speaker, and took the oath
yn the Hebrew Bible, substituting for the words, “ on
she true faith of a Christian ” the words, ‘so help me,
Jehovah.” Thereupon the Speaker shook hands with
1im, and he took his seat on the side of the Liberal party,
che House still maintaining a dcep silence. Thus a
struggle of eleven years was ended by Jews being ad-
nitted to the House of Commons.

Licnel took little actual part in politics. We devoted
|: energies principally to important business under-

kings, especially those in Austria. Anselm, encouraged
dy his success with the Lombard-Venetian railways, had


868 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


again taken up the scheme of getting control of the
Siidbahn, that is, of the line Vienna-Trieste. The Austrian
State had grossly mismanaged this line financially, and
there was no money for further construction.

Approximately the same group, under the leadership
of the Rothschilds, who had acquired the Lombard-
Venetian railway, now turned their attention to the
Siidbahn. They felt that they would thus acquire an
undertaking which would greatly enhance their prestige,
and whose shares would be an admirable speculative
investment. Moreover, it would be possible to arrange
to pay the purchase price in instalments over a period
of several years. The Company accordingly obtained the
concession for the Southern State Railway as well, and
as a result the railways of Upper Italy became united
with the Southern Railway into a single concern.

The transaction was carried through with such tech-
nical skill on its financial side that the purchasing syn-
dicate were enabled to show a highly substantial profit
on its conclusion.

One consequence of the transaction was that large
numbers of foreigners, especially of French officials and
engineers, were taken on the strength of the railway,
which was to constitute the chief link between the Italian
provinces and the monarchy. Aji tins happened just
before the campaign of 1859, al a time when the activities
of Sardinia’s highly gifted Prime Minister had for some
time been watched with growing concern. How little
fear there was of any war with [france was indicated by
the fact that this important railway was le[t to a group
consisting mainly of French capttalists. j

Meanwhile, Cavour had been deliberately proceeding
with his preparations for the unification of Italy under
the sceptre of the only native dynasty that ruled in any
of the Italian States, that is, under the liberal kingdom,
of Pieumont.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 369


The Sardinian statesman perceived that the dearest
wish of himself and his people could only be achieved
by war, and he accordingly set about developing the
commercial and military resources of the country. All
this was done secretly, commercial measures often serv-
ing the purpose of concealing his war aims. When, in
1856, Cavour required a loan for the purpose of strength-
ening the military power of the State, he advanced
the pretext of railway and other construction, more
particularly the construction of a tunnel through the
Mont Cenis, whereby the shortest route from Turin to
Lyons was to be established. Cavour clearly showed
what was in his mind in a confidential letter to the
Director-General of the Treasury, Count T. di S. Rosa.

‘“*T share your opinion,”’ he wrote to him on the 22nd
August, 1856, from Turin,” “ that it will be necessary
to issue a loan; but such an operation must be justified
by reasons which will not give rise to the opinion that
we require it in preparation for war. Such a motive is
quite naturally supplied by the conquest of the Mont
Cenis. If therefore you speak to Rothschild about any
proposal for a loan, avoid saying anything that might
lead him to suppose that we are contemplating a flerza
riscossa (third resumption of war]. Tell him that we want
to drive a tunnel through the Mont Cenis, and to build the
line from Bardonnéche toSusa at the expense of the State
which will involve an expenditure of thirty-six million.”

Cavour fully realised that his small State with its few
million inhabitants could not make war upon Austria
alone, and that he required allies. Sardinia was now to
have her reward for participating in the Crimean war.
Napoleon showed a benevolent interest in the efforts for
the unification of Italy. The Crimean war haviug been
successful he was then at the height of his power ; he was
not to realise. until 1870, what a grievous mistake this


war had been, through which he had made an enemy of
7.


870 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the Tsar, who threatened Prussia’s rear. Austria had
taken no part in the campaign, but Sardinia, with her
beggarly five millions of inhabitants, had, although God
knows what interest she could have had in the Crimea.
Her action had been wise, for it was only with Napolcon’s
help that she could hopetodetach Lombardy and Venetia
from the Imperial State of Austria. Napoleon showed
himself well disposed to Italy’s efforts at unification, a
fact which naturally reacted upon France’s relations
with Austria. Napoleon welcomed any opportunity for
punishing Austria for her dubious attitude during the
Crimean war. Austria’s representative in Paris, Count
Hitbner, as well as her Consu)-General, James Rothschild,
occasionally heard very unfriendly words said about
that country.'*

These dangerous developments were closely followed
by James, as well as by Adolph in Naples, and Anselm
in Vienna. A war between France and Austria, fought
on Italian territory, must necessarily be exceedingly
dangerous for the Rothschild Houses established in those
three countries, especially now that they had acquired
such a large interest in the railways within the Italian
provinces of Austria and in Austria herself. In such
circumstances military developments might have the
most catastrophic consequences, and it was therefore
essential to avert the menace of war. Adolph Rothschild
was himself firmly convineed *hat, as I.ouis Napoleon
had always been so intimately concerned with Italy, he
had his eye upon the King of Naples too."

Meanwhile, the conspiracy started, and actively pro-
moted by Cavour, continued on its course. Orsini’s at-
tempt upon the life of Napoleon III on the 4th January,
1858, provoked by the monarch’s somewhat sluggish
interest in Italy’s interests, hastened the Emperor’s
decision to intervene actively in support of the un'fice-
tion of Italy. The secret conversations between Cavour


CAVOLR


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 871


and Napoleon were naturally kept strictly concealed
from Austria. On the 10th December, 1858, the Emperor
finally concluded the secret alliance between France and
Sardinia, undertaking to come to her assistance in the
event of an attack by Austria. Cavour could be relied
upon to see that that country should finally lose her
patience and attack Piedmont, which would be necessary
in order to put Austria in the wrong with regard to the
world in general.

In December 1858 the Paris Press" started a cam-
paign against Austria which made James Rothschild
very uneasy. IIe asked the Emperor for an audience in
order to call attention to the harm done by this cam-
paign. He said that he was particularly concerned about
an article which had appeared in the Moniteur on the
4th December, and caused very considerable excitement.
Napoleon was very much upset by what James had to
say; he had himself admitted that he inspired the
article, a fact of which Rothschild was not aware. During
this conversation with James, the Emperor was pensive
and uncommunicative. When the latter pressed him to
say something reassuring, the monarch assevernted that
he had _ no intention of making any changes in Italy.
Thereupon James appeared somewhat reassured, and
the funds, which had been gravely depressed, began to
recover moderately. Even after this audience, however,
James was not completely easy in his mind; and a
remark of Napoleon’s at the New Year’s reception of
1859 was again to plunge him into a state of alarm. On
this occasion, after being particularly friendly to all
the other diplomats present, the Emperor turned to the
Austrian representative and said to him : “ I regret that
our relations with the Austrian Government are not as
good as they have been in the past, but I would request
you to inform the Empcror that my personal feclings
for him are unchanged.”


872 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


The diplomats, including Hibner, did not see any-
thing unusual in this remark at first. Paris, however,
took an entirely different view, and everyone was talking
about an imminent war with Austria, which the Emperor
was obviously planning. Neither did James share
Hibner’s sanguine attitude. On the Bourse, and amongst
the leading financiers, there was a positive panic, and
Napoleon decided that it would be advisable somewhat
to mitigate the effect of his words. Hc therefore prompted
the Moniteur and the papers which supported him to
interpret the incident in a reassuring manner, and this
had some effect upon the Bourse.

James, however, continued to be seeptical. On the
8th January he went to sce the Emperor once more, who
again painted the position couleur de rose. As Napoleon
also said that he had no intention of offending Hibner
by his remark, James returncd home satisfied in his
mind, and took the necessary steps to bring about a rise
in public securities. The panic seemed to be stemmed,
but no sooner had the nervousness been somewhat
allayed than it became known that Prince Napoleon had
become engaged to Princess Clotilde, the daughter of
Victor Emanuel. This news produced another terrible
slump on the Paris Bourse, Rentes dropping on the
11th January from 72.30 to 62.80. Thereupon a pacific
article appeared in the Journal des Débats, which was
attributed to the successful efturts of corservative public
opinion and the great financial and commercial interests
which had been so energetically sponsored by James
Rothschild and the Finance Minister Pierre Magne. This
again somewhat improved the Bourse, but there was still
considerable anxiety, and the significant remarks made
by che Emperor did not help to allay it. “I want peace,”
he said to the Spanish Ambassador." ‘‘ I most certainly
want peace ; but one can be carried away by the fo.ce
of circumstance.”


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD B78


When the Emperor’s attention was called to the
terrible depreciation suffered by public securities, owing
to the constant anxiety with regard to foreign affairs,
he observed, “‘ I have not got the Bourse behind me, but
France is on my side.”

Rothschild did everything possible to relieve the situa-
tion, as Austria had approached the bank with a view
to obtaining a loan, and for this it was essential to bring
about a more favourable atmosphere on the Bourse.
James’s efforts in this direction were, however, fruitless,
as there was a complete lack of confidence everywhere.
During a hunt over the Imperial estates James again
asked Napoleon about his plans with regard to Italy,
saying that he had been horrified to learn that troops
had been sent to Bologna and Ancona. Napoleon replicd
that Austria apparently intended to attack Piedmont.
Rothschild maintained that Napolcon’s policy was mis-
taken. Ile reminded him of what he had said at Bordeaux :
“the Empire is peace.” At a Tuileries ball at this time
Rothschild turned this remark round, saying to one of
the Ministers in his bad French": “ Ententez fous, bas
de baia, bas @ Embire.”’ General de la Rue had the hardi-
hood to repeat this quip to the Emperor, but the latter
was not amused.

At that time Austria had sent an envoy to London to
enter into negotiations with Rothschild for a loan. Lionel
asked James to take a share in it, but hc hesitated on
account of the political situation, and the danger that
the State which was asking for the loan might soon be
volved in a war.

‘4. James again contrived to have a word with the
Emperor in order to ask him whether he might under-
write the Austrian loan, or part of it. He wanted to
fensure that the Emperor would not regard any such
action as indicating an unfriendly attitude towards
France on the part of the House of Ruthschild, aud he


374 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


also wanted to observe how the Emperor would react
to this suggestion. Napoleon did not betray his feelings,
and gave James permission to act as he wished in the
matter of the Austrian loan. He may well have reflected
to himself that the wise old banker was entering upon
an exceedingly risky business.

On the 29th January, 1859, the marriage between
Prince Napoleon and Princess Clotilde of Savoy was
celebrated. The extraordinary haste with which this
marriage was concluded caused a general sensation,
dangerous political motives being quite rightly suspected.
“* Everybody is nervous,’’ Hibner reported." ‘ People
take alarm at anything, and fear makes men cowards.”

James Rothschild was the subject of conflicting emo-
tions. He was in favour of peace, and his sympathies
were with conservative Austria, which country, Ansclm
told him, desired nothing less than to be forced into a
war by Italian attempts at secession and by Cavour’s
machinations. On the other hand, he did not like to see
such an old client as Sardinia being lost to the Rothschild
bank through her warlike policy and being driven into
the arms of other financicrs. The war was not yet an
actuality ; perhaps things would not go so far, and in
that case he did not want to lose Sardinia’s custom. As
early as the middle of 1858, when the Senate at Turin
had sanctioned a further Joan, Cavour had entered into
negotiations with Rothschild, put on ti at occasion he
had. felt that Rothschild was too high and mighty. At
the beginning of 1859, Rothschild himself had sugges-
tions for a loan put before Cavour. James’s motive for
so doing was, as much as anything, to see how things
steod, and he was determined that, if Cavour really
intended to make war on Austria, he would, in spite of
everything, refuse to give him the money, so long as the
danger of war continued.

Cavour, however, was delighted that Rothschild had


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 875


this time come of his own accord. ‘* The Herren von
Rothschild,” he wrote to Prince Napoleon, ‘ have
informed us that they would be prepared to make us an
offer. They have summoned their Turin representative
to Paris at top speed, and everything leads me to believe
that they are afraid of seeing the monopoly which they
have enjoyed over a long period of years in the control
of our Rentes slipping from their fingers. If they are
prepared to undertake the loan on the basis of payments
being in definite instalments, we shall easily come to an
understanding with them ; but if, as I fear, they only
mean to deal with the matter on 2 commission basis, we
shall have to look elsewhere. The firm of S. Paul has
offered us its assistance, and as it is more enterprising
than the Rothschilds it is possible that it will underwrite
what we want to place in Paris. As a last resource there
remains the offer of the Crédit Mobilier, which Bixio
has put before me. We shall have to accept it if we can-
not do better.”

Cavour had at that time authorised the Marchese
Monticelli in Paris to negotiate regarding the loan of fifty
raillions. He hoped that with the assistance of Prince
Napoleon, who was now a son-in-law of his King, the
matter would go through somehow or other ; he meant
to float part of the loan himself in Italy.

The terms offered by the Crédit Mobilier were rather
stiff, but Cavour said, “If after divorcing the Roths-
childs we marry MM. Pereire, 1 think we shall get on
very well together.”

Cavour was perfectly right to rely rather more on the
Crédit Mobilier, for James Rothschild and several other
bankers soon perceived the objects for which Sardinia
required the money, and declared that they would not
supply any money for war. Count Walewski, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was naturally acting
in concert with his Imperial master, and with Cavour,


876 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


wishing to reassure them, said : ‘“‘ Gentlemen, if that is
your only difficulty, you need not hesitate to undertake
the loan, for there will not be a war. I assure you that for
the moment there won’t be one.”

This ‘‘pour le moment” was certainly not calculated
to reassure James and the other bankers. A pacific
article which appeared in the Monitteur of the 5th March
was intended to emphasise the good-will underlying the
Minister’s words ; but it did not carry conviction. Five
days later an inflammatory article appeared in the
Constitutionnel to the effect that Austria could not, and
would not, yield.

‘** The funds are falling,” Hiibner reported"; “ early
this morning Rothschild called on me in a state of great
alarm, and he was closely followed by the Duke of
Galliera and a crowd of curious and interested persons
who, knowing that J am a man of few words, hope at any
rate to guess from my expression whether they should
buy or sell.”

Sardinia had. however, refused to accept Fould’s
exceedingly oppressive terms, and she had suceceded
in floating the whole loan in Italy without the assistance
of the Paris bankers.

** More money was brought to us than we could
accept,” Cavour wrote to his banker friend, and he
reported with satisfaction to Nigra : ‘* The loan has gone
through quite splendidly. The populace came in masses
to the subscription oflices. By collecting a large number
of small amounts we have obtuined the millions which
the Paris bankers refused to supply. Kindly tell the
Prince [Napoleon] that it was impossible for us to accept
the offer that Fould made to us after he had kept us
waiting and disappointed us for a fortnight.

““ After being refused by the Crédit Mobilier, by the
Rothschilds, by Fould himself, and by so many others,
we could not in decency venture to offer the loan for


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 877


public subscription in France. . . . If we had applied
to the French public we would have exposed ourselves to
the remark that Piedmont was waging war with the men
and the money of France.”

The result of the issue in Italy so far excceded Cavour’s
hopes that the Sardinian Finance Minister actually had
the supreme satisfaction of returning such applications
as he reecived from the “ great banking barons of
Paris.”

War was now in sight, but this did not alter the fact
that practically everyone in France, outside the army,
wanted peace, and could not see why a Frenchman should
“* carry his bones to market ”’ for the sake of an ambitious
Sardinian Minister. Even the Emperor hesitated for a
moment, and Cavour himself, on visiting Paris at the
end of March, was gravely conccrned as to the success
of his plans. In the end, however, Austria started the
ball rolling by her unwise and premature ultimatum of
the 28rd April, whereby she provided Cavour with the
pretext which, according to his own words, he had con-
stantly been waiting for in order to go to war, and put
herself in the wrong with regard to the world at large.

The Rothschilds were again forced to realise that the
times were past when, as in 1880 and in 1840, they had
been able positively to prevent wars through their in-
fluence. This had already been apparent during the revo-
Jutions of 1848-9, and in the case of the Crimean war.
The declaration of war at the end of April 1859 caused
the greatest dismay to the whole of the Ilouse of Roths-
child, and especially to its three branches in Paris,
Vienna, and Naples. We must remember that they had
only just bought all the Lombard-Venetian railways—
the very railways that would be in the theatre of war,
as well as the Siidbahn, which would be entirely devoted
to military purposes. And they were interested in other
countless loans, schemes, and undertakings in the three


878 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


countries affected by the war. The consequences were
bound to be immeasurable. French Rentes, which stood
at 68 in the middle of April, had already fallen to 60 by
the 8rd of May.

Angrily James said to himself that this “ third-class
Napoleon,”’ who with cynical scorn ignored the peace
promises which he had made so emphatically before the
whole world, would come to a much sadder end than his
uncle, although he had had the most extraordinarily good
luck so far. The aged James felt that his hands were tied,
and that he could but watch the development of events as
a spectator. Much concerned, he noted the great success
of the war loan. Was he mistaken, he wondered, and were
the Emperor and his rash and unsubstantial financial
advisers, Percire and Mirés, to prove to be right, and he
himself, with his solid, conservative, and logical views,
to prove wrong? Events seemed to justify such con-
siderations as these. War broke out in May, and Austria’s
armies, which were commanded by an incompetent
general, were defeated by the French and Sardinian
troops, whose union the gencral foolishly did nothing to
prevent, at Magenta and Solferino.

The armistice of Villafranca was concluded fairly
speedily, on the 8th July, 1859, and, to the considerable
disappointment of Cavour, who had meant to conquer
not only Lombardy but Venice as sell, it was followed
quite soon afterwards by peace prelimi. aries.

The unsuccessful issue of the war resulted for Austria
in the younger branches of the Hapsburgs being deprived
of their rule in Tuscany, Parma, and Modena. The Roths-
childs had business connections in all these States ; their .
interests were everywhere affected, and, when they at-
tempted to save what they could, Austria reproached
them for doing business with the newly established
revolutionary Governments in those territories.

When, on the 22nd August, 1859, French newspapers


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 879


published the news that the new Government of Tuscany
had concluded a loan with the Paris House of Rothschild,
Count Rechberg telegraphed indignantly to Hibner’s
successor, Prince Richard Metternich, the son of the
Chancellor, who had been appointed to Paris after the
armistice, instructing him immediately to ask James
about this, and to report whether the statement were
correct." James and his eldest son were away at the
time, and in their absence Gustave von Rothschild ex-
plained * that there was no question of a new loan, but
that it was the balance of a loan of 100,000,000, which
had been first contracted as long ago as 1852 and which
was only gradually being placed on the market. He
stated that the new Government had asked the House
of Rothschild to deal with this, because the whole matter
had passed through its hands since the start. Count
Rechberg had to content himself with this explanation.
Austria’s influence in Italy was at an end, while the
Vienna House of Rothschild, which might more easily
have been brought to book, put the blame on the French
House, saying that it had nothing whatever to do with
these matters.

The appointment of Prince Richard Metternich, the
son of Solomon’s great friend, as Ambassador in Paris,
was exceedingly welcome to the Rothschilds. They hoped
to establish as good relations with him as they had en-
joyed with Austria’s Paris representative in the days
before Hubner.

The increase in Napoleon’s power, resulting from this
successful war, produced alarm in England, resulting in
.& nervous tension which was not. without its effect upon
the relations between the two courtries. At that time
people were eagerly discussing the news from Cuba, in
which there was a growing movement for secession from
Spain, and in favour of union with North America.
England tended to sympathise with the United States,


380 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


while France’s sympathies were on the side of her Latin
sister. This served to increase the prevailing irritation
between the two countries, which was expressed in sharp
Press attacks on both sides of the Channel.

The Rothschilds already saw the menace of another
war upon the horizon. “‘ James,” Richard Metternich
reported on the 28th October, 1859," “is exceedingly
worried about the feeling against England shown by the
Press in the Spanish-American question. The most
revolutionary developments of French internal policy
would not affect the financial world here as profoundly
as a breach with England, as they themselves admit.”

At the end of March Nice and Savoy were duly an-
nexed, this being the hard price that had had to be paid
to purchase the assistance of France. England had con-
tinued to hope that the war of 1859 would terminate
without France’s obtaining any accession of territory.
Napoleon had, however, achieved his desire.

‘* The example given by France,” Lionel Rothschild
remarked to the Saxon diplomat, Count Vitzthum, *
who was in London at the time, “is dangerously catch-
ing. There will be no ground for surprise if England
avails herself of the first opportunity of securing posses-
sion of Sicily and Egypt. Nor will it now be possible to
prevent the United States from annexing Cuba.”

The Rothschild fears were unjustified. They thought
Napoleon, who had so far been successft! in all his rash
military undertakings, capable of the wildest schemes,
especially as they realised how much he was disposed to
emulate the great. deeds of his uncle. He had avenged
1812 by the Crimean War; was it not a natural inference,
therefore, that he would now proceed to take vengeance
upon England, the most relentless foe of the first
Napoleon.

The Rothschilds were, however, mistaken. Napoleon
by no ineans felt that the moment had arrived to break


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 881


with England. He did not feel strong enough, and he
could not forget that Palmerston had been the first to
recognise him as Emperor. Meanwhile, Count Vitzthum
had travelled from London to Paris and had informed
himself more accurately regarding Napoleon’s intentions.

““The great financiers of Paris,” he wrote to Count
Rechberg, “and especially the Rothschilds, seem to
be engincering a panic, and are shricking from the house-
tops that war between the two great sca powers is in-
evitable. All the English who have come here to spend
Easter in Paris speak so bitterly about the Emperor as
really to make one believe in the impossibility of main-
taining friendly relations. People in socicty here, and
those in official positions, do not conceal the sentiments
of hostility that they feel for their neighbours on the
other side of the Channel, and I hear it being said every-
where, ‘a war with England will be really popular in
France.’ Nevertheless I do not hesitate to maintain
that the Emperor does not want such a war, and that
there will be no breach this year... .”

Vitzthum was proved right. The Rothschilds were
spared the disaster of an Anglo-French war, but there
were plenty of other things happening in the world that
exercised a profound influence on the various Rothschild
Houses.

The fact that Austria’s position had suffered through
the war naturally reacted upon her finances. When, in
April 1860, that State issued a loan of 200,000,000
gulden, which was especially difficult to negotiate, since
nobody had regained complete confidence in the Imperial
State, the Finance Minister went to Anselm at Vienna
to ask him to underwrite as much of the loan as he could,
and also requested Metternich in Paris to induce James
to underwrite 25 out of the 200 millions.

James was very ready to meet him. “ He will gladly
put his name at the disposal of the Imperial finances,”


882 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Metternich reported, “‘ and he will to-day inform the
Vienna House to this effect.”

James called on Prince Metternich on the 8th April, to-
gether with his eldest son, Alphonse, whom he was already
bringing in to the most important transactions. He made
it a condition that the 25 million should be underwritten,
not by his House alone, but by the joint Houses of the
brothers Rothschild, which were lending their names in
order to assist in the success of the loan, but were not
undertaking any responsibility for it."

The loan was very much damaged by the events lead-
ing up to the suicide of the Austrian Finance Minister,
Baron Bruck, who was falsely accused of having been
concerned in malpractices in connection with army con-
tracts, the incident occurring just at this time. At first
only 76 millions were subscribed, and it was not until
public opinion had been reassured and it was recognised
that there was a serious intention to restore order in the
financial administration of the State that Anselm Roths-
child in Vienna was successful in his efforts to bring the
loan to a satisfactory conclusion. He was rewarded for
his services in April 1861 by being appointed a life
member of the Austrian Ifouse of Lords. Meanwhile, in
the South of Kurope, the storm clouds gathered about
the Bourbon State of Naples. The movement for the
unification of Italy, which, owing to the French occupa-
tion of Rome, had been brought up short at the gates
of that city, next concentrated upon the kingdom of
Naples and Sicily. The march of Garibaldi’s thousand
men caused Sicily to secede in May 1860, and the bold
volunteer leader proceeded to transfer his efforts to the,
mainland at Naples. On the 4th September, 1860,
Garibaldi had reached the capital in which the King
and his banker Adolph von Rothschild were awaiting
the course of events in Paris. On the 6th September the.
King withdrew, with the troops that had remained loyal


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 883


to him, to Gaéta, and Adolph Rothschild also left the
unfriendly city, which was shortly afterwards entered
by Garibaldi. The King had not succeeded in taking
with him on his flight the money deposited in the State
coffers, and he soon found himself in serious financial
difficulties. Adolph Rothschild did his best in these
difficult circumstances to assist, with such means as
were immediately at his disposal, but this was only like
a drop in the ocean, and he could not undertake any
more considerable loan without consulting James Roths-
child in Paris and the chiefs of the other Houses. The
King thercfore sent a courier to Paris to ask for a loan
of one and a half million francs.

Meanwhile, the Austrian Government, which naturally
supported the maintenance of the Bourbon régime in
Naples, had informed the King that it would endeavour
to secure financial assistance for him." In doing so it
had Anselm Rothschild in mind, and hoped that it would
be possible to induce him to grant King Francis a loan.

Thereupon the King first asked for 600,000 to 900,000
francs, being the equivalent of 150,000 to 200,000
Neapolitan ducats; shortly afterwards he incrvased his
request to 500,000 ducats.*

The situation had, however, grown very much worse
by the middle of October 1860. Piedmont attacked
Naples, and King Victor Emanuel joined forces with
Garibaldi. Napoleon’s fleet was still lying off Gaéta in
support of the King of Naples, but it was already coming
to be recognised, in Paris and at the Imperial Court, that
it was not possible to offer any continuous opposition to
Italy’s spontaneous movement for unification, which had
also found support in England. James was of the same
opinion, and through his connections he soon learnt that
Napoleon intended to withdraw his fleet from Gaéta and
,to leave the King of Naples to his fate. He therefore
discouraged Adolph’s suggestion of granting a loan to


884 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the King in his difficulties, and also warned Anselm in
Vienna, who was left no peace by Rechberg, against
providing any money for the Kingdom of Naples. Rech-
berg, therefore, was met with a refusal, and had to inform
the King that, in spite of his promises, he was unable to
assist,*° since Austria was in financial difficulties herself,
and could only have come to his support through the
mediation of a bank.

** And,” he wrote, “ it is no use blinking the fact that
the unfortunate issue of the recent fighting has seriously
affected our prospects in this matter.”

Thus the financial position of the King who, with
his brave consort, Queen Maria, was facing things
courageously at Gaéta, soon became desperate.

** Think of it,” the King said“ to the Austrian Cap-
tain Frantzl, who was staying with him. ‘‘ Russia won’t
give me anything Icst she should displease the Emperor
Napoleon. It is dreadful ; it is contemptible. And Qucen
Christine [of Spain, she lived in Paris] is a good woman
too. I have only one hope left—my Finance Minister in
Rome [he was trying to negotiate with the Torlonia
bank]. If he doesn’t send me anything I am finished.
I require 12,000 ducats a day—two ships loaded with
provisions have arrived—but I must have money ! ”

Events followed their incvitable course. All appeals
to the European powers proved fruitless. Finally, even
Napoleon withdrew his fleet from Gzéta on the 20th
January, 1861. Rations were now cut off, and the King
decided to capitulate on the 13th February, 1861. Thus
the Kingdom of the two Sicilies came to an end and was
merged in the new Italy. Adolph Rothschild had re~
mained loyal to the Bourbon régime. He had not fore- '
seen the actual development of events and had not been!
able, or had not wished, to adapt himself in time to the
nev conditions. He therefore left Naples for good. The,
Naples branch, which had in any case long ago ceased


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 385


to be productive for the joint Houses of the Rothschilds,
was liquidated, and Adolph returned to Frankfort with
his brothers.

However, until the end of his life he maintained the
most cordial relations with their dethroned majesties,
which clearly shows that they were grateful to him for
his attitude at the time when they were in the greatest
peril. The royal couple lived a retired life in Paris. They
visited only a few familics, but amongst them were the
Adolph Rothschilds, who also settled in Paris.

Thus, from this time on, only four Rothschild banks
were operative in Europe, and when, in 1870, Italy had
been completely unified, the Rothsehild Houses confined
themselves to having a representative in Rome who,
however. was not a member of the family.


Cuarrer IX


The Eventful Years: 1866 and 1870-1871


Tne Rothschilds had been forming new connections
and founding new businesses all over the world. They
built railways in Brazil; they established offices in the
Southern States of the U.S.A. for the purchase of wool,
which they shipped to France, where they marketed it.
Being no longer able to use their enormous funds prin-
cipally in national loans, as they had been dving in the
past, they bought up whole tobacco harvests for supply -
ing the tobacco requirements of the various States.
Their own ships carried the enormous cargocs between
the United States and France; it was natural that,
having such extensive commercial interests, the Roths-
childs should anxiously watch the course of political
events in the two countries. When the war of secession,
the fight between North and South, broke out in America,
the Rothschilds, whose interests were principally in
the Southern States, supported the Confederates. When
they were defeated the Rothschilds’ Amcrican business
was seriously affected.

The Rothschilds took up a sceptical attitude towards
the rash adventure of Napoleon and the Empress
Eugénie in their attempt to found an empire in Mexico,
to which Maximilian of Austria and Charlotte of Belgium
wore sacrificed, and they took practical:y no part in
the loans issued for that purpose, which were later to
involve the French subscribers in such heavy loss.
They were content to Icave these to the Crédit Mobilier
of the Brothers Pereire, whom Napoleon IJI had pre-
ferred to them, but whosc position was not nearly
so firmly secured as that of the Rothschild bank,
which political circumstances had put in the back-
ground, although it had nearly a century of history
behind it.

387


388 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


After the war of 1859 the Crédit Mobilier had exces-
sive commitments and liabilities. Its shares were
quoted at about 800, and the profit still standing to
reserve in 1859 had completely disappeared from the
balance sheet by 1860. Large dividends were still paid
in order to maintain confidence, but they were paid
out of capital. This bank suffered a scrious blow through
the fall of another rival of the Rothschilds, the notorious
Mirés who had been working hand in glove with an
unscrupulous Press, and had been supported by persons
holding the highest positions in France. The carcer
of this financial swindler had been truly amazing.
Apart from acquiring an cnormous fortune, he had
succeeded in marrying his daughter to a Prince de
Polignac. The result of his arrest in 1861 was all the
more terrible. When it was no longer possible to conccal
the innumerable irregularities of which he had been
guilty, and when it also became known that the Duke
of Morny and other men closcly associated with the
Government had had dealings with Mirés, people in
Paris began to say that the Government was a party
to what had occurred.

The Rothschild bank had held aloof from the activities
of Mirés and his fellows, if for no other reason, because
they belonged to the other camp, so that his fall, which
did not involve them in any way. constituted a certain
triumph, AN was not weil with Frat ce’s finances in
general at this time. In 1851, 1855, and 1859 there had
been issues of Rentes Joans to an amcunt of no less than
two thousand millions, and in 1861 a further 132,000,000
had been subscribed by the public.

It was not possible to count upon the public con-
tinuing to co-operate thus willingly, and in these
difficult circumstances Fould, who in Novembcr 1860
had given up the portfolio which he had held since 1852,
attermptcd to get back into the saddle, and submitted


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 389


a memorandum to the Emperor in September 1861,
which gave an even darker picture of the financial
situation in France than was actually in accordance
with the facts, and at the same time suggested ways
and means for putting France’s house in order.

Napoleon again took on the statesman whom he had
favoured since he had come into power, published his
memorandum, and appointed him Finance Minister on
the 14th November, 1861, with instructions to deal with
the floating debt, which amounted to nearly a thousand
millions.

This appointment particulariy delighted the chiefs
of the Credit Mobilier, since they hoped that M. Fould
would facilitate the operation, which the Company
meant to earry through, in order to be able to pay
further dividends to its shareholders. The only person
who was displeased was the Empress, who had always
disliked Fould, since he had opposed her marriage.
She shed a few tears and then reconciled herself to the
facts; but she was to prove right in her judgment.
Fould was not the financial genius that he had sueceeded
in making Napoleon believe him to be; but kould had
come to realise one thing: in spite of all the support
that the State might give it, the Credit Mobilier would
not be able to carry through to a successful issue the
struggle against the firmly entrenched House of Roths-
child, with its ramifications in so many countrics of
Europe, and its strength based everywhere upon
enormous real assets.

Fould had already taken up a more cautious attitude
towards this undertaking, having a pretty extensive
knowledge of its resources from his brother, who was
in its employ. When shortly afterwards, encouraged
by Fould’s appointment, the Crédit Mobilier sought to
obtain a munopoly of the State’s credit business —an
omnium, as it was called—he advised the Emperor


390 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


not to accede to this request, as going a great deal
too far.

As early as January 1862, only a few months after
taking office, Fould made a much more favourable re-
port on the finances, in doing which he was assisted by
the fact that his earlier report had exaggerated the evils
of the situation. He then attempted the execedingly
daring experiment of converting the 11,000,000,000 of
Rentes from 44 to 8 per cent. This transaction hung fire,
and would have been a complete failure if Fould had not
effected a certain rapprochement with the House of
Rothschild. As carly as February 1862 there was a
rumour in Paris to the effect that the Tlouse had come
to TFould’s assistance, and that the secret purchaser who
had been effecting purchases of Rentes on the Bourse in
order to bring about a rise was none other than the
House of Rothschild. Fould was coming to the conclu-
sion that it was time to give up fighting the Rothschilds.
Ife admitted to himself that they were a world power.
Even though the Crédit Mobilicr had established a firm
footing abroad in Austria, Italy, and Spain, and even on
the other side of the Atlantic, the full burden of these
developments had to be borne by the central bank in
Paris ; it was not, like the Vothschilds, able to rely for
support on its own banks, cach of which had the control
of ample resources in the then great economic centres of
Europe. Napolcon, too, whose teeling: for the Roths-
childs were really not friendly, had to admit this, and
was confirmed in his opinion by his wife. The first
hint that the public got of this change of attitude was
when, on the 17th February, 1862, Napoleon and Fould
pad a visit to James Rothschild, to hunt with him on
his magnificent estate at Ferriércs. It was indeed more
than a visit ; it was a veritable journcy to Canossa. ‘This
was 2 severe reverse to the Crédit Mobilier, for the visit
was « clear indication that it was falling into disfavour


+ FERRIERES.


Ava WOME LE
yaad Sot aa be


AL TT ee


Wuf der grogen Jogo bei Rothigin Und die Weltmadt tom yar Seivaagt,
gat Er weniger an Rothuihd Chae Selomedt, was 12 Celtmagi?
{8 eu gofdme FAQs gedegt. RiGts If Leltmegt ohac Geivwagi!


CARTOON REPRESENTING THE VIStS OF
NAPOLEON TL TO JAMES ROTIESCIIILD AT
FERRIERES ON lth PEBRUARY, 1862


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 391


in the highest quarters. It was being gencrally stated
that Rothschild would now come to the assistance of
the French State with a loan. Comic papers turned the in-
cident to account in some execedingly amusing sketches.

There could be no doubt that the hunt would serve as
a pretext for discussing means by which France’s finances
could be improved. The gencral public were not favoured
with anything more than the superficial statements
usually issued in connection with interviews with mon-
archs ; but the general setting and the list of names of
those who took part in the hunt, which included the
British and Austrian Ambassadors and Ministers for
Forcign and Home Affairs, Walewski and Versigny,
made it perfectly obvious that this was no ordinary
house-party. ‘The Chateau Ferri¢res lies in the middle of
a magnificent park gencrously stocked with game, be-
tween the forests of Cressy and d’Armainvilliers. James
Rothschild had purchased the property about 1820 from
an impoverished nobleman, and had immediately pro-
eceded to demolish the smaller buildings and to improve
the park and the gardens. The property had gradually
been developed by the Rothschilds into a_ princely
estate, and they had also established on it a magnificent
Dutch dairy, a merino sheep farm, and a bakery. There
were splendid stables, a riding-school, and a special
riding-track. When Napoleon arrived at the station of
Ferriéres in hunting dress he was met by James Roths-
child in a coach-and-four @ la Dawmont, the lacqueys all
wearing new dark blue, gold-braided liveries. James’s
four sons helped their father to do the honours of the
occasion. On the stroke of ten the Imperial train arrived
at the station, where a green velvet carpet, embroidered
with goiden bees, was laid down from the railway train
to the carriage. When the party entered the grounds the
Imperial standard was hoisted on the flag-masis of the
four towers of the chateau. James Rethschild’s family


892 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


and representatives of the Frankfort, London, and
Vienna Houses were gathered in the hall. The Emperor
spoke to the ladics, and was then taken through the
reception-rooms, whose walls were hung with pictures
by Van Dyck. Velasquez, Giorgione, and Rubens. Glass
cases containing all kinds of valuable things, artistic
treasures from every part of the world, especially the
old, glowing Gobelins, were indicative of the cnormous
wealth of their owners.

After sccing the chateau, the Emperor went the round
of the gardens, where, in accordance with custom, he
planted a young cedar handed to him by the head
gardener. Afterwards a magnificent lunch was served in
the hall, upon dishes of beautifully wrought old silver,
while the guests ate off Sevres porcelain china that had
been painted by Boucher.

On the Emperor’s right sat his hostess, the Baroness
Betty, and on his left was James. At half-past twelve
the shoot began ta the immense park, which was sur-
rounded by a wall, Shots could be heard on all sides,
almost as if a small war had broken out, and the Emperor,
accompanicd by two loaders, made use of eight guns to
bring down the innumerable pheasants, partridges, hares,
and rabbits. This Imperial amusement cost the lives of
1,231 head of game.

When the guests returned, weary, to the chateau,
they found a buffet of the choicest delice cies, and from
the gallery above the hall a choir from the Paris Opera
suddenly burst into a hunting-song, the music of which
had been specially composed by Rossini for this occa-
sion. When he left the chateau in the evening the Em-
peror rode through an alley of torches which stretched’
to the farthest bounds of the estate.

The splendour of this occasion was no Icss than when
Anton Fugger received Charles V at Augsburg in his
famous house in the Weinmarkt ; but it did not alter the ©


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 893


fact that Napoleon continued to view the Rothschilds
with distrust, while they on their side were unable
entirely to forget the Kmperor’s attitude to them since
his accession to the throne. They realised that the
Emperor had the most excellent reasons for making
advances to them ; he wished to make use of them, and
paid a deposit by honouring them in public. To the
Empress, although she did not come with Napoleon to
Ferricres, they did feel grateful. They felt that her sym-
pathy was more sinccre, and that it was prompted by
gratitude for their earlicr attitude. Napoleon and the
Rothschilds retained their antipathy to one another,
even though their interests compelled them for the time
being to march side by side. In foreign policy their
different temperaments soon manifested themselves
again. Napolcon was always influenced by the memory
of his uncle and a tendency to feel that he ought to fol-
low his example in many matters. When, in January
1863, a further rising occurred in Poland, against the
oppressive domination of Russia, Napoleon was very
much tempted to intervene actively un the side of the
Poles.

The rich bankers and financiers, including the Roths-
childs, were opposed to such an adventure. They did
everything they could to induce the Imperial Govern-
ment to have nothing to do with it; and, in fact, no
action was taken.

“ The peace of the world,” Disracli wrote at this time,
to a woman friend,' “has on this occasion been pre-
served not by statesmen but by capitalists.”

Meanwhile the Crédit Mobilier was continuing to suffer

.“reverses. The year 1864 was an unfortunate year on the
Bourse, and the failure of the Mexican Loan iuvolved
it in loss. It was already apparent that the methods of
the Brothers Percire, although covered by such high-

. sounding phrases, were in essence nothing but rash


894 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


speculation. They were already having disputes in the
courts with persons whom they had treated unfairly.
The brothers hoped that Napoleon would protect them,
and he wished to do so, but was unable to in view of
public opinion.

“* T shall do everything,” the Emperor said, * “ to sup-
port them, because the Empire is deeply indebted to
them ; but I cannot afford to impede the course of justice,
or to come into conflict with it.”

As a result of these developments the value of the
Crédit Mobilier shares fell considerably, and the two
Portuguese brothers lost the great position to which
they had shot up all too rapidly.

While the star of the Pereires was declining, the
Rothschilds were coming to occupy a position of ever-
increasing importance in the Court circles of the Second
Empire, ‘and this was not surprising in view of their
relations to all the Courts and monarchs of Hurope. On
10th December, 1865,* King Leopold I of Belgium diced,
a royal patron who had had dealings with them through-
out his whole life, and had deposited the sum of 5,000,000
francs with them ip 1848, which by the time of his death
had already reached the considerable figure of 20,000,000
frances,‘ and came to form the basis of the enormous
fortune which the Empress Charlotte recently left when
she died after nearly sixty years of mental affliction.

While he was alive Ning Leopold had uot merely con-
fined himself to having financial dcalings with the Roths-
childs, but had also paid them social attentions, by which
they always set so much store. He had also visited them
at Ferriéres, and, like Napoleon, had planted a tree
which, together with his name in the visitors’ book,
bears witness to his visit.

Lioncl in England took a special pleasure in displaying
the social position which his House had achieved. An)
oppor! inity for doing so was afforded by the marriage’


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 895


on 7th June, 1865, of his second daughter, Evelina, to
Ferdinand, the son of Anselm Rothschild of Vienna.
Some years before Lionel had started building a mag-
nifieent town house in Piceadilly close to the house of
the Duke of Wellington, and this was opened on the
occasion of his daughter’s wedding. The ceremony was
carried out with the most extraordinary splendour, in
accordance with the rites of the Old Testament. British
Ministers, several Royaltics, and the Austrian and
French Ambassadors were present. Three of the fourteen
bridesmaids belonged to the families of Montgomery,
Lennox, and Beauclerk. A Jiuindred and twenty-six
people sat down to table; the health of the bride and
bridcgroom was proposed by Diisracli, a friend of the
family and formerly Chancellor of the Exchequer, while
the First Lord of the Admiralty proposed the toast of
the Rothschild family. In the evening a great ball was
given, which was attended by the Duke “ol Cambridge
and other Royaltics, as well as by the whole Diplomatic
Corps and several politicians. All partics were repre-
sented, from the blackest Tories to the most radical of
the Whigs. It was seareely possible for the Rcethschilds
to climb higher in social position.

The Rothschild ladies did not fail cither to do justice
to the wealth of the family. At the magnificent fancy-
dress ball at the Tuileries, to which the Empress HKug¢nie
enme as the unhappy Marie Antoinctte, I'ctty, James’s
wife, and Leonore, the wife of his son Alphonse, appeared
in Renaissance costume covered with jewels.* Thus, with
social festivities and magnificence, Paris unsuspectingly
entered upon a year of crisis, in which Napolcon added
to the serious political mistakes he had already com-
mitted those which were to be fraught with the most
extensive consequences for the future.

, The Crimean war had finally destroyed Napoleon IHT's
relations with the Tsar. Wheu the conflict between


896 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Austria and Prussia broke out in 1866 he failed to take
a definite line such as the interests of France required.

As early as 1865 France’s financial barometer indicated
stormy times ahead. Things were going ill with the
Mexican adventure; a poor harvest had made bread
dear ; the price of Rentes, as well as of other securities,
and especially of the shares of the Crédit Mobilier,
showed a constant tendency to droop.

Bismarck had consistently followed the anti-Austrian
policy which he had originally adopted when he attended
the Dict at Frankfort. Tle meant to secure for his
beloved Prussia a dominating position in the Germany
that was to be united, and if Austria, as was indicated
by the meetings of sovereigns at Frankfort, by her
participation in the Schleswig-Holstein war, and by
many other things, was unwilling to give up her position
of supremacy in Germany without a murmur, she would,
Bismarck decidid, have to be driven out of Germany
by blood and iron. The Prussian statesman had had
the forethought to conclude an alliance with Italy, and
also to establish relations with the revolutionary-
minded subjects of the Emperor of Austria, with
Ifungary, and the southern Slavs. Bismarck also made
tumely preparations for the financial arrangements
for war, having recourse in this conacction to the banker
Gerson von Blcichréder, whe had close business rela-
tions with the Paris and Frankfort. Re thschilds. Like
Metternich, Bismarck was little practised in financial
matters. A contemporary said of him, “Bismarck
was comparatively lacking in financial gifts in spite
of his remarkable versatility. His intelligence was such
that he could undoubtedly have made himself thoroughly
at home in financial matters, but he had obviously
little inclination to specialise in this field, and of all
his Ministers the Finance Minister exercised the greatest,
independence with regard to Bismarck.’’*


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 897


Through Gerson von Bleichréder, who had for some
time been planning the foundation of a big Prussian
financial house in partnership with the Rothschilds,
and who finally formed a banking syndicate with them,
the so-called Rothschild group, Bismarck had some
dealings with the House of Rothschild, with whom he
discussed financial preparation for armaments and
military expenditure. The Prussian Prime Minister and
Bleichréder were, however, to learn that the Rothschilds
were not prepared to provide any money for such
purposes. As Bismarck’s warlike intentions became
more and more apparent, they aroused a storm of
indignation against him, cspecially in England. Lord
Clarendon, Scerctary of State for Foreign Affairs, made
such strong comments regarding Bismarck to Count
Apponyi, Austrian Ambassador in London, that the
latter “ scarcely ventured to repeat them.” Te referred
to the influence which that “ demoniac spirit ~ exercised
upon the old King of Prussia, and said that in his opinion
“ there was nothing more despicable ” than the position
of that monarch, who allowed himself to be guided
into a course that was contrary to his traditions and
his sentiments ‘ by an adventurer and a brigand like
Bismarek.”*

The English House of Rothschild, which always made
the policy of the British Government its own, was
therefore hostile to Bismarck, and it was «pparent that
the Prussian Prime Minister could not expect any
assistance from the Rothschilds in carrying out his
policy, especially since Anselm in Vienna could not be
a party to anything that was calculated to assist a
policy directed against Austria, the country where his
business was. With reference to Austria’s policy in
Italy, however, and the Emperor Francis Joseph's wish
to retain Venetia, fecling in London and Paris was in
favour of ullowing free play to the movement for the


398 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


unification of Italy. It was thought that Austria
would be best advised to scll Venetia to Italy. This
would help to restore her disorganised finances.

The Rothschilds, too, supported a friendly solution
on these lines. They had heavy commitments in Italy,
and the sale of Venctia would raise the value of Austrian
securities, of which the Rothschilds held such large
quantities.

Lord Clarendon also recommended the scheme! to
the Austrian Ambassador on the ground that Austria,
once liberated from this burden, would have her hands
freed in Germany. The Seeretary of State mentioned
various leading persons who were also of this view,
including James Rothschild, who was of opinion that
Italy would not. consider £40,000,000 too big a sum to
pay for the acquisition of Venctia, When it was objected
that Italy, who could searecly pay her own officials,
would never be able to raise such a sum, James replied
that all the baukers of Europe would most joyfully
use their influence to bring about such a result which
would furnish a strong guarantce for the peace of HKurope.
Moreover, the savings which Italy could effect m her
military expendilure should be sufficient to pay the
interest on this gigantic loan.

Austria was completely unresponsive to the sugges-
tion, a fact which did much to alienate the sympathy
which was felt for her in Pans with regard to Prussia.
The French Ilouse of Rothschild, however, continued
to maintain an attitude of reserve with regard to
Prussia. In general the situation was not taken nearly
seriously enough in Paris, as everyone believed that
Austria would beat Prussia hands down.

‘ The Army,” Richard Metternich reported, * “ from
the War Minister down to the junior subaltern, does.
not doubt that Austria will be victorious.” As early.
as the middle of March the Prussian Minister, von der


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 399


Goltz, had reported to King William: “‘ It is said that
the House of Rothschild is determined to bring its
whole influence to bear to prevent Prussia from going
to war,”

Bismarck thereupon replied : ‘‘ We wish to postpone
making full preparations for war in order first to carry
through the financial operations which would necessarily
be more difficult when the situation had become more
tense owing to an increase of armaments. In this connee-
tion I would mention in confidence that we had entered
into preliminary negotiations with the House of Roths-
child, and that they have led us to a conclusion which
is cssentially in agreement with Your LExcellency’s
observations regarding the House of Rothschild. It is
in the nature of things that that Ifouse should not
welcome the possibility of war, and should do every-
thing possible to prevent war from breaking out; I am
able more particularly to assure Your Execllency that
Baron Rothschild informed our agent that a few weeks
ago he would not have been averse from carrying through
a transaction with Prussia, and that he would perhaps
have done so with real pleasure, but that the altered
circumstances, and especially a conversation which he
had had with Your Excellency, now prevented bim
from doing so. I feel I ought to mention this fact, since
it shows how careful one must be in dealing with
Rothschild.

Meanwhile, the situation wus becoming much more
acute. On 8th April Prussia and Italy concluded an
“offensive and defensive allinnce,”’ and military prepara-
tions proceeded actively in both States. The two great
rivals, the Rothschilds and the Brothers Percire, whose
Crédit Mobilicr was involved in serious diflicultics, were
united in their desire for peace. Both familics had been
invited to an Imperial reception't at the Tuilerics on
the evening of 11th April, and they most earnestly


400 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


implored the Emperor to exert his powerful influence
in the cause of peace, and thereby restore general con-
fidence. They drew a dismal picture of the position on
the Bourse, and showed how public and private intcrests
would be affected. They added that if the present
condition of uncertainty were to last even a little while
longer, they would no longer be able to kcep the Bourse
in hand. in which case a terrible disaster would become
inevitable. The Emperor, however, stated most cate-
gorically that it was not in his power to take any
preventive action.

Bismarck pursued his aim with uncompromising
logic, even against his own King, his Queen, and the
Crown Prince. Austria was again cleverly manceuvred
into making the first military move : she made her army
ready for action. Bismarck was now easily able to induce
the King to issue the appropriate orders. Not until the
beginning of May did Austria decide at the last moment
to sacrifice Venetia in order to isolate Prussia by becom-
ing reconciled with Italy. She was now prepared to
surrender for nothing that for which a little carlicr she
might have received so much money under the scheme
which James Rothschild would also have welcomed.
Tt had, however, been regarded as a point of honour
not to surrender a provinee, and that the last province
in Italy, for gold. Thiers clearly recognised at the time
that, if Prussia and Italy were to be victorious over
Austria, the unification of those two countrics would
result, to the great detriment of France. Germany was
the traditional enemy, and Italy was bound to cast
longing eyes upon Rome, as the crowning point of her
unification, and Rome was still oceupicd by the French.
Ile, therefore, strongly urged upon the Chamber that
the fundamental principles of the Peace of 1815, which
had ensured that Germany and Italy should remain
disunited, should be upheld. Napoleon was the more


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 401


dismayed by the leader of the Opposition’s specch.
received as it was with preat applause, since it had been
the very ‘Treaty of 1815 that had scaled the fate of his
uncle, and had restored the Bourbons to power.

On 6th May, at the opening of an exhibition, the
Emperor stated clearly, in reference to Thicrs’s spcech,
that he must definitely oppose the suggestion that those
treaties should be regarded as a basis of French policy.
His remark was misunderstood, and produced alarming
reactions throughout Europe. It was interpreted as
indicating warlike intentions, as had been the case
with the remark that Napolcon had made to Hibner
at the New Year’s reception of 1859.

Von Radowitz, Prussian Sceretary of Legation, re-
ported": that public opinion had been so much alarmed
that Rentes had immediately fallen a france, and that
James Rothschild had expressed strong disapproval of
the speech. The next day, at a Tuileries ball, at which
there was an atmosphere of considerable excitement,
owing to recent political developments, James pessi-
mistically summed up the whole policy of Napoleon
IIT in the epigram which afterwards became famous:
“DEmpire, cest la batsse.”

The conduct of foreign affairs, both at Paris and
Vienne, was in the hands of men whose judgment and
decision was somewhat to seek. On the other side was
the Prussian Prime Minister, who concentrated with
decision on a definite goal, and had a clear and concrete
appreciation of the position. It was not, however,
Bismarck only who discouraged all attempts, by media-
tion, conferences, or other political Cxpedicnts, to prevent
‘matters with Austria from coming to a head. Austria
also proved exceedingly obstinate. Her forcign policy
was controlled not by the Emperor or by his Foreign
Minister, but by two exceedingly inept heads of depart-
ments in the Foreign Office. Through declining to attend

Br


402 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


a conference, on which James had set his last hope of
maintaining peace, Austria forfeited such sympathy as
is always accorded to the party attacked.

James was indignant that his repeated exhortations
to his nephew Anselm at Vienna to urge the authorities
there to use their influence in favour of peace had pro-
duced no result. The Rothschilds could not get a hearing
in Vienna or in Paris, and certainly not in Berlin. The
times of 1830 and 1840, when they had successfully
used their influence in the cause of peace with the
persons in authority, and had been able to compel the
avoidance of war by withholding their money, were
over. They endeavoured to show their disapproval of
the fact that their wishes were being so little regarded
by being correspondingly disobliging in mecting financial
requests, but such action too produced no result. It is
interesting to note that towards the end of May the
Flouse of Rothschild deliberately returned a cheque of
the Austrian Ambassador, Prince Richard Metternich,
for the trifling amount of 5,000 francs, on the ground
that he had not at the time this amount standing to his
credit. The incident was talked about in Paris with the
result that the temperamental Princess Pauline Mct-
ternich was quite unrestrained in her comments on the
Rothschilds, stating that in future she would treat thein '
as tradesmen, and not as gentlemen.

Thesameevening, onthe 27 tL. May, Alphonse Rothschild
gave a big ball, at which the Metternichs were
conspicuous by their absence. Such occurrences, how-
ever, were only a storm in a tea-cup. In June the
Austro-Prussian war broke out, which ended on 38rd
July with the dcfeat of Austria on the battlefield of-
Koniggratz.

The fact that Anselm was at Carlsbad just at this
evitical period may be regarded as characteristic of the,
unconcerned attitude which even financial circles at


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 403


Vienna adopted with regard to the outcome of the war.
Just before the battle Anselm had subscribed 10,000
gulden for the wounded, and for the rclicf of the general
distress. He was now also seized with panic, and returned
as speedily as possible to Vicnna, where the wholly
unexpected news had brought people specdily to earth.
He had to see that the interests of his Ilouse were
secured as far as was possible in the general débacle.
He had the bitter satisfaction that the Viennese were
forced to admit that the House of Rothschild, especially
its eldest representative, James, in Paris, had been
proved right in their warnings against going to war.
It could scarcely be expected that the Rothschilds
should be eager to assist Austria and the German States
who had suffered defeat in alliance with her, but they
were Immediately asked to come to the rescue.

Such a request was first made by Austria’s close aily,
Saxony, whose territory was occupied by Prussian
troops. As they advanced the possessions of the Saxon
Treasury were hastily removed from Dresden to Munich ;
but after the Battle of KGénigeriitz tiey were no longer
safe in that city, and Count Vitzthum was sent to
Munich to Jook after the money. Ife found the treasures
of the green vault and the cash reserves of the Finance
Ministry lying about in chests and cascs in a shed
without any locks."

Prussia had already occupied Asclhaffenburg ; she
gave battle at Kissingen. Theie was, thercfore, a serious
danger that she would seize this treasure as booty. The
plan was to get the things into a ncutral country, i.e.,
into Switzerland, but there were too many cases, and
‘they had to be reduced as far as possible. The consign-
ment consisted of inumerable little botil.s which
looked as though they contained spirits, but in reality
held over « million of money in silver thalers which it
had not been possible to convert into gold.


404 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


“In order to get over this difficulty,” Vitzthum
reported, '* ‘“‘ I made enquiries of the agent of the House
of Rothschild, and learnt that one of their couriers had
just arrived, and would be returning to Paris in a few
hours. I therefore sent the bottles by the courier to my
friend, Baron James Rothschild, asking him to kcep
them in the Rue Laffitte. where I would myself arrive
shortly.

““QOld Baron James wanted to convert the solid
thalers into franes, which would naturally have involved
quite unnecessary charges.’ Vitzthum insisted that
the million thaler should be deposited in natura, and
that he should have the right to demand their return
in a similar condition. Baron Rothschild remarked
that this was not business, and that he only knew
francs. ‘“‘ And T only thaler,” Vitzthum replicd. There-
upon James attempted to intimidate the Count and
asked what would happen if Prussia should sequester
the Saxon cases.

“Oh,” replicd Vitzthum, “that’s all right. Pve
provided for that. But if occasion should arise I would
simply remind you of the origin and traditions of your
House. When the Elector of Hesse, driven from his
country by Napolvon, entrusted his treasure to your
father, the latter never thought of enriching King
Jerome of Westphalia with those moncys, but, on the
conclusion of hostilities, returned to the Elector the
moneys which had been cntrusted to him, himself.
The King of Saxony is showing similar confidence in
you, and I am sure that you will not disappoint him.”

This was hoisting the Rothschilds with their own
petard, for they themselves had assisted in ercating
the legend regarding their conduct towards the Elector
of Ilesse and were gratified when people spoke about
the loyalty which they had displayed on that occas.on,
so that James had to make the best of a bad job. He


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 405


took charge of the money, and afterwards, when every-
thing had again settled down, it was duly returned to
Saxony.

Now, when Prussia, swollen with power, could rely
upon a victorious army. which had scarecly an enemy
left that could be regarded seriously, Napoleon demanded
at Berlin the territories on the left bank of the Rhine,
including Mainz. In the Prussian capital, however, they
would not hear of such proposals. Bismarck pretended
that he had never dreamt that Napoleon would express
such a wish.

In England it was thought that Prussia would im-
mediately comply with these requests. Anthony Roths-
child in London assured Count Vitzthum that the Paris
Bourse, which was a reliable barometer, was at “ set
fair,” that Prussia would make no diffcultics, and would
pay the modest bill. The British Ministers, however,
shook their heads over this optimism, and expressed
the view that Prussia would refuse. Anthony is said to
have made observations to Vitzthum at this time which
were characteristic of the matcrialist attitude of the
Rothschilds, even in the third generation.

“The sooner we are rid of all our colonies,” he is
actually supposed to have said on the 12th September,
1866," *‘ the better for England. We want peace at any
price. It is the desire of all our statesmen. Take, for
instance, Lord Derby. He owes his income of £120,000
to the fact that his estates in Ircland and Lancashire
are being covered with factories and factory towns. Is
he likcly to support a mililarist policy ? They are all in
the same boat. What do we care about Germany or
Austria or Belgium? That sort of thing is out of date.”

While the war had the gravest consequenecs for
Austria, since it determined her complete exclusion
sfrom Germ:.ny, it had no less serious effects upon the
prestige of tle Emperor Napoleon. The whole of France


406 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


instinctively felt that Napoleon had let pass the favour-
able opportunity for fighting against a Power which
might still become highly dangerous to France at a
time when that Power was involved elsewhere. This
attitude, which infected all circles of opinion in France,
also expressed itself in the financial condition of the
Napoleonic State, which became progressively worse.
The Crédit Mobilier, which had large holdings in the
seriously depreciated Austrian sccurities, and had other
commitments far beyond its strength, was unable, in
spite of Napolcon’s favour, and in spite of being assisted
by the State, any longer to conceal its bad financial
position. To pay dividends out of capital was bound to
have the most devastating effect upon a concern that
was so dependent on the good opinion of the Bourse
and of the public, and that was now revealed to rest
upon a purcly speculative basis. By December 1866 the
shares had already fallen to 600; in April 1867 the
Crédit Mobilicr had to show a loss of 8,000,000 frances
in respect of the year 1866, and its shares then fell to
350. Napolcon was implored not to continue to support
the Percires, as the Government risked being involved
in the débacle of the Crédit Mobilier, which could no
longer be concealed from anyone. 'The open war between
the two great Jewish financial groups, the Percires
and the Rothschilds, had now been decided in favour
of the latter. As Scheffer says,’ they had always
regarded the Crédit as a foreign body which, since it
could not be made to serve their ends and only acted
as a rival, must. at all costs be destroyed. And it had now
come to that. In the evening of his life James had been
proved right. All his warnings had come home. The
enemy had left the ficld defeated. The brothers Percire
withdrew into private life, while the collapse of this
enovious concern, the shares of which stood at 140
francs in October 1867, implied an unheard-of personal


Stel STE LLOUsE SUL


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 407


humiliation for the Emperor. For this his financial
adviser, Achille Fould, was to no small degree respon-
sible; he had resigned his oflice in January 1867, and
died unexpectedly in the following October.

After her unsuccessful war, Austria made a change
with regard to the control of her foreign policy, the
direction of which was now transferred to the Saxon
Baron von Beust. He had known the Rothschilds for
a long time and was a fricnd of the Tfouse ; and he took
advantage of this connection to bring to their notice
the urgent need for a loan for his country which had
been knocking in vain at the door of the financiers.

Austria was at the time planning to reduce the bu:den
of interest payments on her public debt by conversion.
The suggestion caused great dissatisfaction amongst. the
numerous holders of Anstrian Rentes abroad, especially
in France, who, after the war of 1866, had, in any case,
suffered considerable loss owing to the fr:l in price of
these securities. It was even proposed that Austrian
securities should no Jonger be quoted on the Bourse.
Thereupon Beust decided to approich the aged James
Rothschild direct, with a request for mediation.

“To am instructing Count Vitzthuro,” the Minister
wrote,” “ to discuss our financial position with you, and
the m:easures that should be taken to prevent Austrian
securities from being excludcd from the quotations on
the Bourse. I hope that you will give us some help with
your advice and inthience. Ti the requirements of our
position could be better understood in Paris, it is pos-
sible that the measures announced by the I. and R.
Government would not be judged so harshly... . T very
much hope that, on mature consideration, Fy iunee will
arrive at a |better opinion of us, and you woul! do us a
real service if you would assist in bringing about such
a result.”

Jamcs, who had latterly becn suffering acutely from


408 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


gall-stones, perccived from the tone of this request that
it was realised in Vienna too that his position in Paris
had been substantially strengthened by the fall of his
opponents. He assured the Austrian Ambassador " that
he would do everything in his power to ensure that
Austrian securities should continue to be quoted; he
coupled this assurance with the advice that Austria
should give preferential treatment to the loan subscribed
in Paris and London. This advice, and the steps that he
took in connection with the Austrian sccuritics, were
amongst the last acts of a business nature that it fell to
James to carry out. In the summer of 1868 he fell
seriously ill. Besides his painful complaint, he was suffer-
ing from liver trouble and jaundice. He dicd at the age
of seventy-six and a half, on the 15th November, 1868,
one day after the death of his friend the composer,
Rossini. So long as his strength had permitted, he had
continued actively to direct his business, and death alone
could interrupt the extraordinary activity which he had
shown throughout his life. “‘ Rothschild is dead ; long
live Rothschild.” Thus the French Court adapted the
well-known epigram made on the death of a king ; for
a king James had undoubtedly been in his own sphere.
The democratisation of financial operations was beyond
his understanding. He remained throughout his life the
banker who had risen to power in the shadow of princely
houses, and who sought and found his ci stomers amongst
the monarchs of the whole of Europe.

Speculation having become the dominant interest of
considerable sections of the population in Paris, the
Bourse was always a centre of excitement. James Roths-
child, who was cautious and reticent, and exceedingly
confident of his own judgment, although quite friendly
to such persons as knew how to handle him, appeared
once or twice at the Bourse during the last years of his
life. This always produccd a sensation. A buzz would go


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 409


through the crowd of brokers, and he would be immedi-
ately surrounded by a swarm of clients and officials.
Every one of his gestures would be carefully noted ;
people hung upon his every word, and he could make a
man happy by asking him to hand him the list of quota-
tions, or to do him some other trifling service. On his
death the Paris correspondent of the Kélnische Zeitung
wrote an article in which he stated that James had come
to Paris in 1812, with about a million frances, but that
he was now estimated to be worth about two thousand
million. The journalist observed that English financiers
who were in a position to know had assured him that in
all the United Kingdom there was no one possessed of
a similar fortune. The figure mentioned was, of course,
imaginary; James’s son, Alphonse, would himself have
found considerable difficulty in estimating the value of
his inheritance ; but the publication of this article, to-
gether with the descriptions of the magnificent funcral,
constituted a great advertisement for the House of
Rothschild.

If the dead man’s wishes had becn carried out, the
funeral would have been a very simple one, without the
military honours to which he was entitled as a holder of
the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour, but such was
the interest displayed that half Paris took part in the
magnificent funeral procession. Napoleon was repre-
sented by his chief Master of Ceremonies, the Duke of
Cambacérés ; the King of the Belgians sent an aide-de-
camp; the Royal Family of Orléans, the Emperor
Francis Joseph, and the President of the United States
telegraphed their condolences. James was allotted a simple
tomb in the old Jewish cemetery in Pere Lachaise, the only
inscription on the tombstone being the letter R. Tie papers
published fong accounts and biographical sketches.

. Thus the last of the five brothers, who had brought
their House to such heights of power, was dead.


410 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


James’s eldest son, Alphonse, succeeded to the direction
of the Paris House. Born in 1827, he had been sent to
the Collége Bourbon as a boy, and had made friends
there with young Léon Say, who was later to become
the famous Finance Minister of the Third Republic. At
the age of nincteen he was sent to England to study the
organisation of railways, and was afterwards employed
in the Northern France Railway Company, of which he
became chairman on the death of his father. In 1855
Napoleon appointed him a member of the governing
body of the Bank of France. Alphonse was already a
naturalised Frenchman, and whereas his father had
always spoken the most wretchedly bad French, which
was the joke of all Paris, Alphonse was acomplcte master
both of written and spoken French. He was destined to
lead the Paris House through the stormy period which
followed upon the fall of the Imperial régime, which his
father had so often predicted, but which he did not live
to see.

This catastrophe approached with gigantic strides.
All Bismarck’s energies were concentrated upon his life’s
work—the union of all Germans under Prussian leader-
ship. He attached to himself all those who would be use-
ful to him in this connection, and the question of ways
and means was given proper consideration. The relations
between Bismarck and Bleichrédcr, the clever financier,
had become constantly closer since 1866 Since her vie-
tory over Austria, Prussia had risen substantially in the
regard of the Rothschilds, and the association between
them and Bleichréder, which was already of many years‘
standing, became a close one. As the House of Roths-
child had no member of their family to take charge in‘
Berlin, as they had in the other capitals of Europe,
Bleichréder was entrusted with representing the interests ,
of the House in Berlin and the whole of Prussia.

In accordance with the usual practice of the House of


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 411


Rothschild, he received the political information from
London, Paris, and Vienna that was always furnished
to its representatives. Thus Bleichréder was always kept
most accurately informed regarding the position of
Napolcon HI. As Alphonse Rothschild had access to the
Emperor, Bismarck was cnabled to convey confidential
messages to the Emperor through unofficial channels ;
and he was also able to reecive important scerct infor-
mation, such as only Rothschild would be able to pro-
cure. It was, of course, advisable to exercise caution in
this matter, for Alphonse Rothsehild’s attitude was con-
sistently that of a French patrict, and it was necessary
to take care that the general antipathy which the Roths-
childs had always felt towards the Napoleonic régime
should not outweigh in the sentiments of the present
chicf of the House his feclings of patriotism for France.

Bleichréder was influential with Bismarck in financial
and commercial matters, and the latter had piven in-
structions that Bleichréder should be kept informed of
developments in the political situation. In this matter,
however, he exercised a greater degree of caution and
reserve than Metternich had done in his relat.ons with
Solomon Rothschild. Te used Bleichréder and his as-
sociation with Rothschild, for his own purposes, but he
was able to say with justification »: “It is not neces-
sary to Iet the Jews get the upper hand, or to come to
depend on them financially to such an extent as is re-
srettably the case in several countrics. My relations, as
a Minister, with Jewish high finance have always been
such that the obligation has been on their side and not
on mine.”

Through the private channel available to Bleichréder,
Bismarck kept a close watch on what was happening i in
Paris, where dissatisfaction with the Imperial régime
had been constantly increasing since the unfortunate
year 1866. Napoleon wished, by the peaceful acquisition


412 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


of Luxemburg, to conceal the indirect reverse which he
had then suffered, hoping in this way to divert attention
from the growing opposition at home. But in this he
was not successful. The Emperor found himself opposed
by the North German Confederation ; Luxemburg was
declared a neutral country, and the evacuation of the
Prussian garrison was but poor consolation. Bismarck,
however, was forced to admit to himself that Napoleon
would never tolerate a powerful and united Germany
such as the Prussian Minister dreamed of. But since he
meant, at any price, to weld such a unity together, war
would be sooner or later inevitable.

Napoleon was too sick and too undecided to rush into
such a conflict, and Bismarck hoped that perhaps he
might be able to achieve his cnd without bloodshed.
Then an incident occurred which eaused French national
feeling suddenly to flame up, depriving both leaders of
the control of their people, and hastening the catastrophe.

Spain, constantly afflicted by political crises, was
attempting to find some final solution of her problem.
A republic was not in favour, neither did past experience
render a Bourbon dynasty desirable. The chance of
finally achieving a union between Spain and Portugal
was a motive for considering a member of the Portuguese
Royal house. Prince Leopold of Tehenzollern-Sigma-
ringen, whose wife was a daughter of the King of Portugal,
was suggested. Bismarck stpported this candidature,
which appeared to him to be in the interests of Prussia,
but in France the proposal aroused a storm of indigna-
tion. It was felt that France would be ground between
the upper and nether millstone of Germany and Spain.

When, on the 3rd July, it became known in Paris
that the Prince had accepted the candidature, the French
completely lost their heads. ‘“ Vengeance for Sadowa ”
was shouted in the strects, and it was admitted that
the dcieat of Austria in 1866 was a defcat for France.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 413


The Court and the Emperor were not able to resist the
influence of the general emotion. At this fateful moment,
Napoleon sent for the chief of the House of Rothschild,
in order through him to urge upon England that she
should repel this attack upon the honour and security
of France. The Duke of Gramont, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, had already said to the British Ambassador,
Lord Lyons, that France could not and would not put
up with the insult. On the 5th July, 1870, Alphonse
Rothschild was hastily called for by the Imperial
adjutant and brought to St. Cloud, where he appeared
before the monarch in a state of considerable excite-
ment, for he had never been summoned in such an
unusual manner or at such an unusual time. * The
Emperor explained to the banker that there was at the
moment no Foreign Minister in England (Lord Clarendon
had died on the 27th June and Lord Granville was not
appointed until the 6th July), and that he therefore
desired to send the message through Alpbonse to the Prime
Minister, Gladstone. This was a sumewhat clumsy
excuse, for it would have been possible to make use of
official channels, but Napoleon preferred to cueal with
the mattcr privately, through the Rothschilds. The
Emperor wished in this way to let Gladstone know that
the Hohenzollern candidature was intolerable to France,
and to ask Gladstone to do everything possible to have
it withdrawn.

Alphonse Rothschild immediately sent acipher telegram
to Lionel in London, and Lionel’s son Nathaniel, after-
wards Lord Rothschild, deciphered the telegram for
his father, and then hurried with it himself to Carlton
‘House Terrace. There he found Gladstone, who was
just about to leave for Windsor to sce the Queen ; he
got into his carriage and drove with him to the railway
station.

After reading the tclegram, Gladstone said nothing


414 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


for a while. Finally he stated that, although he was by
no means in favour of the candidature, he was not
inclined to interfere with the free right of the Spanish
people to choose their own sovercign. The telegram
which Lionel scent containing this news profoundly
disconcerted the Paris bank.

As early as the 7th July, Bleichréder received a Ictter
from Alphonse expressing absolute panic at the threat of
war. * At the same time a similar alarmist letter was
sent to Anselm at Vicnna, painting the position in the
darkest colours, and indicating the financial measures
that were called for in the cireumstances. The Vienna
bank, too, was in a panic. Anselm, whose business had
only just recovered from the blow of 1866, found him-
self faced with the incalculable consequences of an
armed conflict between Prussia and France, in which
Austria might casily become involved. IIc is said to
have quite lost his temper over the rash and short-
sighted politicians and gencrals, as he called them, who
were bringing such disaster upon Europe, and he
decided that, if he could not check the course of events
in the west, he would, at any rate, do everything possible
to prevent Austria from engaging in the conflict herself.

By the J1th July Bleichrocder regarded the situation
as hopeless; on that day he instructed his London
correspondent, Worms, by ‘elegram, to sell all his
securities at any price, and this was donc, at considcr-
able loss. *

Nevertheless, it seemed that everything would end well
after all. On the 12th July the Prinve of Hohenzollern
spontancously resigned his candidature, and Alphonse
Rothschild telegraphed to Gladstone * with great satis-
faction: “ The Prince has renounced his candidature ;
the French are satisfied.” :

But Alphonse’s rejoicing was premature. Lionel has!
immediately got into touch with all persons in influential


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 415


positions in London whom he could expect to use their
influence on the Continental situation in a way likely
to assist in maintaining peace. He and his son Nathaniel
had been to see their friend Disraeli, and had had a
detailed discussion with the ex-Premier, who was opposed
to Gladstone’s foreign policy—as to what could be done
in the interests of peace. Disracli thereupon asked her
Majesty’s Government what were the real causes of the
dispute, and whether the Government would not busy
itself with the question of mediation, concluding with
some cloquent words of warning regarding the terrible
political and moral responsibility incurred by a soveicign
who should disturb the peace of Europe at that moment,
thereby exposing himself to the indignation of public
opinion throughout the whole civilised world.
Ifowever, the ball had been set in motion, and nothing
could stop it. The efforts of the Rothschilds were again
entirely fruitless, and one of the greatest dramas in the
history of the world procecded to develop without their
being able to interfere with the acticn, As soon as war
had been declared, Alphonse Rothschild identified himself
entircly with the French cause. In spite of the mis-
understandings between his louse and Napolcon, he
hoped whole-heartedly that France would be victorious.
In a manner that was scarcely polite to the Ger-
man Government he resigned his office of Prussian
Consul-General, and, as far as he was able, he assisted
financially in the energetic prosecution of the war
against Prussia.
» Meanwhile, the campaign developed with surprising
rapidity. To the astonishment of Inurope the French
Army was conquered after a few battles, rapidly follow-
ing on on: another. The Kmpire was shattered, and
Napoleon ILL was taken prisoner. On the Ist September
the monarch capitulated with his army at Sedan ; on
‘the 4th September the revolution in Paris cverthrew


416 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the Imperial régime; the Empress fled; the republic
was proclaimed; and a gouvernement de la défense
nationale was set up, of which General Trochu was
President, Jules Favre being Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Soon afterwards the Prussians were at the gates of
Paris, and by the 19th September, 1870, the investment
of the city was complete.

On the same day the Prussian High Command,
including King William, Bismarck, and Moltke, with
their magnificent staff, took up its quarters on the
Rothschild estate at Ferritres. The thunder of the guns
and the bustle of war scemed strangely out of place in
the magnificent Renaissance chateau, with its wonder-
ful park and its lake on which the swans and ducks swam
peacefully, and its coverts full of game. The Genera]
Staff, although not a little spoilt by the quarters which
they had hitherto enjoyed in the chateaux of France, were
nevertheless quite overcoine by the splendour which
they found at Ferriéres. As though perfect peace reigned,
the stables were full of the finest horses. Grapes of
incredible size ripened under glass, and orchids bloomed
in the conscrvatorics. When the King, arriving from
Lagny, entered the gorgeous apartments he said to his
staff, « “* Folk like us can’t rise to this ; only a Rothschild
can achieve it.”

Alphonse Rothschild had cnly left a steward and a few
female servants. The King refraincd from installing
himself in the owner’s gorgeous bedroom. Ile had his
iron bedstcad put up in a modest little room, and
strongly forbade his suite to touch anything. Even the
game were not to be interfered with in any way—an
order which specially grieved Bismarck, who was pas-
sionately fond of sport.

Scarcely had the German general headquarters heen.
installed in Ferri¢res when, on the 19th September,,
1870, Jules Favre arrived at the chateau to negotiate


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 417


with Bismarck regarding an armistice and_ possible
terms of peace.

This meeting proved fruitless, the French negotiators
being determined not to surrender an inch of territory,
so that arrangements had to be made for a prolonged
stay at Ferrieres, as the war would continue. This fact
naturally produccd friction with the Rothschild steward,
who, amongst other things, refused to produce wine, *
although he was offered payment. These disputes
eventually came to the ears of Bismarck, who summoned
the steward, and rebuked him for the unfitting manner
in which he requited the honour of entertaining the
King at Ferrié¢res. As the Rothschild servant continued
to make difficulties, Bismarck asked him whether he
knew what a truss of straw was. The steward was puzzled
and silent, and Bismarck explained to him that it was
an object on which obstinate and rude stewards were
laid, with their backside uppermost. The rest he would
leave to his imagination. Thercupon the official gave
way, and brought the wine. But he availed himself of
an opportunity of letting his master in Paris know that
the Germans had actually threatened to beat hin.

Alphonse Rothschild mentioned this to one of his Paris
acquaintances, making fun of the Germans, and the
latter wrote a Ictter about it to a certain Countess de
Moustier in the provinces. The letter was sent by balloon,
the method used for communicating with the outside
world. The balloon was shot down by the Germans, and
fell into their hands. with all the mail it contained.
The letters were examined by the German Intelligence
Department to see whether they contained infc*mation
of military value, and the letter of the 28th 1 cember,
1870, to the Countess de Moustier was discovered. It
contained the following sentence, * ‘‘ The Prussians in
the neighbourhood of Paris have a liking for pheasants ;
Rothschild told me yesterday that they were nct satisfied

Co


418 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


with his pheasants at Ferritres, but had threatened to
beat his steward, because the pheasants did not fly
about filled with truffles.”

This extract was brought to the knowledge of general
headquarters, and Bismarck felt that it was a hit at him,
because he had been one of the few, if not the only
person, who had shot a few pheasants in the park, in
spite of the King’s prohibition. He said, “ What will
they do to me? They won’t arrest me, for then they
would not have anybody to arrange peace."

Bismarck expressed himself stronyly about the remark
made by Rothschild, as quoted in the letter, observing
that old Baron James had had more savoir faire.

Meanwhile, Jules Favre’s first attempt to bring
about an armistice and peace had proved unsuccessful.
Bismarck’s demands were stated to be unacceptable, and
national war was proclaimed, to the last drop of blood.

Gencral Trochu organised war to the knife in Paris,
calling up every man capable of bearing arms.

Meanwhile, the King moved his headquarters from
the Chateau Ferri¢res to Versailles. [lowever, their
courageous resistance in the capital and the provinces
was of no avail. ‘The French were foreed to realise that
further resistance was uscless, and Thiers and Jules
Favre, the representatives of the new Government, were
compelled, on the 21st February, 1871, to proceed to
Versailles, where they learnt Bismarch’s conditions for
a preliminary peace, namcly, the surrender of Alsace
Lorraine and the payment of a war indenmity of
6,000,000,000 francs. Bismarck had _ discussed the
financial side of the question with his confidential ad-
viser, Bleichrédcr, and Tfenckel von Donnersmark, whe
had been summoned to the headquarters at Versailles.
During his conversation with Jules Favre and Thiers on
the 25th February, 1871, Bismarck specified the dates
on which he thought this sum should be paid, and he


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 419


invited the French negotiators to hear what his financial
advisers had to say on the matter.

The French said that Bismarck’s proposals were some-
what unusual and technically complicated. ‘ You have
been able to prepare them at length,” Thicrs replied to
Bismarck, * “ with the assistance of eminent financial ex-
perts. We ask for similar facilities. M. Alphonse de Roths-
child is in Paris ; like myself, you have a high regard for
his experience and his absolute honesty. I shall send him
a telegram, and after I have spoken to him I shall {cel
more confident that Iam not making a mistake.”

Bismarck could not well refuse this request, but it
obviously displeased him. He said angrily that the
negotiators were procrastinating and were trying to
evade the conditions imposed upon France. With all
their suggestions and excuses, they were slowly exhaust-
ing the patience of his Royal master, P:issia’s great
statesman pointed out that he was ill (he was suffering
from lumbago). Ife said his strength was exhausted and
that he was unable to continue negotiations which the
other side obviously wished to come to nothing. With
clever deliberation Bismarck assumed anger. As he
strode up and down the room, he exclaimed explosively
to the French negotiators, “ Tt is exeecdingly accom-
modating of me to take all this trouble which you are
forcing on me; our conditions are an u'timatum - they
must cither be accepted or refused. Iam not going to
discuss the matter further. Bring an interpreter to-
morrow—I shan’t speak French in future.” Bismarck

- did, in fact, proceed to discourse vehemently in German.

Thiers had remained calm during this painful scene,
‘and waited silently until his opponent’s angcr should
abate. Fortunately, it was now five o’clock, and dinner
was announced. The French negotiators were invited
‘to join in the meal, but they declined, although Thiers
had eaten nothing since the morning.


420 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


The telegram to Alphonse Rothschild had been sent off,
and the two negotiators were now waiting for him to
arrive. He arrived at half-past seven the same day, the
25th February, 1871. Thiers immediately informed him
of Bismarck’s enormous demands, and of the German
proposals with regard to payment, and the banker fully
shared the opinion of Thiers, who was naturally still
trying to resist the oppressive conditions.

Bismarck was angry that Rothschild, whose family
was, after all, of German origin, should also be making
difficulties, and that he should behave as though he were
as I’rench as the other two negotiators.

When Alphonse Rothschild, who was a puny little man,
went up to the big Chancellor and began talking to him
in French. © Bismarck treated him with scant courtesy,
in fact with positive rudencss, while he treated the two
other negotiators in a more friendly way, in order to
make them forget his earlicr outbursts. He was annoyed
at Rothschild’s acting as Thiers’s second. He was also
annoyed because of the Ferriéres incident, and because
a man of German-Jewish extraction was acting as
though he were a full-blooded Frenchman, and not
speaking German.

Bismarck wanted to get the matter settled speedily,
and he was therefore also vexed because Alphonse Roths-
child had not managed to ‘liscuss the necessary ma-
ehinery with Bleichréder and Wenckel that evening.
Rothschild asserted that Thiers had not given him
sufficient information, * and the result was that the
agreements were not signed until the following day.:
These laid down the main lines of the arrangements
whereby all the great moncy merchants of Kurope were
to be brought in as guarantors of the war indemnity,
which, meanwhile, had been reduced to 5,000,000,000.

While these negotiations were being carried on, the
wildest rumours were current in Paris regarding


SVGENIE


"RESS


Mi


E


TH


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 421


Bismarck’s mad demands, such as that he demanded
the surrender of several provinces, the payment of
10,000,000.000 of war indemnity, etc. Alphonse Roths-
child’s brother, Gustave, who after James’s death had
been appointed Austrian Consul-General, had been
through the siege of Paris with his brother, and was still
in the town. Count Vitzthum found an opportunity in
the middle of February of having a conversation with
him, and said," that he was intimate with the most
important people and had observed men and things at
the closest possible quarters Gustave Rothschild ¢x-
pressed himself very strongly to Vitzthum regarding
General Trochu, the defender of Paris.

** He is an honourable man,” said Gustave Rothschild,
** but weak, indecisive, and soft ; he permitted the events
of the 4th September, instead of quelling the rising and
compelling the Regent (the Kimpress Eugene) to Jiqui-
date the situation created by the incompetence of the
Ministers and Generals of the Empire. It would always
have been possible to change the form of Government
after the Imperial Government had been co.npelled to
sigit the terms of peace. General Trochu, who became
master of Paris on the 4th September, never suceeeded
in making good this carly mistake. Terrorised by Belle-
ville, * he exercised a most damaging influence upon the
negotiations at Ferritres, which were so lamentably
carried on by an inexperienced lawyer. The unfortunate
phrase. “‘ Not a foot of our territory, not a stone of our
fortresses ” originated with General Trochu, who thought
that he would disarm the Faubourgiens, at the same
time entertaining them with his marvellous war schemes
which had me ver existed. Whenever there was any sign
of trouble, General Trochu was nervous and undecided
in dealing sith the enemy.”
> Guste:¢ Rothschild was convinced that towards the
end of October, six weeks after the city had first been


422 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


invested, the armcd resources of the capital would have
been sufficient to break through the lines of the attackers,
and compcl them to raise the siege. Ile was also of the
opinion that the sortie of the 2nd September, 1870, had
every chance of being successful if only the French troops
had been led by an energetic and competent general.

The Austrian Ambassador, Prince Metternich, and
the British Ambassador, Lord Lyons, had left Paris for
the scat of the French Government at Tours. Gustave
Rothschild spoke of the unfortunate effect produced by
their quitting Paris, for it had been believed, and it was
still believed, that the presence of these two Ambassadors
in Paris would have facilitated the negotiations at
Ferri¢res and would have modified the terrors of the
siege, and possibly prevented the bombardment. Gustave
Rothschild also discussed the future, and the probable
terms of peace, with Count Vitzthum.

“The moment,” he said, “ for Austria and England
to intervene actively and firmly has arrived. If the
neutral Powers allow things to take their course they
will have to pay dearly for their inaction. It is a mistake
to suppose that the fmancial question takes preecdenec
of the territorial question. The two questions are more
related than is realised. I am not referrmg to the ten
milliards. It is an absolute impossibility for France to
raise such a sum. But I woud reques. you to bear the
following proposition in mind: if Prussia proves mag-
nanimous, and forgocs any accession of territory, we shall
easily be able to raise a large sum to indemnify her for
the cost of the war. If, however, she should insist upoa
wresting from us the line of the Vosges from Belfort to
Metz and Longwy, it will be exceedingly difficult for us
to raise even a much smaller amount, as I shall explain.

“A mutilated and humiliated France will have but
one thought -revenge, that is, war. It, however,
she is shown consideration and left whole, she will


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 423


recover, and attribute her defeat and her sacrifices to
the Empire. She will then only desire a lasting peace,
guaranteed by a firm Government and an cconomical
administration. There is no financier in Europe who does
not appreciate this fact, or who does not therefore gauge
the grcdit that may be granted to France by the con-
ditions that will be imposed upon that country. M.
Favre’s fine phrases are absurd —-it is no more dishonour-
able for France than for any other country to be foreed
to surrender a province after an unsuceessful war. At
the same time, we financiers 1,:ust caleulate, and we ave
compelled to take into our calculations the qualities and
defects of the peoples who require loans. Credit is deter-
mined by such considerations.

“Wierr von Bismarck is in a position to ruin France.
I do not, however, believe that this wonld be in the
interests of Germany, and it would certaiiy not be in
the interests of Austria, Russia, or England. I present
facts as they are. If Austria does not suceced in bringing
about a reasonable peace, let her reconcile herself to a
struvgle of desperation, a war without ceasiag, battles
without end, and a barbaric tyranny for which history
ean offer no counterpart.”

Gustave Rothschild was, moreover, of the opinion that
a peace after Sedan or at Ferri¢res would perhaps have
been even more devastating, since, as | ¢ said, the long
resistance strengthened the nation’s backbone, healed
it of many illusions, and destroyed the Red party.
Gustave Rothschild remarked with satisfaction that the
Bonapartists, as “such, fad suffered a complete fiasco
at the polls.

“The comradeship m arms,” he said, “ che self-
sacrifice of the rich, and the courage of the aristocrats
have eli ated the fears that Paris might have felt of

epetition of the June fighting. Every day I drove in

brougham through Belleville and the mos: notorious


424 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


districts, and was never insulted by the populace, which
seems to have forgotten its old hatred of the aristocrats.
In this, at any rate, the disaster did good.”

When Count Vitzthum informed Gustave Rothschild
that Changarnier, the old friend of his House, had left
for Bordeaux, with the intention of proclaiming ‘‘ Long
live the King! Long live Henry V!”’ Gustave Rothschild
at first seemed surprised. Then, recollecting the good
relations between his House and the Bourbon Royal
Families, he suddenly exclaimed, ““ Upon my word, the
General is right ; it is the only possible thing to do!”

This conversation is interesting in more than one con-
nection. On the one hand, it reveals an attempt of the
House of Rothschild to intervene actively at the last
moment, on behalf of France, in the peace negotiations
that were in progress ; also it clearly showed how little
use the House of Rothschild had for the Imperial régime.
Itis truc that Gustave Rothschild was mistaken as to the
temper of the masses in Paris; and the rising of the
Commune a few months later was to show him his
mistake.

Meanwhile Thiers, Jules Favre, and Alphonse Roths-
child had concluded the negotiations regarding the prelim-
inary peace at Versailles. Bismarek’s conditions for the
surrender of Alsace Lorraine and the payment of five
milliards had to be accepted with a heavy heart. Jointly
with other bankers, Alphonse Rothschild guaranteed the
financial arrangements, as well as the moncy neccssary
for revictualling the city, and the millions demanded as
a contribution from the City of Paris. :

The English Government had indced, as Disraeli and,
Lionel Rothschild, who was behind him, so keenly de-
sired, attempted at the last monient to propose that the
amount of the war indemnity should be decided by.
arbitration. But England was too late, and nobody took*
any notice of her attempt at intervention.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 425


On the 26th February, 1871, the preliminary Peace
of Versailles was accordingly signed, concluding the war
that affected the future more perhaps than any other of
the nineteenth century.

Bismarck did not deny himself a small personal re-
venge on Rothschild. Three days after the signature of
the preliminary peace Thiers’s aide-de-camp, d’Hérisson,
was dining at Versailles, and Bismarck deliberately told
the story of the churlish behaviour of Rothschild’s
steward at Ferri¢res, passing on to some general remarks
about the Rothschilds, whos. grandfather had heen
“Court Jew” to the Elector of Hessc, and “ private
Jew ” to innumerable noble families. »

On the 11th March the Emperor William and the
German Gencral Staff left Versailles. There were, huw-
ever, days of bloodshed and strife still in store for Paris.
Gustave Rothschild had been too sanguine in his judg-
ment of the social enmitics. Just before and during the
peace negotistions, disturbances broke out in Paris,
which were directed against the new authorities in the
State. On the 18th March the rising known as the Com-
mune broke out in full force. The Government thought
it best to leave the capital for the time being, and to
withdraw to Versailles, whither the National Assembly
had recently been transferred. Alphonse Rothschild, who
‘vas in constant touch with Thiers on questions affecting
the finances, left the capital with the Government, and,
Versailles being crowded out, he took a room in the
Hotel des Réservoirs, which was converted into a kind
‘of apartement by screens.

. There Alphonse Rothschild lived through the terrors of
the Paris Conunune, during which there were numcrous
encounters with the Government’s troops at the barri-
cades just. outside the Rothschilds’ palace, and the house
kmext it, which belonged to the Pereires. Strangely erough,

though there was a terrible ainount of Idoting, and even


426 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


the Tuileries were set on fire, the Rothschilds’ house and
their possessions on this occasion scarcely suffered at all.

Finally, at the end of May, the Government troops
suceceded in quelling the rising and in restoring order
in Paris by their energetic action. The Government de-
partments, and the various fugitives, including the
Rothschilds, returned to the capital, where they had to
procecd with the work of actually carrying out the peace
conditions.

The Rothschilds were referred to extensively, especi-
ally in connection with determining the instalments in
which the war indenmnity should be paid. Thiers and
Favre had invited them to the peace negotiations rather
than other bankers, because they knew that behind the
Paris Rothschilds, who, like all other French bankcrs,
had suffered heavy losses in the war, stood their cousins
in the other capitals of Kurope, especially those in
London and Frankfort. In view of the extraordinary
position that Lionel had been able to achieve—and
which was attributable, to no small degree, to his friend-
ship with Disracli, who had so long been Chancellor of
the Exchequer, and in 1868 had been appointed Prime
Minister —his financial support was necessarily of the
greatest valuc to France.

Lionel did not disappoint the hopes that had been
placed in him ; he took the scadershi, of the syndicate
of English bankers who, by maintaining the rate of
exchange, facilitated the French payments of their war
indemnity.

The English and French Wouse of Rothschild also
played an extensive part in the Joan operations, which
made it possible for France to pay off the five milliards
fully two years carlicr than had becn contemplated, and
thereby to secure that the French territory that haq
beer occupicd by the Germans should be evacuatee.
proportionately earlier.


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD 427


Thereby the Rothschilds earned the gratitude of the
new authorities in the State and the new form of govern-
ment, the Republic. They shed no tears over Napoleon
III, and, now that the fine days of Bourbon rule seemed
to be definitely over, they felt that there was no reason
why they should not make friends with the Republic.

The Paris Rothschilds emerged from the upheavals
of the war of 1870-1 financially unshaken, ard able to
point to themselves as men who had proved their
patriotism for France.

Thus they succeeded in main‘aining their position and
their wealth in France, and under the new conditions,
too, of the Third Republic, in playing an important, if
not a decisive, part in the political and financial life of
the State.


Epritocur


The Rothschilds from the Close of the Nineteenth to the
End of the First Quarter of the Twentieth Century.


Durine the half-century after the Franco-German war
the developments of the House of Rothschild were not
so dramatic as they had been, but neither did it decline
from the social and economic position that it had
achieved. The social position of the family, as revealed
by its residences outside Germany, had reached a point
which, in view of the origin of the family, is surprising,
and must be regarded as unique. Economically they
succeeded through all the vicissitudes of the modern
era in maintaining their wealth at a most impressive
level, although they had to surrender to others the
distinction of being the wealthicst in Kurope.

Through the unique combination of J:igh social
position and great financial resourees with the interna-
tional connections of Jews, they have succeeded, by
cleverly adapting themselves to the politics of the day,
in playing an active part in important pol'tical and
economic developments up to the present day. It is still
impossible completely to ignore them in those countries
in which the fumily is still established. But the general
position of the TTouse has somewhat changed as com-
pared with earlier times. When the five brothers of the
second generation disappeared from the scene, the close
union between their Houses, and their intimate co-
operation, became somewhat modified. This was partly
a consequence of the fact that the members of the third
generation almost completely adapted thems«lves to
the nations i, whose midst they were living aid came
to think and feel nationally. In England, France, and
Germany {he members of the Rothschild family had
themselves naturalised; they were received in the
fishest social circles in these countries, an? it was,

zi 429


430 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


therefore, only natural that they should have en-
deavoured to outdo in patriotism the natural-born
Englishman, Frenchman, or Austrian whose family
had been settled in the country since time immemorial.
This change came to be expressed in the regulation of
the family property. Whereas during the time of the
five brothers cach brother shared in the profit or loss
in every transaction according to conditions determined
by contract every three or five years, now each of the
four presiding Wouses had its own private property,
and it was only in certain big transactions, individually
specified when they arose, that the four Houses acted
together under special agreements, more or less con-
stituting a single firm for such purposes. This did not
prevent each House from assisting the other in its private
transactions by supplying information or by other
effective help, when opportunity offered. The most
important men of the time have recognised, often
reluctantly, the peculiar position which the Rothschilds
have achieved in the world.

Bismarck, whose attitude to them has been shown
to have been sometimes cynical, and at other times
friendly, once said at a dinner which the Crown Prince
was giving to the Reichstag, and at which Meyer Carl,
the Frankfort Rothschild, was a guest, that he missed
him in Berlin, that he ought to stay there more often
and entertain; that he owed it to his House. Roths-
child asked whether he should give dinners im a
restaurant, whereupon Bismarck replied that it would
be still better if he would buy a house of his own it
Berlin, for the Paris and the London Rothschilds were.
not much use to him, and so the Frankfort one ought
to do something in Berlin. This remark of Bismarck’s
confirmed the actual development under which the,
Rothschilds, after 1870, no longer formed one intern&
tional bank as’ before, but constituted several national


EPILOGUE 431


banks, although there was a certain connection between
them.

The suggestion of a Berlin branch came to nothing,
and indecd the original Frankfort House declined more
and more in importance under the Empire.

Meyer Carl, the head of the Frankfort Ilouse, had,
contrary to the usual practice of the Rothschilds, taken
an active part in politics. In 1867 he had been elected
member for Frankfort in the Reichstag of the North
German Confederation, and afterwards he became a
member of the Prussian Uprer Chamber, and of the
Reichstag under the Empire. For two years he was
actually a town councillor of the City of Frankfort,
which not long before would have been quite incon-
ceivable in the case of a Jew. Meyer Carl worked in
close association with his brother Wilhelm, whereas
Adolph, who had been in Naples, made ho permanent’
home in Paris. Meyer Carl always felt that fate had
treated him very cruelly in giving him only daughters,
and no son. Lis brother Wilhcln also had no male
descendants. Meyer Carl’s ambition to achieve a high
and honoured position in the Empire of William I
revealed itself in later years in a positive craving for
Orders. The Emperor William had given up his previous
ideas with regard to granting Orders of a special design
for non-Christians, and he wrote playfully to Bismarck
when Meyer Carl was aspiring to a Grand Cross with
broad Ribbon::

“Carl Meier, Baron von Rothschild, has developed
a@ bad attack of tape-worm at the approach of the
investiture ceremony. I can’t provide a remedy ‘or this,
but I could cure kreuzschmerzen (lumbago).* We must
remembcr that during the war he spent an enormous
amount on charity, for which his wife reccived the Cross
@f Merit; she, of course, spent the money whicl. her

husband gave her, but he received no distinct’on.”


432 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


During the following years the commercial and
political importance of the Frankfort House dwindled
considerably. When Meyer Carl died in 1886, his brother
Wilhelm became head of the bank—Meyer Amschel
Rothschild & Sons. But he had not the qualities required
to re-establish the importance of the Frankfort firm ;
and when he dicd in 1901 the parent firm ceased to
exist.

It is represented indirectly at the present day by
the Goldschmidt-Rothschild Bank. Minna Caroline,
the daughter of Wilhelm von Rothschild, married
Maximilian von Goldschmidt, who had an independent
bank at Frankfort, and, after the marriage, added the
name of Rothschild to his own. As this couple inherited
a large proportion of the enormous wealth of the parent
firm that had now disappeared from the scene, the
Goldschmidt-Rothschild Bank soon acquired consider-
able importance.

The value of the inheritance may be inferred from
the taxes paid, as wellas from interesting estimates made
by Bismarck. The latter remarked in the year 1875 during
his campaign against Rome. “ If I were to assess the
Jesuit Order for income tax purposes, I should not, at
the moment, assess it quite so high as the property of the
late Rothschild, but at over half his wealth, that is to
say at about 250 to 280 millica thaler, or about one
thousand million francs in capital value. ”

According to the diaries of the French Ambassador,
Georges Louis, the Emperor William II, when his yacht
Hohenzollern was in Palermo harbour in April 1908,,
received a young Paris Rothschild, whose yacht had also
put into that harbour, and, as Bismarck had done on a
previous occasion, suggested to him that a member of
his family should settle in Berlin.» The Ambassadoz
asserts that the Emperor spoke for more than an hour}
to this young French Rothschild about the greatness


EPILOGUE 433


of his House, praising the services which it had rendered,
and lamenting the fact that, although it had originated
in the German town of Frankfort, it was no lonncr re-
presented in Germany. Te said that a member of the
family ought to come to Germany again; that he, the
Emperor, had no religious or race prejudices, and would
give a branch of the Rothschilds in Germany a position
that would actually excel the position of the Ifouses in
Paris and London. Enquiries of a personage very closely
connected with the Emperor William prove this story to
be entirely imaginary, the Emperor never having had
any such conversation, or made any such suggestion to
a member of the Mouse of Rothschild. However that
may be, the fact remains that there was now no branch
of the Rothschilds in the country whence they had set
out to conquer Kurope, and that, of the five original
branches, only those of London, Paris and Vienna
flourished.

On the other hand, Anselm had sueeecded in re-
establishing the prestige of his Tlouse in Austria, and in
restoring the position of his family, which had been so
much damaged by Solomon’s flight in 1848. On the
conclusion of the Franco-Prussian war a veritable fever
of company promotion and unparalleled over-speculation
broke out in Austria too; Ansclin condemned these ten-
dencies and kept aloof from them as far as possible.
There was a gencral desire to imitate the Creditanstalt,
founded by the Rothschilds, the value of whose shares
had risen in a most extraordinary manner, on the part
of persons who, however, lacked the financial solidity of
the Rothschild Houses. This finally led to the notorious
‘collapse of the 8th May, 1873, which Anselm alone was
prepared for, and able to deal with, at a considerable
Sost, whilsi the new companies and banks surrounding

m came to grief. As the House of Rothschild alone
temerged without serious damage from this catistrophe,

Dp


484 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


it acquired many enemics and critics. When Anselm died
in July 1874, his wealth was much greater than the
inheritance to which he had succeeded ; but this result
had been achieved rather by caution in preserving what
had come to him, and by the more or less automatic
growth of a large fortune, than by new undertakings on
a large scale.

His name is still associated with that beneficent
institution, the Wahring Jlospital. Anselm had three
sons, of whom the eldest, Nathanicl, had no taste for
business at all, his preference being for good company
and artistic interests, a fact which often caused trouble
with his father. Anselin’s houses, 17 Rue Malfitte,
Paris. the Rémische Kaiser in Vienna, the house in the
Renngasse, the Gundelhof in the Bauernmarkt, and his
estates at Schillersdorf and Beneschau, were divided
amongst his children by his will, with the explicit
injunction never to sell or mortgage any of them, but to
maintain them faithfully in the male line. He dis-
tinguished in his will between the tastes of his sons
Nathaniel and Ferdinand, who, as he wrote, had, like
himself, a special liking for the arts, particularly for
such artistic objects as are associated with the period of
the Renaissance, and his son Albert, who preferred to
occupy himself with business and practical matters. ,

In his will, Anselm emphasised tle necessity for
maintaining “that lively sense of brotherly unity”
which had hitherto existed, and which, he had no doubt,
would continue to exist in the future. He emphasised
the importance of co-operating zealously for the familys
prosperity, and of carefully watching over all the family |
interests.

Clauses 20 and 21 are reminiscent of the last will of the
founder of the bank.

“| charge,” * he wrote, ‘‘all my dear children to lisy
constantly in perfect harmony, not to allow family ties


EPILOGUE 435


to loosen, to avoid all disputes and unpleasantness, and
legal actions ; to exercise forbearance and tolerance to
one another, and not to Iet themselves be carried away
by angry passions. In their gentleness of spirit and
tranquil dispositions, let my children follow the example
of their splendid grandparents ; for these qualities have
always ensured the happiness and prosperity of the whole
Rothschild family, and may my dear children never
become unmindful of this family tradition.

“Jn accordance with the exhortations of my father,
the grandfather who so sincertly loved them, as con-
tained in Clause 15 of his will, may they «and their
descendants remain constantly true to their ancestral
Jewish faith.

“T forbid them most explicitly, in any circumstaness
whatever, to have any public inventory made by the
courts, or otherwise, of my estate. ... Also I forbid any
recourse to the courts, and any publication of the value
of my estate... . Anyone who disregards these provisions
and takes any kind of action which conflicts with them
shall immediately be regarded as having disputed the
will, and shall suffer the penalties for so doing.”

Anselm did not wish the courts to obtain too ercat an
insight into the financial affairs of the House of Roths-
child ; such as is always an inevitable consequence when
icgal disputes arise in a family.

Albert Solomon von Rothschild, Anselm’s third son,
now beeame head of the Vienna Ifouse, while the two
elder sons followed their hobbies on a grand scale,
Nathaniel living an extravagant life as a grand seigneur
with a taste for art, while Ferdinand was a great sports-
man. Born in 184-4, Albert attended the Gymnasium at
Vienna, followed by a University course at Bonn and
Sraining in i bank at Hamburg, after which he went on

ng journcys until 1874, when he took charge of the
Vienna Ifouse. Two years later he marricd the daughter


436 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


of Alphonse Rothschild of Paris, thus following the
example of his predecessors, who, with few exceptions,
had married members of their own family bearing the
Rothschild name.

His position in the world of finance and in Vienna
society was much more important than that of his
father. In JIungary he took a special part in the
conversion of the 6 per cent. Gold Loan of 1881. In
Vienna he was chalicnged by a grandiose attempt of the
financial adventurer Bontoux to counter the Rothschild
influence by founding the Linderbank, with the support
of the Government. The Rothschilds lost a great deal
of their influence in forcign affairs, while maintaining
their influence fully in financial and social matters.
They extensively increased their possessions of houses
and Jands in the Monarchy. In Vienna Nathaniel built
the mansion in the Thercsianumpasse, which is one of the
features of the city. The precious objects which it
contains are litcrally unparalleled, and the historical
value attaching to many of them cannot be estimated.
In the dining-room,’ fur instance, four pictures by
Vanloo had been Ict into the panelling representing the
plastic arts which were originelly conmiissioned by the
Marquise Pompadour for her Chateau Bellevue. In a
corner there is a small oval Louis XVI table with a
porphyry top, formerly in the possession « f Queen Marie
Antoinette, which bears her monogram with crown. An
enamelled Medici china sct of the sixteenth century,
consisting of twelve pieces, is to be seen in one of the
electrically lighted glass cases. On a red table is a dagger
with a rich gilt handle which once belonged to Wallen-.
stein. Perhaps the most valuable article in this mansion is
a golden toilet-box in a roscwood case with the Arms of
Napol:on I, which he left behind in his carriage after,
the Baiile of Watcrloo. There are paintings by Fragonarat
and Boucher akove the doors, while from the walls there


EPILOGUE 437


look down a Princess of Hanover by Lawrence, the
Laughing Girl by Reynolds, Louis Philippe’s mother by
Lampi, Natticr’s portrait of the Pompadour, and count-
less other priccless pictures.

The mansion which was built by Albert Rothschild,
in the Louis XVI style, in the Prinz Hugenstrasse,
suggests that it was deliberately constructed in such a
way as not to be casily attacked from the street. The
stone wall itself, on which a massive surrounding iron
fence several metres in height is built, is taller than the
normal height of a man. The mansion lies rather far
back, there being a fairly wide empty space to cross
after passing the railing. This scheme may have been
adopted as a result of the painful experience of the 1848
revolution in Paris. Inside, the mansion is no less
sumptuously furnished than the one in the Thercsianum-
gasse.

The Vienna Gardens of the Rothschilds on the TTohe
Warte are famous; they are au absolute paradise, in
which every variety of rare flower and fruit is to be
found in its season.

It is not surprising that, leading such a manner of life,
the Rothschilds should also have wished to continue
to improve their social position. Indeed, having regard
to the circumstances of the time, they put forward the
most audacious requests. Thus they had conceived a
great longing to achieve the fullest competence to attend
Courts, so as to be on an cqual footing with the highly
privileged great noble families of the country who could
show hundreds of ancestors. They applied great pressure
to secure this object. The Rothschilds had succeeded in
putting many of the mcmbers of the highest nobility
under obligations to them. Alphonse Rothschild in Paris
induced King Albert of Saxony, the friend of the
Bimperor Francis Joseph, to use his influence to get this
distinction conferred upon Alphonsc’s son-in-law. At first


438 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


there was a very obstinate opposition, and many a
financial sacrifice had to be made in rendering services
to the State and assisting in philanthropic objects before
it was decidcd in the winter of 1887 to make an exception
in favour of Albert Rothschild and his wife, and to
admit them to Court. The other members of the Louse
also secured this distinction in course of time, and the
Rothschilds felt themselves thenccforward to be equal
members of the so-called Vienna Court Society, and
from that time to the present day they have moved
almost exclusively in those circles.

There was no close personal bond between the House
of Rothschild and the Emperor Francis Joseph. He
maintained towurds them, too, the attitude of the calm,
deliberate Ruler, showing them neither hatred nor any
special good will, although it is true that he was unable
to ignore their position and their financial importance.

The Empress klizabcth, on the other hand, was on
friendly terms with the female members of the House of
Rothschild. Baroness Julie Rothschild, the daughter of
Anselm of Vienna, who was married to Baron Adolf,
who lived in Paris, enjoyed her special favour. Julie
Rothschild owned # delightful villa at Pregny on the
Lake of Geneva, with extensive conservatorics where
she could devote herself to her favourite hobby of
horticulture. The fact that the Empr‘ss also loved
flowers more than anything clse in the world gave an
excuse for inviting the Empress to Pregny. This was in
the fateful year 1898. The Empress, who had a weak
heart, had been taking the waters at Nauheim, after
which she spent one night at Munich in the room she
had lived in as a girl. Thence she went to Switzerland,
and on the 9th September arrived at Pregny by the
ordinsry passenger steamer. The Baroness had offere
the Enipress her yacht, but this had not been acceptedg:
since Ilizabcth had heard that the crew were not


EPILOGUE 439


allowed to accept presents, and she felt this fact to be
embarrassing.

The Baroness, a Jady of charm and _ distinction,*
received her Imperial guest, who was accompanied by
the Countess Sztaray, at the entrance to the villa. A
magnificent dinner was served; the china was old
Vienna, and the glass was very old and precious cut
crystal. At first the richly clad servants who were
constantly fussing about the table distressed the
Empress ; but the easy charm and good-humour of her
hostess, and the subdued Italia: air played by a con-
cealed orchestra, soon induced such a genial temper in
the usually so difficile lady that she clicked champagne
glasses with her hostess, a thing that she was very
rarcly known to do. The ladies then went into the garden
to inspect the incomparably magnificent conservatorics.
Arranged according to countries and climates, the most
magnificent blaze of flowers met their view. The orchids
especially aroused the enthusiasm of the HMmpress. As
she left, Klizabeth was handed the visitors’ book, and
after signing her name jn a firm handwriting, sLe turned
over a Teuf to her hostess’s surprise. Her face, beautiful
still in her old age, paled, and without a word she passed
the book to the Countess Sztaray. To her dismay that
lady read the name Rudolph written in firm characters.
This incident led the Empress, on hee way home,
although she had spent such a happy day, to talk about
religion and death to the Countess Sztaray. When the
latter observed that she Jooked forward to death without

fear, Klizabeth replied : “ But I fear death, although 1
Afton long for it; the transition and the unecrtainty

make me tremble, and especially the thought of the
terrible strugole which one must undergo befure reaching
e other side.”” Little knowing what was in store for her,

e unhappy Empress spent the night at the Wotel
Beau Rivage in Geneva. On the following day the sharp,


440 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


thin dagger of the anarchist Luccheni pierced her heart.
She herself did not realise what had happened, and she
was spared the death struggle she had feared.

Albert Rothschild, head of the Vienna House, dicd
on the 24th March, 1892; he had five sons, of whom
Alfons and Louis to-day control the fortunes of the
Vienna House of Rothschild.

Meanwhile the Rothschilds in France continued in
their attitude of hostility towards Germany, a fact
which, together with the financial services that they
rendered, confirmed their position with the new repub-
lican authorities. There was, indeed, one incident which
caused the German Ambassador, von Arnim, to protest
strongly against the Rothschilds. Alphonse’s wife had told
a story in a salon that showed the Emperor William in a
thoroughly ridiculous light. This gave rise to a keen
diplomatic and social controversy, in the course of which
Alphonse’s wife denied everything.

As long as Thicrs’s conservative Government was at
the helm everything went well, for the Rothschilds got
on much better with the new form of Government than
with the Empire which had preeeded it. They would have
welcomed even more joyfully, it is truce, a restoration of
the Bourbons, especially if it had been the House of
Orléans, but they were careful to keep this wish to
themselves. :

The Monarchist-Clerical régime of Marshal MacMahon
was Icss congenial to them; and they did not feel that
he had the ability to remain at the head of the State.’

After some keen party contests, the year 1877 saw the
triumph of the republican idca in France, and a new
Ministry in power, in which the friend of the House of
Rothschild, Léon Say, who had remained true to his
libera’ principles, was again responsible for the finances,
He wap in a general way the friend and confidant of tht
Jlouse of Rothschild, and this connection brought several


EPILOGUE ‘441


advantages to the Bank. At the beginning of the eighties,
when Gambetta was in power, the atmosphere was
again less favourable to the Rothschilds. Gambetta was
opposed to the private companies, which controlled the
railways of France, and he was therefore also opposed
to the Rothschilds as having the most important railway
interests in France. His fall and death in the year 1882
again liberated the railways. An agreement was concluded
between the French State and the six gicat railway
companics, under which the former undertook not to
avail itself for thirty years of its right to repurchase the
private railways on repayment of the advances. ‘The
Rothschilds, who feared any new war as likely to inter-
fere with the smooth running of their business, were not
inclined, in spite of their strongly patriotic attitude, to
support Gencral Boulanger, who preached a war of
revenge against Germany, although they exercised
caution in showing their feelings. Alphonse continued with
a sure touch to control the destinies of the Paris House.
The differences between France and England with
regard to Keypt and the Suez Canal caused embarrass-
ment to the Paris and London Tfouses, who were sup-
porting their respective Governments in these questions.
When the matter had been finally settled in favour of
England, the path was clear for creating more fricndly
selations between the two countries. As carly as 1877 the
Prince of Wales, who was afterwards King Mdward VII,
had taken up this idea, and endeavoured through his
personal friends in Paris, especially Alphonse Rothschild,
~to produce a congenial atmosphere for an entente between
‘England and France."
At that time he was not successful, but a change in the
world situation made France more amenable to the
zidea later. France’s occupation of Tunis had led to
Vill-feeling in Italy, and at the beginning of 1883 that
country joined the German-Austrian. Duai Alliance.


442 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


This fact caused alarm in France as to the possibility
of war on two fronts, and she endeavoured to ascertain
the seeret provisions of the Treaty of Triple Alliance,
and if possible to detach Italy, whose association with
Austria was only half-hearted, from her friends. During
the following years the first efforts were made to secure
an understanding between France and Russia.

Considerable progress had already been made in the
matter of the understanding with Russia, when in April
1891 Paris proceeded to work with greater energy to
detach Italy. The representative of the House of
Rothschild in Rome, a certain Padova, was used for
this purpose. Italy had appeared in the French Money
Markct inscarchof loans, and Padova" was instructed to
state that no money could be Ient to a State which might
conceivably embark on a hostile action against the
country of the persons supplying the money. In this
way an attempt was made to asccrtain the military
provisions of the Treaty of Triple Allianee. The Austrian
Ambassador in Romeactually reported that he had learnt
from arcliable source that a representative of the House
of Rothschild had made extensive promises of a financial
nature on condition that Italy should remain neutral
in a Franco-German war, or should acquicsce in the
re-conquest of Alsace-Lorraine.

The attitude of the Rothschilds with regard to the
Franco-Russian rapprochement was at first reserved.
The Prussian Diskonto-Gesellschaft of Bleichréder and
the Frankfort Rothschilds had refused Russian requests
for loans (the financial situation was one of the prin-:
cipal reasons which drove Tsarist Russia into the arms
of republican France). The Rothschild attitude was
influenced to no small degree by the fact that the Jews
were p«rsecuted in Russia. When, however, the Alliance
betwee: France and Russia took shape, and the squadrons
of the two countries united in friendly festivities at


EPILOGUE 443


Kronstadt in July 1891, it became a patriotic duty to
assist Russia in her financial requirements, and the
Rothschilds recognised that they would have to ignore
the special interests of the Jews, as for the sake of
their position in France, they could not stand aloof
from participating in the big loans which that country
was making available for Russia.

Towards Germany they excused their change of
policy, principally on the ground that, whereas they had
previously refused Russia a loan, since she oppressed the
Jews, they were now attempting to get better conditions
for the Russian Jews by granting such loars. Count
Minster, German Ambassador in Paris, reported on this
matter to the German Chancellor, von Caprivi, ou the
23rd October, 1892, as follows: ‘ Whereas I have
hitherto always assumed that His Majesty the Emperor
of Russia will never bind himself to the Democratic
Republic, or enter into a treaty of alliance, 1 am now no
longer quite certain whether some agreements have not
been entered into. The Rothschilds, who have so far
aiways asserted that nothing of the kind existed, no
longer so definitely deny this ; and they have suddenly
changed their negative attitude towards Russia and are
negotiating a 500,000,000 loan. The Rothschilds, who
have so far been Royalists, have approached the Republic,
and are now hand in glove with the Gove*nment, where-
by they regain their influence. ‘The prospect of making a
profit, and, according to Alphonse Rothschild, the hope of
attaining better conditions for the Jews in Russia, have
Anduced the Ilouse here to enter into negotiations for a
loan. The fact that the London TIouse will have nothing
to do with this luan shows how cunning these great Jews
are. hey always have a back door open. . . . That the

ife of the new Finance Minister, Witte, whom Russian
wedics here have described to me as being an intelligent
jand very intriguing Jewess, is of great help iu bringing


444 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


about an understanding with the Jewish bankers,
seems to me to be not improbable. The Paris Bourse is
afraid of being overshadowed by the Bourse of Berlin,
and the big Jews believe that if they can earn money
they can best help the small Jews, with the result that,
although the French market is saturated with Russian
securities, the French give their good francs for bad
roubles,” '#

In view of the international position of the House,
there was always the possibility of diplomatic indis-
cretions, such as might have the most far-reaching
consequences. Thus we now know from the memoirs
of Prince von Eulenburg that the secret understanding
regarding the Mediterranean between France and Italy,
which paved the way for Italy’s sccession from the
Triple Alliance, was known in Vienna and Kerlin before
the Treaty had been settled, through Nathanicl, the
brother of the Vienna Rothschild, who had heard about
it from his Paris cousin."*

The social position of the Ilouse of Rothschild con-
tinued to be maintained at the highest possible level.
The male members of the House generally married only
in their own family, or at any rate married girls of purcly
Jewish extraction, while the daughters, as in England,
often marricd persons belonging to the highest aristo-
eracy. Thus, for instance, the two Barones3ses Marguerite
and Bertha Rothschild married the Duke Agenor de
Gramont, in 1878, and Alexandre Berthier, Duke of
Wagram, a descendant of Napoleon I’s famous Chicf of
the General Staff. :

Like all members of his family, who in the course of:
time attained a positively legendary reputation for
enormous wealth, Alphonse Rothschild was the victim of
daily anonymous Ictters. In his case an attempt waa.
made a:tually to carry out the threats. It may be tha’
the shot fired at him one day while shooting at Ferriéres


EPILOGUE 445


was an accident, but there can be no doubt that a parcel
which was addressed to him, and which exploded when
opened by a secretary, was directed against the life of
Alphonse Rothschild. Besides being chief of the Paris
House, Alphonse was also chairman of the Northern
Railway of France, and, to his great joy, he was elected
one of the forty immortals of the French Academy.

Alphonse Rothschild died on the 26th May, 1905, and
his son, Edouard, succeeded him as chief of the French
bank. Alphonse’s brother Edmund has become famous for
his support of Zionism and the idea of a Jewish colony
in Palestine.

During recent years, and at the present day, the
English Rothschilds have occupied the most important
position of all the branches of the House of Rothschild.
During the period after the Franco-German war this
was especially attributable to the close relations be-
tween Lionel Rothschild and Benjamin Disraeli, Earl
of Beaconsfield. When Gladstone was defeated in 1874,
Disracli again became Prime Minister, and succeeded in
ingratiating himself with Queen Victoria to an extra-
ordinary degrec. Although Disracli was a Christian, his
Jewish descent was an important factor in making his
friendship with Lionel, which dated from their youth,
an excecdingly intimate onc. Beaconsfield once wrote of
the Rothschilds: “ I have always been of the opinion
that theré could not be enough Rothschilds.’

The fact that Lionel belonged to ‘the Liberal and
Disraeli to the Conservative Party was quite irrclevant.
The banker and the Minister understood each other
kxceedingly well, and in questions affecting the
emancipation of the Jews Lionel and Disraeli were so

uch of the same opinion that the Conservative Minister

Imost always voted against his own party. It is‘apparent
Pit the Ilouse of Rothschild ecrtainty did not suffer
om this close friendship with England’s Prime Minister,


446 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


but the Government and England also gained advantage
from this connection. This was particularly the case in
the matter of the Sucz Canal question. The grandson of
Mehemct Ali, the Khedive Ismail Pasha, who ruled in
Egypt from 1863 to 1879, had incurred a_ perfectly
monstrous load of debt. It is true that he inaugurated
an era of unexampled progress in his country, but he had
also increased the national debt by the year 1875 from
about three hundred million marks to about two thousand
million, his own personal cxtravagance having been a
large factor in bringing this about. In the end the
Egyptian State and the Khedive got so heavily into
debt. that the ruler was compelled to procecd to sell the
177,602 shares" in the Suez Canal which he held, to
obtain money for his most pressing requirements.

It was essential that the cash should be made im-
mediately available, and the Khedive had already got
into touch with French financiers. Heinrich Oppenheim,
a banker who had often lent the Khedive money, heard
of the whole scheme which it was proposed to carry
through ; and informed both the journalist Frederick
Greenwood and Lionel of this excellent opportunity for
the British Government to sceure their hold upon the
maritime conncction with India. Disracli had for some
time been thinking of securing 2 dominating influence in
the canal by sccuring the 400,000 Suez Canal shares.
But now it was essential to act quickly, for the Khedive
had already granted an option to French financiers, so
that the British could not afford to delay with their offer.
Parliament was not sitting and could not be summoned
quickly enough; and it was not such a simple matter to’
take £4,000,000 out of the Treasury without parliamen-
tary sanction. In view of the importance of the matter,
Disrac}i ignored all these difficulties. “‘ We have scarcely
time tu breathe, we must carry the matter through,
Disracli wrote to his Queen,'* and through his friend


EPILOGUE 4A7


Lionel Rothschild the £4,000,000 required for the pur-
chase was raised without parliamentary sanction. By
the afternoon of the 26th November, 1875, the purchase
had been earried through. The Rothschilds had advaneed
the moncy at 3 per cent., while Ismail had undertaken
to pay 5 per cent. per annum until the dividends on the
shares should again become payable.” Thus the British
Government carried through an important political and
a magnificent business deal.

Disracli reported to his Queen in terms of the
profoundest regard :


“*Madam,—tThe business has gone through, you
have the money. Four million pounds. There was only
one House that cowd have done this, the House of
Rothschild. They have behaved wonderfully, and have
lent the gold and the money at a very iow interest,
The whole of the Khedive’s share is now in your

fajesty’s hands.”


This transaction in particular revealed to the world
at large the friendship between Rothschild and Disraeli.
German Ambassadors and statesmen, such as Count
Miinster* and ILohenlohe,® always spoke of the English
Rothschilds as being intimate friends of the Premier.

It was not, however, the Prime Ministc> Disracli alone
who was on good terns with the Rothschilds living in
England. The Prince of Wales, Prince Edward, who was
then thirty-four years old, was also on the most fricndly
terms with the whole family. The Queen was positively
shocked by the intimate friendship between bum and
the great Jewish financiers, Lionel, Anthony, ana Meyer,
the heads of the Rethschild family, and later with the
younger gencration, Nathaniel, Ferdinand, and Leopold.
hehe Prince wus often a guest at their magnificent country
houses. d


448 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


In Sydney Lee’s biography of Edward VII we read":
“The Prince’s business instinct enabled him to appreciate
the financial acumen of the Rothschild clan, but he was
more effectively drawn to its members by their profuse
charity, their range of political information, their
hospitalities, their patronage of sport, and their assiduity
in collecting works of art.”

The Prince himself was present as a guest at the
marriage of Leopold Rethschild to Marie Perugia, in
1881, and was greatly impressed by the Jewish marriage
ceremonial, which he had never seen before. The Prince
of Wales was also frequently present at the Rothschild
dances.

While the sons of the Rothschild House observed the
family rule of marrying only girls of Jewish race,
daughters of the House were already marrying members
of the highest English aristocracy, The daughters of
Lioncl’s younger brother, uthioay, Constance and
Anna, married respectively Lord Battersea in 1877, and
the Honourable Eliot Yorke, a son of the Karl of
Hardwicke, in 1873. Moreover, a daughter of Lionel’s
fourth brother, Meyer Nathan, married in 1873 Archi-
bald Philip Primrose, Earl of Roscbery, who was Under-
secretary of State at the Home Olfice under Gladstone in
1881, and was Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in
Gladstone’s third Ministry of 1886, ana im his fourth
Ministry of 1892 to 1894. In 1894 he succeeded Gladstone
as Prime Minister. With such extensive and unique
connections, it was not unnatural that the Rothschilds
should continue to exercise a profound influence upon
high politics.

When the Congress of Berlin met in 1878, and it was
feared that the peace of the world was endangered by
the Arglo-Russian conflict in the Kast, and Beaconsfield
spoke it) a menacing manner at the Congress, it wag
Lionel who had direct news from the Premier in a


EPILOGUE 449


contrary sense, and was able to calm his business friends
throughout the world. The House of Rothschild still main-
tained the closest relations with Bleichréder; on the 15th
June, 1878, Prince Chlodwig 2u Hohenlohe-Schillings-
first, who was then Ambassador in Paris, was staying
in Berlin, and called on Bleichréder, who was able to
show him a letter of Lionel’s which had just arrived
from London, and which definitely stated that Beacons-
field had gone to the Congress at Berlin with the most
peaceful intentions."

Beaconsfield and Lionel did not fail to act in the
interests of their common race ut the Congress. Lionel
wrote a Ictter to Beaconsficld requesting him in the
name of humanity and civilisation to intervene on behalf
of the ill-treated Jews in the cast of Europe ; this letter
was read to the Congress in session. At the same time
Lionel brought pressure to bear upon Bismarck through
Bleichréder, and also sent an appeal to the French
Delegate, Waddington, and to the Italian Delegate,
Count Luigi Corti, with the result that Article 4-4 of the
Congress of Berlin actually provided that all the mem-
bers of all faiths in the Balkan Peninsula should be on an
equal footiny. The Austrian Delegate, Count Andrassy,
had been appealed to in a similar way by the Vienna
House of Rothschild.

Lionel had actually been the successf.:] protagonist
of Jewish emancipation in England. Sir Moses Monte-
fiore and he shared the honours of having rendered this
service to their fellow-Jews. When, on the 18th March,
1869, Lionel attended the consecration of the Jewish
kynagogue in London, he exclaimed in the course of his
speech : “ We are cmancipated, but if our emancapation
should damage our faith, it would be a curse instead of
& blessing.’ His chief source of pride lay in the fact that
“ had succeeded in getting into the House of Commons.
finally, in 1874, he lost his seat through oppusing the
: EE


450 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


abolition of the income tax, which Gladstone was trying
to carry through at the time. During his last years he
suffered so acutely from gout that he could scarcely use
his legs at all. Nevertheless, during the period of more
than forty ycars during which he was chicf at the
London House, he was always extremely active. He
died on the 3rd June, 1879, after a stroke.

Lionel had been most carefully prepared for his work
by his father, and throughout his life he conducted the
affairs of the bank with sound judgment, and prodigi-
ously increased the wealth of the Rothschilds, while
the activitics of his brothers in art, sport, and social life
furnished a background which obliterated the modest
origins of his family. He floated about sixteen British
State loans in the course of his life, and had also suc-
eceded in getting on to good terms with the Prince
Consort.

Tlis eldest son, Nathaniel Meyer Rothschild, succeeded
to the baronetcy of his uncle Anthony. In his way he
was the complete Englishman, quiet and of few words ;
he spoke no language but English, was modest, warn
hearted, and always courtcous. He was exceptionally
interested in history, and Beaconsfield said of him on
one occasion, when he was dining at Beaconsfield’s
house, 148 Piccadilly, ““ When I want to know a date in,
history I always ask Natty.”

Beaconsfield died in 1881, and the Rothschilds lost in
him one of the best and most powerful friends they had
ever had. Their position was, however, so firmly estab-
lished that the disappearance even of this man did not
constitute more than an unfortunate episode. ;

During the Egyptian crisis, which preceded the
occupation of Egypt by the British in 1882, the Roths-
childs rendered the British Government services for
which it was grateful, although without failing. to mg
member their own financial interests ; they granted the


BARON LIONEI, DE ROTHSCHILD


EPILOGUE 451


Egyptian Government a loan of £8,500,000, which loan
was guarantecd by Great Britain. Gladstone’s Govern-
ment rewarded their action by raising Nathaniel
Rothschild to the House of Lords. He was the first Jew
to be made a peer. Even Queen Victoria, who had
hitherto been exceedingly cold to the Rothschilds,
changed her attitude, and Ferdinand Rothschild,
Lionel’s son-in-law, had the honour of ree ceiving the
Queen of England in his house on the 14th May, 1890,
having already entertained her daughter, the Mmpress
Frederick of Germany, and the Shah of Persia. Ferdinand
was a son of Ansclm, the Vienna Rothschild, who had
settled permanently in England after his marriage.
The House of Rothschill was now more firmly
established than ever. It was possessed of enormous
wealth, and enjoyed the highest social prestige, whilst
almost all its former great rivals had disap penred from
the field. Where were the Frics, the Geymiillers ?
Where were Arnstcin-liskeles, the Foulds, the Pereires ?
The Rothschilds had survived them all.

In general world polities the Rothschilds continued
to use their influence in favour of peacc. They observed
with dismay the growing opposition between the
impulsive Emperor William IY, who was always liable
to make injudicious remarks, and the sensitive and
ageing Prince of Walcs. They also watched with concern
the development of an inerecasing jealousy between
England and Germany. The German Kmpcror’s tele-

am congratulating the Beers on their attitude with
regard to the Jameson Raid of 1895 was a matter of
absolute despair to the English Rothschilds, whe thought
that this mistortune would immediately be the cause of

ar. Alfred, Lord Rothsehild’s younger brother, con-
tituted hiaself a kind of unofficial diplomatic agent,
working in close collaboration with the British Govern-
ment, while he was also in touch with the German


452 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Embassy, which was under the direction of Count
Hatzfeld.

We know to-day from the writings of Baron von Eckard-
stein that Alfred Rothschild was one of the promoters of
the idea of an alliance between England and Germany.

In view of the Russo-British rivalry in Asia (Port
Arthur) and the Franco-British rivalry (Fashoda),
towards the end of the nincteenth century there were
moments when such a combination was not by any
means out of the question, and towards the end of
February 1898 sccret discussions took placc, generally
in the house of Alfred Rothschild, between Count
Hatzfeld and Chamberlain, who was then Sceretary of
State for the Colonics, and was acting on behalf of Lord
Salisbury, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. But
all this came to nothing ; indced, at the end of 1898 there
was a dispute between England and Germany regarding
the ownership of Samoa, and William IL agreed to the
demand that a Commission of three representatives of
the protecting Powers, together with one impartial
representative, should be sent out if relations should be
broken off against the wishes of Germany. Count
Hatzfeld, the Ambassador, did not immediately transmit
this command officially, since he feared the consequences
of taking such a step. He preferred to warn the British
Ministry™ unofficially of the scrious con sequences that
might possibly arise from a further unfriendly attitude.
The Rothschilds could always be made use of most
conveniently for such a purpose, and Ilatafeld availed
himself of their services with such skill that Salisbury
accepted the German proposal.

The Rothschilds had contributed in no small degree
to a friendly solution of the Samoa qucstion ; although
it is true that England’s accommodating attitude was
largely influenced by the fact that she was threatened
with the Boer war.


EPILOGUE 453


The British Government also frequently had recourse
to the Rothschilds when it wanted to get things done
without committing itself officially. When in January
1900 the German steamer Bundesrat was held up by
British ships in Delagoa Bay and searched, the German
Government protested. ‘Che Rothschilds in London
became nervous,* scenting the possibility of a major
European complication. Their fears were increased when
in March* they received a telegram from ticir cousins
in Paris to the effect that Germany had attempted to
persuade France to intervene in the South African war.
When the Emperor William heard of this he exclaimed,
* An impudent lie!’ The London Rothschilds, however,
regarded this as an indirect attempt by the French
Government to sect Gerinany and England against each
other, an endeavour that did not suit their plans at all,
The Times, too, was exceedingly anti-German at this
period, and exploited the Bundesrat affair for violent
attacks upon Germany. The British Government, on
the other hand, was at this time not at all inelined to
add to her difficulties in South Africa by involving
herself in a conflict with Germany. On the other hand,
the Government did not wish to expose itself to attacks
from The Times by being too accommodating in its
attitude towards Germany. ‘The Government therefore
again had.recourse to the Rothschilds, aud Alfred “ was
persuaded to explain to the acting German Ambassador,
Count von Metternich, that the Press was excecdingly
independent of the Government. ‘ Baron Rothschild,”
Metternich reported, “has confidentially informed me
that since this (the attack in The Times) has displeased
the Foreign Office a Cabinet Minister has urged him to
make every effort to bring pressure to bear on The Tomes
ia this matter. Barun Rothschild was shortly to mect
Mtr. Buckie, the Editor-in-chief of The Times, and he told
me that he intended to speak to him very strongly on


454 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


this matter. He said that this independent newspaper
had only been confirmed in its opposition by the attempt
of the Government to apply pressure, and by the effort
of a Minister who sought to influence The Times through
Rothschild’s mediation.”

The fact that, on account of the Boer war, the British
Government was inclined to welcome a rapprochement
with Germany cntirely suited the Rothschilds, and they
exploited any opportunity that offered for promoting
this, as, for instance, when the question arose of appoint-
ing a commander-in-chief of the international expedi-
tionary force for the suppression of the Boxer rising.
Again it was Alfred Rothschild who made every possible
effort to secure this command for Germany.” Ele hoped
thereby to secure a material improvement in the attitude
towards England of the Emperor William, who was so
especially proud of his army, while HMngland was the
most influential! Power in the Far East.

Alfred Rothschild’s attitude is best revealed in one of
his Ictters, written to the German Ambassador, Baron
von Kickardstein, for transmission to the Chancellor,
Prince Bilow, the essential extracts from which read
as follows":


* Your friends (my dear Eickardstein) know from
experience that I have had the inverests of the two
countrics at heart for many, many years; although
during this period various subjects of discussion
have arisen between the two Governments, taking
it on the whole, great good will has subsisted with
regard to Germany in the highest circles, in the
Ministries and in the country itself, and successive
Ministrics have always done everything possible
to meet Germany's wishes ; I can prove persoy
ally that this is the case, for I have always beers
more or.less behind the scenes, and I have always}


EPILOGUE 455


done my best to produce satisfactory results.
When Prince Bismarck was Chancellor he wanted
to have a representative on the Egyptian Caisse
de la Dette, and this was immediately agreed to ;
later he embarked upon a colonial policy which,
after discussion with Lord Derby, was also
approved by the British Government (on the
Samoa question an agreement was reached in
accordance with Germany’s wishes, and quite
recently, at the special request of the German
Government, British troups in China were placed
under the supreme conmmand of Count Waldersee),
in a word, as far as I can recollect, the British
Government has always done cverything possible
to mect the wishes of the German Government.

“What is the position now ? lor some months,
it might indeed be said, for some years, the
German Press has constantly written against
England ; indeed, to such an extent that authori-
tative circles are beginning to wonder what is the
aim of this aggressive policy, and whether Prince
Bilow or the German Government cannot do
something to prevent it. T am well aware that
the Press in Germany is free, as it is in Kneland,
and that it will not have its policy prescribed for it,
but .when the Press of a country spreads rumours
about a friendly Power that are absolutely false,
the Government could have well taken the first
convenient opportunity of stating how much it
regrets that such false statements have been
given currency.

“This has oceurred with regurd to our fxpedi-
tionary Force in South Africa, and such allega-
tions have not merely made the Germans resident
in this country indignant ... pcople here would
have been glad to hear that the caxicatures of our


456


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Royal Family, which were sold in the strects of
Germany, had been confiscated by the police—
in a word, of recent years Germany’s policy
towards England has been a kind of “ pinprick ”
policy, and, although a pin is not a very impres-
sive instrument, repeated pricks may cause a
wound, and, since I hope and pray with my whole
heart that no serious wound may result, [ am
venturing to address these lines to you in the
hope that you will clearly explain to Count Biilow
how difficult my position in this matter has
become with regard to the British Government,
since I have done everything possible over such a
long period of years, and that I fcel now that you
do not fully appreciate the great advantages of a
genuine understanding with England. Possibly
Count Riilow does not know that various German
Ambassadors have often met famous English
statesmen at my house, and it is not very long
since the deceased Count Hatzfeld frequently met
Mr. Chamberlain at my house, and they both
shared absolutely identical views regarding the
general poli¢gy of the two countries, in their
mutual interests.

“In referring to thes details in a very private
way, my dear Kckardstein, I do so in order to
show that I am not speaking sans connaissance
de cause, and I should be infinitely sorry if the
small refroidissement which at present obtains,
and has absolutely no raison détre, should con-
tinue, and possibly cven increase. . . . I regard
this, however, as absolutely impossible, and it
would only need a slight effort on the part of
Count Biilow to blow away the cloud which is ag
present hovering. Possibly you can prevail upon’
His Excellency to send me a few lines in reply to


EPILOGUE 457


my observations ; I would naturally show these
only in the highest circles, and make the most
discreet use of them; I am convinced that a
friendly éclaircissement would produce the most
satisfactory result—and immediately. If you
should have the opportunity, my dear Eckard-
stein, assure the Emperor of my complete
devotion ; you know how grcatly I csteem His
Majesty.
“Yours,
** ALFRED VON RoTHscHILp.”


Berlin received other accounts regarding the London
Rothschilds from France. The German Ambassador in
Paris said, with reference to the question of the attitude
of the London Rothschilds to the question of an Anglo-
Russo-French rapprochement, that the Roiiischilds in
general were, for social reasons, not well disposed towards
Germany, because they had always been treated worse
socially in that State than anywhere clse. The London
Rothschilds’ aversion to Russia was also wel) known."

Shortly afterwards Ickardstein reported from Lon-
don® that the bead of the London House was sensitive
on the point that he felt that he had been badly treated
by Germany. Bilow, in writing on this mattcr to the
mperor, .observed that the House of stothschild had
previously rendcred valuable services as mediators in
difficulties with the Bank of England, and other matters.

““T venture most submissively to suggest for Your
Majesty’s consideration,” Biilow wrote to the Impcror

liam II, “ whether Your Majesty’s Ambassador in
London should be specifically asked about any possible
action to be taken with a view to dissipating any ill-

eling thac the Rothschilds may have, or about any
Fie points arising out of Ieckardstein’s report.”
Berlin bad become exceedingly worried by the


458 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


tendency of Russia to join up with the Western Powers,
and enquiries were made of Count Metternich in London
whether the statements of the Ambassador in Paris
with regard to the attitude of the Rothschilds were
correct. Count Metternich said in his reply of the 2nd
June, 1903," that the object of Russia’s financial policy
was to bring HKngland into the nct ; nevertheless, there
was for the moment no prospect of a Rothschild loan for
Russia. Massacres of Jews had recently taken place in
Russia.

In a general way, Miinstcr wrote that the power of
the Rothschilds in London had declined considerably.

““The London House,” Metternich wrote, “enjoys
great prestige, it is truc, owing to its history, but*for a
long time no new business has come its way, and it
contents itsclf with the safe investment of its wealth.
For a long time it has ceased to undertake forcign loans
on a large scale. the only exception is in the case of
Brazil, to which country it occasionally lends money.
Other important firms here, such as the Barings, are
much more appropriate for the purpose than the
Rothschilds, but these, even if they were willing, would
not be competent to float a loan.”

The provocative attitude of the Iunperor William and
the trend of public opinion in Germany caused England
at the close of the Bocr war, fron: 1903 onwards, to
become markedly distant in her attitude towards
Germany. The change of fecling first revealed itself
clearly in the question of the construction of the Bagdad
Railway. On this matter also the Germans had sounded,
Alfred and Leopold von Rothschild in London as to
whether England would interest herself financially in
the scheme, but the political aspect of the question was
the predominant factor, and the Rothschilds learnt fro
an authecritative source that England did not wish to
have anything tg do with it, and it soon became apparent


EPILOGUE 459


that she was putting every possible obstacle in the way
of the scheme going through.

In view of the friendship that had always subsisted
between the Prince of Walesand the House of Rothschild,
his accession to the throne on the 22nd January, 1901,
as King Edward VII, greatly assisted in strengthening
their position, but it also made them proceed more
cautiously in their endeavours to promote an under-
wtanding between England and Germany, for King
Kdward, who had repeatedly suffered personal provoca-
tion from the Emperor Williae:, stood for a rupproche-
ment with France, and the only obstacle te a ciose
understanding with that country was her alliance with
Russia, which still threatened the road to India in Asia.
The defeat of Russit in the Russo-Japanese war
elimimated this danger. That war had alsu been un-
welcome to the Rothschilds. Up to the lest momept
they had believed that it could be avoided, and refused
to accept its possibility. Shortly before Christmas 1908
Alfred Rothschild gave a dinner at which, in addition to
Lord Rothschild and Leopold, the Duke of Pevoenshire
was present, who was convineed that war between Russia
and Japan was immincnt. Leopold wagered a walking-
stick against it, asserting that Lhere would be no such
war for five years.

Baron Eckardstcin, who was present at this scene,
shortly afterwards told Count Hayashi, the Japanese
Ambassador, about the wager, and he laughingly rejoined
that the Duke would win, and that he did not believe in
the possibility of a peaceful solution. Kckardstcin wrote
fin this sense to Alfred Rothschild, who tried to convince
his brother. On the 20th January Count Hayashi was
at Alfred Rothsehild’s and asked him for financial
gupport foc Japan. Alfred Rothschild made certain that
the British Government woull have no objection, and
then spoke of his sympathies with Japgn’s aspirations,


460 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


offering the prospect of the support of the House of
Rothschild at a later opportunity. On 8th February,
1904, the Japanese suddenly attacked the Russian
Fleet at Port Arthur. The war took its course. Russia
attempted to secure financial assistance from the French
House of Rothschild ; but she found that it was not
particularly cordial. The German Ambassador, Prince
Radolin, reports on this matter :”

“The Paris House of Rothschild is hostile to Russia,
and at the present time is standing somewhat aloof from
Russian operations. Baron Alphonse sail to me recently
that Russia had made fine promises regagding the future
treatment of his co-religionists, if only the money were
forthcoming, but that his attitude was that these were
empty promises. Since, however, as a good I*renchman
he fecls that he is morc or less called upon to support
the Russian Alliance (and that is what I infer), he will
possibly soften in the end and open his purse, however
unfavourable a view he may take of the present
situation.”

These short extracts give us sufficient indication of
the fact that the House of Rothschild was courted by the
Great Powers until quite recent times, and that questions
of high policy were most closely associated with their
business transactions at all poirts. It must be left until a
later period to deal with this in greater actail and more
explicitly.

During the last ten years before the World War,
during which those of the associations of the Great
Powcrs were formed which subsequently ranged them-
selves on opposite sides in the conflict, the Paris and
London Rothschilds naturally entirely iden! ‘fied them-
selves with the policy of the countries with vhich they
were doing business; but both they and tae Vienr
House, which was in the camp of the Triple Alliance,
hoped until the last moment that the great conflict


EPILOGUE 461


could be averted. The policy that the Rothschilds had
followed since the fall of Napoleon, or indeed since they
had come to possess a very large fortune, of always
using their influence in the cause of peace, under whose
protection they could preserve their money and
develop their world-wide business without disturbance,
continued to be their main inspiration throughout the
period immediately preceding the World War. If ever
the archives of this period should be made available to
the public, it will probably be possible to show, by
documentary evidence too (whs! we can now deduce
only from the consistency of the Rothschild policy
during a century, as shown by various indications and
the information derived from certain responsible persons),
that immediately before the outbreak of the World War
the Rothschilds, especially the London Rothschilds
(and to a far smaller extent the Paris Rothschilds), did
everything possible to avert the catastrophe which was
bound to constitute a serious blow to the unity of their
House, which, in a certain sense, was still an important
factor.

However, their complete impotence in intervening
effectively in the important decisions regarding world
policy during this century was only too obvious. They
were not listened to, and when the Sarajevo murder
snatched the reins ont of the hands of the statesmen
throughout the world and the steeds of destiny took the
bit between their teeth as they headed for war, the
Rothschilds too had to make the best of a bad job, and,
like everyone clse, submit to the course of events. They
again found themselves faced with a situation which,
although it was not new to them, was not by any means
ae to deai with ; again they had a foot in both camps.
The Londvu and Paris Houses were in the camp of the

tente, the Vicnna [louse was in the camp of the

entral Powers. The male members of the various Houses


462 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


who were of military age joined the colours of the
countries which they had adopted, and a member of the
London House, Evelyn Rothschild, actually fell in
battle on November 1917, fighting against the Turks in
Palestine. In gencral, the Rothschild Bank adopted a
cautious reserve and waiting policy, such as was natural
in their position. The result of the World War was as
fortunate for them as was possible in the circumstances,
since two branehes of the Rothschilds, and those the
more powerful and well cstablished ones, were in the
countries of the victorious Entente, while only one
branch was affected by the consequences of defeat.

The Vienna House certainly suffered cnormous losses,
as did everybody in the conquered states, from the
depreciation in securitics and the valuc of money ; but
scarecly had peace been concluded end the close relations
between the three Rothschild Wouses re-established,
when everything possible was done by the two Houses
operating in the victors’ countrics to assist the Vienna
House in its great difficulties. A particularly fortunate
coup was successfully carried through when the Morgan
Bank came to the assistance of the depreciated French
frane in 1924. The Rothschild Bank in Paris took part
in this operation, and was therefore in a position to
estimate to a day when the frane would rise, and
naturally informed the Vienna House of Rothschild,
advising it to deal in francs with a view to a rise, and
not, as almost all the rest of Murope was doing, with a
view to a fall.

In a manner entirely unintclligible to a layman
endowed with ordinary common sense, even the most
experienced financicrs in Germany and Austria, and
also in several other European States, speculated on a
fall in the currency of the most powerful of the victorious
States on the continent. A similar fate was prophesie
for‘the franc as that which had been experienced by th


EPILOGUE 463


German mark. When the measures for assisting it began
to take effect, and, instead of falling, the franc improved
by almost a third of its valuc, the Rothschilds and the
Vienna Creditanstalt, which they control, and which
advised all its correspondents not to join in the franes
speculation, won the day, whilst a large number of
speculators, especially including the new rich, were
forced to register extensive losscs. By this move,
amongst others, the Vienna Rothschilds have succeeded
in making good a large proportion of their war losses,
and even under present conditions their social position
and their general prestige has survived undiminisie
in the small republic of Austria.

The Rothschilds are to-day, one and a half centuries
after the foundation of the Bank, still firmly established ;
their riches and the name are world famous. It would be
idle to attempt to measure their wealth in figures, for
wealth of this nature changes continuously, and cannot
be registered in figures even by its possessors, Such
figures as occasionally appear in the newspapers repre-
scnt estimates of an entirely imaginary nature. It is
sufficient for us to know that the wealth of the family as
a whole is still enormous, and inereases automatically ;
even though it may be surpassed by many private
fortunes in England and America, ‘The wealth of the
family has become proverbial; in anc:ent times the
name of Croesus was a synonym for very great wealth.
To-day the same idea is conveyed even amongst the
uneducated by the name of Rothschild. We have
endeavoured to show how this mass of wealth was
Acquired. It has always becn done by maintaining the
closest contuct with those in charge of the world’s
destinies, and by a clever adaptation to events, The
Rothschilds practically never opposed themselves to the

uthoritics in the State for the time being ; they aimost
always sought to come to terms with them, however


464 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


uncongenial they might sometimes be. This naturally
involved an extensive opportunism, but their success
increased the prestige and the power of the family.
To-day the Rothschilds constitute a dynasty, with all
the advantages and disadvantages which that word
implies.

Every dynasty has been founded by exceptionally
intelligent or exceptionally brave men, and certainly
by men of unusual energy. In their way this was also
true of the Rothschilds; but in-brecding, which they
adopted as a policy, carrying it to even more dangerous
lengths than many ruling houses, is undermining their
spiritual and physical capital. Up to the present the
advantage of concentrating their power and wealth by
marrying within the family has overborne all other
considerations. Bismarck once stated on this point":
“I have known many members of the House, and I
have always been struck by their lust for gold ; this is
attributable to the fact that cach one of them wishes to
leave to every one of his children as much as he himself
has inherited, and that is surely absurd. ... The Roths-
childs are an outstanding example, but the 5
provide a similar instance.” (Bismarck here mentioned
the name of an illustrious Prussian noble family.)
** Between a hundred and a hundred and fifty years ago
the s furnished cminent statesme:: and generals
to the State, and they were fine men. To-day a can
scarcely be employed as a subordinate official or second
lieutenant.”

The future will show whether the Rothschilds will
develop along similar lines. During the sixty years tha.
have passed since the conclusion of the Franco-Germani
war of 1870 the world has undergone profound changes,
Scientific discoveries have produced revolutionary results,
in every field ; conditions of life have been changed F
the extraordinary development of a world Press, by th


EPILOGUE 465


discovery of the petrol engine, the aeroplane, wireless,
and a thousand other things; all these have influenced
the technique of finance and commerce. Throughout
the centurics, however, one factor has remained constant
—the power of moncy ; indeed, the importance of this
factor has inercased. For the unequal distribution of
money, which has existed throughout history, has
become more extensive in its cffeets, since the total
population, and therefore the numbers of thuse who
lack moncy, has increased to an extraordinary degree.

Now, since the Rothschilds have maintained their
wealth as well as the social position which they achieved
with so much difficulty, it would be a mislake to believe
that they have lost all influence upon the course of
events at the present day. Their influence is certainly
not comparable to that which they excreised in Kurope
in the second third of the nineteenth eentury ; but
if the correspondence and documents regarding recent
events were as plentifully available as those of an carlier
period the inference which has just becn drawn would no
doubt be substantiated.

One thing is certain, and that is that none illustrate
better than the Rothschilds Bjérnson’s saying: “A
family that works together is invincible."


Fr


NOTES


CHAPTER I


1Sce The Rise of the House of Rothschild, p. 410. 1 They consisted of Crown
Jand mortgages to an amount of 21,547,000 reichsthaler, and Treasury bills to an
amount of 14,058,000 reichsthaler. ? Rother to King Frederick William TID
Berlin, 8.1X.1830. Prussian Seeret State Archives. 4 Rother to King Frederick
William TI. Berlin, 18.17.1831, Prussian Seeret State Archives. * That is Lo say,
the conversion af the 5 per cent. loan in return for the issuc of 4 per cent. deben-
tures, * Amschel Meyer vor Rothschild to Count Lotti. Frankfort, 22. FEL.1831,
Prussian Seeret State Archives. 7 About £145,700, whieh sum however, owing
to various deductions, dwindled to £58,825. * Rother to King Frederick William
WI. Supplementary note dated 30.111.1831. Prussian Secret Static Archives. *At
first it was intended to arrange discounting ty “ities to the amount. of 4,000,000 te
5,000,000 thaler; later on, Prussia wanted to go to romeh Tigher am omnis.
10 King Frederick William HiT to Rother. Bertin, ZPVI83.. Prussian Sceret State
Archives, Berlin, '' From the Vagebitchern des Grafen Prokesch von Osten,
Vienna, 1909, p. 68. "James Rothschild to Salomon, Paris, 14.001891, An
extract forwarded by the latter to Metternich, State Archives, Vienna. + 3Sames
Rothschild to Solomon, 16.00183). (xtract.) State Archives, Viena, Nathan
Rothschild to Solomon. London, 5.111.183. Extract made for Prince Metlernich,
State Archives, Vienna. The prachee of making extracts natur viv gave ap oppor-
tunity te madify sentences tor the Chaneetlor’s benefit. + tivinrich Wilheta
Baron von Bulow, Prussian Ambassador in London. '¢ Charles Maurice, Prince
Talleyrand-Périgor’¢, Ambassador in London after the dnly Revolution. 17 French
financier and an enterprising bauker. Sir Robert Pr el, Opposed Grey’s Reform
Bill. }* Maric Jean, Marquis de Lafayette, the famous general and statesman of
the great French Revolution, who again came inlo prominence, despite his seventy-
three years, in the July Revolution of 1830, *¢ dames Rothschild to Solomon,
Paris, 7.119,1881, Extract made for Metternich, State Archives, Vienna," Count
St. Aulaire, at this time French Ambassador in Rome ; sent to Vienna as Ambas-
sador in 1832. 9 Casimir Peérier, banker and financier, President of the Chamber
after the July Revolution, #4 France’s leading bankers, 74 James Rathsehitd’s
circular fetter to his brothers. Paris, 9.01831. State Archives, Vienna, 8 Sce
Tugebiicher des Karl Kriedrich Freiherrn Kiibeck von Kitban vol. T, part Il, p. 858.
2¢ James Rothschild to Solomon. Paris, 1 1.70L1831. State Archives, Vienna,
37 James Rothschild to Solomon, Paris, L4171.1831. State Archives, Vienna.
%¢Nathan Rothschild to Solomon. Extract made for Metternich. London,
15.L1F.1881. State Archives, Vienna, James Rothschild to Solomon. Paris,
19.31.1831. State Archives, Vienna, Carl, Baron von Werther, Prussian
diplomat. ** Scbastiani remained Minister for Foreign Affairs under Périer's
mew Ministry. *2 James Rothschild to Solomon. 31,1IL 1881. State Archives,
Vienna, "3 Nieolns, Marquis Maison, Marshal of France. Then Anbassadar in
Vienna. % Janis Reuthschitd to Solomon, Paris, 1.1V.1831. Stace Archives,
Vienna. James Rethsehiid to Solomon. Paris, 9.1V.1881. (fxtract.) State
Archives, Vieena. ** Kid-eek :see former ref., vol. TF, part IT, p. 883. 37 Kitheck 5
ce former ret, vol. T, part LE. p. 593.* 2* James Rothschild to Solomon, T1.£V.
831. (Extract.) State Arebives, Vienna, *% Extract from James Rerhsehild’s
letter to Solomon. Paris, 20.1V.1831. State Archives, Vienna, «© James Roths-
‘child to Solomon. 18,1V.1831. (Extract.) State Archives, Vicuna. ¢! Nathan
467


468 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothschild to Solomon. London, 18.1V.1831. (Extract.) State Archives, Vienna.
“2James Rothschild to Solomon. Paris, 2.VI.1831. (Extract.) State Archives,
Vienna. ‘* James Rothschild to Solomon Rothschild. 10 and 11.V1.1831.
(Extract.) State Archives, Vienna. 4¢ James Rothschild to Solomon, 22.VI.1831
(ixtract.) State Archives, Vienna. 4* Count Apponyi to Metternich. Paris,
7.V1I.1831. (Private letter.) State Archives, Vienna. ‘** James Rothschild to
Solomon, Paris, 9.VII.1831. State Archives, Vienna. ‘7? James Rothschild to
Solomon, Paris, 5.VIII.1831. State Archives, Vienna. ‘** Count Apponyi to
Metternich. Paris, 24.V1I.1831. State Archives, Vienna.


CHAPTER II


1 Kiibeck 3 see former ref., vol. FH, part I, pp. 472 and foll, * Solomon Roths-
child to Metternich, Vienna, 17.V1.1831. State Archives, Vicnna.  * Prince
Esterhazy to Solomon Rothschild. Vierma, 14.VI1.1831, State Archives, Vienna.
“Solomon Rothschild to Metternich. Vienna, 21.V1.1831, State Archives, Vienna,
* Por further details see Kabeck ; vol. 1, part TT, p. 466. * Count Lebzcltern to
Metternich. Naptes, 26. V111.1831, State Archives, Vienna. 7 Count Lebzeltern to
Metternich. Naples, 23.0X.1831. State Archives, Vienna, * James Rothschild to
Count Apponyi. Paris, 1 XTI.1881, State Archives, Vienna. ° Solomon Roths-
child to Metternich. Munich, 15.1X.1882. Slate Archives, Vienna. '° Kitbeck ;
vol. IT, part TL, p. 544. '' Castelli, J.P. : Wemoiren meines Lebens. Munich, chap.
Tl, p. 271. 3? M. G. Saphir to Solomon Rothschild. Munich, 80.X.1831, State
Archives, Vienna. ' Solomon Rothschild to Metternich. Munich, 2.X1,1831,
State Archives, Vienna, 34 from the Tagebitchern des Grafen Prokesch von Osten.
Vienna, 1909, p. 103. '® Reported by Baron Eliigel to Metternich, 20.1.1832, and
by Apponyi to Metternich, Paris, 28.1.1832. State Archives, Vienna, 1* Solomon
Rothschild to Metternich. Frankfort, 5.1.18382. State Archives, Vienna. 1? James
Rothschild to his brothers. Paris, 7.11.1832. State Archives, Vienna. 1% Solomon
Rothschild to Metternich, Paris, 11.11.1832. State Atehives, Vienna.  ?* Solomon
Rothschild to Metternich, Paris, 26.111.1832. State Archives, Vienna. ?® Apponyi
to Metternich. (Personal letter.) 8.1V.18382, St. te Arebives, Vienna. ™ Wellingion’s
Despatches ; sec former ref. VILE. 308. London, 1867, 22 Sc.omon Rothschild to
Leopold von Wertheimstein, Paris, June 1882 (no nearer date given). State
Archives, Vienna. 72 Solomon Rothschild to Metternich. Vienna, 25.1V.1833.
State Archives, Vienna. * tus den Tagebiichern des Grafen Prokesch von Osten.
1880-34. Vienna, 1909. p. 58. ** Tagebticher von Friedrich von Geniz, Vienna,
1920. p. 204. #6 An Indian ruling house of fabulous wealth. #7 Tugebticher von
Freidrich von Gentz. Sce former ref., 30.NTELU830. p. 247. 2" Zageblicher cen
Friedrich von Gentz. See former ref., 830.X 16.1830. p. 247. #* Briefe von und an
Friedrich von Gentz. Munich-Berlin, 1900. Part Tf of vol. THY, p. 340, 3° Cordier
to the Duke of Blacas in Prague, from the Hagne. 6.VIIT.1833. State Archives,
Vienna. *! Baron Keutzinger to the Duke of Blacas. Frankfort, 45.1833. State
Archives, Vienna. *? Cordier to the Ike of Blacas in Pragne. The [Hague
7.1.1833. State Archives, Vienna. ** Nathan Rothschild to James. Londéry
15.11.1838, State Archives, Vienna. 34 Solomon Rothschild to Metternich. Vienna]
8.V.18u4. State Archives, Vienna. ** Rother to King Frederick William IIT o


NOTES 469


Prussia. 30.V.1832. Prussian Sceret State Archives. ** Rother to Count von
Lottum, 3.11.1833. Prussian Seerct State Archives. 57 Solomon Rothschild to
King Frederick William. 1883. Prussian Secret Stale Archives. #4 Nathan
Rothschild to the King. 7.V.1833. Prussian Secret State Archives. 3% Rother to
King Frederick William IL. Berlin, 21.1.183.4, Prussian SccreL State Archives,
4? Rother to King Frederick William LL. 25.¥.1834. Prussian Sceret. State
Archives. ¢! Rother to Kiag Frederick William ELL 23.V.1834. Prussian Seeret
State Archives. 4* Viktor Bibl. : Der Zerfall Gesterreichs, Kaiser Franz und sein
Erbe. Chap. I, p. 885. 4? Kiibeck ; see former ref., vol. IH, p. 677.


CHAPTER if


Leland Elamilton Jenks : The Migration of British Capital. Vad. 1875. New
York, 1927. p. 380. 2 Dée Ersten 50 Jahre der Kaiser-Kerdinands-Nordbahn,
1836-86. ? Solomon Rothschild to Coant Mittrowsky. 11.X1L1835, State
Archives, Vienua. Solomon Rothschild to Count Mittrowsky. LIXITi835,
State Archives, Vienna. *Selomon Rothschilds preliminary memoranda,
20.11.1836. State Avchives, Vieona, ‘Solomon Rothschild tu the Moperor
Ferdiminc. 15.1V.1895. Shite Archives, Vienna. 7 Report of esran von Drohs-
dick of 23.V.1835. State Archives, Vienna.  * Sulotion Rothsehihl to Tis fexccl
leney the Head of the Trensury. Vienna, 5.XTL4885, State Archives, Vieuun,
*¥oll details given in Die Ersten 50 Jahre der Kaiser-Ferdinands-Nordbahn, See
former ref. 3° Minute by Baron von Drohsdick, dated 2NTL1835, State
Archives, Vienna, 2! Minute by Baron ver Drohsdick, dated 25.1L1886, State
Archives, Vienna. ?? Solomon Rothsehild to the Head of the Tre: sary. Viera,
TIIL1836. State Archives, Viena. '* Presidentiat address by Count Mittrowsky
of 12. 1TE.1836, note by Cont Kolowrat of 18.0EL1s8a6, the Mmperor Perdinand’s
Tmperial Resohation dated 19.11.8886. State Archives, Vienna. 14 Solomon
Rothschild to the Emperor Ferdinand, 200TE E8386. State Archives, Vienna,
18 Solomon Rothsehitd to Metteenieb. Vienna, + 36. State Archives, Vienra,
$6 Metternich to the Kniperor Ferdinand, 23.48.08 7 Count Mittrowsky to
the Mmperor Ferdinand. 3.1V.1886. State Archives, Views. | State Archives,
Vienna, 1° Ludwig, Baron von Pereira, to tbe Committee of the Kaiser-Fer-
dinands-Nordbahu. 80.V.1836. Transport: Archives, Vienna, *°'The Bauperor
Ferdinand to Count Mittrowsky, Schonbrunn. 13.V1.1836. ‘Transport Archives,
Vienna. * Count Mittrowshy to Leopold von Wertheimstein, 16.V01836.
Transport Arebives, Vicrna,  *? Baron Solomon yon Rothsehild’s Declaration,

ated Vienna, 2.V1.1836. Transport Archives, Vienna, Provisional Board of
Management of the Kaiser-Ferdinands-Nordbahn to Count Mittrow sky. 27.V1.
1836. Transport Avebivcs, Vienna, 4 Opinion on) Baron Percit ’s counter-
memorandum. Vienna, 25.V E1836. Transport. Archives, Vienna,  7* The draft
had the word Ges lanerss (vermin). * Coun Mittrowsky fo the fmperor Ferdinand,
0.171.18:37. te Archives. Vienna. #7 Josef Wak, statioumaster at Florisdorf, in
Volks-Zoiting. 7 5. UL Ciapham : The Economic Development of France and
Bermany, We 19th. Cambri tye, 122. p. 1b.


470 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


CHAPTER IV


4Apponyi to Metternich. 25.VI.1835. State Archives, Vienna. * Count
Apponyi to Metternich. 2.X1.1837. State Archives, Vienna. * Von Ltummelauer
to Metternich, London, 12.1X%.1835. State Archives, Vienna. ‘4 Count Apponyi to
Prince Metternich, private and confidential. Paris, 24, VI. 1835. * Extract from
a Ietter of James Rothschild’s. London, 23.V1.1835. State Archives, Vienna,
*Hummelauer to Metternich. London, 12.0X.1885. State Archives, Vienna.
?Hummelauer to Metternich. London, 24.V1.1835. State Archives, Vienna.
®Solomon Rothschild to Wertheimstein. Paris, 24.V1.1835. State Archives,
Vienna. * Charles Maurice de Talleyrand Perigord, the revolutionary bishop, and
subsequently Napoleon’s Minister for Forcign Affairs, who, as early as 1812, had
approached and succeeded in getting on friendly terms with the Bourbons, tater
becoming Louis XVUI’s Minister for Foreign Affairs ; had transferred his allegi-
ance at the right moment to Louis Philippe. In 1835, although cighty-one years
old, he was still actively engaged in affairs, and in 1834, he had brought into being
the quadruple alliance between England, France, Portugal and Spain, for the
protection of the constitutional principle in Western Europe. '°'The Duke of
Broglie was then Minister for Foreigu Affairs and President of the Council. ++ The
stutesman and historian, Guizot, was then Minister of Education. 22 Frangois
Manguin, Mxtreinely radical lawyer and parliamentarian. 3°39 'fhiers was Minister
of the Interior at this time. %*Solomon’s daughter, whom James, of Paris,
married. '* Hummelauer to Metternich. London, $0.X.1835, State Archives,
Vienna, 2° Humimelauer to Metternich, London, 15.VL18386. State Archives,
Vienna, '7 extract frome a letter of Nathan Rothschild to James, London,
20.X11.1835. State Archives, Vienna. 8 Metternich to Solomon Rothschild,
Vienna, 29.XI1.1835. State Arehives, Vienna, 1* Hummelhwer to Metternich.
London, 15.1V.1836. State Archives, Vienna. **Memo. concerning the finan-
cial relations of the House of Rothschild with Spain, sent to Prince Metternich,
on 28.1V.1836 by Solomon and Anselm Rothschild. State Archives, Vienna.
2 Finnmelaucr to Mettemich. London, 26.1V.1886. State Archives, Vienna.
*2Apponyi to Metternich, 22.V.1836. State Archives, Vienna. 2? Solomon
Rothschild to Metternich, 3.VUI.1836. State Archives, Vienna.  *4 Solomon
Rothschild to Moritz Goldschmidt and Leopold) Wertheimstein. Frankfort,
4.VIII.1836. State Archives, Vienna. **Sesomon Rothschild to Metternich.
Frankfort, 10.VI1IL.1836. State Arehives, Vienna. *... von Treskow:
Biographische  Notitzen tiber Nathan Meyer Rothschild. Quedlinburg, 1837,
p. 18. #7 Dr, Eduard Ileyden : Galerie beriiiniter und merhwirdiger Frankfurter,
Frankfort, 1861. p. 56. ** Karl Gutzkow : Gesammelie Werke, vol. U1, p. 188.
2° Memoirs of Sir Thomas Buxton ; see former ref., pp. 343 and fol. *° Varigny :
“Tes grandes fortunes en Angleterre,” Revue des deux mondes, June 1888. 3+ Karl
Guizkow to Kolb. Frankfort, 12.VII1.1836. Cotta Archives, Stuttgart.
®t Hummelaucr to Metternich. London, 6.X.1886. State Archives, Vienna,
33 Baron von Hiigel to Metternich. Paris, 8.V11.1887. State Archives, Vienna.
*4 Apponyi to Metternich. 20.1X.1837. State Archives, Vienna. 7° Lionel to his
uncles, a circular Ictter. London, 22.0X.18387. Copy in the State Archives,
Vienna, ** Emissary of the Kuglish Parijament. *" Metternich to Baron Higel,
Vienna, 4.6%.1887, State Archives, Vienna. * Hiigel to Metternich. Paris, 18.D9yq
1837. State Archives, Vicnna. ** Apponyi to Metternich. Paris, 2.X1.1837.
State “Archives, Vienna. ‘* Count Apponyi to Metternich. Paris, 18.11.1888.
State Archives, Vienna, ;


NOTES 47]


CHAPTER V


278 Jahre Osterreichischer Lloyd, 1836-1911. Trieste, 1911. p. 9. " Note in the
Emperor’s own hand. Vienna, 26.X.1835. State Archives, Vienna. * See Princess
Melanie’s diary (Mctternich’s posthumous papers), vol. VI, p. 92. State Archives,
Vienna. ‘Lebzeltern to Metternich. Naples, 23. VILL1835 and 10.LX.1835,
State Archives, Vienna, * Baron von Handel to Metternich. Frankfort, 8.1.1886,
State Archives, Vienna, * Impcrial Reseript dated 20.11.1836. State Archives,
Vienna. 7 Extract from the Protocol of the Senate of the Free City of Frankfort.
13.1V.1886.  * Anselm Rothschild to Metternich. 16.11.1886, State Archives,
Vienna, *Baron von Kichoff to Metternich, Vienna, 17.NTL1885. Stiute Archives,
Vienna. 1° Note from the Chancellor to the President of Uhe Bi asury. Vienna,
80.X%.1886. 1! Humimelauer to Metternich, Ryde, 28.UN.1836. State Archives,
Vienna, 3% Hummelaucr to Metternich, London, 6.N.1836, State Areh
Vienna, 33 Hummelauer to Metternich. Leodon, 16.X.1836. State Archives,
Vienna, }¢ Wertheimstein to Metternich, Vienna, 20.01.1887. State Archives,
Vienna, 18 A.W. Pribram : Urkunden und cthten zur Geschichte der Tuden in Wien.
Vienna-Leipzig, 1918, vol. I, p. 376. '* Solomon Rothschild to Metternich.
Paris, 9.1.1887. State Archives, Vienna. 3? Goldschmidt, p.p. S. ME von Roths-
child to Metternich. Vienna, 20.VETI834. State Archives, Vienna. 7% Solomon
Rothschild to Metternich. Vienna, 0.FV.1888. State Archives, Vieana. '* Solomon
Rothschild to Count Kolowrat. Vienna, 26.711.1838, State Archives, Vienna,
20 Solomon Rothschild to the Emperor Ferdinand. 27.1E188" State Archives,
Vienna. *! One of these receptions, held on 18.VEL1888, is deseribed in’ Monte-
flore’s diary, p. 142. 3# Note to the Chanecllery, Viena, 18. VITE. E838 5 permission
by Solomon dated 16.VIIL.1838. Vienna, Police Archives. A silk handkerchief
of the type described was attached to the documents 3 this, however, was recently
destroyed on the 15th of July, when the Palace of Justice in Vienna was burnt
down, @ James KRolhschild to Solomon, Paris, 17.0V.1888, State Archives,
Vienna. *4 Lionel Rothsehild to Metternich. 1S.VLI83s and 8).V.1838. State
Archives, Vienna. 3° Sulfomon Rothschild to the President of the Treasury.
Vienna, 10.EX.0838. State Archives, Viena. #9 Solomon to Metternich, Vieana,
26.1X.1889. State Archives, Viepon. 27 Sofomou KRothsehild to Baron von
Kdibeck, undated. State Archives, Vienna. 7° Report.of Baron von Michoff, dated
90.1111839. State Archives, Vienna, 2* Count Apponyi to Metternich. Paris,
12.11.1889. State Archives, Vicuna, ** Solomon Rothsel ld to Richteuberger.
Paris, 2.01.1889. State Archives, Vienna. 3! Count Apponyi to Metternich.
Paris, 12.11.1839. State Archives, Vienna. #7 Richtenberger to Che Llouse of
Rothschild in Paris. Brussels, 16.11.1839. State Archives, Viepna. 73 Solomon
Rothschild to his Branch in Vienna. Mauris, 18.01.1889. State Archives, Vienna,
*¢Count Apponyi to Metternich. Paris, 1.VIL7388. State Archives, Vienna.
*5Sclomon Rothschild to Metternich. Frankfort, 26.0X.1830. 2° Prinecss

elanie’s diary (Metternich’s posthumous papers), vol. VI, p. 31. 97 Count
Apponyi to Metternich. Paris, 30.X.3840. State Archives, Vienna 3* Sce the
author's Biogriphie Leopuld f von Belgien, pp. 104 and foll, 3 Baron vor Minch-
Bellinghausen to M: tternich. Frankfort, J.VGiIL1840. 4° James to Solomon.
,Paris, 3.VIJi.1840. State Archives, Vienna. * Ansclm and Solomon to Amschel

eyer. Paris, 3.VHI.1840. Siate Archives, Vienna. 4? Lionel Rothschild to his
lincle on the Continent, London, 3.\ ITL1810. State Archives, Vienna, ** Lionel
otbschild to his uncle on the Continent London, +.VIIL1840. :tate Archives,
Vienna. *4 Anselm to his father. Paris, 5.VIIT.1840. State Archives, Vienna,


A72 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


45 Anselm to his father. Paris, 6. VIITI.1840. State Archives, Vienna. 4* James to
Solomon. Paris, 6. VIIL.18-40. State Archives, Vienna. ‘7 Lionel and his brothers
to their uncles. London, 18.VIJE.1840. State Archives, Vienna. #8 Lionel to his
uncles. London, 11.VIL0L.1840. State Archives, Vieni.  «* James to Solomon.
Paris, 13.VIEL1.1840. State Archives, Vienna. °° James to Solomon. Paris, 13.
VITI.1840. State Archives, Vienna. *! James to Solomon. Paris, 16. VIEE1840.
State Archives, Vienna. §? Nathaniel to Solomon. Paris, 18.VIIL1840. State
Archives, Vienna. © The three brothers in London to James und Nathaniel.
London, 22.VIIT.1840. State Archives, Vienna. ** Nathaniel Rothschild to
Solomon. Paris, 6.1X.1840. State Archives, Vienna. ** Nathanicl Rothschild to
Solomon. Paris, 7.1X.1840. State Archives, Vienna. °° James to his brothers.
Paris, 9.1X.1840, State Archives, Vienna. §7 James to his brothers. Paris, 11.
TX.1840. State Archives, Vienna.  ** Nathaniel to his uncles. 22.10N.1840. State
Archives, Vienna. *° James to his brothers. Paris, 25.UX.18-40. State Archives,
Vienna. 4 James to Solomon, Paris, 5.X.18-40, State Archives, Viera. ¢! Pub-
lished in the Constitutionnel, 13.X.1840. 4? Count Apponyi to Metternich. Paris
27.X.1840, State Archives, Vienna. *? James to his brothers. Paris, 30.X.18 40.
State Archives, Vienna, Solomon Rothschild to Weetheimstein aud Guld-
schmidt, Frankfort, 10.XI1.18-40. State Archives, Vienna.  ¢° James to his
brothers. Paris, 18.X11.1840. State Archives, Vienna,


CHAPTER VI


* Karpeles : Riographische Einlettung zu Ueinrich Heine's gesammellen Werken,
vol. T, p. xxiii," Report. on the German Revolutionaries, Paris, 28.N.1835,
Apperded to a similar report. of Apponyi's to Metternich. State Archives, Vienna,
* Ludwig Borne : Gesamimelte Schriften. Reclaim dition, vol. TH, p. 858. 4 Leine
to Baron Anselm Rothschild. 16.XTE1855. Published in Friedrich Wirth’s essay,
* Meine und Rothsehild,” in the Deutsche Rundschan, Qetober-December 1915,
p- 276. § Heinrich Heine, by Ludwiy Borne. * Karl Kraus ina polemic against
Friedrich Tirth, “ Weine’s published correspondence with the Rothschild
family.” See “ Die Keinde Goethe und Heine,” Die Backel, October 1915, p. 78.
THeinrich Heine, Lutetia, Paris, §.V.1813. Part 2, Naryeles Edition, vol.
VI, p. 885. § Heine on the French sitnation, in a letter from Paris, 19.EV.1832.
*ieine: Gedanken und Einfdllen, Fistor, VII, p. 432. '° eines cermischte
Schriften, Ludwig Marcus, Elster, VI, p. 23.0"! Ueintich Heine to Baroness Betty
Rothschild. Paris, 9.X1T.1854. Published by Friedrich Hirth in the Deuische
Rundschau, January-March 1915. 3? Grillparzer : Selbstbiographie und Bildnisse.
Vienna, 1923, p. 202. 48 Karpeles, Dr. G. : Weinrich Heine, p.'78. '4 Consul von
Laurin to Rothschild. 16.1V.1840. State Archives, Vienna. +5 James Rothschild *
to Solomon, Paris, 7.1V.18-40. State Archives, Vienna. ?¢ A Jewish teacher, born
in Babylon, a contemporary of Christ. 17 See A. F. Pribrum: Urkunden und
Akten zur Geschichte der Juden in Wien, chap. I, pp. 479-86. '* Solomon Roths-
chile's petition to Court. Vienna, UAVILIS6, State Archives, Vienng,
2° Imperial Resotution of 15.VEIL1842 aud 17.N17.1842. State Archives, Vieunag
8° Schwemer ; see former ref., T1I1., p. 886. 2 Schweimer ; see former ref., ITI,
p. 386; Donhoff to the King of Prussia, 16.VIL.1846. ** Baron von Mensshengen
to Metternich. Frankfoit, 80.VII.1841. State Archives, Vienna. © Metternich ta


NOTES AT3


Kiibeck, Vienna, 6.VI.1841. Metternich und Kitbeck, Ein Briefwechsel, Vienna,
1910, p. 7. ** Report from Hummelauer to Metternich, by order of the President
of the Treasury. Vienna, 11.V1I.18-41, State Archives, Vienna. % Prince Metter.
nich’s answer to Hummelauer’s report. Konigswart, 14.VELLIBEL, Stitte Archives,
Vienna. ** Metternich’s posthumous papers ; Princess Melanie's diary. 26.V.1841,
Vol. VI, p. 491. 2? Metternich’s posthmmous papers: Princess Mehanic’s diary. Kind
of July, 1846, ?* Metternich’s posthnmous papers; Prineess Melanie's diary.
*° Mctternich’s posthumous papers; Princess: Mekinie’s diary, vol. VI, p. 512.
2° Note in the Emperor's hand, dated 31.X0L7842. 2! Baron Solomon Rothschild
to Metternich. Vienna, 21.V.18-02. State Archives, Vienna. 92 Report by Kibeck,
the Head of the Treasury, dated 20.X.18-43, State Archives, Vienna, 3 Imperial
Ratification dated 14.X11843. 34 Report by Kitbeck, 12.018 th ratitied by the
Emperor, 27.11.1844 State Archives, Vienna. 379 Solomon Rothschild to the
Emperor Ferdinand. 15.N 1.1843, State Archives, Vienna. 34 Presidential Report
of von Tnaayhy, the Lord [igh Chaneellor, US tL U8 td State Archives, Vieuna,
27 "Phe four Moravian Estates to the Mamperor. Griinn, 18. EX.18t& Copy. Amicxe
to Presidential speech by Count Ingaghy, dated 27.N.184¢b Stale Archives,
Vienna, 2* The Kmperor Ferdinand’s Despatch. Vienna, 22.85. State
Archives, Vienna. 3" Police Report from Pressburg, 20. V L108 #4, from (he now
destroyed Legal Archives, Vienna. ¢° Petition of Solomon Rothschild on behatt
of the Caal Mining Company of Dalmatia and Istria, State Archives, Viens,
« Contract between Solomon Rothsehild and the Austrian Governincat regarding
the construction of salt-works alo Venieu. Pe XLL1S8 $5. State &cchives, Vieuna,
4? Letters from Metternich to the Minister at Munkfort, and frost Frankfort 10
Metternich, of T.N.I865. 49 Mémeh-Bellinghausen in friokfort to Mettermich,
S.VILLI8-41. State Acchives, Vienna. 44 Terr von Phom to Metternich. Paris,
2LNABE, State Archives, Viena. 4) From Apponzrs report to Metternich,
Paris, SLE 1843 and JOUIE1S8 3. State Archives, Vienna. 4° Solomon Roths-
child to bis ‘dear friends aud brothers.” Vienna, TV.ES be Stete Archives,
Viemns. 4? Metternich to Apponyi, Vienna, PEN ELIs t5. See Met tertich’s
posthumous papers, vol VIE, po Lon 48 Willebrand : Geschichte Mrankreichs,
vol. Hi, p. 666. 4 Alexander Weil: Rothschild und die curapaischen Staaten,
Stuttgart, 1844. °¢ Anselin Rothsebild to the Prussian Minister of Stale, 220K.
1846. State Archives, Vienna. *! Metternich, posthumous papers; sce former
ref., vol. VIL, p. 155. 8? Report of the Allied Chanceries, 4.V IIS 67, Stile
Avehives, Vienna.  *&? Kolowrat’s notes ou above. Stat | Archives, Vienna,
*4 Solonion Rothscirild’s petition to Lis Majesty, 11. VLI8 42. "Phis was to include :
Koritschau in Moravia, valucd at $00,000 florins, the town touses Nos. 138 and
139 (Renngasse), valued at 600,000 Horins, and the house No, 588 in the Banera-
markt, 500,000 florins. §* Memorandinn by the Head of the ‘Treasury, Baron
von Kiibeck, dated 12. X11.18-47. Ft was a question of the sale of 3,775,000 tlorins
4 per cent. bonds, which sum had stood in the books since 1830, being held in
Merve for unforeseen circumstances, “ Chey cannol, however, be is~ wed on the
Austrian Bourse,” the memorandum stated, “since such a transaction emanating
from the Treasury could not be kept sceret, and it would: produce most un-
pleasant and damagins sesully for credit and the moncy market. Besides, it is not
Rossible even qpuroximately (o ascertain the price at which they could be sold, in
of the fact that such rchable and timely help as is essential cannot be
ected. Danser to Austrian eredif can only be averted by disposing of them in

é strictest scercvy to a solid bunk. The Head of the House of Rothschild, who
ppens to be in Paris, has therefore been asked to state his conditions.”


A74 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


** Metternich und Ktibeck, Ein Briefwechsel; see former ref. Metternich to
Kibeck. Vicnna, 20.X1.1847. p. 35. 5? See von Srbik’s book, Metternich, Munich,
1925, vol. II, p. 258. 4# Metternich to Kiibeck. Vienna, 23.1.1848, See Ein Brief-
wechsel, vol. VI, p. 36. ** Battersea: Reminiscences. London, 1922. p. 75.
°° Caussidiére, Mémoires de, vol. Y, pp. 210 and foll. * Capefigue : Histoire des
grandes operations financiéres, vol. VII, p. 244. ** Count Apponyi to Metternich,
Paris, 10.11.1848. State Archives, Vienna. ** La révolution de 1848 en France.
Rapport de J. Tolstoi. Edition d’Etat, Leningrad, 1926. * Von Srbik : Metter-
nich, vol. LU, p. 249. ®* Baron von Dictriehstcin to Metternich. London, 6.0L
1848. State Archives, Vienna. *© Von Srbik ; sce former ref., vol. II, p. 289,
§? Solomon Rothschild to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Vienna, 15.VI1.1848,
State Archives, Vienna. ¢* Derr von Thom to Baron von Wessenberg. Paris,
4.VIILAU848. State Archives, Vienna. °* See Corti; Mavimilian und Charlotte von
Mexiko, 7° Count Woyna to Baron Wessenberg. Brusscls, 2-4.0X.1848, State
Archives, Vienna. 7! Herr von Thom to Baron Wessenberg. Pais, 8.X1,18-48,
State Archives, Vienna. 7? Baron von Lelfert : Die Wiener Octuberrevolution,
1848, Vienna, 1910, pp. 163 and foll, 73 Hermann von Goldschmidt : inige
Erinnerungen aus langst vergangenen Tagen, Vienna, 1917, p. 62. 7 Hermann von
Goldsehinidt : Linige Lrinnerungen aus ldngst vergangenen Tagen, Vienna, 1917,
pp. 64 and full.


CHAPTER VIL


1See Aton Bettelheim’s Biography of Balzac. Munich, 1926. * Hiibner to
Schwartzenberg, Paris, 13. V1.1815. Slate Archives, Vienna. ?Alphonuse Rothschild
to his uncle in Brankfortl. “ Zrés particulier.” Pavis, 9.X.1850, Stale Archives,
Vienna. 4 Litbuer to Sechwartacuberg, Paris, 27.X.1850. State Archives, Vienna,
* Hiibner to Schwartzenberg. Paris, 2.411.1851. Slute Archives, Vienna. ¢ See
Lebenserinnerungen, hy Belli Gontard, p. 283. Also quoted by Barghoetfer ; sec
former ref., po 174. 7 King James {1 of Boyland and his heirs were declared to
have forfeited their right to the throne by Parliament in 1689. Me and his sor,
James TIT, as well as the latter’s son, Charles Mdward, frequently sought, with
the assistanee of their supporters, the “ Jac. bites,” to regain the British throne.
* Report on Lionel’s election to the House of Commons. Bar nu Koller to Schv art-
zenbery. London, 1.VIIT.1850. State Archives, Vienna. See the excellent
description in Egon Schetfer’s Der Siegeaug des Leihkapitals, p. 172. Vieuna, 1924.
»© Counsellor Weil on the financial situation in France for the year 1852. State
Archives, Vienna. '! Count Moritz Esterhazy, Austrian Envoy to the Pope, to
Schwartzenberg. Naples, 6.11850, Stale Archives, Vienna. !? Hiibner to Schwart-
zenberg. Paris, 17.1.1850. State Archives, Vienna. 1° Monsignor Fornarini, Bishop
of Nizza, Papal Nuncio, to James. Paris, 241.1850. State Archives, Vienne
44 The loan consisted of the sum of 50,000,000 francs at 5 per cent. Immediately
on its conclusion, 15,000,000 were guarantecd at 75, to be paid at fortnightly
intervals in instalments of 1,000,000. The Rothschilds further asked for 13,000,000
at 773, but this was not done until two months after ratilication. The balance wy
to be sold on the best terms possible for the Papal Government. In respect of'g
first 28,000,000, they asked 8 per cent. commission and their costs.” ** C;
Rothschild to Schwartzenberg. Naples, 20.V.1850. State Archives, Vienna. 2° i
Jewish Community in Rome to James Hothschild. Rome, 27.V11L.1851. Staf


NOTES ATS


Archives, Vienna, 17 James to IItibner. Paris, 27.VIU1.1851. State Archives,
Vienna. ** On 80.1X.1849. 1" Cavour to de Ja Rue. -4.X.1849. Sce André Bert !
C. Cavour, nouvelles lettres incdites, Turin, 1889. p. 343. *" Cavour to de In Rue.
Turin, 5.X.1849. See Bert, p. 344.0 2! Carlo Bombrini, banker. 2? Cavone to de
la Rue. Turin, 6.X.18-49, See Bert, p. 846. 22.G. Landau, Agent. of the House of
Rothsehild in Turin. ** Cavour to de Ia Rune. 8.X.1849. See Bert, p. 348.
** Cavour to de la Rue. 11.01.1850. See Bert, p. 867. #8 Cavour to de ta Rue.
26.VITI.1850. See Bert, p. 395. 27 Cavour to de In Rue. 21.1N.1850. See Bert,
p. 398. ** Cavour to de Ia Rue. 6.X.1850. See Bert, p. 399. 2” Kor further
details see “ Mémoires sur les opérations financiéres executes sous le minislére de
M. de Cavour, 1852 " in Chiala, Letlere edile ed inedite di Camillo Carcur, vol. 1,
p. 564, 9° Cavour to de la Rue. 24.X 101850. See Bert. 7! Cavern. to dela Rue.
22.111.1851. See Bert, p. 416. 9? Cavour to Marqris Azegio. Turin, 25.EV.185 b.
Nicomede Bianchi: La politique du Conte de Cavour de 1852 a 1862. pp. band 2.
53 Cavour to Count Ottavia di Revel. Trin, die, 1851. See China, Lettere, vol. 1,
p. 447. 4 See Chinla, Lettere, vol. T, pp. 5 6.0 °) Cavouc to Revel. Turia, OV EL
1851. Chiala, Leitere, vol. (, p. 459.0 28 The Times had published an article at this
time dealing with the unfavourable economic and political situation in Sardinia,
*7 Cavour to Cont Revel. Torin, 5.VILGSSt. Chinla, Fetiere, vol. I, p. 455.
25 Count Luigi Corti, af(erwards Haly’s Minister for Mocagn Affairs and Ambas-
sador to Landon. A prent-nnele of the author, 3® Cavour to Count level. Burin,
10.1X.1851, Chiala, Lettere, vol. T, p. 495. 4? Count Apponyi to Prince Sclrwart-
zenberg. Turin, 20.01858. State Archives, Vienna. “ Cavonr t. Revel. Turin,
8.1.1853. Chine, Ledlere, vol. Uf, po 8. 4? Count Lagi to Cavour, Paris, 27.0 1853.
Archives of the Marchese Gaspare Corti. Taino, @ Corti to Cavour, Paris, 22.10.1850.
Corti Archives, Taino, “(Cavour to Count Luigi Corti, Miuvin, 25.01854. Corti
Archives, Tino. Chiala, Leifere, vol, IE, p. 875. 4 Corts to Cavour, Paris, 28.6,
31353. Draft from Cacti Arehives. Taine, © Corti to Cavour. Paris, 10,11,1853.
Corti Archives. Corti to Cavour. Paris, 14.01.1853. Corti Arehiv s. 4 Corti
tu Cavonr, Paris, 27.11.1853. Corti Archives, Chiala, vol. Hp. 376. 4 Cavour to
Corti. Turin, 25.01858. Corti Archives, Chiala, vol. UF, p. 876. 2" Cavour to Corti.
Turin, 25.).18538. Corti Archives. ®! Cavour to de fy Rue, ‘Turin, 2.111.1853.
Bert, p. 402. ¢* Cavour to Corti. Twin, 38.01.1858. Telegram, Cocti Archives.
** Cavour tu Corti. Turin, 2.10L1853. Corti Archives, Chiala, vol. 1G, p. 387.
Bismarck to his wife. Mrankforl, 18.V.1851, Bdrst Bismarchs Briefe an seine
Braut und Gattin., Stutlgart. ** Bismarck to his wile. ¥ vikfort, TR.V.ISSE.
Farst Bismarcks Briefe an scine Rrant unl Gattin, Stuttgart,  $* Bisnrarck
to his wife. Frankfort, 18.V.1S51. First Bismarcks Briefe an seine Braut und
Galtin. Stuttgart, p. 266. 47 Bismarck ; die Gesammellen Werke, vol. 1, p. 43.
Bismarck to Manteuffel. ®$ Schwemer: Geschichte der Freien Stadt Frankfurt,
vol. HI, p. 61; also mentioned by Arnold Oskar Meyer: Bismarcks Kampf mit
Osterretch am Bundestag sa Frankfurt (1851-9). Leipzig. §? This is shown by
o von Manteuffel’s letter to. Bismarck, 50. X11 1852, appended to Gea aiken und
Pvnernae > Bismerelks Bricfweechsel, po iit. * Arnot Oskar Mover. p. 73.
MThung to Sebwartzenderg, 12.L1852. Slate Archives, Vienna. * Thon to
i, el Frankfort. [2..1852. State Archives, Vienna, ° Bismarck to
Wetzel. 10.L142% Bismarck : Gesemmeate Werke, vol. I, p. 125. Thun to
‘mecavartzenberg. Frankfort, 12.1.1852. State Archives, Vienna, * Phun to
wartzenber Frankfort, [2.1.1852. Draft, State Archives, Vienna. The
iginal report has been removed from the files. °¢ Wetzel to Bismar- k. 11.71.1852.
rek ; Gesammetie Werke, vol. L. p. 126. *? flun to Bismarck. Frankfort,


476 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


13.1.1852. Published in the Bismarck-Jahrbuch, vol. UT, p. 58, and in Arnold
Oscar Meyer, p. 77. ‘ Bismarek to Thun. Berlin, 19.1.1852. Bismarck-Jahrbuch,
p. 58. °* Thun to Schwartzenberg. [rankfort, 20.1.1852. Stute Archives,
Vienna. 7° Bismarek to Manteuffel, 11.111.1852. Bismarck : Gesammelte Werke,
vol. I, p. 146. 7! Bloch to Bodelschwingh. 10.1V.1852. Prussian Secret Archives,
Berlin. 7? Manteuffel to Bismarck, Berlin. 80. NIL1£852. Gedanken und Erinner-
ungen, appendix. Bismarcks Briefwechseln, p. 111. 75 Bismarck to Manteuffel.
6.1.1853. Posehinger: Preussen im Bundestag, 1851-9, vol. VI. p. 182. 74 Bismarck
to Mantcuffel. 10.01.1853. The original document is dated wrongly 1852. Bismarck ;
Gesammelie Werke, vol. I, p. 278. Prussian Sceret State Archives, Berlin.
76 Manteuffel to Bismarck. 20.17.1853. Prussian Secret State Archives, Kerlin
76 Bismarck to Manteuffel. 21.1.183%, Bismarck : Gesammelle Werke, vol. I, p.
284. 7? Manteuffel to Bismarck. 12.11.1853. Prussian Secret State Archives.
78 Mantenlfel to Bismarek. 15.11.1853. Prussian Secret State Archives, 7° Bis-
marck to Manteuffel. 6.XIL.1853, Bismarck : Gesummelte Werke, vol. I, p. 395.
*° Bismarck to Muanteuffel. 5.X11.1853. "! Bismarck to Manteuffel. 0.X01.1853.
** Denkwirdigheiten des Ministerprdsidenten Quo Freiherr von Mantenffel. Pub-
lished by Weinrich Poschinger, Berlin, L801, vol. T1, p. 468. 9? Denhiwiirdighkeiten
des Ministerprdsidenten Otlo Freiherr von Manteuffel, vol. LU, p. 469. #4 Bodel-
schwingh to Gerlach. 21.VII85h See Manteaffel, vol. Ll, p. 471, note 2.
*§ Bismarck to Sechald. SVIGLISSt. Bismarck : Gesamatelte Werke, vol. 1, p.
463. ** Bismarck to Mantculfel, 22.1.1857. Prussian Secret State Archives,
°7 Meyer Carl Rothschild to Bismarek, 28.V.1857 and 3.V 11857, Prussian Seerct
State Archives, Berlin, ** Bistnarek to Mantenffel. 9.VE1857. Prussian Seerct
State Archives, Berlin, Also published in Prenssen cane Bundestage, vol. ELL, p. 85.
89 Muauteuffel to Bismarck. 10.VILI857. Prussinn Seerct State Archives, Berlin,
69 Bodelsehwingh ta Mauteuffel, 9.VAILI857. Prussian Sceret State Archives,
Berlin. * Von Patow to von Usedoin. 18.1.1860. Prussian Secret State Archives,
Berlin. ** Usedom to Patow. Frankfort, 14.X1.1859. Prussian Secret State
Arehives, Berlin. 9? Bismarck to Manteuffcel 4.VEL1853. Bismarck : Gesam-
melte Werke, vol. 1, p. 843. °4 Manteuffel to Bismarck. 25.11.1857. Bismarck +
Gesammelle Werke, vol. 1, p. 343. % Biamarek to Manteulfel. 31.0DL 1858.
Bismarck : Gesammelte Werke, vol. 1, p. 843. °* Bisinarck : Gescmmelle Werke,
vol. VIL, p. 428. A dinner-table conversation at Versailles, 30.X1.1870,


CHAPTER VIIt


1 Alexander Hiibner to Count Buol-Scliauenstein. Paris, 27.%.1853, State
Archives, Vienna. * Debraux to Baron Kiibeck. Paris, 2.11853. State Archives,
Vienna. * Debranx to Baron Kiibeck. Paris, 23.1.1853. State Archives, Vienna.”
4 Debraux to Baron Kiibeck. Paris, 5.ULL. 1853. State Archives, Vienna. © Hiibner
to Count Buol. 25.X1.1853. State Archives, Vienna. § Count von TDiibner:
Neun Jahre der Erinnerungen eines dsterreichischen Botschafters in Paris unter dem
sweiten Kaiserreich, 1851-9, Berlin, 1904, p. 2038. 7 Ernest II, Duke of Saxe¢
Coburg-Getha : Aus meinem Leben und aus meiner Zeit, Berlin, 1888, vol. I;
143. The Memoirs of the Duke should, however, in many cases be rexud wit!
consiferable caution. * Count Ksterbazy to Count Buol. Berlin, 3.XL18
State Archives, Vienrfa. * Kiibeck ; sce former ref., ‘vol. II, p. 66. +° Birk


NOTES ATT


Alois von Negrelli, Vienna, 1925, p. 126. '! Kiibeck ; see former ref., vol. I,
p. 80. ** Baron Anselm von Rothschild to the Minister of the Interior, Baron von
Bach. Vienna, 22.11.1855. State Archives, Vienna. ™ Dr. No N. Gelber: Zar
Vorgeschichte des Zionismus, Vienna, 1927, p. 87. '4 Petition from the brothers
Rothschild, 12.04.1856, and reply from the Board of ‘Trade, 28.1X.1856. State
Archives, Vienna. 1° Ansel Rothschild to Count Buel, London, 8. VILL1857,
State Archives, Vienna. ' Anselin Rothschild to Count Colloredo, in Rome.
Vienna, 30. VILL.1857. State Archives, Vienna. 37 Cavour to Count ‘T. di S. Rosa.
Turin, 22. VITL.1856. Luigi Chiala: Lettere ; see former ref., vol. VE, p. 36. Tiber;
see former ref., vol. IL, p. 22. 2° Deniwurdigkciten des Ministers Otto Freiherr von
Manteuffel, vol. 11, p. 197. 2° Liibner ; see former ref., vol. Wp. 145.0 t! Wiibuer
to Count Buol. Paris, 14.17.1859. State Archives, Viewna. #2 ‘* Mark my words,
no peace, no Empire.” *9 Wiibner to Count. Buol. Paris, 81.[1859, state Archives,
Vienna, *4 Il Carteggio Cavour-Nigra, Cavour to Prince Napolvon. 13.11.1850.
Vol. HT, p. 13. Also in the Chiala : Leltere; see former ref,, vol. V1, p. 865. ** Cavour-
Nigra ; see former ref. Cavour to A. Bixio. 15.01.7859. Vol, p. 1h. 2% Hiibner to
Count Buol. Paris, 27.0.1859. State Archives, Vienna, 77 Llabner ; see former
ref., 10.111.1859, vol. I, p. 13. 2" Bort; sce former ref., p. 54%. 29 Cavour-
Nigra ;see former ref, Cavour to Nigra. Carin, BEELISS9. Vol. HE, p. 0. 3" Carorr-
Nigra; see former ref. Cavour to Nigra. Turin, OTEI859. Vol I, p. 71.
Telegram from Count Reehberg to Richard Metternich, 24.VIEL1859. State
Archives, Vienna. 2% Prince Richard Metternich to Reebberg. Paris, 25. Voll.
1859. State Archives, Vienna. ** Prince Richard Metternich to Reehberg,
Paris, 28.X.1859. State Archives, Vienna. 34 Count Carl Vitsthtes cor Kekstidt :
St. Petershurg und London in den Jahren 1852 64, volo Wp. 51. 1" Count. Vilz-
thum to Reehberg. Paris, 23.1V.1860, State Archives, Vienna, 9° Prince Richard
Metternich to Rechberg. Paris, 8.1V.1860. State Archives, Vienna. 97 Prince
Richard Metternich to Reehberg. 1O.1TV.1860. State Archives, Vien Count
Rechberg to Count. Széchéenyi, 29. VEEL 1860. State Archives, Viewna.  7* Connt
Széchényi to Count Rechberg. Ga: ta, 24.0N.1860 and 20.X 1860. Stove Archives,
Vienna, 1 Count Reehberg to Count Széehényi. Vienua, 16.N.1860. State
Archives, Vieuna. 4! Captain Frantzl to Connt Széchényi. Gar ta, 4.X11,1860,
State Archives, Vienna,


CHAPTER IX


1Diszacli to Mrs. Williams, 17.X.1863. See Froude : The Earl af Beaconsfield,
London, 1890, p. 186. #C. de 2B. te James Rothschild. Conlidential report.
Paris, 21.11.1865. State Archives, Vienna, *Sce the author's Biography of
Leopold I of Belgium. ‘Count Zichy to the Mmpress Charlotte. 2 +.1V.1866.
exiean Archives in the Stute Archives, Vienna. § clafseichniuigen und Erin-
erungen aus dem Letun des Buischufters Josef Maria von Radawitz, Bers Leipzig,
1925, vol. I, p 85. * Wiluowski: Meine Hrinnerungen an Bismarck, p. 190.
? Count Apponyi to Meusdorff. London, 1.VILi866. State Archives, Vienna,
Count Appousi to Mensdorff. London, 7.1V.1866. State Archives, Vienna,
chard Mcttermich to Rechberg. Private. 17.1V.1866. State Archives, Vienna.
oltz to ui William. (7.L1L1866. See Oncken : Die Rheinpolitik Kaiser
leons ILI und der Ursprung des Kricges von 1870-1, Berlin-Leipzig, 1926,


478 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


vol. II, p. 118. 41 Bismarck to Goltz. 18.1II.1866. Oncken ; sce former ref.,
vol. I, p. 120. !* Baron von Wachter to Baron von Varnbiihler. Paris, 11.1V.1866.
The Baron had this news at third hand. See Oncken, vol. I, p. 182. 1" Aufzeich-
nung und Erinnerungen aus dem Leben des Rotschafters Josef Maria von Radowitz,
Berlin and Leipzig, 1925, vol. I, p. 92. 14 Radowitz ; see former ref., vol. I, p. 93.
18 Karl Friedrich Graf Vitzthum von Kckstiidt : London, Gestein und Sadova,
1864-6, p. 245. '*Sce above ref., p. 246. '7 See above ref., p. 350. 13.1X.1866.
48 Scheffer : Der Siegeszug des Leihkapitals. See former ref., p. 181. '* Scheffer :
Der Siegeszug des Leihkapitals, p. 182. *° Beust to James Rothschild. 28.V.1868.
State Archives, Vienna. ?! Richard Metternich to Beust. 30. V.1868. State Archives,
Vienna, #* Hermann Iofmann : Iiirst Bismarck, 1890-9, Stuttgart, 1913, vol. T,
p- 149. #* Morley : The Life of W. Ie. Gladstone, London, 1911, vol. IT, p. 246. *4#See
Oncken above, vol. LU, p. 416. Thele to Abeken 77 (870). 2 Count Apponyi to
Beust. Londou, 12.VIL.1870. Telegram, State Archives, Vienna. *° Sce Morley,
vol. I, p. 249. 27 Buseh: Tagebuchbldlter, vol. J, p. 807. 2 LL. Salingré : Im
Brossen Hauptquartier, 1870-1, p. OL. ?* See Busch, vol. J, p. 213. Bismarck :
Fesummelte Werke, vol. VIT, p. 350. 2° See Salingré, p. I44. 91 See Busch, also
Bismarck, above ref., vol. VH, p. 352. 3? Gouvernement de la défense nationale,
by Jules Favre, Paris, 1875, vol. JEL, p. 112. 3% Sec Ueinrich Otto Meissner :
Kaiser Preidrich HU Nriegstagcbuch von 1870-1, Berlin, 1926, p. 410. 34 Posch-
inger. Fiirst Bismarck und der Bundesrat, Stuttgart, 1898, vol. IT, p. 43.
38 Vitzthum to Beust. Brussels, 24.10.1871. State Archives, Vienna. 9° A district
in the 2Oth Arrondissement, the inhabitants of which are notorious for their
radical sentiments. 3 See Bismarck : Gesammelte Werke, vol. VIL, p. 489;
“ Versailles Table Talk © ; also Busch, lagebuchbldlter.


EPILOGUE


1See Bismarck, former ref. A dinner-table conversation recorded by Busch.
Vol. V, p. 466. 7? Appendix to Bismarck’s Gedanken und Erinnerungen.
Stuttgart-Berlin, 1901, Emperor William fo Bistuarck, Berlin, 16.01875. "A
pun, Kreuzschmerzen, etymologically, could mean ‘desire for a Cross,” but
actually means tunbago. 4 Mrnst Ludwig, von Gerlach : dAnfseichnungen aus
seinem Leben und Werken 1795 -1877, published by Jakob v. Gerlach, vol. IL, p.
301. * Entry in the diary of Louis, dated 9.V.1908.  ° Will of Baron Anselm von
Rothschild. State Archives, Frankfort. 7 Viktor von Tritsehe : Bilder aus dem
dsterreichischen Hof und Gesellschaftsleben, Vienna, 191-4, p. 227. * Countess Irma
Sztaray : Aus den letzten Jahren der Kaiserin Klisabeth, Vienna, 1909, pp. 214 and
foll. ® When the Republican régime again came inta power in France, the deputy
Lucius wrote in 1876 to Bismarck about the marshal : ** According cven to such 8
cautious and reticent person as the Paris Rothschild, MacMahon is an absolu
oaf. Ile cannot utter three consecutive words, has to have everything written do
beforehand that he is to say, and then eannot say it correctly, The newspapers 01
course publish what he ought to have said.” See Bismarck, vol. VIH, p. 211
10 Sidney Lee : King Edward VII, London, 1925, p. 347. 2}! For further details
the collection of documents, Die grosse Politik der enropdischen Kabinette, etc.,
VV, p. 91. '*Pribram: Die politischen Geheimvertrdge Oecesterreich-Ung
187-1014. Vienna-Leipzig, 1920. 1 Johannes Haller: Aus dem Leben ,


NOTES 479


Farsten Philipp zu Eulenburg Hertefeld, vol. T1, p. 185. 24 Constance Battersea,
Reminiscences. London, 1922. '* Battersea ; see above ref., p. 48. 14 About half
she total sharcs, most of the remainder being in Freneh hands. '? André Maurois ¢
La vie de Disraeli, pp. 274 and foll. + This did not oceur again until 1891.
‘8Count Miinster to the Emperor William. 25.VL1876. Wertheimer: Graf
Andriissy, Stuttgart, 1013, vol. IT, p. 814. 29 Hohenlohe ; see former ref., vol. U1,
p. 284. #1 See Sidney Lee, p. 176. 2? See Wohenlohe, pp. 234 and foll. #* Bran-
Jenburg : Von Bismarck zum Weltkriege, p. 109. **Sce Die grosse Politik, val.
XV, p. 473. Private Ictter of Kekhardstein to Holstein, 15.1.1900. 25 See Die
grosse Politik, vol. NV, p. 53-4. Count Metternich to Prince Llohenlohe. 20.111,
1900. #°See Die grosse Politik, vol. XV, p. 496. Count Metternich to Prince
Hohenlohe. 24.111T.1900, 2? See Die grosse Politik, vol. XVV, po V2. Wermann
Baron von Eckardstein : Lebenserinnerungen und politische Dent wiirdigheilen,
vol. I, p. 381. Letter of Alfred Rothschild. London, 20.1L.1892. 0% Prince
Radolin to Bilow. 18.V.1908. Die grasse Politik, vol. XVH, p. 582. 8° Bitlow to
the Emperor William. 20.V.1903. Same ref. 4 cetlemich to Billow, 2.V1, 1908,
Same ref. 3? Metternich to Bilow. 2. VET903, Same ref Radolin ta Bulow,
9. VITI.1904. Same ref., vol. NIN, p. 208, 34 See Bismarck, vol. VIED, p. Zot. A
dinner-table conversation of Bismarck’s at Kriedrichsruhe, * Bjirmson: Lin
Fallissement, vol, ILI, p. 6.


BIBLIOGRAPILY


of the books used in addition to those mentioned in
The Rise of the louse of Rothschild


Alison Archibald, Sir. History of Europe. London, 1858.

Andiganne. Les Chemins de fer en Europe et en Amerique, 1855.

Andlau. Mein Tagebuch. Frankfort, 1862.

Andréades, A. History of the Bank of England, 16-40 to 1903. London, 1924.

Anonymous. Le Gouvernement de juillet. Paris, 1825.

Anton, Alfred. La Politique financiére du gouvernement provisuire, février-mai, 1848,
Paris, 1910.

Ashley. The Life and Correspondence of Viscount Palmerston. Lowlun, 1879.

Aycard, M. Iistoire du Crédit Mobilier, Paris, 1867.


Bapst. Le Mardchal Canrobert, souvenirs @un ..éele. Paris.

Barrauld, Lettre de 12., réducteur du“ Tocsin rhe» wravailleurs.” Paris, August 1648,

Battersea, Lady. Reminiscences. London, 1922.

Baxter, Robert. The Panic of 1866, London, 1866,

Belli-Gontard, Lebenserinnerungen,

Bert, André. C. Cavour, Nouvelics lettres inddites. Turin, 1889,

Bertrand et Ferrier, Ferdinand de Lesseps. Paris, 1587.

Bettelheim, Anton, Balzac. Munich, 1926.

Betz. Heine in Frankreich. Girich, 1895.

Bewer, Max. Bismarck und Rothschild, Dresden, 1891,

Bianchi, Nicoméde. La Politique du Comte de Cavour de 1852 4 1861. Turin, 1885,

Birk, Alfred. Alois von Negrellt. Vienna-Leipzig, 1925.

Bismarcks Briefe an seine Guttinans dem Kriege, 870 1, otutigart-Berlin, 1903.

Bismarck. Denkwtirdigheiten aus dem Leben des lirsten, Leipzig, 1890.

Bisunarck. Bismarcks Hriefwechsel. Stuttgart-Werlin, 1901,

Bismarck, .dnhkang zu Gedanken und Erinnerungen, Kaiser Wilhelm I und Bis-
marck,

Bismarck. Dic gesammelten Werke. Berlin.

Bocher, Charles. Meénotres, 1760-1848, Paris.

Bechm, Max von. Vom Katserreich zur Republik. Munich, 1921,

Bohm, Gottfried von. Konig Ludwig UL, von Bayern. Rerlin, 1922.

Borne. Pariser Briefe, Ausgabe Ludwig Geiger. Vol. Vi.

Brandenburg. Von Nismarck sum Welthrieg. Berlin, 1924,

Busch, Moritz. Tagebuchblatter.


Cambridge Modern Ilistory, The. Cambridge, 1909.

Camp, Maxime de. Paris, ses organes, ses functions, ct sa vite, Vol, 1V. Paris, 18738.

Carteggio Cavour-Nigra, Il, dal 1858 al 1861.3 volumes. Bologna, 1926.

Coussidiére, Mémoires de, expréfet de polices cl représentant du peuple. U uris, 1849.

Phiala, Luigi. Lettere edite ed inedite di Camillo Cavour, Turin-Naples 1887,
lapham, J. UW. The Heunomic Development of France and Germany, 1815-1914,
Cambridge, 1u21.

Clermont-Tonncrre, BE. de. femoires. Paris, 1928.

Bogeiderazions stud convensionc de? 15 gingna 1862 stipulata trat signort Ministrt
delle finanze e dei wort pubblici ed t signori Barone Rothschild e P. Tathet per la
concessione di strade ferrute nelle provincie meridionali e nella Lom’ ardia. Turin,
1862,

, GG 451


482 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Constitutionnel, Le, 12.X.1840.

Commandini. I! principe Napoleone nel risorgimento italiano. Milan, 1922.
Corti, 4. C. Leopold I von Belgien. Vienna, 1922.

Corti, Ki. C. Maximilian und Charlotte von Mexiko. Vienna, 1924.

Cromer, The Kart of. Modern Egypt. London, 1911.


Dairnwell. Histoire édifiante et curieuse de Rothschild Ir, roi des juifs, suivie du
récil de la catastrophe du 8 juillet, par un temoin oculaire. Paris, 1846,

Damasehke, Adolt. Zeitenwende. Aus meinem Leben. Leipzig-Zirich,

Debats, Journal des, 5.VIVL.1836.

Die grosse Politik der europdischen Kabinette. Berlin,

Diest-Daber, Otto von. Bismarck und Bleichrider. Munich, 1897.

Diest-Daber, Otto von. Geldmacht und Sozialismus. Berlin, 1875.

Diest-Daher, Otto von, Lebensbild eines mutigen Patrioten. Berlin, 1891,

Diethen. Aus Schleiermachers Leben. In Bricfen. Vol 1V. Berlin, 1863.

Dino, Duchesse de. Chronique de 1881- 62. Paris, 1909.

Druck, David. Raron Kdmond Rothschild. New York, 1928.

Duncker, Politischer Briefwechsel aus seinem Nachlasse. Uerausgegeben von Dr. J.
Schulze, Stuttgart, 1925,

Dunder, Denkschrift tiber die Wiener Oktoberrevolulion. Vienna, 1849.


Eckardstein, Hermann Frhr. v. Lebenserinnerungen und politische Denkwiirdig-
keiten. Vols. T and (I. Leipzig, 1919.

Eckardstein, Hermann Ihr. v. Die Isolierung Deutschlands. Vol. WI. Leipzig,
1921.

Eckardstein, Hermann Frhr. v. Persénliche Erinnerungen an Kénig Mduard.
Dresden, 1927.

visenbahnen der Osterreichisch-ungarischen Monarchie, Geschichte der. Vienna, 1898

Embden, Ucinrich. Ueines Familienleben, Wamburg; 1892.

Ernst H., Herzog von Sachsen-Coburg-Gotha, dus meinem Leben und meiner Zeit.
Berlin, 1888.

Escott, D. H. S. City Characters Under Several Reigns. London, 1922.


Fanta. Der Verkauf der Siidbahn, Vienna, 1803.

Favre, Jules. Guurernement de la défense natianale. Paris, 1871.

Ferronaye, Mémoires de Mme. de ta. Paris. 1.90.

Figard, Jean. Lendemains financiers (une guerre. Paris, 1915.

Francis. La Bourse de Londres, Chroniques ct Portraits. Paris, 1854,

Frankfurter Nachrichten, Sccond supplement, Sunday, 13.X1.1927,

Friedjung, Heinrich. [Historische Aufsdize. Osterreich von 1848 bis 1860. Stuttgart-
Berlin, 1912.

Friedjung, Heinrich. Das Zetialter des Inperialismus, 1884-1914. Berlin, 1922.

Friedrich 111, Kaiser, Das Kriegstagebuch von 1870-1. Herausgegeben yon
Meissner. Berlin, 1926. \

Fritsche, Victor von. Bilder aus dem Osterreichischen Ilof- und Gesellschaftsleden.
Vienna, 1914.

Frébel, Julius. Ein Lebenslauf. Stuttgart, 1890.

Froude, J. A. The Earl of Beaconsfield. London, 1890.


Garnier-Pages. Histoire de la révolution de 1848. Paris, 1861-72. 11 vols.
Gelber, Dr. N. M. Zur Vorgeschichte des Zionismus. Vienna, 1927.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 488


Gerlach, Ernst Ludwig von. Aufzeichnungen aus seinem Leben und Wirken, 1795
1877, Schwerin, 1903.

Goldschmidt, Hermann von. Linige Erinnerungen ans ldangst vergangenen Tagen.
Vienna, 10917, :

Gooch, G. P, History of Modern Europe, 1878-1919, London, 1925.

zuizot, M. Mémoires pour servir a Phistoire de mon temps. Paris, 1861,

Gutzkow. Offentliche Charaktere. Wamburg, 1835.

Guyot. La Premiere Entente cordiale. Paris, 1926.


Haller, Johannes. stus dem Leben des Fiirsten Philipp zu Enenburg-Hertefeld.

Mayward, Le Dernier Siecle de la Rome Pantificate. Paris, W928,

Ucigel, Ludwig [. Konig von Rayern. Leipzig, 1X72.

Heine, einrich., Memotren. Uerausgeseben von Karpeles. Berl, 1909,

Heine, Heinrich. Lutesia, Mrankreich, U1. 18103.

Heine, Uecinrich. Ober Ludkeig Borne, Wan or, 18-40,

Heine, Salomon, Jon Joseph Mendelssohy.. as ambare, 1843,

Helfert, Frhe. v. Die Wiener Oktoberrenalatiug, 1848. Vienna, 1810,

Herzteld, Michael. Leben tad Wirken des Baronet Sir Lionel von Rothschild.
Vienna, 1879.

Hillebrand. Geschichte Frankreichs,

Hirth, VWriedrvich., Meine and Rothschild, Deatsche Rundschan. January-March,
1915, and October-December, 1915.

Tfofmann, Hermann, £éirsd Bisme ch, 1890-8. Stuttgart, 1913

Hohenlohe-Schillingstiirst. Denhicdrdighetten des Mtirsten Chilo vos si. Stuttgart,
1907,

Hohifeld. Geschichte des Deutschen Reiches, TL V2. Laipaip, W024.

Holamann, Michael, Ladwig Bérne, Berlin, 1883.

Hiibner,Graf von, Nevin Jahre der Wrinnerungen eines osterreichischen Botschafters,
tn Paris weer dem 2. Kaiserrcich, 5-9. Berlin, L904.


Jackman, W.T. The Derelopmeni of Transportation in. Modern England. Came
bridge Vnivessity Press. 1916,

Janssen, Johanues. Johann Briedrich Bohmers Briefe. Freiburg, 1868,

Jenks, Leiand Hamilton, The Mesration af British Capital to 1875. New York,
1927.

Jugement rendu contre J. Rothschild ct contee Georges Dratrinecll par te tribunal de la
saine raison, Paris, 1846.

Jong, Prof. Dr. it. Bismarcks Wobnungen in Frankfurt a. M., 1851-9. Lrankfurter
Zeitung.


Karpeles, Dr. G. Weinrich Heine. Beriin.

Kayserling, M. Die jucdischen Frauen in der Geschichte, Literatur und Kunst.

a Leipzig, 1879.

Keudell, Robert yon. Pars wed Kirstin Bismorel, Berlin-stutivart, 1902,

Keoechlin, 208 Dosedisis de ba fanalle Rothschild,

Kohl, Horst, Die Redon des Minislerprasidenten und Reichskauzlers: Pursten von
Bismarck ii prcussischen Landtage und deutschen Reichstige, 1851-3. Stutt-
gurt, 1805.

Kohut, Dr. Adolf Meinrich Heine und die Franen, Bertin, 1888.

Kohut, Dr. Adalf. Berithite fsraclitische Manner une Frauen. Leipzig.

Konrad, Johann. Der Glickssoleat. Munich, 1913.


484 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Kraus, Karl. Verdffenilichungen Heinescher Briefe an die Familie Rothschild,
Dte Fackel. October, 1015.

Kreppel, J. Juden und Judentum von heute. Vienna, 1925.

Kronfeld. Fiihrer durch die Dr. Alfons Frhr. v. Rothschildschen Garten auf der
Hoken Warte. Vienna, 1912.

Kupka, P. F, Die Hisenbahnen Osterreich-Ungarns, 1822-67. Leipzig. 1888,


Lange, Dr. Georg. Geschichie der freien Stadt Frankfurt a, M. Darmstadt, 1887.

Lassalle, Briefe von und an bis, 1848. Herausgegeben von Gustav Meyer. Stuttgart-
Berlin, 1921.

Lavissc, Ernest. Histoire de la France contemporaine. Varis.

Lee, Sidney. King Edward V IT, London, 1925.

Lloyd. Finfundzwanzig Jahre dsterreichischer.

Loewe, Dr. L. Diaries af Sir Moses and Lady Montefiore, London, 1890.

Lonyay, Graf Melchior. Graf Stefan Széchéenyi und scine hinterlassenen Schriften.
Budapest, 1875.

Louis, Georges, Lea Carnets de. Paris, 1924.

Lowell, Kdward Jackson, The Hessians and the other German Auxiliaries of Great
Britain in the Revolutionary War. New York, 1884.


McCarthy, Justin. A Ilistory of Our Own Times. 1880.

Mutter. Bismarck et san temps. Paris, 1905.

Malthes, Dr. Peter. Tm grossen Hauptquarticr, 870 1, Munich, 1892.

Maurois, André, La Vie de Disraeli, Patis, 1927,

Moyer, Arnold Oskar, Basmarch’s Kampf mit Osterrcich am Bundestag zu Frank-
furt, 1851.9. Leipzig, 1927.

Michaud et Villenave. Mistoire du Saint Sinonisme et de la famille de Rothschild.
Paris, 18-47,

Michel, Léon Say, sa vie, ses wuvres, Paris, 1899.

Mires, Der Borsensch.eindel und die offentliche Korrupltion in Frankreich. Vienna,
1861,

Mires, M. et M., de Rothschild, Paris, 1861.

Monypenny. The Life of Benjamin Disracli, earl of Beaconsfield. London,

Morgand et Fatout. Le Baron James de Rothschild. Paris, 1881.

Morley, John. The Life of William Ewart Gladstone. Loudon,

Myers, Gustavus. Geschichic der grossen amer-’anischen Vermégen. Berlin, 1216.


Nolte, Vincent. 50 Jahre in beiden Hemisphdren. Wamburg, 1854,
Nordbahn. Die ersten 50 Jahre der Kaiser-Ferdinand-Nordbahn, 1836 bis 1886."
Vienna, 1886.


Oncken. Die Rheinpolitik Kaiser Napoleons WY ven 1863-70 und der Ursprung
des Krieges von 1870 1. Rerlin-Leipzig, 1926,

Oncken. Das Zeitalter Kaiser Wilhelms, Berlin, 1890. Sy

Ouvrard, H. J. Mémoires de, Sur sa vie et ses diverses opérations financiéres, Paris,
1926.


Papiers secrets du second empire, Les. Brussels, 1870-3.
Paul, [erhert. History of Modern England, London, 1904.
Penzler. Kaiser und Kanzlerbriefe. Leipzig, 1900.

Pepoli, Marquis J. N. Les Finances pontificales. Paris, 1860.
Plener, Erinnerungen von Ernst Frhr. v. Stuttgart, 1911. .


BIBLIOGRAPHY 485


Plenge, Dr. Johann. Griindung und Geschichte des Crédit Mobilier. Titbingen, 1908.

Poschinger, Heinrich von. Preussen am Rundestag, 1851-9. Leipaig, 1882.

Poschinger, Heinrich von. Bankwesen und Rankpolitik in Preussen. Bertin, 1878.

Poschinger, Heinrich von. Bismarck in Frankfurt. Leipzig, 1885.

Poschinger, Heinrich von. Fiirst Bismarck als Volkswirt. Berlin, 1890.

Poschinger, Heinrich von. Denhwiirdigheiten des Ministers Otto Prhr.v. Manteuffel.
Berlin, 1901.

Poschinger, Heinrich von. Aus grosser Zeit. Erinnerungen an den Ftirsten Bismarck,
Berlin, 1905.

Pribram, Alfred Francis, Die politischen Geheimvertrage Osterreich-Ungarns, 1879—
1914. Vienna, 1920.

Pribram, Alfred Francis. Urkunden und -Akten zur Geschichte der Juaen in Wien,
Vienna-Leipzig, 1918.


Radowitz. Atfzeichnungen aus dem Leben «'-s Botschafters Josef. Maria von,
Leipzig, 1925.

Raumer, Friedrich von. Biefe aus frankfurt und Paris, 1848-9. Leipzig, 1849.

Reschauer. Das Jahr 1818, Geschichte der Wiener Revolution,

Richer, M. Paul, Notice sur la vie ef les travate de Mr, le baron Alphonse de Roths-
child. Séance de Vacadémie, 19 XTL1908,.

Robert, S. Paul. La Verilé sur la icaison Rothschild. Paris, 1816.

Roon, Denkwtirdigheiten aus dem Leben des Gencral-Feldmarschalls und Kriegs-
ministers Grafen von. Breslau.

Rothfels, Tans. Bismarcks englische Biindnispolitk.

Rothschild, Le baron James de. Hartraits des journaur. Paris, 1869,

Rothsehild, Le baron James de, Réponse de Rathsclild do Koi des Juifs & Sutan
dernier Roi des intposteurs, Paris, 1816,

R—-M.P. de. Nouvelle réponse du prince des Israclites Rothschild fer aun pam-
paléluire, suivic dune dissertation ser la catastrophe du & juilict. Paris, 1846,


Salingré. fin grossen Tiauptquartier, 1840-1. Berlin, T910.

Smital. Geschichie der Grossgemeiste Floridsdarf. Vloridsdorf, 1903,

Scheffer, Nyon, Der Siczeszug des Lethkapitale, Vienma, 1924.

Schneider, Oswald. Bismarcks inan.- und Wirtschaftspolitik. Munich and Leipzig,
1912,

Schneider, Oswald. Aus dem !.cben Kaiser Wilhelns. Berlin 1888.

Stern, AJfred: Geschichte Muropas von 148 -TT, Stuttgart, 1os4,

Strach. Geschichte der Lisenbahnen der dsterreichisch-ungarischen Monarchie.
Vienna, 1898. :

Strodtmann. Meines Leben und Werke, Bertin, 18738 4.

Stricker, Wilhelm. Goethe und Frankfurt a. M. Vircine-Sammlung Serie XT, Heft
261. Berlin, 1876.

Summer, Josef. Bildliche Darstellung der Geschichte der ausschliesslich ; ivilegierten

Kaiser Ferdivetned: Nordbain. Vieuna, 1855.

Stiirmer. Geschichts der Eisenbatnen, Bromberg, 1872.

Szthray, Griifin Irma. -lus den letzten Jahren der Kaiserin EtWsabeth. Vienna, 1909.


ou, Freiherr du. Deniretirdiakeiten aus dem Dienstleben des Hesstsch-D wmstad-
} tschen Stualsmintsters, 1803-48.
frolstoi, J. La Revolution de 1848 en France. Leningrad, 1926.


486 THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Toreno, José Maria. Oneipo de Llano Conde de, Historia del levantimiento, guerra
y revoluzién de Espasia. Madrid, 1840. To be read in conjunction with Toreno’s
Biography.


arigny. “Les Grandes Fortunes en Angleterre.” Revue des deux mondes, June
1888.

Vial. Changarnicr. Paris, 1877.

Viel Castel, Mémoires du Comte Ilorace de, sur le Régne de Napoleon IIT, 1851-
64. Paris, 1883.

Vitzthum, Graf. St. Petersburg und London in den Jahren 1852-64. Stuttgart,
1886.

Vitzthum, Graf. London, Gastein, und Sadowa, 1864-6.


Wagener. Der Niedergang Napoleons Uf, Berlin, 1889.

Waldbitchl, Withelm von. Das Leben berithmter Werkmeister. Frankfort-on-Main,
1853.

Werner, Anton von. Erlelnisse und Kindriicke, 1870-90. Berlin, 1913.

Wertheimer, E. v. Graf Andrissy. Stuttgart, 1918.

White, Andrew D. Aus meinem Diplomatenteben, Leipzig, 1906.

Wilmowski, Meine Brinnerungen an Bismarck.

Wollf, Theodor. Pariser agebuch. Berlin, 1927,


Zanichelli, Cavour. Florence, 1026,


INDEX


Norr.—I. refers to The Rise of the House of Rothschild ;


II. to The Reign of the


Tlouse of Rothschild.


A


AACHEN, CONGRESS OF,
Nupoleon visits, F535

Abcrdcen, Lord, 1, 402

Adélaiide of Orleans, Madame, T. 425

Adrinnople, Peace Treaty of, 1. 408

Aguado, 1. J16 5 TL bk

Akkon, Pasha of, FT. 190

Albert, Kiny of Sixony, LL. 437

Albrecht, Archduke, U1. 265

Alessandria, rising in, 1.265


I, 22%,


Alexander of Russin, Tsu, 1.146, 147,


404
Ali, Mehemet, IT, 397, 198, 208, 233,
446 5 ini wes Sytia and Arabia, U.
190;
IT. 200 ;


Rothschild, 7. 292, 293
Allianee Jusurance Company, T. dts.


Almada quicksilver mines, TF, 120, 121,


158
* Alpine Kingdam,” T, 848
Alsace Lorraine, D6 498, 424, 442
Amélie, Princess, IL, 866


Ametica, imuyuration of steamship


service wilh, Hf. 1805 suggested
annesxution of Cuba. HY. 870 5
Secessioy, FO. 387

Amiens, Tray of 1.85

Amsterdam: Bonise, decline of, Ft

Ancona, freneh hiunding at, 1b 59

Andrissy. Count, PE 264

Angoutéox, Duke of, leads French
army into Spain, TP. 38165 sets up
Regency in Madrid, 1.317

Aphonyi, Count, L376, 421; 11. 2,
gz, 49, 81, 126, 182, 157, 161, 101,
198. 201, 203, 262, 260, 3907

Arago, Dominic rancois, HH, 113, 260

Arbuthnot, Mr., (1.64

Ardouin, banker, LP. 123, 182

Arnii, von, IL. 2 $i, 410

Xrnstein and Iiskeles, View bankers,
1.97, °3; DD. 1 225, 220

Arnsteiner, Baron. §. 19%

Asperm, Battle of. 1. 90

Auersperg, Price, EH,

Auerstedt, Batih ‘of, La

Misterlitz, Bartle of, £5)

Austria,  Mreneis LT Tadetiis d
Emperor of, 1. 55; joins cualition
against Napoleon, 1, 56, 143;


; .
7,


225:


yp raed 5


Powers take action against,
recouciled to Sullan, Hi. @n
Allgemeine Acitung altacks Louse of


War of


Austria confinued :
Kugtish financial help for, I. 57;
financial straits of, £785 relations
with Franee, I, 87, 07; State


finances of, 197 pappeals to William
of Hesse for loun, 148, 00 5 st:
Jews in, i. i7! tn oof Roths-
child establishes business with, Te
TSt cul war with Dfaly, $2.58 ef seq.
finaneial position in, 1 2oa get et seq,
276s evaenates the two lies, Te
es conversion of fonts, f. tths
a oommises new King of franec, 1b
(0: proposed mobilisation of Inner,
TL. 165 Modena oeenpicd by, UL 17 ;
Varmi and Bologna ocenpied by,
Th. 2. 2d. evacuates: Papal Slates,
U1, 26, 273 (nancial silaation in, TL
BO, 316, 864s receives loan of
Kederat money, Hi. ty Jews for.
hidden loo aequire io caperty in, TD
455 uenin enters ai jan States,
595 stuunships introduced into, TH,
1655 compar in Syria, UE 200;
secret loan to. EB 253 5 represented
on Frankfat Diet, T. 815 ef seq. 3
adopts anti-dewish meusures, 17,
Bt 5 threatens Russin, UD, 8565
Paris Press camper aginst, Un
ST U5 atbowar with Franee, EE 8t7 5
atowar will) Prossii TE 806 ct seq,
402; defeated at Nonitggriitz, Eb
toz ; change of foreign polies DE 407
Austrian Lloyd S.S, Line, Th. 665, 182
Austrian State Ruilway Co., fh, 857,
oh


BB


Bacner, Baron, 1.89, 02, 117

Baydad Raibyay, DE dos

Baldsicet, Baron von, U. bto

Balkans, concessions to Jews in, LT, 449

Rallabene, 183

Rate, Honoré de, H. 282

Bauberg, suti-dewish dem. astrations
ju, F232

Barandon, London representative of
Prussian Mereantile Marine, F210

Baehaia, Dominik, offers luan to
Neapolitan Government, 1, 270, 271 5
apolies for lease of Court Theatre, 1.
200

Barhier, Nikolaus oven, — protects
Austriin financial inierests, 1. 98;

Py


437


488


Barbier—continued :
entrusted with raising of Austrian
Joan, I. 98; William of Hesse sends
scheme for loan to, I. 99; accom-
panies Metternich to Imperial Confer-
ence, I. 148 ; negotiates concerning
subsidies, T. 154 et seq. 5 President of
War Indemnity Conference, 1. 186;
becomes supporter of Rothschilds, [.
189; on wisdom of obtaining security
for loans, J. 251

Baring Bros., I. 186, 225,
330, 338,

Baruch, Jakob, represents Frankfort
Jews at Vienna Congress, I. 171;
signs petition to Dict for Jewish
citizenship, I. 204

Basel, Pence of, I. 88, 51

Bassano, Duchess, UL. 48

Battersea, Lord, LL. 448

Baumgartner, Professor von, IT. 346,
349

Beaconshcld, Lord. See Disnacwt

Beauclerk family, 11. 395

Beethoven in Vienna, [250

Behrend, Bernhardt, UL 362, 863

Belgian Congress, U, 27

Belgium breaks away from Tolland,
I. 488, 436 5 independence of, IL 24,
255; unrest in, I. 27; 9 Prince
Leopold of Coburg takes over govern-
ment in, 1632; invaded by Holland,,
If, 84; England and France inter-
vene in, LI. d+, 72 5 railway const rne-
tion in, I. 118, 1855 renewed
dispute with Holland, Th. 185;
refused loan by Rothschilds, IL. 188

Belin, Monsieur, [. 319

Belliard, General, If. 27

Benzel-Sternau, Count Christian von,
1, 120

Beresina, Napoleon's crossing of the,
1141

Berghoeffer, [. 33

Berlin, rising in, TI. 267; Bleichréder
represents Rothschilds in, UH. 410;
Meyer Carl Rothschild asked to open
branch in, II, 430; Congress of,
TI. 448

Berry, Duke of, I. 242

Berthier, Alexandre, Duke of Wagram,
444

Bethmann, Moritz von, on the Roths-
childs, 1. 299; Goethe's friendship
with, 1.400. See also He. 327, 334

Bethmann, Simon Morits von, FE. 30,

7, 50, 75, 120, 148; IL. 227; fined
for harbouring colonial goods, I.
107; approached regarding subsi-
dice, I. 164; attitude towards Jews,


228, $21,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Bethmann—continued :
I. 212; Rothschilds try to divert
business from, I. 416 ef seq.

Beust, Baron von, IL. 407

Beyrout, bombardment of, IT. 202

Biedermann, financier, U1. 93

Binean, M., Tf. 311

Bismarck, Otto von, first contact with
Rothschilds, II. 8138; represents
Prussia on Frankfort Diet, TH. 315,
816; on Aimsehel Meyer Rothschild,
IL. 316; on Rothsehildy’ attitude in
Austro-Prussian dispute, IL. 824,
$25; reconciled with Rothschilds,
Il. 828 ef seq. recommends Carl
Rothsehild for decoration, If. 381 ;
attitude towards Austria, 11. 8843
on speculation through — political
knowledge, HE 848; anti-Austrian
policy, IT. 396; dealings with Roths-
childs, Jk. 897; on Rothsehilds’
attitude towards war, TI. 899 5 aims
at German unity under Prussia, IT.
41035 supports Hohenzollern candi-
dature in Spain, TT. 412 ; installed at
Ferrites, Il. 416; conditions for
peace, IT, 418, 420; desire for a
Berlin) branch of Rothschilds, IT,
430; assessment of — Rothschild
wealth, UL 4325; on Rothschilds’
desire for wealth, I. 464

Bixio, M., 1. 375

Bjérnson, I. 465

Blacas, Duke of, ET, 73

Blanenienil, Monsieur de, IT. 56

Bieiehroder, Gerson von, TH. 396, 897,
AI0, 442

Bloch, Herr, 11. 827, 328

Bodelsehwingh, Finance Minister, II.
327, 8G ed seq.

Boer War, FL. 452 et seq.

Boers, William 3% congratulates, If.
451

Bohemia, proposed mobilisation of,
TI. 16

Bologna, end of temporal power of the
Pope deelared at, If. 10; Austrians
occupy, IT. 22, 59

Bombelics, Count Louis Philippe de,
1.358 .

Bompbrini, Carlo, IL. 301

Bontoux, IL. 436

Borne, Iudwig, represents Frankfort
Jews at Vienna Congress, I. 171;
signs petition to Diet for Jewish
citizenship, I. 204; goes to Paris, J™.
213 ; attacks on Rothschilds, I, 214

Boschan, Josef, I. 180

Boucher, II. 392, 436


INDEX


Boulanger, General, IT. 441

Bourbon dynasty, end of, TI, 424

Boxer rising, I. 454, 455

Brazil, breaks away from Portugal,
T. 835; abdication of Emperor of,
VW. 80; railway construction in,
TY. 887 ; loans to, TH. 458

British Government sanetion smug-
gling, 1. 1805 approve Rothschilds’
money exports, 1.1335 obtain
Nathan Rothschild’s help in’ finan-
cing Wellington, I. 136; subsidies
for allies, 1.350 ef seq., 170

Broeckhaus publishing tirm, T. 368

Broglie, Duke of, 17. 182, 183

Bruck, Baron, UE. ¢

Brunswick, Duke of, ¥, 420

Brussels, inauguration of postal service
between Vienna wad, Ll. 45; revolue
tion in, 1,453

Bubenctsch Castle bought by William
of Hesse, 1, 97

Bubna, Count von, I. 268

Buchholz, Ur, represents
Aachen Congress, 1, 226

Buckle, Mr., edilor of Vhe Times, IL
453

Buderus, Carl Feicdrich, Privy Coun-
eiltor, 1. 26, 48 5 ie troduces salt tox,
T. 27: relations wilt, Meyer Aruschel
Rothsehild, b. 27, 80; relations with
Wolf Solomon Schorpper, 1. 30;
supports Rothschiiis in’ fionneial
lours, 1. 50. 505 tuinslers poveer of
attorney to Rothschilds, 1.
flight from Crssel, £68 5 appeals to
Londov for money. 1.655 returns to
Hanan, 1. 69; watches over Wilbam
of Uesse © interests, 1.70 ; pleads the
Rothschilds’ canse, £ T4109, 1105
Napoleon suspicious of, 1. 80; arrest
of, I. 823 contidential agreement
with the Rothschilds, 1. 85; dis-
courages Hessian loan to Austria,
J. 983) sithouctte of, To 1005
appointed Dircetor of Finsuice Com-
muttee of Diet, T. tO; entrasts
Hessian property to Cart Rothschild,
I. 105, 106; suggests transfer of
Hessian business to Rothschilds, T,
1113 obtains fous to suppotl allics,
TL. 143 s report ab the firm of Van der
Notten, J. 170; prowoticn lo Privy
Councillor, 182; iphovencs cn
Denalf of teas to Crown Prince of
Hesse, 1. 2303 de athof, 1. 220

Billow, Com vor, I. 12, 65, 197

Bulow, Prince, Ll, 455, 456


Jows at


489


Buol-Schauenstcin, Count, I. 208, 284,
251; 11. 366; on frecdom for Jews,
1. 185; Smidt report to, on Roths-
childs, F. 289; instructed to stop
repression of Jews, I. 290, 291;
Jewish campaign against, 1.829

Ruonaparte, Jerome, King of West«
phalia, 1.74, 76, 88,59 ; TE. 404

Buoounparte, Joseph, 1. 860

Buonaparte,  Lactitin, mother of
Napoleon T, 1. 860

Buonaparte, Napoleon. Sce NaroLron


c


Cavnrz, Kind or Seain prisoner IN,
[3a7 ; Breneh capture, 1,320

Cate ria, Duke of, § 296

Cidkeshan, banker, T, 3 tt

Cumbaceérés, Duke of, EL. 35-4, 409

Cambridge, Duke of, VE. 305

Cumbridge, Piinee George of, VE, 179

Cumpe, publisher, U1, 222

Canning, George, 1. £03

Caprivi, von, Chancellor, Hh. 443

Carbonari, Sceret Lee of, To 252,
27h

Carte, TE. 217

Cart Albert, King of Piedmont, IT. 258,
269, 290

Carl Naseln of
Prince, J. 4b

Carl, Archduke, 11.79, 80

Carl August vor Weimay, Duke, 1 24

Carlists, 118, 130

Carlos of Spain, Don, TE 117, 138, 143,
144, 196, 165

Carlsbad Conterence, T. 282

Carishausen, Carb Mriedrich
von. See Beperus

Carl Vheodor von dee Pils, Duke, T. 24

Caroling of Denn rk, Princess, PT. 24

Casoentier, accountant, PP 365

Casarus, 1. 20

Cassel, Wilhelm of Hanau sets up his
Court in, £288; French refugees in,
I. 34; French troops enter, 3. 61, 62

Castlereagh, Lord, attceads Aachen
Congress, L222

Caussidiére, Prefect. of Polic s, 11. 260

Cavaignac, Kupcue, I. 276, 271, 274,
271), 286

Cavour, Count Camillo, TT. 209 ef seg.,
864, 369, 374

Chamberlain, Jeseph, IL. 452, 456

Changarnier, Nicolas Théodule, IT.
271, B74, 285, 285, 286, 424

Charlemapne, §. 55

Charles V, 11. 392


Thurn and ‘Taxis,


Buderus


490


Charles X, King of France, I. 846, 404,
423, 426 ; Il. 55, 72, 117

Charlotte of BHelgium, Empress of
Mexico, IT. 274, 387, 394

Chartres, Duke of, FE. 420

Chateaubriand, L. 305, $41

Chaumont, Treaty of, I. 158

Cholera, epidemic in Vienna, IL. 85, 46,
165 ;in Paris, IL. 63, 218

Chorinsky, Madame, TI. 167

Chotck, Count, II. 226, 361

Christine, Queen of Spain, IL. 384

Clarendon, Lord, IT, 198, 397, 398, 413

Cloth trade in early ninelecnth century,
I. 127, 128

Clotilde of Savoy, Princess, IT. 372, 374

Coburg, Duke Krnest. of, TE. 356

Coburg, Prince Leopold — of.
Lreoro.p, Kine or BeLGruM

Coffee smuggling, TE. 67

Cohen, banker, LL. 126


See


Cohen, Honnal. See Rorusciimp,
TANNA

Cohen, Judith, wife of Moses Monte-
fiore, I. 130


Coucession Decree of 1836, IL. 93

Confederation of the Rhine, founded
by Napoleon, 1. 553 krankfort joins
the, T. 673 exchanges Unnunu and
Fulda for Regensburg, I. 100;
collapse of, 1. Leb

Consols, L. 349

Continental blockade against England,
1. 67, 105, 117, 131

Conversational Eneyelopwdia, biblio-
graphy of House of Rothschild in,
1. 368 et seq.

Cordier, Legitimist agent, IT. 73, 74

Corti, Count Luigi, IF. 308, 449

Cotta, publishing firm, 1. 292, 293

Creditanstalt fiir Handel und Gecerbe,
TIL. 361, 3645, 463

Crédit Mobilier, WW. 292, 298, 353,
355-7, 361, 362, 364, 387-8, 393-4,
405

Cremicux, lawyer, IT. 217

Crimean War, LL. 356-60, 363, 869, 305

Crown Agents, duties of, in eighteenth
century, I. 26, 27

Criiger, Treasury official, II. 324

Cuba, secession from Spain, IF. 379

Custine, General de, leads French army
across Rhine, I. 35


D


Da.sBexe, CARL von, made Primate of
Confederation of the Rhine, I. 67,
89 ;" given title of Grand Duke of


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Dalberg—continued :
Frankfort, I. 100 ; obtains loan from
Rothschilds, I. 108 ; grants passport
to James Rothschild, FE. 109, 132 ;
grants rights of citizenship to Krank-
fort Jews, I. 1193 negotiates pur-
chase and sale of Fulda and lfanau,
I. 120; resigns Grand Duchy of
Frankfort, I. 144; leaves Frankfort,
I. 170

Dalberg, Duke of, visits Janies Roths-
child, I, 402

d’ Andrea, Marchese, I, 272

Darby, John, T. 400

@Argout, IT. 63

David, Veidel, Crown Agent at Cassel,
T. 26, 30

Davillier, Charles, Paris banker, I.
182, 136

Davoust, Marshal, [. 187, 138

@Azeplio, Marchese, TT, 308, 353

Debraux, journalist, IT, 854

Decazes, Duke of, I. 420

de la ‘Tour, House of, See THuRN AND
TAXIS

Detessert, banker, I. 518

della Torre, House of. See Tarn AND
TAXIS

Denmark, finaneial assistanee for, 1.
47; gives up ber neutrality, 1. 76

Derby, Lord, I. 867, 405, 455

Desmarest, Police Prefect, L138, 189

Devoushire, Duke of, 11, 459

@ Herisson, TY. 425

Disracli, Benjamin, Lord Beaconsficld,
supports Lione] Rothschild, 11. 366 ;
at Byelinn Rothschild’s wedding,
TL. 395 5 on question of mediation in
Franco-Prussian dispute, UL. 415;
desire fo arbilrate on Franeo-
Prussian peace terms, TR. 4243
ay pointed Prin > Minister, IT. 425 ;
friendship with Lionel Rothschild,
TI, 445; buys Suez Canal shares,
Il, 446-7 5 at Congress of Berlin, IL.
448-9; death of, IT. 450

Dollfuss, firm of, FT. 361

Donncrsinark, HWenckel von, IT. 418

Drohsdick, Baron von, on railway con-
struction, II, 91; on rival claims ef
Rothschild and Sina, EI. 95 ms

Duponchel, M., 17. 219

Dupuytren, Dr., 1. 217


,


E


East Inma Comrany, J. 135
Eber}, Colonel, I. 347
Eckhardstein, Baron von, IT. 454, 459.


INDEX


Edward VII, King of England, works
for Entente, If. 441 ; friendship with
Rothschilds, IT. 447; attends wed-
ding of Leopold Rothschild, U1. 448 ;
opposition to Eniperor William U,
Il. 451 ; succeeds to the throne, LL.
459

Egypt, dispute regarding, LI. 441, 450

Elchanan, Isaak, I. 17

Elizabeth, Empress of Austria, 11. 359,
434-40

Evisson & Speyer transfer oflices to
Offenbach, I. 287

Elssler, Kanuy, 11. 46, 70

England purehases Llessian soldiers, I.
25, 35; at war with France, 1355
foreign loans to, L415 relations of
llesse and, [. 51 5 Continental block-
ade against, 3.67, 105 5 illicit) Lrading
with, J. 109; difficulties of comnuiuni-
eating with, F. 108, 115-16 5 commer-
eh importance oof, after French
Kevylution, LL. t275 supplies sub-
sidiesy to hinperial Powers, 1. 150
et seq., 179; demands repayment of
Austrian Joan, £20 8285 finaneial
activily in, L348 5 opposed to Ru. vo
Turkish war, £. 106 5 peace poticy of,
TH. 205 makes Joan to Spain, TD 640;
qunptign in Syeia, T. 200 cf seq. 3
status of Jews in, LE 252 5 conchides
alliance with Turkey, 2b 3565 lakes
part in Crimean war, Th. 856;
alarmed at Napoleau ELPs power,
UY. 879; attempts co arbitrate on
France Prussian peace terms, IL.
424 5dispuic with Prince over Wgy pt
and Suez, 26 t#b; disputes with
Germany, Eh. al et seq.

Lskeles, Baron Daniel, IL. 100, 857

Eskeles, Here von, Vienna banker, §.
97-8, 188, 107, 2045 TL 17,

Is partero, General, 11, 157, 16"

Esterhazy, Count Carl, H. 245

Mstcrhazy, Count Moritz, 11. 296, 298-9

Esterhizy, Prinee Paul Anton von, F.
206, 2-65, 40251 125, 100; infinancial
striits, U1. 405 interviews Nathan
Rothsehild on Spanish policy, LL.
329

Prevhizy, Princess Maric, Hf. 167

Gstorff, aseneral sea, meets Meyer

> Amsehel Kottschild, Lot8 s poes Lo

\ planav to Wailhelin ot Hesse. 1.793
introduces Mever Amscho fb Ruthie


hind to The treo, 120
Recnie, empress, 1. 350, $52. 887,
+ B95, 416, Is
gulenburg, Prince von, U1. t44


491


Europe, change in general polities in,
I. 96; conditions in, after French
Revolution, 1. 127 ; repercussion of
French July revolution in, 1. 433;
financial difficulties in, duriug: Paris
revolution, TE. 83 threatened war
between astern and Western, LL.
33


Pp
Fabnn, Fina or, 1. 136
FKalkeustein, Gertrid, Countess of


Schaumburg snd Princess of Hanau,
HE. 227

Favre, Jnles, 1 446 15, 424

Ferdinand, igmperor of Nustria, U1. 80,

92, 99, 205

sand dT, King of Naples, Ego

; el seq. SAD

Ferdinand SIE, King of Spain, B25;
asks France for armed belp, 1. 805 5
buprisoned at Cadiz, bo 307 5 elope
of, 1. 8205 question of succession lo,
WH. 1tts death of, I tts

Ferrara, opyression of Jews ing Ul, 17u

Ferrié¢res, James Rothschild’s chateau,
HH, 390 15) Prossis  Seadquarters
estabhisnhedtat, TE a

Fettmileh, leader of anti-Jewish rising,
16

Fiequehuont, Couit, F260, 264, 272,
273 ; efforts concerning reparvracnt of
Neapolitan Joan, £  Y85 65 on
Neapolitan war burdens. 1 205, @43 5
on settlement of Neapolitun debt,
1. 377 8

Elahault, TE. 286

Fornarint, Monsignor, 1, 297

Fould, Achille, H. 281, 286, “91-2, 309
ef seq., 35203, SSO, 407

Fould, Adolf, Hl. 857, 37

Pould, Benoit, 9. 325 ;
291 2, 204

Fourneyton, ML, TT. 180

Fragonard, TL. 436

Franee, relations with Austria, 1. 87,
97; ultitude of Rothschilds tawards,
Lo rots eect of Continentat blockade
on, 1. 105 5 Contributions payable to
Allies, 1. 1600150 war ou: lenmmnities
frosa, £186 5 invades Span, E3163
political disturbances in, 404, 407,
420 ef seq. 5 issue of Mentes in, F415 5
campainn in Algiers, 1, 4165 Karo-
penn countries recognise new king
of, FL 105 peace poticy of, ML. 195
goes to assistance of Beluium, UL. 34 5
rvohtfion in, stops railway plans,
TL &? railway) contruction in,


113, 225,


492


France—continued :
IE. 112 ef seg., 246 ; makes loan to
Spain, IT. 140; attitude to Quadruple
Alliance and Syrian question, IT. 198
et seq. ; Revolution of 1848, EI. 259 ;
Republic declared, LH. 262; Louis
Napoleon elected President of, IL.
275; political situation in, If. 279
et seg.; coneclides alliance with
Turkey, I. 856 ; concludes alliance
with Sardinia, If. 3871 ; Press cam-
paign in, against Austria, IL. 371;
at war with Austrin, HW. 877;
financial position about 1860, IT.
888 ; outcry ut Hohenzollern candi-
dature in Spain, I. 412; defeated
in) Franco-Prussian war, II. 415;
dispute with Kngland over Egypt,
TT. 4415; occupies Tunis, TL. 441 5
alliance with Russia, Il. 442

Francesconi, Crown surveyor, IT. 110

Francis I, King of Naples, I. 345,
379

Francis 11, Emperor of Austria, heads
union of German princes, 1. 345
relations with William of Hesse, T.
89; proclaimed Manperor, 1. 55 5
invites Willian: of Llesse to Austria,
I. 76-7 ; efforts to obtain loan, 0.79,
80; declines the scheme for loan,
I. 99; meets Napoleon in Dresden,

122; confers with amperor of

Russia and King of Prussia, L147 5
urges realisation of British subsidies,
I. 1515 confers tithe of aobility on
Rothschild brothers, T. £98 5 orders
higher pay for army, [. 261 ; loan to
King of Naples, b. 267; views on
Neapolitan loan, L271; agrees to
further fean from Rothschilds, 1
299 ; attends Congress of Sovereigns
at Verona, I. 305 ; appoints Nathan
Rothschild Consul-General, YF. 312 3
illness of, 1. 365; LL. 79; death and
will of, Lf. 80

Francis Joseph, Mmperor of Austria,
receives James Rothsehild in audi-
ence, IT. 290; journey to Northern
States, LL. 346 ; condolences at James
Rothschild’s death, TL. 409 ; attitude
towards House of Rothschild, 11. 438

Franco-Prussian War, causes leading
to, Il. 412 ef seq.; declaration of,
Il. 415

Frank & Co., Viennese bankers, I. 62,79

Frankfort-on-Main, early development
of, I. 15: status of Jews in, I. 15 et
seq. ; Ghetto of, I. 16, 17; original
hore of Rothschilds in, I. 17 ; fairs


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Frank fort-on-Main-—continued :
held in, [. 20-1; bombardment oi,
I. 36 ; bankers flourish in, I. 86 ; end
of political independence of, L. 67;
incorporated in Confederation of the
Rhine, I. 67; political changes in,
I. 100; inervased prosperity of, L
100 ; refuses to carry out blockade
orders, F. 1063; search for Linglish
goods in, T. 106 7; new Rothschild
bank built in, I, 142; bankers in,
negotiate English subsidies, I. 152;
Rothschilds’ efforts on behalf of Jews
in, 1. 188 et seq. ; anti-Jewish dis-
turbances iu, I. 2335 slump in the
Bourse after) French Revolution,
I. 428 ; rioting in, IT, 267 ; Diet of,
TT. 314 et seq. ; decline of Rothschild
braneh in, LL, 431, 432

Trrank!, banker, IE. 228

Frantz), Captain, ID. 3384

Frederick, Mainpress, U1. 451

Frederick V, King of Denmark, T. 19

Frederick William, King of Prussia,
Rother’s report. on Pinissian loan to,
If, 2 et seq. 3 agrees to Rother's
reconmnendition, PD. 5, 95 confers
order on Meyer Carl Rothsehild,
HL, 362

¥reiburg, Imperial headquarters moved
bo, 1952

French Fapire shattered, 1, 415

French Revolution, effcet of, in Marepe,
1,33, 127 5 aftermath of, [438

Wriedrich UF of Hesse, 119, 20, 24 5

Bricdrich Wilhelin I, Elector, IT. 227

Frimont, Baron, Fo 188, niarehes on
Naples, 1.258, 370

Fugyer, Anton, tb. 302

Kulda, exchauged for Regensburg by
Confederation of the Rhine, T. 100 ;
beaght and re-. ald by von Dalberg,
1. 120-1

Fulton, shipowner, IL. 83

Furstenberg, Prince, UL. 361, 364


G


GABRIEL FAMILY, I, 241

Galicia, first railway in, IL. 87

Gallicra, Duke of, LH. 292, 364, 376

Gambetta, UL. 441

Garibaldi, 11. 382, 383

Gentz, Fricdrich von, I. 148, 152 ; visé
Rothschilds in Frankfort, I, 2238
mects Rothschilds at Aachen Cor
gress, 1. 226; returns to Munick


INDEX


Gentz—continued :
I, 227; private opinion of Roths-
childs, I. 228 ; supports lottery loan,
I. 248 5 intermediary between Met-
ternich aud Carl Rothschild, b. 267 -
8; protests against Press atlacks on
Rothschilds, f. 292; intimacy with
Rothsehilds, F293 5 UE. 46 : reecives
gratuity from Court of Naples, 1.
8301 ; uttends Congress of Sovereigns
at Verona, [. 305 5 interview with
Solomon Rothschild, J. 307, Sze;
presses claims of Jews, 1 323 5 on
French debt: reduction scheme, I.
3415 propaganda werk for, and
relations willl, Rothschilds, £. 368 ;
TI. 69 3 use made of, by Rothschilds,
1. 407 ; death of, IL. 69

George LY, King of Englund, 1. 19;
1. 366

George LV, King of Mngland, bE 54

German-Aagstrian Dual Alfianee, 441

Gernin Bederation, constitution of,
B. 4723 loan te, LTR fs Gini dal
position of, TL 250 5 political working
of, 11. 313

Germany, liberation of, in 1813, bbe b;
anti-Jewish activities in, Lo 2820 et
seq. 3 distirbances in, after Prench
Jaly revolution, 1. £83 5 disputes
with nghand, PE. 31 et seq.

Geynniller & Coy 197, (68, 241, 825

Gcymiiller, Here, banker, approuched
for omailitary lean, Ib, 175 seths
Métalliques. TL 66. subscribes to
Galicaaa omiilway fond, TE 9350 in
Jinanciat didienttivs, Gh 225

Gheva, Carl, ob

Giorgieue Eh 302

Giadstong, Me, TL 4138, 448, 450

_Gtyn, Halifis, Mills & Co., Of 85

Gocthe, T. (7, 26.38, 140 5 anti-Jewish
attitude of, L399; on growth of
House of Hothechild, D -f00

Cotausen, Dircetor af Poliec, L193

Goldsehinidt, Maximilian von, Ti. 433

Goldsetinidt, Moritz, Soloman Roths-
ehild’s taanager in Vicnta, bo 307 3
LL. 47, 68, 150, 167, 176, 189, 190,
209, 276, Sal

ddschmidt-Rothschith Bank, IT. 432

Foldschmidt, Stuber ease, I. U0

zoltz, von dex, TL. 2.8

Bonterd, firnta: bankers, 1. 163-4, 322,

See also Rowrtscnitis and GusTarD

ordon, Sir Koncert, b. 38 °

op Castle, William of Pte sse flies

_ to, 1. 64

udchuux, Michel, If. 260, 263

Fries & Co., Vienna bankers, I. 97


498


Gramont, Duke of, IT. 413

Gramonut, Duke Agcnor de, TL. 444

Granville, Lord, I. 413

Gravelines, the reeognised centre of
sinugyling, 1. 11

Greeve, rising in, [305

Greenwood, Frederick, I. 446

Gregory NVI, Pope, confers order on
Carb Rothschild, Li. 3t

Grey, Lord, Liberal) Primte Minister,
VL. 133; and Reform Bill, WW. 6b;
tesiguation of, El. Gt; returns lo
otfivy, MH. 65

Grillparzer, E17-6; IL. 207

Grisi, Giita, TE 179

Groeditzberg, Herr Benecke von, [
ts

Gaeta, Dukedoimn of,
Mane Louse, 1. 38

Guizot, Minister of Madueation,
Inu 3, 193, 197, 2o8, 2k, 259

Gampreeht, J... Meyer Anochel
Rolhischild’s partner, 1 018, U7

Gunoersbory House, home of Lionel
Rothschild, IL, ats

Cather, Dn. fl 79

Gutzkow, Warl, 2b 15


ceeded to


tL,


i


Larne sorriner aap PO Tit FRENCH,
B53

Hanbro, C2. & Son, TL 306

Yiaunbarg, fire of, LL. 280

Thana, va. See Roruscuinp, Eva

Hanau, Princess of, EL 227

Hanau, Wilhelin of Hesse established
in, 1. 19, 203 exchanged for Re-
gemsburg by Confederation of the
Whine, £100; von Dalberg buys
and sells, T. '20

Handel, Baron vor
Ht. 1638

Timover, House of, I 1o

Ifanover, Meyer Amschel Rothschild
gocs to, [£8

Hapsbury dynasty, UL. 378

Mfardenberg, Carl August, Prince von,
1. 99, 182, 1835 agrees to prutec-
tion of Frankfort Jews, J. 1855) re-
commends Joan from fogtand, I.
210, 212; Rothsehild’s Ici ter to, on
behalf of Jews, [. 225 ; bibliography
of, f. 457

Hardwicke, Earl of, LW. 448

Hartiv, Count, I. 232

Hatzfeld, Count, IL. £52, 456

Hayashi, Baron, HL. 459

Haynau funily, I. 24


I, 192, 287, 242-3;


494


Hebenstreit fined for
colonial goods, I. 107

Heidelberg, Conference at, II. 386

Heimrod family, I. 24

Heine, Weinrich, Il. 283; goes to
Paris, IT. 213; meets James Roths-
child, II. 214; opinion of Roths-
childs, II, 216 et seq. ; admiration of
Betty Rothschild, Uf, 220-1

Heine, Solomon, IL, 221, 251, 292

Heralds’ College of Austrian on Roths-
child coat-of-arms, I. 200; objec-
tion to granting of baronetcy to
Rothschilds, 1. 302

Herries, John Charles, 1, 136, 146, 153,
154, 167, 177; IT. 133) sugeested
as Chanecllor of the Exchequer, L.
402; made Master of the Mint, I,
403; bibliowraphy of, L457

Hertelendy fimily, UI. 241

Uerz, Adelheid. See Rornascniny,
ADELUEID

Ilerz, Herr von, Frankfort: banker, I.
150

Hess, Councillor, IL. 79

Hesge, Carl, Landgraf of, F. 117

Lesse-Casset, William OX of. goes 10
Denmark, Te 193; 0 ostablished in
ITanau, E2050 charecteristies of, 1.
20, 24553 relations will Meyer
Aunschel Rothschild, 1. 21, 2-4, 28 0 5
married Princess Caroline of Den-
mark, I. 245; children olf, 1,26; busi-
ness interests of, 1. 25-7; suceeeds
to throne of Mlesse-Cassel, 1. 28 5
joins Union of German Princes, I,
343 drives French force frou Prank-
fort, 1.355 made Ficld-Marshal of
Prussia, 1.35; withdraws from war,
1.35; aets as banker, [. 38 3) rela-
tions with Mnuperor of Austria, T.
39; makes loans lo Hngland, 0. 513
proclaimed Elector, [5153 ineurs
Napoleon's displeasure, I, 525° de-
clines Napoleon’s invitation — to
Mainz, {. 53; obtains title for
Caroline von Selilotheim, TI. 57;
makes loan to Prussia, I. 57 ;
neutrality during Napoleonic wars,
I. 59, 60; takes slcps to safeguard
his possessions, IL. 60, 62 ; Napoleon’s
ultimalum to, [. 61; "Hight from
Cassel to Rendsburg, I 625 arrival
at Castle Gottop, I. G4; moves to
Itzehoe, I. 72; life in exile breeds
distrust, I, 72-3; goes to Carlsbad
and Frayvue, I. 76-7; trics to
promote insurrections in Germany,
I. 82; makes Hritish investments,
1. 86, 95 ; calls for Hessian rising to


harbouring


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Hesse-Cassel—continued :
support Austria, I. 88 ; vicissitudes
during Napoleonic campaign, I. 938-4,
appeals for reinstatement, 1. 94, 96;
financial position of, I. 97 ; appealed
to, for loan to Austria, I. 98; de-
vises scheme for puyment of debts,
I. 98-9; satisfaction with Roths-
childs’ dealings, T. 108: returns to
lkesse, I. 122; demands recinstate-
ment, I. 143; returns to Cassel, I.
1443 demands compensation for
losses, I. 153; relations with Roths-
childs after Napoleonic wars, [183 ;
death of, I. 222, 274

Ilesse, Crown Prinee of, in financial
difliculties, 1, 217 ct seq. 5 appointed
Elector of Hesse, 1. 275

Hesse, Friedrich UL of, T. 19

Llesse, House of, L. 18 -19 ; influence of,
on House of Rothschild, I. 20;
Napoleon’s attitnde towards, TL. 62;
censorship of correspondence to, I.
117; Amschel Rothsehild’s — rela-
tions with, IT, 227

Hesse, WilhelIn VITT of, T. 19, 20

Hessenstein, Countess von (Caroline
von Sehfotheim), Wilhelm of
Hesse's anistress, J. 563 0 grated.
tithe, 1,575 declines loun to Crown
Prince of Hesse, 1. Pech

Hessenstein family, . 2h

Hessian soldiers via! to England, L
25

Heyden, Dr. duard, 11. 15-4

Himte, Couasellor of Mnibassy, I, 23-4

Ilirz, Naftali, [. 17

Lfohenlohe, Vf. 447

Hohenlohe-Sehillingsfiirst,
Chlodwig 21, TL. £49

Tohenzollern, Princess von, IT, 352

We Yenzollecn-Sigmaringeo, Prince Leo-
pold of, LL. 415, 444

Holkund, conquest of, by France, T. 36 ;
Hessian loan to, 1. 110-11; sepura-
tion of Belgium and, TF. 423; 1%. 24;
mobilises on Belgian frontier, UL.
27; marches on Belgium, II. 345


Prince


Kingland and France take steps
against, I. 72; renewed dispute
with Belgium, Tf. 186 ee
Holzférster, I. 219 _


Hope, banking firm, IT. 78, 228

Hormayr, Director of Vienna Sta

« archives, 1. 3439

‘Hottinguer, Paris banker, I. 132, 186
3138 wee

Hounman, French banker, H. 14

Hibner, Herr von, IL. 269, 283, 28
347, 352-3, 372


INDEX


Higel, Baron von, I. 100, 151, 170,
176; TI. 55, 158

Humann, M., Finance Minister, IT, 208,
243

Tumboldt, Alexander von, I. 213;
social intercourse with Nathan
Rothschild, I. 215; at Congress of
Sovercigns in Verona, 1. 307

Humboldt, Baron von, I. 169, 171,
203

Humboldt, Caroline von, I, 216

Humboldt, Wilhelm von, report on
the Rothschilds, 1. 21-45 social inter-
course with Nathan Rothschild, [.
215

Hummelaucr, Herr von, UW. 125, 129,
139, 143, 146, 156, 176

Hungary, railway consteaction in, UH.
240; revolution in, EL. 275

Huskisson, Mr., 1, 351


I


Teranim Pasa, LT. 199

Idria quicksilver mines, LL. 127

Inglis, Sir Robert, Uf, 280

Inzaghy, Count, IL. 236, 238

Treland, disturbances in, L. 8445  pro-
posed recruiting in, for Naples, 1.
Bor

Trish Famine Loan, H. 252-3

Irving, John, banker, [. 32t

Isabella, Queen, ID. 214-5

Israclite Religious Commuuity, T, 119

Italy, eflect of Paris revolution on, Ir.
10; Austrian troops sent to, Ti. £2 5
proposcd medilisation of, JI. 16;
evacunted by Susteia, HD 26075
eonchides «Hianee with Prussia, HL
$99; joins Gernian-Austrian alii-
ance, TL. tb!

ilestein, Here von, Director of Volice,
Lo128; made President of Isratite
Religious Community, Tti9 5) re-
warded for services, L. 121


J


Jan. onowsxy, Prince Lupwie vs, I.
361-3

Jameson Raid, UH. 451

Fpan defeats Russia, IT. 459

Jena, Baitle of, 1. °9

Jerome, King of Westpisalia, 1. 74, 76,
88-9 ; ET. +4

Jesuit Grder, 10. 402 :

prs, status of, ia Middle Apcs, J. 1s €
geq., in Ausiria’ 1. 171, Tk. 43 5 mn
England, (i. 252 ; “ protented,’” L.
16; tolerance of Wilhelm of iesse


495


Jews—continued :
towards, I, 24-5; given more free-
dom, L. 36; attitude towards Roths-
childs in Cassel, [. 52 ; taxes payable
by, in Cassel, $1. 523 Rothschilds’
activities on behalf of, [ 118, 1833
TL, 17-4, 206, 208, 3295 granted citi-
zenship in Brankfort, L119, 120;
pelition for citizenship in Austria, I.
204; Hindenbury's efforts on behalf
of, A. 201, 2123 German campaign
agninst, 1, 252 ef seq. > Metternich’s
efforts on behalf of, 1 288 91; im-
proved social status of, (a 1820, I.
258 9; coneessions sriated to, in
Frankfort, 1. 328--6; portnission to
marry Christians, 1. 3005 hostility
ftp Damascus, T2235 eleetion to
beectish Parliament, [IL 252, 367,
ip, lish opposition to crianeipacun
of, HH. 258 5 Austrian veto on pur-
chase of estates by, Th. $475 con-
eessiou for, in Balkans, $1. 2403
emancipation of, in Mogland, Te
419 5 muussucres of, in Russia, TL,
458

Joel, Crown Agent, L253

Johann, Archduke, J... $8 5; UL 79, 80,
265

Jordan, Sylvesier, 1. 203

Josef, Archduke, IL. 79, 90

Josephine, Koipress, L. 96


K


Kaiser - Frernixanns ~ Norpnanny,
Emperor gives patronage to, HL. 09 5
first meeting of, TE. 90, 1005 Pereira
om difficulties ip voustructing, UL.
100-3; Ricpel’s views on coastruc-
ting, LL, 104 et seq.

Kauls Bros., 1. 193

Kurchner, Perr, Pf. 125, 171

Klindworth (Appe vis agent), IL, 157,
Ju, 178

Kratz, War Seerctary, I. 8-4

Kober, V., publisher, 1. 222

Koller, General, 9. 205, b43

Kolowral. Count, Il. 16, 26, 92, 150,
239, 25), 253, $465; recommends
Austrian conversion low, T4145
flight during cholera cpotemic, LE
46, 47; omitted from [Mmperor
Francis’ will, 39.81 3 opposes Jtoths-
chikls building Pressburg railway, IL.
96 ; social relations with Rothschads,
If. 166; opposes State support of
Austrian Lloyd, LL. 1s&

Ko niygriitz, Battle of, I. 402

Kossuth, I. 275


496


Kotzebue, I. 232

Kraus, Karl, II, 217

Kubeck, Baron von, I. 381; IT. 26-7,
39, 51, 81, 229, 232, 254, 257, 845,
358, 359

Kunkcl, Hessian agent, I. 93


L


LaBiacna, IT, 179

Lafayette, General, IT. 18, 32

Laffitte, banker, and later Finance
Minister and Prime Minister, I. 313,
$25, 353, 437; IT. 12, 13, 14

Lagrange, General, appointed Governor
of Hesse, IL. 50 ; Napoleon’s orders to,
I. 64-5; sells the Lesse securities,
1. 66

Laibach, Congress of Kings at, I. 253

Laing, Mr., UL. 864

Lamartini, M., If. 260

Limel, Jewish banker, I. 223 ; IL, 261

Lampi, IT, 437

Landau, Herr von, IT. 301, 312

Landerbank, I. 436

Lansdowne, Lord, L. 403

Latour, Count, If. 275

Laurin, Anton von, report on Nathan
Rothschild, L. 275 ; efforts on wehalf
of Damascus Jews, UL, 223

Lawactz, Hamburg banker, I. 49, 50,
54, 59, 70

Lawrence, artist, LL. 437

Lebzeltern, Count, Austrian Minister
at Naples, LI. 48-9

Lederer, Baron von, report on the
House of Rothschild, 1. 195 et seg. 5
sceptical views of Nathan Roths-
child's securities, I. 277; objects to
Rothschild’s receiving title of Baron,
J. 302 ; on Austrian Joan in England,
I. 332

Ledru-lollin, Minister of the Interior,
IT, 263, 280

Lee, Sir Sydney, IT. 448

Lehmann, Lieut., Il. 227 .

Leipzig, Battle of, I. 144

le Monnier, Secretary of Legation, I.
243

Lennep, Military Counsellor, I. 50, ‘70,
82


Lennox family, II. 395

Leopold I, King of Belgium, visit to
Naples, I. 378 ; arrives in Brussels,
II. 88 ; interest in railway construc-
tion, I]. 114, 188 ; financial dealings
with Rothschilds, II. 274; death of,
Tl. 394, See also LI. 30, 32, 185

Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany,
1. 259


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Leopold II, King of Belgium, H. 409

Letronne, II. 217

Leuchtenberg, Princess von, II. 292

Levy, err, I. 89, 91, 110

Liechenstcvin Palace, residence of Wil-
helm of Hesse, [. 78

Licven, Count, Russian Ambassader,
I. 409

Lieven, Countess, F. 291

Lieven, Prince, Austrian Ambassador,
II. 74

Lieven, Princess, Il. 197, 201

Limburger, Chevalier von, I. 154, 165,
177, 181

Lis, Bertram de, Spanish banker, I.
314-15

Liverpool, Lord, Prime Minister, I.
146, 349

Liverpool-Manchester Railway, IT. 84,
88, 131

Livyd Steamship Co,, origin of, IL. 165

Lombard-Venetian Railway, UL, 364,
368

London, Nathan Rothschild makes hie
home in, 1. 128; Neapolitan securi-
ties on the market in, 1. 275; Con-
ference of, on Belgium's independ-
ence, IT. 25, 24; Jewish synagogue
opened in, LT. 449

Lonyay family, If. 241

Lorentz, agent for Wilhelm of Hesse in
London, I, 112-138, 130

Lottery loan, oulery at, I. 246 et seg.

Lottum, Count von, TL. 5, 77

Louis XVI, King of France, I. 242,
252,319 5 11.279 ; assisted financially
by Rothschilds, [. 1675 flight from
Paris, 1, 1725 appealed to for help
by King of Spain, 1.305 ; death of, 1.
3465 bicgraphy, Fr. 457

Louis, George, Ambassador, IT. 432

Lovis Napoleon. Sce Narounon TIT

Louis Philippe, Ka ‘g of France, I. 282,
424, 426; IL. 117 ; averse to war, ID,
10, 191 ; changes his Prime Minister,
Il. 14; honours James Rothschild,
Tl. 55; attitude towards Spain, IT,
146 ; complains of Quadruple Alh-
ance, IT, 194+; views on Quadruple
Alliance, IT. 198 et seq. ; attack made
on his life, 11. 207; flight of, LL. 29

Lowenburg, Castle of, L. 61

Lucea, Duke of, I. 378, 384, 390-1

Luccheni, anarchist, I}. 440

Ludwig, Archduke, II. 79, 80, 92

Lanéville, Treaty of, 1. 43, 51

Luxemburg, dispute concerning,
81-2, 185 ; neutrality of, LI. 412

Lyons, Lord, I. 413, 422

Lys, Don Vincente Bertram de, IL. 19


INDEX


M


MacManon, Mansnat, II. 440

Madrid occupied by French, 1. 347

Magne, Pierre, 11. 372

Mahmud, Sultan, Il. 190, 210

Mahren, Napoleon advances on, I. 94

Mainz, Napoleon visits, TI. 55; de-
manded by Napotcon III, H. 405

Mallet Freres, Paris bankers, I, 182,
313, 416

Maltzuhn, Madarne, If. 167

Manguin, Francois, LH. 133

Manteuffel, I}, 327 et seq., 387-9

Marcus, Ludwig, LH. 220

Marenmma, scheme for draining, 1. 359

Maria, Quecn of Naples, 17. 384

Maurie Antoinette, Queen, LT, 395, 436

Marie Christine, Queen of Spain, H.
VW17 ct seg., 156, 2493

Marie Louise of Austria, marriage to
Napoleon, 1, 96 5 gives birth to awson,
1. 108 3 character and life of, B. 381 5
attachment te Count von Neipperg,
i. 382; financial arrangements for,
T. 883 ef seq. yrants audience to
Solomon Rothschild, £, 397 5 rein-
vestment of moan¢y, TL. 415; tight
from Parma, IL, 10; stays at Iyehl,
TI. 230

Marion, [. 133

Marmont, August Friedrich, Marshalde,
T. 854, $23, 458

Martignac, FT, 40-4

Martin, Jlerr von, Secretary to
Emperor braneis, F334

Martins, Major, £216

Maximilian of Austria, [1,387

Maximilian PT, Kinperor, 1. 45

Mayer, Abraham, houses the Hessian
treasures, 1. 93

Medici, Luigi Cavaliere de’, T. 252, 362 ;
appointed Finance Minister, I. 296 ;
Carl Rothschild’s business dealings
with, 1. 342 ; on burden of finance in
Naples, I. 3765 applies for loan to
Naples, 1. 37% ; Metternich opposes
decoration for, 1. 379

Melbourne, Lord, TL 202

Mendizabal, Don .fuan Alvarez y, If,
324, 132, 138, F24, Ga, 2

Menierc, Prosper, HT. 260

Mensshenger. Baron won, JL. 228

erey, Count ven, © 254

pde, M. ele, LL. 187

étalliques oun, f, 244, 261, 830-1;

SAL. 17, 57, 66

ietternich, Count von, Il. 453, 458


}He


497


Metternich, Prince Clemens Lothar,


appointed Foreign Minister, I. 94;
interview with Napoleon, I. 143 ; at
Frankfort Conference, 1. 1475 lack
of financial ability, I. 148; joins
Imperial headquarters in Freiburg,
JY, 162: prevents expulsion of Jews
from Vienna, 1. 171; contidence in
Rothschilds, F. 181 5 appealed to on
question of recognising Rothschilds’
services, I. 198, 205-6, 284; private
financial transactions, I. 223; at-
tends Aachen Congress, I. 225;
meets Rothschild brothers, 1. 226;
presides over Carlsbad Conference,
1, 232 ; reorpanises Austrian finance,
I. 244; entrusts more business to
Rothschilds, b. 2509-1; summons
congress to diseuss [talian situation,
T. 252 5 on Nenpolitan loan, FE 254-5 5
on Neapolitan expedition, L263 ;
invites aid of Carl Rothsehild, [.
263 ; instructions to Gencral Vincent,
TL, 268 ; supports James Rothschild’
appointment as Consul General, 1
284; instructions regarding Nea-
politan repayment, L285 5 promotes
emancipation of Jows, L288, 200-1;

dines with Aipschel Meyer Roths-
child, 1. 2015 obtains private Joan
from Rothschilds, [, 301; restores
peace in Apennine peninsula, 7.
305 ; attends Congress of Sovercigns
at Verona, 1. 8055 supports Roths-
childs for Austrian loan, LL 8265
makes terns for repaymentof Muglish
loan, L. 828 5; on Rothschilds’ courier
service, [. 347 5 on annuity for Mar-
shal Marmont, 1. 3555 refuses to
sanction Joseph Buonaparte’s return
to Murope, L. 360, opposes decora-
tions for Medici and Carl Rothschild
I, 3795 arranges inheritance for
Maric Louise’s children, 1. 384 et seq.;
on question of Russian loan, L405 ;
appeued -to, on behall of exiled
monarchs, If, 10; sends Austrian
troops to Italy, I. 12; demands
military preparations, (1. 16 ; agrees
to Austrian evacuation of Italy, UL
26; approaches Solontia Roths-~
child for loan for Esterh tay, UL 41 5
attilude during cholera epidemic, TI,
47; approaches Sulomon Rothschild
regaruing Papal Joun, UL. 49; en-
gages Saphir, U0 $4; trouble With
State finanees, Il. 66; drafts
Emperor Francis’ will, U. 30-1; in
favonr of railway de: clopinent, LI.
88 ct seg.; endorsey Rothschilds’


ate


498


Metternich—continued :
petition to Mmperor, IL, 98; sup-
ports Carlists in Spain, 1. 118 ; dis-
trust of Rothschilds’ Spanish policy,
IL. 125, 129; on Anglo-I‘rench loan
to Spain, 11. 141; on James Roths-
child’s interference in’ polities, 1.
159; social relations with Roths-
childs, HT. 1665 appoints Anselm
Rothschild Consul-General, 11. 168 ;
calis couference to discuss question
of Jewish rights, Uf. 175; visits
Frankfort, IJ, 189; intervenes on
behalf of Daniaiscus Jews, IL. 224-5 ;
confidence in Solamon Rothschild,
IT. 228-30; plans to support Don
Carlos, TT, 24-4; on French braneh of
Rothschilds, I. 2455; public cis-
satisfaction with, HD. 255 5 resigna-
tion of, IT, 264; flight of, IL. 265 6 ;
returns to Vienna, Il, 843;
biography of, F, 453

Metternich, Prince Richard, If. 379,
382, £08, 422

Metternich, Princess Melanie, I. 167,
189, 230

Metternich, Princess Pauline, H, 402

Metternich, Prince Victor, visits James
Rothsehild, £401

Metzler, Mayor, T. 23-4

Mexican loan, faiture of, TL, 893

Mexico, Kimpire of, LL. 8&7

Mignel, Don, IL. 29

Mirabaud, Solomon
partner, 1. 391, 805

Mireés, Jules, Lh. 29-4, 378, 388

Mittrowsky, Count, LL. 87, 96, 106, 109
et seq.

Modena, Duke of, IT. 10, 31

Modena, oecupicd by Austrians, ID,
17; oppression of Jews in, TL, 176

Moldavia, occupied by Russia, TT. 348 ;
railway coustruction in, EH. 365

Molé, Count de, I, 431 ; 11, 153

Mollicn, Count von, 1. 132.3, 137,

Moltke, General vou, I. 416

Montalivet, Minister, If. 159

Mont Ceuis tunnel, 1. 369

Montefiore, Judith (ade Cohen), I. 130

Montetiore, Sir Moses, If. 449

Monteuuovo, Albertine, L. 382, 398

Montenuovo, Wilhelin Albreeht, Count
of, 1. 382, 398

Montgomery family, Hf. 395

Mozssticelli, Marchese, IL. 375

Moutijo, Countess, IL. 350, 352

Montijo, Eugéuie de. See MuGENIE,
Empress

Morel, firm of, I. 136


Rothschild’s


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Morny, Duke of, IT. 286, 357, 388

Mortier, Marshal, as envoy to Wilhelm
of Hesse, I. 61; oceupies Cassel, I.
G3

Moscow, Napoleon's advance on, I. 122

Motz, Herr yon, Finance Minister, I,
411; 11.6

Moustier, Countess de, IT, 417

Miihten Brothers, bankers, E. 148

Miller, Adnm, I, 227, 873

Muneh-Bellinghansen, Baron von,
grants concessions Lo Jews, I, 323-4 ;
conveys news of Paris revolt to
Metternich, [. 427

Minster, Count, II. 443, 447


Napaspy, Comnt, 3 sueceeds
Stadion, 1.336 ;investigates Austrian
finnnees, 1. 863; Solomon Roths-
child reports Lo, on conversion Joan,
L. 416

Napier, Admiral, 11. 200, 208

Naples, revolution in, LL. 251-2;
Austrians enter, [2675 revolution
collapses, 1. 272 ; Carl Meyer Roths-
child takes np residence in, 1. 207 5
financial straits of, 1, 342 3, 875-6 ‘
merged iuto Ttaly, U5. 88h; Roths-
child branch at, given up, HL. 885

Napoleon Buonapurte, victories of, 1.
35; refused Joon by Wilhetm of
Hesse, ¥. 525 tours Rhine provinces
und) founds Confederation of the
Rhine, I. 533 concentrates against
Austria, 1.565 wins sixteen German
States, [585 orders occupation of
Tlesse and Cassel, 1, 595 ultimatum
to Wilhehn of Hesse, 1. 61 3 attitude
towards House of Cassel, 1. 59, 64 5
deechires Continental blockade
against Enghim . 1, 673; learns of
proposed Hessian rising, [813
returns from Spain and threatens
Austria, I, 87; campaign against
Austria, 1. 935 returus to Paris, L
94; marriage contract, 1. 96; birth
of hisson, 1.108 ; collects the Grande
Armée, 1, 121; advance on Russia,
I. 122; defeated in Russia and
Germany, T. 122, 141; negotiates
with Jénglish smugglers, [1313
campnign in Saxony, 1. 142 ; abdica-
tion of, I. 153; leaves Elba and

“ returns to France, I, 172; defeat at
Waterloo aud banishment, I. 177-3

Napoleon III] (Louis Napoleon) lan
in France, IT. 194, 284 ; activity afte
revolution, II, 272 et seq.; elect]


INDEX


Napoleon ITI--continued :
President, IT. 275, 279, attitude
towards Rothschilds, TT. 281, 287;
dissolves National Assembly, Uf.
285-6; denlings with Roathsehilds’
rivals, TV. 291 ; proclaimed Napoleon
IIT, 11. 293 ; sends troops to Rome,
IL. 295 ; warringe of, LL. 350 ; interest
in unilication of Ltaly, TI. 369;
attempt on tile of, IL. 8705 visits
James Rothschild at) Ferri¢res, IT.
390 ; relations with Tsar destraved,
IL. 395; demands Rhenish tervi-
tories, 1T. 405 5 Jawered prestige of,
IT, 405 5 desire to annex Luxemburg,
TI. 412-125 opposition to Hohen-
zollern candidature in Spain, LL Ais 5
tuken prisoner and capitulates, L.
415

Napoleon, Prince, UE. 872, 87-4 6

National Workshops, 1. 270

Nattier, I. 47

Navarino, Battle of, [408

Neapolitan espeditionary furee, 1. 261 ;
lonns, 1. 258 et seq., 288 5 lorn repay
ment, 2. 285 ef seq; kingdom
restored, 1, 895

Neipperg, Adin Adalbert, Count von,
atlendant on Marie Louise, F 3at;
marries Maric Louise, 1.883; death
of, L. 397; biography of, L 458

Nell, Baron von, (1, 820

Nesselrode, Count, Russian Minister,
[, 255

Neanuun, Baron von, FT. 176; TT. 75,
107, 204

Nice, Preneh annexation of, Of 380

Nicholas of Hussin, Wear, E4065 01 56,
TH, 108, 3 be -0, 360

Niebuhr, Uerr, 11. s36 -7

Nigra, Giovanni, 11. 299 ef seq., 576

Nobili, Count, TL 266

Notten, Van der, Amsterdam: bankers,
I. 26, 115, 109, U7e


cé)


O’DonNEt., Coonr, AUSTRIAN CHAN:
CELLOR OF ‘Fite ExcHequen, I. 79, 83
Ofen, floods in, IT. 177
Imiitz, Napoleon's advanee on, I, 94
Oppenheim, firm of, Meyer Amschel
Rothsebild joins, 1, 18
Oppenheim, Heinrich, 11. 446
Order of St) Jahn confer, order on
4 Meyer Anwehel Rothschild, L475
Foun made to, £. 50
rdinances in Lrance, I, 425, 423
léans, Duke of, LL. 55, 68, 19-4, 196,
204


499


Orléans, Louis Philippe, Duke of. See
Louis Puireer, King of France

Orsini, attempt on life of Napoleon ITI,
IL. 370

Outram, Mr., If. 83

Ouvrard, Paris bankers, IL 186, 317,
BAL; IL 13, 21, 73, 144


P


Paccann, B., TY. 26-4

Padova, Rothschilds’ representative in
Rome, EL, 442

Pages, Garnicr, ET, 269

Pabnersion, Lady, TD. 26-4

Palinerston, Lord, EF, 13, 20, 188, 197,
14, 197, 202 8,27 t, B8T

Papal States, evacuation of, (1, 26, 27 5
loan for, TL. -#7, 20 be? seq.

Paris, Napoleon returns to, £94) von
Dalberg visits, b £08 5 daanes Roths-
child goes to, £109, 682 5 Solomon
Rothschikl gous to, 1 126; police
suspicion of Rothschilds’ activitics
in, 1. 938 93 repniation of James
Rothschild in, IT. 1404 entered) by
Allies in 1818, 1.158; Treaty of, F.
153, 1603 Newpotitin securities on
the market in, E2755 revolt in, I
423 3; revolniion of 1880 in, Th 1;
cholera epidemic in, TL G3, 208 5
proposed State tank in, TT. 201;
Alphoase Rothschild becones head
of branch in, TL. 4103 Prussian army
renches, JT. 4385 rising of the
Commune in, TY. £25

Parish, Oavid, 1.97, 228, 235, 241, 822 5
associated with Rothsebitds in
lottery loan, T. 263 el seq; con
neeled with Neapolitan Joan, —. 258 3
proposed Austrian Joan from Roths-
ehild and, £. 300, $865 reproaches
the Rothschilas, 2. 867; conmuits
suivide, 1.3067 ; hiogrphy of, 1. 458

Parish, John, £, 97, 225, 360

Partinment,: election af dews to, IT.
252 et sey., 367

Parma, Dukedoin of, ceeded to Marie
Louise, 1. 381; lean to government
of, T. 385 et seq. 3 flight of Maric
Lonise from, Ik. 10; Austrians
occupy, HD. 22

Paul, 8., TE. 3875

Pedro, Don, of Portugal, 7, 385 ; IY, 138

Peel, Sir Robert, 5.402 5 11. 14, 209288

Pepe, General, £252, 420

Percy, Major Uenry,
envay, I. t78

Pereira, Ludwig, Baroa von, TI. 100,
357


Wellington's


500


Pereire, Isaac, IT. 118, 291-2, 358, 857,
361, 865, 378, 393, 406

Pereire, Jacques Emil, II, 112-13, 217,
282, 201-2, 294, 353, 357, 365, 393,
406

Péricr, Casimir, I. 311, 437; offered
Premiership, IT. 14; James Roths-
child’s opinion of, 1f. 15 ; appointed
Prime Minister, TL. 18 ; ov Austrian
evacuation of Italy, II. 25; recalla
troops from Belgium, IL. 34; inter-
venes on Austrian catry into Papal
States, 11. 59 ; contracts cholera and
dies, 11. 63

Persia, Shah of, If. 451

Persiguy, Jean, II. 281, 284-6, 391

Perugia, Marie, niarrics Leopold Roths-
child, TI, 448

Perzonale, Herr, 11. 240

Pesth, floods in, IL. 177

Peyronnet, M., 1. 421-2

Pfalz, Duke Carl Theodor von der, I. 24

Piacenza, Dukedom of, ceded to Marie
Louise, I. 381

Piedmont, disturbances in, I. 265-6

Pillersdorif, Baron von, E. 299 ; TT, 238

Pitt, the vounger, F. 127

Pius EX, Pope, IL. 250, 295 et aeq.

Plettenburg family, loan to, L111 12

Poland, rising in, IT. 393

Polignac, Prince de, L. 407, 420-1; ID,
388

Pompadour, Marquise, 1. 436-7

Pope, temporal power of the, declared
ended, [h. 10

Portugal, Brazil breaks away from,
1. 3353 loan to, IL 138 ; proposed
union with Spain, I. 412

Post Ofliee claims compensation if
interests damaged by railways, H. 92

Postal systent introduced into the
Tyrol, 1. 45; uureliability of, after
European wars, [. 187; methods of
“interception ” in, 1. a1

Pozzo di Borgo, Count, IE, 23, 74-5,
136

Prague, Wilhelm of Hesse goes to, I.
77; Chief of Police of, reports on
Meyer Amschel Rothschild, [. 83 ;
Wilhelm of Hesse buys palace in, I,
97

Preye and Jordis store the Hesse
treasures, I. 66

Primrose, Archibald Philip, I. 448

Prokesch, Baron von, IT. 10

Prokesch-Osten, Buron yon, IT. 385

Prussia, defeated by French in 1792,
J. 85; withdraws from war, I. 35;
Wilhelm of Hesse made Field-
Marshal of, I. 35; King of, forced


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Prussia—continued :
into exile, I. 76 ; joins Russia against
France, I. 142 ; King of, confers with
Emperors of Russian and Austria,
I. 147; British subsidy for, 1. 173;
financial state of, in 1818, I. 212;
State loan for, I. 412; receives foan
of Federal money, IT. 40; repre-
sented on Diet. by Bismarck, IT. 315 ;
defeated at Olmiitz, I. 817; war
with Anstria, IE. 396 ef seq., 402;
concludes alliance with Italy, IL, 309

Prussian Diskonto-Gesellschaft, IL. 442


Q


QuavRuPLk ALLIANCK OF 18-40, IT. 190
et seq.
Quicksilver mines, HT. 120-2, 161, 163


R


Rapay Fasnny, IL. 241

Radetzky, Count, TH. 59, 269, 299

Radolin, Prince, TH. 460

Radowitz, Josef Maria von, Ambas-
sador, VL. 401

Ragusa, Duke of, L354

Railways, origin of the, Tf. 83; con-
struction of, in Wngland, TP. 88 3 in
Austrian, PL. 89 et seq, in Brazil, 1,
387, in Hnngary, HW. 240, in Moldavia
IT. 365 5; Lionel Rothsehild's interest
in, LL. 181; sale of Austrian State,
TE. 358

Rechberg, Count von, IL. 189, 379, 381,
3st

Reform Bill, TH. 1-4, 29, 57, 64, 65

Regensburg exchanged for Hanau and
Fulda by Confederation of the Rhine,
Tod

Reichenbach, Treaty of, 1. 143

Reichstadt, Napoleon Fruicois Charles
Joseph, Duke of, birth of, IT. 108 ;
question of inheritance of, I. 384-
5, 397

Reid-Irving, banker, I. 330

Reiner, Archduke, IL. 226

Rendsbury, Wilhchn of Hesse escapes
to, 1. 62 »

Renevicr, M., L 357

Rentes in Franee, Rothschilds under-
write 80 million, I. 415; slump in,
eafter French revolution, I. 424, 420 ;
conversion of, IT. 878, 390 ; fluctua-
tions in, I. 351, 435, 430; Il. 10-My
14-15, 18, 25-6, 28, 30, 34, 196, 200,
262, 364, 872 ; a

Revel, Count, If..306 ef seq.


INDEX


Rhine, crossed by French army in 1792,
I. 35; Confederation of the, I. 55,
67, 100, 144; Confederate fortress
built on, I. 250

Richelieu, I. 216


Richtenberger, Rothschilds’ agent, IT.
3187

Ricpel, Franz Navicr, foresees import-
ance to mines of railways, TL. 86;
visits Englund to see railway pro-
gress, JI. 935 on construction of
Kaiser-Verdinands-Bahn, If. 104

Rieti, Battle of, I. 264

Ritter-Lindenthal, Frau von, I. 27, 56

Robespierre, Tl. 216

* Rocket,” The, H. 8-4

Roman Empire, Holy, Peiuce of Thurn
and ‘Taxis Postmaster-Geueralof, L. 44

Romano, architcet, TT, 266

Rome, riots in, L, 295

Roquirol, M., IL. 76

Rosa, Count ’f, di S., UL. 369

Rossi, Countess, EL. 177

Rossini, 1.3195 F, 147, 179, 283, 217,
221, 304, 4038

Rother, Christian von, efforts to obtain
a foun for Prussia Fo 2t4-13 > makes
terms with Nathan Rothsehild,
I. 214: opinion of Nathan Roths-
child, L215 5 negoti ites new Prussian
loan, Fo ft 3 President of Seehand-
lung Bank, Ut 23; an caneettation of
Joan agreement, TL ed seq. 5 advises
acceptance of Rothsctilds’ terms,
Hog faaneial dentings with Roths-
childs, FI. 760: recommends Solomon
Rethsehibt for Prussian Order, EL
G7 vseeures (ithe for Nathaniel Rot hs-
child, IL. 78 ; biography of, FE. 458

Rothsehitd, Adetheid  (aée — Iferz),
marries Carl Rothschild, I. 225;
visited by von Gentz, L226 5 joins
Carb in Naples, I. 297 5 friendship
with Princess Metternich, IL. 167;
sings at charity concert, TL. 177;
death of, IT. 360

Rothschild, Adolph, Baron, takes over
Nuples branch, €f. 361; watches
developments in’ Haly, ID. 370;
leaves Naples, Tf, 3835 settles in
Paris, Ti. 385, 431

Rothschild, Aibert Selomon, Baron,
WI, 4534; becomes head of Vienna
heuse, II, 4:5: marries Bettina,
“daughter of Alphonse, 11. 43353
financial activities of, IT. 436 ; social
position in Vieuna, Il, 487; death
iof, Il. 440


501


Rothschild, Alfons Meyer, in control
of Vienna house, II, 440

Rothschild, Alfred Charles, — inter-
mediary between England and Ger-
many, 1. 451/453 ; letter to German
Ambassador, EL 454; consulted
regarding Bagdad railway, IL. 458 5
pro-Japanese sentiments of, IL 459

Rothschild, Amsehet Meyer, Baron,
birth of, I. 23; taken into the busi-
ness, J. 37, 40; marriage to Wva
Ifanau, 1. 37; obtains protection in
Cassel, 154: takes steps to protect
interests during Napoleonic wars,
TE. 50; police report on, I, 92 5 terror
during Napoleon's advance — on
Austria, 1. 985 partner in the re-
constituted firm, f. 102; benefits
under his father’s will, £123; pre-
sent at his father’s death, Lo lk;
builds new bank in Frankfort, [142 5
tries to obtain Metternich’s iiterest,
T. 148; first tinaneinal dealings with
Austrian Government, T, 152 5 evades
military service, [1753 title of
nobility conferred on, T. 198 5 sub-
mits desipn for cont-of-armes, 1.199 ;
petitions for Jewish citizenship,
LT. 204; efforts to obtain title of
Consul for James and Nathan, TL
205-6; efforts on behalf of Jews,
TF. 210; endeavours to obtain Prassian
business, [. 212; negotintes loan to
Frussia, I, 2165 contreteraps res
garding loan to Crown Prince of
flesse, 1. 216 ef seq. 5 interview with
von Gentz, [2245 suggested tight
from Frankfort, F. 232 5 oakes loans
to important persons, L275 5 invites
Metternich to dine, £. 200 5 granted
title of Baron, 1. 3025 negotiates
French Joan, I. 8185) collaborutes
with Frankfort bankers, [. 3465
fetter of congratulation on Kimperor’s
recovery, 1. 366 ; on Austrian con-
version loan, I. 418 ; joins Frankfort
eivie guard, F428 5 on settlement of
Prissian Joan, IE 53 attitude to-
wards Spain, TL. 120; attends Liouel’s
wedding, IT. 147 5 organises charity
concert, IJ. 177; atlends family
eouference at Frankfort, IL. 189;
activities of, I. 227-8: visits
Metternich, If. 230; annoyance at
Press attacks, 1. 248 ; rioters attack
house of, HT. 267 ; anxiety at French
situation, IL 284; on financing
political newspapers, IE. 314; calls
on Bismarck, H. 3:5; Bismarck’s
opinion of, i, 316 ; attitude towards


502


Rothschild, AmschelMcyer—continued:
Austro-Prussian dispute, II. 320 e¢
seq. ; death of, If. 344, 362 ; charae-
teristics of, LL. 362-3

Rothschild, Anna, inarrics Hon. Biot
Yorke, LL. 448

Rothschild, Anselm. Solomon, Baron,
sent to delay signing of Prussian
loan, J, 4133 marries his cousin
Charlotte, I. 400; visits Berlin to
obtain cancellation of loan apree-
ment, H. 25 inercases his denimnds,
TI. 5 ; made Austrian Cousul-General
in Frankfort, LL. 168 ; on Quadruple
Allianee, If 192, 19%; appeals to
Government to stop Press attacks,
VT, 248 5 treasurer of German Federa-
tion, I], 2505; granted freedom of
City of Vienna, Tf 2515 takes over
control of Vienna branch, [L. 200,
345, 861 5 calls on Bismarck, TE 828 5
appeals to Vienna for intervention
on behalf of Jews, U1. 329, 366 ;
opposes Austrian Stale railway,
AL. 358 5 efforts to coutrol Vienna.
Trieste Railway, U1 868 > watches
developments in Italy, HL. 870, asked
to underwrite Austrian loon, LL 8st 5
attitude towards | Aust co-Prussinan
War, IL, 402 5 5 alarmed at threat
of war, IL, 4145 rises prestige of
Austrian branch, 11, 4335 death of,
JT, 43-65 will of, TE. 43-45

Rothschild, Anthony, Baron, IL 78,
230, 252, 36; visits Gocthe, F400 5
ereated Baron, LH. 2885 on Inglish
colonies, IL. 405; friendship with
King Mdward VIL, IL, 447; daugh-
ters of, IL. 448

Rothschild, Bertha Marie, Baroness,
marries Duke of Wagram, If, 444

Rothschild, Betty, Baroness, FT. 400 ;
II, 134, 152, 167, 220, 283; nurries
James Rothschild, 1. 345; flight to
England during Revolution, TE. 260 5
entertains Napoleon TIT, Ll. 392 ;
at Tuileries ball, IT. 305

Rothschild, Carl (Kallmann) Meyer,
Baron, birth of 1. 31; supervises
Wilhelm of Hesse’s business, I. 71 ;
share jn reconstiluted firm, I. 102;
entrusted to carry Hessian property
to Prague, 1. 105; visits Wilhelm
of Hesse in Prague, 1. 1t4; goes to
Lapdon and smuggles cheque back,
T. 115; engaged on Electoral busi-
ness, I. 116; benefits under his
father’s will, I, 128; present at his
father’s death, I. 124; intermediary
for money for Wellington, I. 153,


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothschild, Carl Meyer—continued :
138; negotiates with von Barbier
to obtain Imperial business, I. 155
ef seq.; evades military service, T1753
efforts on behalf of Jews, I. 183;
title of nobility conferred on, T. 198 5
efforts to obtain title of Consul) for
Janes and Nathan, I. 206; inter-
views Crown Prince of Hesse re-
garding loan, I. 217; interview
with von Gentz, I. 224; attends
Aachen Congress, I. 2255;  marrics
Adelbeid Herz, 1. 225; suggested
flight from Frankfort, 1, 232; visits
Vienna and Laibach regarding Nea-
politan loan, L. 259, 260; neyotia-
tions with Metternich, (1. 264;  dis-
agreement with Stadion, I. 268;
wrrives in Florence, I 2705 inter-
view with Prince Ruaffo, I. 270;
arrives in Naples and is interviewed
by Governinent, 1. 271-2; issues
Neapolitan loan, I, 273 3 reports to
Metternich, 1. 2745; arranges re-
payment of Neapolitan loan, £. 286-
7; arranges second Neapolitan Joan,
1.288 ; takes up residence in Naples,
I. 2073) obtains gratuity for von
Gentz, To. 8015) granted title of
Baron, [. 3023; meets Solomon and
James in Vienna, 1.3103 financial
transnections in Naples, 1. 342; ne-
gotiations for Spanish loan, L345 5
Neapolitan sympathies of, 1. 3876 7 ;
mikes loan to Naples, I. 378 5
Metternich opposes decoration for, 1,
3793 visits Berlin regarding Prus-
sian loan, 11.53 negotiates Prussian
Joan, TL, 3893 negotiates loan for
Papal States, UL. 47 et seq.; Papal
Ovder conferred on, IT. 51 5 attitude
towerds Spnin, I. £20; attends
Lione!’s wedding, IT. 147; attends
fanuily conference at Frankfort, I,
18; position in Naples after French
Revolution, Tl. 267; negotiates
Papal loan, IL. 296; efforts on be-
half of Jews, Il. 206, 298; calls
on Bisimarek, IL. 828; death of, IL.
360

Rothschild, Charlotte, daughter of?
Carl and wife of Lionel Rothschild,
Ul. 147

Rothschild, Charlotte, daughter of
«Nathan aud wife of Anselin Roths-
child, I. 400; 11. 353.

Rothschild, Constance, marries Lofts,


Battersea, IT. 448 4
supported


Rothschild, Kdmond,
Zionism, IT. 445


INDEX


Rothschild, Eduard, becomes head of
Freneh branch, IT. 445

Rothschild, Eva (née Hanau) marries
Amschel Meyer, I. 38; works in
Rothschild business, 1.77, invited
to ball at Prussian Legation, 1. 289,
293

Rothschild, Evelina, marries
nand Rothschild, IT. 395

Rothschild, leovelyn, Uf. 462

Rothsebild, Ferdinand Anselm, mar-
ries his cousin Evelina, Il. 305;
artistic tastes of, IT. £343 as sports-
man, I, 435; friendship with King
Edward VII, Uh 4473 0 entertains
royalty, IT. 451

Rothschild, Gaduta (ee Schnapper)
wife of Mever AMinschel, 1. 23, 82;
interrogated by poliee, I 92;
benefits under her drusband’s will,
I. 3285 death of, I. 3085 Tb 2s7;
characteristics of, LL. 27s

Rothschild, Gustiuve, on Joan te Tus-
enny, FE 879 3: on Geoeral Trochu, LL.
4215 on peace terms, TL 422

Rothsehild, Uannah (née Coen),
Baroness, marries Nathan, tf. 126

Rothsehild, House of
Financial Joan to Budernus to sup-


Ferdi-


port allies, To 145 proposed
Auslrion loan from, 2. 2003


grants private loanto Metternich, 7,
Sob; repated loan to Spain, T.
306. Joun fo Rusia, 63075) pro-
fits derwed from Austrian town, §,
382. Lustiess relitions with Maric
Lonive, Lo o80 07 5 trustees for
Monfenvove faraily, f. do8 2: ree
fuses down Co Ritssia, 2. AO6 ef ser. 5


transactions regarding Prussian
loans, HE. 9; general foams tn


States and individuals. I. 39 5
finanees railway construction, TL,
835 et seq. ; dealings with Spain, FH.
U7; engineers fall in’ Spanish
securities, IT. 1275 inanetal in-
terest ip Austrian Lloyd, HE 165,
185; refuses iilitary loan to
Belgiwn, UW. 1865 grants Joan for
Belgian raibeays, 1D, 89; handles
Trish Famine Joan and other State
loans, UE £385) financins difli-
culties during French Revolution,
HI. 262: loan fo Pope Pius UX,
IL. 295 «ts. y.3 loans io Sardinia,
Il, 209 ¢f seq. 5 refuses to finance
political newsnapers, TE. 314; un-
derwrite British war loan (Crimes),
II. 359; dealings with Bis:arck,
IL. 897; helps France to pay off


503


Rothschild, House of-—continued :

her war debts, HT. 426; financial
assistauee for Russia, IT. 443;
loans to Brazil, TE 458 5 assists
Morgan Bank to stabilise Mrench
exchange, LL, 402

Houses: Kuglish and Freneh bran-
ches established, T. 4d; Frankfort
activities, IT. 4: diflieuties in
Frankfort, I. 1695 proposed re-
moval from Frankfort during
riots, I. 252, 2375 Vienna branch
established, To 240, 250. Nuples
branch established, 1. 27-4; policy
of Naples brineh, 1, 296-75 effeet
of French Revobition on Conti-
nemtal pbraneches, LL. Yok 5 Vienna


branch revived, JL 045; Naples
branch given up, Tb 808-55
English branch hostile to Bis-


marck, TE 8973 Muglish braneh
becomes most important, EE 445
Political: influence of House of
Hesse on, 1. 203 rehitions with
flouse of Tourn and Tasis, Bek;
comfidentisl agreement with Bue
derus, 1,855 Wathelin of Hesse’s
dissatisfaction with, FE. 11250 cn
deayvonrs io obtain | Austrian
Government business, IT. 152 et
seq. 3 fidiuie to obtain il, L163 5
distrust of, in’ Austria, I. 175 5
establishes rehutions with Austrian
Government, L.2815 in the cone
fidence of Wing Louis Philippe, 1.
4325 relations with von Geuts,
LE. G93 allituide towards Minperoe
Francis’ death, HL. 81; attitude
during Syrian trouble, Th 1900 et
seq., used by France for diploniatice
purposes, Fb, 2455 altitude of
Louis Napoteou towards, LE, 287 ;
dismay at branco-Austriu: War,
HE, 3773 support sale of Veuctia,
EL. 808; failure to obtain Ans-
trian peace, TE. 4025 appenled to
for help by Saxony, TL. 4033; tn
tervention in) Franco-Prussian
pence negotiations, U1. 4265 re-
Jations wilh Jimpetor | Francis
Joseph, TE 4385 consulted by
British GCovermmentl, 1, 453 5 aver-
sion to Russia, PT. 4575 efforts to
avert Workd War, Hl. 460-1
General: Viterature dealing with, T.
§13 origin of name of, Fo o173
petitions for titles, 1. 22; income
before 1700, 1,33 5 family spirit of,
I. 87; wealth of, .n 1798, T. 405
position dyring Napoleonic era,


-.


504


Rothschild, House of—continued :

I. 48; members employed in the
business, I. 77; police suspicion
and investigation of, I. 91-3;
reconstruction of the business, I.
101; police activity ugainst, I.
117, 188-9 ; rewarded for services
to Dalberg, [. 1213 effect of
Napoleon's fall on, 1. 145 5 recom-
mended by von Newnann, FE. 176 ;
supported by von Barbier and
Stadion, I. 189 ef seq. 5 appeals for
Imperial recognition of services, I.
192 ; reports by Stadion and vou
Lederer on, J. 192 ef seq.; coat-of-
arms of, I. 199 ef seq.; efforts to
extend its influence, T. 204 ; policy
during period 1815 22, 1. 209, 210;
policy for declining business, I,
216-17; benefits derived from
Aachen Congress, TI. 2263) von
Cents’s privale opinion of, 1. 228 5
institutes private courier service,
J. 242 ; Stadion’s report on, L280 ;
Smidt’s report on, 7. 289 ; becomes
Iessee of Court Theatre, T. 290;
attacked in German Press, 1. 292 5
loss suffered by death of Stadion,
1. 387 5 courier service under sus-
picion, 1. 8t7 5 carieatures of, 1,
8545 von Gents’s hiography of,
1.370 ef seq. 3 Goethe's views on, T.
399, 400; anxicly during French
Revolution, J. 4805) ¢fforta to
weather the storm, L441 5 anxiely
during Paris Revolution, Th. 1;
comes safely through uropean
crisis, TL. 3865 social status of, LL.
55, d4eh 5 loss sustained by death of
Nath, If 15-6; dixpule regarding
quicksilver imines, T. 161; efforts
on behalf of Jews, TT. 1745 hospi-
tality of, IL. 179 ; propaganda of,
II. 170; interest, of, in’ applied
scienee, 1.180 ; Borne’s attacks on,
AL. 214-15; Heine's opinion of, 11.
216 et seq. 3 public resentment at
power of, IL, 239; priesthood
opposed to, TL 241 ; reconciliation
between Bismarck and, Hl. 328 ;
opposition to Austrian State Kail-
way Co, 11 858; commercial
interests of, 11. 387; wealth and
position after Franco-Prussian
,War, Il, 429; present-day wealth

and position, II. 463 et seq.
Rothschild, James Meyer, Baron, birth
of, I. 31 ; enters the business, I. 77 ;
assists in hidiny Hessian treasures,
1. 90 ; interrogated by police, I. 91-2;


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothschild, James Meyer—continued :
partner in the reconstituted firm, I.
102; gocs to Paris, I. 109, 132;
business activity, I. 116; benefits
under his father’s will, [. 123 ; lives
in Gravelines, I, 124; assists in
smuggling money to Wellington, I.
136 ; business reputation in Paris, L.
140; smugyles French bullion to
Jloland, 1. 147; assists Nathan in
financing loan to Louis XVIIL, 1,
447 ; characteristics of, L168 ; title
of nobility conferred on, Lo 198 ;
social activilics of, I. 204, 401;
appeals for title of Consul, 1. 204-5 ;
endeavours to secure handling of
war indemnity, P2290; on anti-
Jewish disturbances, 1. 285 5 offers
assistance for building Rhine for-
tress, 1. 250; puts Neapolitan loan
on Paris market, I. 275 5 desires to
become Austrian Cousul-Geucral, L
279 ; supported by von Stahl, FT. 282 ;
appointed Austrian Cousul-General
in Paris, T. 2845 grauled title of
Baron. IT. 802; Order of Wladimir
conferred on, FE. 8075 sells French
bonds, 1. 808: meets vou Gentz at
Verona, 1. 3102) friendship with
Rossini, £811 5 correspondence with
Bertram de Lis, 1. 8bt; financially
assists French campaign in’ Spain,
T. 816; Cross of Legion of Honour
conferred oon, I. 8213 tarries
Solomon's diughter, Belty, 1. 345 5
negotiates for Spanish loan, [. 345 5
views on French conversion scheme,
7. 351-2; refers Russian low ques-
tien 10 Solomon, 1. 4053; attitude
during Pariy revolt, T. 4245 in the
confidence of Louis Philippe, 1. 430,
45. 5 report to Solomon urging Muro-
pean peace, L. 4b ct seg. 5 works to
maintain peace during Revolution,
Il, 3, 105 report to his brothers on
polities and finance, UL. 11; on con-
ditions in Paris, 1. 11 5 oi Casimir
Périer, 11. 15, 17 5 works for Péricr’s
appointment, Li. 185; on political
situation in France, LE. 18, 19, 23;
on Belgian problein, IL, 28 ; opposed
to election of General Lafayette, UL
32 ; influence with French Court and
Ministry, 1. 86-7 ; on loun to Papal

»States, I. 49 ; social position of, ET,
55; commends Noquirol to Mette js
nich, II. 76; negotiates for railwt;
construction in France, Ul. 113
atlitude towards Spain, IF. 119, 12
183 ef seg. ;- refuses loan to Cow


INDEX 505


Rothschild, James Meyer—continued :
Toreno, IT. 123; attends Lionel’s
wedding, TH. 147 ; reproved by Met-
ternich for political tendencies, IT.
159 ; refutes rumours of intervention
in Spain, II. 162; atlends family
conference at Frankfort, UL 189;
audience with King Louis Philippe,
IE. 194; attacked by the Press, H.
205-6, 247; weets Heine, WW. 214;
Heinc’s opinion of, 11. 216; efforts
on behalf of Damascus Jews, LY, 223 ;
visits Metternich, IT. 230; under-
writes Freneh loan, I. 243 ; activity
during 1848 Revolution, IL. 259
et seq. ; retains the coufidence of the
French, TH. 270-15 visits Brussels,
H. 273; position under Presidency
of Louis Napoleon, TY. 282 5 loss of
financial snpreniacy in Paris, TL. 287 ;
audience with Manperor | Francis
Joseph, TF. 290 ; warns Louis Napo-
leon against rival bankers, U. 292 5
negotiates Pupal joan, HL. 207;
nepotiates Sardinian loan, If. 200
et seq., 309; invited to Heidelberg
conferenee, IT. 836 5 dismay at damn.
age to Austrian credit, IL. 8487 ;
interest in Louis Napoleon’s unarri-
age, LL. 350, 3535; antagonism to
Hitbner, U1. 353; fear of war, PL. 355;
opposes Austria State Railway Co.,
TL. 358; shares in French war loan,
TL. 8505 watches developments in
Stuly, LE. 870 ct seq. y appealed to for
Austrint loan, UL 373 5 dismay ab
Franeo- Austen war, LL. 387% ; loan
to Tuseavy, Ef, 879 5 asked to under-
write Austrian loun, TE. 388i 3; Napo-
Icon Tii's visit to, ED, 390, 3915
efforts towards Austrian peace, IL,
401-3 ; appealed to to assist Austrian
finance, IL. 407 ; illuess and death of,
IL. 408 : fhincral of, Uf. 409

tothschild, Julie, Baroness, marries
Adolf, UL. 361 ; friendship with Ein-
press of Austria, TL. 438

tothsehild, Kalman, partner with
Meyer Amschel, 1. 23

Rothschild, Leonore, marries Meyer
Alphonse, 1f. 366, 305

Yothsehi'td, Leopold, friendship with
King Edward VU, U1. 447 ; inarries
Marie Perugia, IL. 4h ; consulled
regarcing Bagdad Railway, UL. 458

Yothschild, Lisuel Nathan, Baron,
visits Gocthe, 1. 400 5 visits Madrid
with offer oi loan, IT. 120 ; decorated
by Queen of Spain, HI. 12! ; marries
Charlotte, daughter of Carl, II. 147 ;


Rothschild, Lionel Nuthan—continued:
becomes head of the London branch,
HL. 152 ; on troubles in Spain, TL 158;
Uunmetaner’s report on, I. 170;
appointed Austrian Consul-General
in London, TE, 17-4; obtains permis-
sion to use title, HT. 179 ; ou develop-
ment of shipping and railways, TL.
180, 181 5 attends family conference
at. Frankfort, Hl. i893 activity in
England, 1. 2525 elected M.P., IE
2535 efforts to obtain admission to
Parliament, Ub 288 95 efforts on
behalf of Jews, 11. 366 5 takes sent in
Ifonse of Commons, PD. 867 5 appeal-
ed to for loan to Anstria, 1. 373 3
social position of, TL, u96-5 ; efforts
tounaintain Maropean peace, LE, drt;
desire fo arbitrate on Mrance-Prus-
sian peace tera, DY. fs leads
syndicate to secure Brench debt piay-
ments, UT #26; friendship with
Disrachi, TE 465 5 assists in purchase
of Sucz Count shares, PL BET;
friendship with Wing alward VIET,
TL. 447: work for Jewish cmaneipa-
tion, TE, 4495 death of, UE 450

Rothschild, Lonis Nathaniel, in control
of Viewum louse, 2. '40

Kotlisehild, Marguerite, — Baroness,
mutrries Duke de Grunout, Uh. 464

Rothschild, Maric (aée Perugia), mar-
ries Leopold, HT. 448

Rothschild, Meyer Alphonse, Baron, on
sitnation in france, TE. 284; in Turin
to negotiate with Cavour, TL. 808,
310 ct seq. 3 marries Leonore Roths-
child, Fi. 8665 visits Mettternich,
Th. 382 3 gives a ball, Ib 402 5 sue-
eceds James in directing Paris
branch, [1.4003 sent for by Napoleon
Ji, W¥. 433, alarmed at threat of
Franco-Prussian war, TL. 4045 sides
with France in Franco-Prussian war,
Wf. 4153; consulted on Franco-
Prussian peace terins, PE. 419, 420,
4243 guarantees Mrench indemnity
payments, PE fb j experiences in the
Paris Commune, HR 25.5 controls
Paris house, TL. 4605 sosists Russia
financially, Uf, $63, 405 atlempts
mide on life of, LL. bit, #45; death
of, TL. 445

Rothschild, Mever Amschel, birth of,
1.173 joins firin of Oppenheim, 7. 18 ;
Mrets Gencral von Estorff, £183
work as wumismatist, [. 19; returng
to Frankfort, E. 19 ; bi siness dealings
with Wilhelm of Hesse, I. 20-1, 24,
28-9, 38; prtitions for a title, [. 21


506


Rothschild, Meyer Amschel—continued;


becomes Crown Agent, I. 223
characteristics of, I. 22; marries
Gudula Schnapper, I. 23; birth of
his children, J. 28, 313; work as
Crown Agent, I. 27; his home in
Frankfort, TI. 82, 86; war-time
transactions, I. 36; encourages
family participation in his busi
ness, I, 37; intermediary between
Emperor of Austria and Wilhelm of
Hesse, 1. 39; petition to Holy
Roman Emperor, I. 455 granted
title of Imperial Crown Agent, 1. 46 ;
honours conferred on, 1. 47; obtains
loan from Wilhelu of Hesse, B47;
negotiates loan to Denmark, I, 48 9,
545 appeals for protection in Cassel,
1, 53 ; takes steps to protect interests
during Napoleonic wars, T. 595
accepts pawer of autlorney for
Wilhelm of Hesse from Buderus,
1. 62; assists im recovering Hessint
treasures, F. 66 5 ingratiates himself
with Carl von Diatberg, Tr. 68;
watches over Wilhehw of Tlesse’s
interests, T..70; Wilhelm of STesse
becomes suspicions of, I. 783
Wilhelm of Hesse again takes him
into confidence, 1.755 honesty of,
¥.77; first connection with Austrian
Court, L. 79; summoned by French
to appear in court, 1. 81 3 illness and
operation, T. 81 3 police report on, I,
83; negotintes purchase of British
stocks, FL. 86 5 warrant issued against,
J. 89; interrogated by police, 1. 91;
Jonn to Savagner, [F. 925 devises
scheine for Hessian loan to Austria, L.
99; obtains promotion for Buderus,
I. 300; signs new partnership deed
with his sons, 1. 101 3 business prin-
ciples and tactics, I. 1045 fined for
harbouring colonial goods, T. 107 ;
loan to Dalberg for journey to Paris,
I. 108 ; censorship of correspondence
regarding, I. 117; activities on
bebalf of Jews, LL. 1483 made a
member of Electoral College of
Frankfort, I. 120; renewed illness,
J. 122; makes his will, I. 1233
death of, I. 124; maxim of, TL. 135 ;
in favour of family intermarriage,
1.345 ; 11.147

Rothschild, Meyer Amschel, & Sons,
forfnation of the firm, I, 101-2;
terms of partnership, I. 102-3;
appointed official bankers to Grand
Duchy of Frankfort, 1. 120; letters
to von Barbier, 1. 156, 159 ; activities


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothschild, M. A. & Sons—continued :
on behalf of Jews, 1. 184; proposed
invitation to move to Vienna, I.
238 ; transfer of money from Naples,
TI. 240; negotiations concerning
Austrian loan, I. 245; issue lottery
loan, I. 246; issue French loan, I.
318 et seg. ; losses in Haiti, I. 353;
appointed Court bankers, IT. 338 ;
Wilhelm Carl becomes head of, HU,
AB

Rothschild, Meyer Carl, Baron,
altends Heidelberg Conference, IT.
336 3; negotiates Prussia loan, IT, 338
et seq. 5 receives Order of Red Kagle,
HH. 841; takes) over Krankfort
branch, HD. 3860, 868; cleeted te
North German Reichstag, IL. 368 ;
asked Lo establish Draneh in Berlin,
IL, 430; political activities of, LT.
431; death of, TT, 4825 friendship
with King Edward VI, TI, 447

Rothschild, Meyer Nathan, [, 252, 366

Rothsehild, Minna Caroline, marrics
Manimilian von Goldschinidt, 1. 432

Rothschild, Moses Meyer, police report
on, [, 83


Rothsclitd, Nathan, Buron, birth of,
TI. 285 enters the business, 1. 87 3
yoes to Mngland and founds branch
there, Lbs characteristics of, 1. 40,
44; supervises Wilhelm of Hesse’s
interests in Mnghind, I. 75 5 rehution
to the reconstituted firm, T. 109 3
ilicit trading from Isnglund, DT. 108 3
benefits under his father’s will, I.
123; commercial activities im
Manchester, JY. 127 83 — leaves
Manebester for London, I. 128;
obtains British naturalisation, I.
129 ; marries Hannah Cohen, Lb. 129 ;
“elations with Moses Montefiore, I.
180 ; negotiates for Wilhelm of Hesse,
1. 130; favours smuggling, 3. 1382;
exports money to France, [. 132-3;
vives financial uid to Wellington, I.
185; acquires bullion fram = East
India Co. and selis to Goveroment,
1. 135-6; business dealings with
English Royal Family, I. 145, and
Treasury, I. 145-6 ; goes to Holland
and acquires French currency, I.
147; negotiates regarding English
subsidies, I. 156 et seq. ; becomes the
directing hand of the firm, I. 167;
makes loan to Louis XVIF, I. 167,
makes loan to Prussian Governmen
I. 178; his intelligence service, I
178; conveys news of Battle of
Waterloo to. Government, I. 178,


INDEX 507


Rothschild, Nathan—conlinued :
appeals for tithe of Consul, I. 204-5 ;
aspirations of, I. 209-10 ; negotiates
loan to Prussia, 1. 214-163 inter-
course with von Humboldt, 1. 215;
issues nglish Govermuent loan, TL
229 ; granted tithe of Consul, 1. 245 ;
puts Neapolitan securities on London
market, 1.175; Laurin’s favourable
report. on, IT. 275 et seg. 3 conchides
loan to Prussia, L801 ; granted title
of Baron, I. 302, 402 5 made Consul-
General, I. 342 ; in Paris to neyotiate
French loan, 7.318 5 arranges repay-
rent of Austrian doan, 1. $30 ; makes
loan to Brazil, 1. 33855; phins for
reduction of French debt, I. 338 ;
founds Alianee Hnsurance Co., 1.
3-46 5 consulted by Lord Liverpool in
finuneial crisis, [, 8405 regret at
Uerries’ resignation, 1.403 5 opposed
to Russian loan, £406 ; 0n England's
attitude towards Russia, I. 409;
receives news of Paris revolt, L. 42-6 3
tries to release hinusclf frome Prussian
loan, UL. 1; sends his brother Carl
to help Anselm in Berlin, Th 535
on English attitude towards French,
HH, 22-18; on Maglish peace policy,
TL 20; social position of, Th 55;
urges Wellington’s adoption of peace
policy, TL. 64; warns Metternich
against alliance with Russia, LE 74;
receives present fro King of Prussia,
IL. 77; interested in early railways,
11.95; develops railways in Belgium,
JL. its uttitede towards Spain, Mf,
HD, W20 fF seq, US eb seq. 5 urges
Kinglish imervention in Spain, I.
12%; on suggested [English loan to
Spain, Uk. 140; death of, ID. 147;
estate und will of, U1. 151-3 : funeral
of, 11,155
vhsehild, Nathaniel Meyer, Lord,
given Prussian title, IL. 78; on
Eastern Kuropean question, LH, 196
et seg.; social interests of, Ll. 252;
acts as link between James and
Lionel, II. 200; atlends Heidelberg
Conference, Hl. 3863 visits Glad-
stone regarding Hohenzollern candi-
dature in Spaiu. Il, 4135 visits
Disracli in interests of peace, UL.
415; artistic tastes of, LL. 434.5;
art treasurce it. his possession, Fd.
436 , friendstoy, with King Ldward
WII, 13. 447 : succeeds to baronetey,
10,450 ; ruisedl to peerage, IL. 451
thschild, Solomon, Baron, birth of,
I. 28 ; enters the business, I. 87, 40 ;


Rothschild, Solomon—continued ;


marries Caroling Stern, I, 44;
appears in) French court, L823
assists in hiding lesstan treasures,
1.90 ; interrogated by police, 1. 91-2;
partner in the reconstituted firm, TL
102 ; benefits under his father’s will,
L. 123 5 in Paris, F.124%5 in Berlin to
neyolate Russiun Joan, L158 5
transmits English subsidy to Prussia,
{.. 1735 granted title of Commercial
Adviser, L. 17-45 representations on
behalf of Jews. 1. 1833 tithe of
nobilily conferred on, 1. 198 3; sub-
mifs design for cont of arn, [199 ;
negotiates loan to Prussia, bo Ytes
attends Anchen Congress, 1. 285 3
sugeested flight frome Mrankfort, TL.
232 5 attends to Austrian business of
the finn, 1. 2405 makes Vienna his
headquarters, L. 260, 250 ; offers loan
for building Rhine fortress, 1. 250;
on Neapolitan duan, 1 255 et seq. 3
ansicly at Halian sitistion, 1. 266 5
puts forwards Jsunes's request. for
Consul-Generalship, 1. 279 5 intimacy
with von Gentz, 1. 203- 6 5 annoyed
at failure over Austrian loan, 1. 801 5
granted title of baron, L802 ; attends
Congress of Sovercizns al Verona, L.
306; refutes rumours of Joan to
Spain, 1. 806 7 ; interview with von
Genls, 4.8075 Order of Vladimir
conterred on, L, 807 3 starts courier
service between Verona and Paris, £
3085 meets James and Cark at
Verona, §. 310 ; presses Metternich to
help Jews, E3235 efforts to secure
Austrian loan, b. 880 5 negotiates for
Spunish loan, bo 3455 views on
French conversion scheme, [352 5
on annuity for de Marmont, 7. 356 ;
supports Joseph Buonaparte’s  re-
quest ty return to Murope, 1. 360 ;
social risc sof, LL. 8665 attends to
Maric Lonise’s finances, I. 388) ct
Seq. 3 tries to obtain decoration for
Wertheimstein, 1. 39% 5 reeeived in
audience by Maric Lours., 1. 397 ;
negotiates Prussian loan, © 412; 10
3893; shares in Austria conversion
Joun, I. 4-45 efforts to divert busi-
ness from Bethmann, I. 416 ; goes to
Paris to study political situation, 1.
420 ; report to Metternich on French
situation, 1. 425 ; LL. 57; work® for
Kuropean peace, DL. 488 ; hastens to
Puis during revolutien, I. 1;
Rother's favourable criticism of, LU,
5; deputed lo settle Prussian loan


508


Rothschild, Solomon—continued :
question, 11. 9; returns to Vienna,
II. 11; anxious to participate in
military loan, HT. 16; opposes
Austrian support of Russia, TIL. 27 5
opposes military policy, IL. 35; on
Joan to Esterhdzy, LL. 41 ; appeals for
right to buy property, IL. 43 ; leaves
Vienno for Munich during cholera
epidemic, I}. 465; approached re-
garding Papal loan, LL. 49 ; relations
with Saphir, If. 52 ; assists Mctter-
nich’s wife, 1]. 54; on French inter-
vention in Austro-Italian dispute,
If, 60; on new Métalliques loan, Li.


66; appeals for “toleration” for
Goldschmidt, TI. 68;  cominends
Roquirol to Metternich, Lf. 76;


receives present from Kingof Prussia,
TL. 77; iaterested in early railways,
IL. 86; applics for permission to
build) Northern Railway, Hf. 89;
applies for concession for Central
Railway, TH. O45 tetlers to Emperor
and Mebternich about Northera Rail-
way, IT. 96, 97 ; proposal to share-
holders of Northern Iailway, LE. 99,
100, 109 ; atlitude towards Spain, TL.
120 et seq.3 ou Nathan’s Spanish
policy, TH. 1343 on Pozzo'’s enmity,
TL. 1365 attends Lioncl’s wedding,
IL. 1473 letter to Metlernich on
Nathaw’s death, TT, 1-47, 150 5 social
position vof, TL 1665 obtains post
of Austrinn Consul-Gencral lor An-
schn, I]. 168 ; appeals to Metternich
for extension af Jewish rights, TH,
175 5 urges State support of Austrian
Lloyd. JF. 182 5 on refusal of foun to
Belgium, TE. 186, 188; attends
family conference at Frankfort, IL,
189; on need for pacitic French
policy, If. 209; efforts on behalf of
Damascus Jews, IL. 223 5 coutrols
Vicenna-Trieste loan, If. 229 ; friend-
ship with Metternich family ; UL.
230 ; becomes citizen of Vienna, HH.
231 ; imports cigars into Austria, TY.
232 ; appeals to aequire landed pro-
perty, IT, 232 ; purchases estates, IL.
239; luxurious habits of travel, If,
240 ; applies for entail of estates, IL.
251; lends Metternich money for
flight, 11, 265 ; flees from Vienna to
Frankfort, 11. 276, 433 ; anxiety on
French sitnation, H. 284; calls on
Bismarck, IL. 328 ; death of, IT. 361

Rothschild, Wilhelm, TH. 431-2

Rothsehild and Guntard, bankers, I.
187-8


THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD


Rothworth brings news of Battle of
Waterloo to Nathan Rothschild, I.
178

Rubens, I. 392

Rudolph of Austria, Archduke, II. 226,
439

Rue de la, Swiss banker, II. 300

Rue, General de la, IE. 373

Ruffo, Prince, 1. 270

Ruppell and Harnier, finance loan to
Denmark, L. 47; dissatisfaction at
Rothschilds’ transactions, I. 49;
nepotinte loans, I. 7)

Russell, Lord John, 11. 367

Russia, refuses to recognise Continental
blockade, I. 116; Napoleon’s ad-
vance on, J, 121-2; his defeat. in, I.
122, 141; Rothschild loan to, I. 8073 ¢
hostilities with Turkey, L. 404, 408 ;
refused loan by Rathsehitds, TE. 406 ;
military loan to, IL, 73 ; dispute with


Turkey, Wf. 3485; threatened by
Austria, HI 356; Polish — rising
against, II. 89385; alliance with


France, TZ, 442; massacres of Jews
in, IL. 458 ; defeat of, by Japan, I.
459

Russo-Japanese War, IT. 459, 460


Ss


Sananene, Barris or, FE, 61
Saint Aulaire, Count, If 1-4, 167
Saint Aulaire, Countess, U. 167
Saint Simon, Count, HY. 112
Salicey, Rothschilds’ contidential ser-
vant, I, 250
Sakunanen, plight of troops in, I. 135
Salisbury, Lord, TH. 452
Samoa, dispute regarding, IE. 452, 455
Saphir, M.G., TL 51-4
Sarajevo murder, IT, 461
Sardinia, Rothschild loans to, FL. 299;
participates in Crimean War, IL
369, 3870; alliance with France,
II. 371 ; negotiations for loan to, IL. -
374-5 i
Saurau, Count, I. 238 rs
Savagner, Chief of Police, visits Roths-
childs with search warrant, I. 89-91 4,
Meyer Amschel Rothschild’s loan to J
I. 92 4
Savary, General, Commissioner off,
“Police, I. 147, 130 U
Savoy, French annexation of, II. 38(. ¢
Saxony appeals to Rothschilds for helps.
IL, 403 i


‘3
had


oe


Say, Léon, II, 410, 440
Schaumburg, Countess of, If. 227
