ANCIENT   FRAGMENTS        -


OF  THE

PHCENICIAN,    CHALDEAN,    EGYPTIAN,   TYRIAN,
CARTHAGINIAN,  INDIAN,  PERSIAN,  AND  OTHER

WRITERS ;


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTORY  DISSERTATION:
AND  AN  INQUIRY  INTO  THE


ill


"  >i


PHILOSOPHY  AND  TRINITY  OF  THE  ANCIENTS.


BY  ISAAC  PRESTON  fiORY,  ESQ.

FELLOW  OF  CAIUS  COLL.  CAMBRIDGE.


SECOND  EDITION.


ALDI


LONDON :


WILLIAM  PICKERING.

1832,


,>r-T|


f


I


r^»mimrm>tf»


AAEAOHI  OIATATHI


!)30


AAEAOOC


XPHCTH  XAIPE


XAIPEIC  TAP  EN  XPICXni


T.  G.  White  and  Co.  Printers,
Crane  Court.


rS


•    or

I


h


20038


ANCIENT  FRAGMENTS.


Phoenician.

From  Sanchoniatho.

CHALDiEAN.

From  Berossus,  Abydenus,  Megasthenes,  Nicholaus  Da-
mascenus,  Hestiaeus,  Alexander  Polyhistor,  Eupolemus,
Thallus,  Ctcsias,  Diodorus  Siculus,  Herodotus,  Castor,
Velleius  Paterculus,  iEmilius  Sura,  Plinius  and  Cicero.

Dynasties    of    the    kings    of    Chald^ea,   Assyria,    Media,
Persia,  Thebes,  and  Egypt.

From  Abydenus,  Africanus,  Eusebius,  Syncellus,  Castor,
Ptolemaeus,  Ctesias,  Eratosthenes,  Manetho,  Josephus,
Diodorus  Siculus,  Herodotus,  Theophilus  Antiochenus,
Malala,  Suidas,  Diogenes  Laertius,  Dicaearchus,  Arta-
panus,  Plato,  Pomponius  Mela  and  Barhebraeus.

Egyptian.

From  the  Obelisks,  Manetho,  Chaeremon,  Diodorus  Sicu-
lus, Lysimachus,  Polerao,  Ptolemaeus  Mendesius  and
Artapanus.

Tyrian.

From  Dius  and  Menander.

Carthaginian.

From  Hanno  and  Hiempsal.

Indian.

From  Megasthenes  and  Clitarchus.

"Atlantic  and  Panch-ean.

From  Marcellus  and  Euemerus.


anci£nt  feagments.

Oracles  of  Zoroaster.

Hermetic,  Orphic,  Pythagorean  and  Tyrrhenian.

From  the  ancient  and  modern  Hermetic  Books,  Hora-
poUo,  Chaeremon,  Orpheus,  Hesiodus,  Aristophanes,
Timotheus,  Timaeus  Locrus,  Plato,  Amelius,  Onomacri-
tus.  Ion,  Philoponus,  Plutarchus,  Ocellus,  Aristoteles,
Suidas  and  Damascius.

Chronological.

From  Berossus,  Seneca,  Censorinus  and  Theon  Alex-
andrinus.


lo


INTRODUCTORY  DISSERTATION.


In  presenting  this  collection  of  Ancient  Frag-
ments to  the  world,  some  explanation  of  what  is
comprehended  under  that  title  may  not  be  deemed
unnecessary.  We  are  accustomed  to  regard  the
Hebrew  scriptures,  and  the  Greek  and  Latin
writings,  as  the  only  certain  records  of  antiquity  :
yet  there  have  been  other  languages,  in  which
have  been  written  the  annals  and  the  histories  of
other  nations.  Where  then  are  those  of  Assyria
and  Babylon,  of  Persia  and  Egypt  and  Phoenicia,
of  Tyre  and  Carthage  ?  Of  the  literature  of  all
these  mighty  empires,  where  are  even  the  remains?
It  will,  no  doubt,  tend  to  excite  some  reflections
of  a  melancholy  cast,  to  look  on  this  small  volume
as  an  answer.  That  all  such  remains  .are  con-
tained in  it,  I  should  be  unwilling  to  assert :  yet,
with  some  diligence  and  research,  1  have  not  been
able  to  increase  its  size  with  other  fragments,
which  I  could  consider  sufficiently  authenticated.
It  was  my  wish  to  have  included  in  this  col-
lection all  the  fragments  of  the  earlier  Gentile
world,  which  have  reached  us  through  the  me-

b


J


/\


11


diiim  of  the  Greek  language.  Of  the  early  his-
torians of  Greece  the  names  only  of  some  have
come  down  to  us;  whilst  of  others,  such  as
Eupolemus  and  Histia^us,  several  very  interesting
fragments  have  escaped  the  general  wreck.  In
the  classic  ages  of  their  literature,  the  acquaint-
ance of  the  Greek  liistorians  with  anticjuity  was
generally  confined  and  obscure :  nor  was  it  till
the  publication  of  the  Septuagint,  that  they
turned  their  attention  to  their  own  antiquities,  and
to  tliose  of  the  surrounding  nations  :  and  for  this
reason  Vve  meet  with  more  certain  notices  of
ancient  liistory  in  tlie  later,  than  in  the  earlier
times  of  Greece.  To  have  drawn  a  line  then  ;  to
have  inserted  the  earlier  writers  in  exclusion  of
the  later,  would  have  been  to  have  omitted  the
more  valuable.  To  have  reprinted  the  fragments
of  many  authors,  such  as  Nicolaus  Damascenus,
a  writer  of  Damascus,  of  the  Augustan  age,  would
have  introduced,  with  some  matter  worthy  of  at-
tention, much  of  little  interest.  To  have  selected
from  them  all,  the  passages  relating  to  ancient
times  and  foreign  states,  would  have  been  a  task
as  useless  as  laborious,  and  would  have  swelled
the  collection  to  a  series  of  volumes.  I  have
therefore,  for  the  most  part,  excluded  the  native
Greek  historians — and  every  writer  of  the  Au-
gustan age  and  downwards — I  have  also  omitted
all  fragments  which  bear  about  them  the  stamp
of  forgery,  or  are  the  productions  of  Hellenistic


A-


111


Jews,  or  of  authors  who  have  had  access  to  the
sacred  Scriptures,  and  following  the  words,  throw
no  additional  light  upon  the  subjects ;  under  one
or  other  of  which  divisions  may  be  classed  the
Antediluvian  books  of  Enoch,  the  fragments  of
Artapanus,  the  Sibylline  Oracles,  the  Correspon-
dence of  Solomon  and  Hiram  king  of  Tyre,  the
tragedy  of  Ezekiel  in  which  Moses  figures  as  the
hero,  with  several  compositions  of  a  similar  de-
scription.

The  contents,  then,  of  this  volume,  are  Frag-
ments which  have  been  translated  from  foreign
languages  into  Greek ;  or  have  been  quoted  or
transcribed  by  Greeks  from  foreign  authors ;  or
have  been  written  in  the  Greek  language  by
foreigners  who  have  had  access  to  the  archives  of
their  own  countries.  Yet  to  render  the  collection
more  useful,  and  as  it  were  a  manual  to  the  Chro-
nologist  and  Mythological  Antiquarian,  I  have
added  by  way  of  Supplement  such  fragments  and
extracts  as  appear  to  have  descended  from  more
ancient  sources,  though  they  are  now  to  be  found
only  in  the  works  of  Greek  or  Latin  writers.
Some  of  these  are  merely  illustrations  of  the
fragments,  or  contain  detached  chronological  no-
tices, or  such  other  curious  information  as  may
well  be  deemed  worthy  of  a  place.  Thus  I  have
endeavoured  to  comprise,  in  the  volume,  all  the
genuine  relics  of  antiquity  which  precede  the  era
of  Grecian  history  ;  and  wliich  lie  so  scattered


IV


among  the  folios,  chiefly  of  the  Fathers  and  the
Philosophers  of  the  lower  empire,  as  to  be  inac-
cessible to  the  Antiquarian,  unless  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  some  large  public  library.

Miscellaneous  as  such  a  collection  might  be
at  first  supposed,  it  will  be  found  to  resolve
itself  into  two  subjects ;  the  early  History,  and
the  ancient  Theological  Systems  of  the  world.
In  the  following  pages  I  have  endeavoured  to
present  a  sketch  of  both  ;  not  with  a  view  of
entering  into  the  details,  but  rather  as  a  method
of  connecting  the  fragments  with  one  another,
to  facilitate  an  examination  of  their  contents,
by  directing  the  attention  successively  to  those
great  landmarks  which  stand  prominently  forth
amidst  what  might  otherwise  be  deemed  a  wild,
pathless  and  interminable  ;  and  to  enable  the
reader,  by  following  the  same  order  of  perusal,
to  elicit  something  like  a  regular  continued  nar-
rative. In  the  Scriptures  we  have  a  brief  but
authenticated  account  of  the  earliest  ages  :  but
among  the  heathen  writers,  with  the  exception  of
some  few  very  valuable  historical  fragments,  we
have  little  more  than  a  collection  of  allegories  and
legendary  tales.  Upon  examination,  however,
most  of  these  legends,  notwithstanding  their  ob-
scurity, will  be  found  to  contain  references  to  those
grand  primeval  events  whose  memory  was  retained
among  every  people  upon  earth  :  and  for  the  com-


memoration of  which  were  ordained  so  many  of
the  ceremonies  and  mysteries  of  the  ancients.


From  such  traditions,  handed  down  for  ages
before  they  were  committed  to  writing,  we  might
expect  but  little  aid.  Indeed  in  all  the  re-
searches of  the  antiquarian,  conjecture  must  very
generally  supply  the  place  of  science.  Yet,  by
pursuing  a  proper  method  of  investigation,  we
may  approximate  to  truth,  and  frequently  illus-
trate circumstances  obscurely  hinted  at  in  Scrip-
ture, and  even  occasionally  fill  up  the  gaps  of
history,  by  supplying  events  which  have  been
omitted  by  the  sacred  writers  as  unconnected
with  the  immediate  objects  under  their  consi-
deration.

Persons,  Events,  and  Dates  in  History,  and
Systems  in  Theology,  are  the  objects  to  be  ex-
amined and  ascertained.  And  where  the  subject
under  investigation  can  be  so  divided,  that  the
truth  must  lie  among  some  few  plausible  hypo-
thesis, which  can  be  a  priori,  and  at  once  laid
down :  by  collecting  all  the  evidence  that  can  be
had,  and  examining  separately,  and  excluding
successively  each  of  these  hypothesis  which  shall
be  found  inconsistent  with  that  evidence,  we
may  contract  the  circle  of  conjecture,  in  some
cases,  till  but  one  hypothesis  is  left ;  which  one
must  be  the  truth,  and  is  thus  negatively  rendered
matter  of  demonstration.     In  other  cases  want  of


VI


vu


ll


'I*

i  t


evidence  may  leave  room  for  several  different
opinions,  none  of  which  can  really  be  refuted,
thoui^h  one  may  often  be  more  plausible  than  an-
other.

Mr.  Faber,  in  his  admirable  work  on  the
Pagan  Idolatry,  has  collected  and  separately  ex-
amined all  the  different  systems  of  the  Heathen
Mythology  ;  and  has  shown,  *  that  there  is  such
a  singular,  minute,  and  regular  accordance  among
them,  not  only  in  what  is  obvious  and  natural,
but  also  in  what  is  arbitrary  and  circumstantial,
both  in  fanciful  speculations  and  in  artificial  ob-
servances,' as  to  render  untenable  every  other
hypothesis  than  this — *  that  they  must  all  have
originated  from  some  common  source.'

Having  thus  shown  their  common  origin,  he
enumerates  three  hypothesis  as  the  only  three
on  which,  he  conceives,  the  common  origination
of  the  various  systems  of  Paganism  can  be  ac-
counted for :

1.  Either  all  nations  agreed  peaceably  to  borrow  from  one,

subsequent  to  their  several  settlements.

2.  Or  all  nations,  subsequent  to  their  several  settlements,

were  compelled  by  arms  to  adopt  the  superstition  of  one.

3.  Or  all  nations  were  once  assembled  together  in  a  single

place  and  in  a  single  community ;  where  they  adopted  a
corrupt  form  of  religion,  which  they  afterwards  re-
spectively carried  with  them  into  the  lands  that  they
colonized.

After  examining  at  lenj'th  and  shewint;   the  utter


impossibility  of  maintaining  either  the  first  or
second  of  these  hypothesis,  he  concludes  that
the  third  only  can  be  the  truth.*

In  the  same  manner  we  may  ascertain  the  re-
gion from  which  mankind  originally  dispersed.
Both  in  ancient  and  modern  times  the  Greeks  have
been  accused  of  a  kind  of  plagiarism,  which  was
the  prevailing  custom  of  every  nation  upon  earth.
Egypt  and  India,  and  Phoenicia,  no  less  than
Greece,  have  appropriated  to  themselves,  and
assigned  within  their  own  territorial  limits,  the
localities  of  the  grand  events  of  primeval  history,
with  the  birth  and  achievements  of  the  Gods  and
Heroes,  the  Deluge,  the  origin  of  the  arts  and
the  civilization  of  mankind.  And  their  claims
have  found  more  able  supporters,  only  because
they  have  not  been  so  obviously  liable  to  refuta-
tion. Yet  by  rejecting  each  country,  whose
claims  rest  upon  no  better  foundation  than  its  own
local  histories,  and  retaining  those  only,  whose
pretensions  are  substantiated  by  the  concurrent
testimony  of  the  rest ;  it  may  be  shown,  inde-
pendently of  Scripture,  that  the  primitive  settle-
ments of  mankind  were  in  such  places,  and  at-
tended with  such  circumstances,  as  the  Scripture
instructs  us  was  the  case.

*  To  these,  perhaps,  may  be  added  a  fourth,  viz.  that  the
superstition  became  general,  partly  by  peaceful  communication,
and  partly  by  force  of  arms  :  though  the  fulness  of  the  evidence
is  such  as  to  render  this  equally  untenable  with  the  others.


VUl


Of  the  transactions  previous  to  the  Deluge
there  are  but  few  and  faint  memorials  among  the
heathens.  One  of  the  most  authentic  may  be
found  in  the  remains  of  the  Phoenician  History
of  Sanchoniatho,  who  is  considered  to  be  the
most  ancient  writer  of  the  heathen  world.  In
what  age  he  wrote  is  uncertain  :  but  his  history
was  composed  in  the  Phoenician  language,  and
its  materials  collected  from  the  archives  of  the
Phoenician  cities.  It  was  translated  into  Greek
by  Philo  Byblius,  and  for  the  preservation  of
these  fragments  we  are  indebted  to  the  care  of
Eusebius.

The  Cosmogony*  I  shall  have  occasion  to  re-
fer to  hereafter :  as  one  of  the  most  ancient,  it  is
extremely  valuable,  and  as  it  speaks  more  plainly
than  the  rest,  it  affords  a  key  to  their  interpre-
tation.

The  Generations  contain  many  very  curious
passages.  In  the  firstf  is  an  allusion  to  the  fall :
in  the  second  Genus  may  be  Cain  :  after  which
we  lose  the  traces  of  similarity  :  at  the  fifth  J  there
is  an  interruption.  But  taking  up  the  thread  of
inquiry,  at  the  end,  in  Taautus  or  Thoyth,§  we
may  recognize  Athothis,||  the  second  king  of  Egypt,
the  Hermes  Trismegistus,  who  again^  appears  as
the  adviser  of  Cronus.     His  predecessor  Misor


p.  1.


f  p.  5.  X  P-  7.


'  p.  1.  J  p.  o.  I  p.  /.  §  p.  9.

II  See  also  Manetho,  p.  94  ;  Eratosthenes,  p.  84.        ^  p.  10.


^K


then  corresponds  with  Mizraim,  the  first  king  of
Egypt,  the  Menes  and  Mines  of  the  dynasties.*
In  the  preceding  generation  is  Amynus,  Amon,  or
Ham,  the  same  with  the  Cronus,t  of  what  by  the
historian  is  supposed  to  be  a  different  but  contem-
porary line.  An  ascent  higher  we  find,  Agrus,
the  husbandman,  who  was  worshipped  in  Phoe-
nicia as  the  greatest  of  the  gods  :  he  corresponds
with  Noah,  the  Ouranus  of  the  other  line,  whose
original  name  was  Epigeus  or  Autochthon.  ,

Sanchoniatho  seems  to  have  been  a  very  dili-
gent inquirer,  and  intimates  at  the  conclusion  J
that  the  generations  contain  the  real  history  of
those  early  times,  stripped  of  the  fictions  and
allegories  with  which  it  had  been  obscured  by  the
son  of  Thabion,  the  first  hierophant  of  Phoenicia.
That  such  is  the  case,  we  are  assured  by  Philo
Byblius,  in  the  remarks  on  Sanchoniatho  with
which  he  prefaces  his  translation  of  the  work.
The  passage  also  informs  us  that  the  history  thus
disguised  was  handed  down  to  Isiris,  the  brother
of  Chna  the  first  Phoenician,  apparently  alluding
to  Mizraim  the  brother  of  Canaan.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  he  has  placed  these
characters  in  the  true  order  of  succession,  though
in  all  the  traditions  of  the  heathens  they  are  ge-
nerally confounded  with  one  another.  It  is  also
remarkable  that  Sanchoniatho  is  almost  the  only


*  See  pp.  8,  84,  94,  139.


f  pp.  8,9.


+  p.  U3.


c


XI


heathen  writer  upon  antiquities  who  makes  no
direct  mention  of  the  deluge,  though  several  ob-
scure allusions  to  it  may  be  found  in  the  course
of  the  fragment.  Were  we  assured  of  his  silence
upon  the  point  in  the  parts  of  his  work  that  have
been  lost,  the  omission  might  still  be  accounted
for  from  his  avowed  determination  to  suppress
what  he  considered  merely  allegorical,  for  he
would  find  the  traditions  of  the  deluge  so  inti-
mately blended  with  those  relating  to  the  creation,
that  in  endeavouring  to  disengage  the  truth  from
the  fable  he  might  easily  be  induced  to  suppose
that  they  related  to  the  same  event.

For  explanation  of  his  fragment  upon  the
mystical  sacrifice  of  the  Phoenicians,*  I  must
refer  to  the  very  curious  dissertations  by  Bryant  t
and  Mr.  Faber.|  Sanchoniatho  wrote  also  a
history  of  the  serpent,  a  single  fragment^  of
which  is  preserved  by  Eusebius.

In  the  fragments  of  Berossus  again  we  have
perhaps  some  few  traces  of  the  antediluvian  world.
Like  Sanchoniatho,  Berossus  seems  to  have  com-
posed his  work  with  a  serious  regard  for  truth.
He  was  a  Babylonian  by  birth,  and  flourished  in
the  reigii  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  resided  for
some  years  at  Athens.  As  a  priest  of  Belus,  he
possessed  every  advantage  which  the  records  of

♦p.  16.  t  Mythology  vi.  323.

{Pag.  Idol.  Lib.  II.  c.  8.         §  p.  17.


the  temple  and  the  learning  and  traditions  of  the
Chaldaeans  could  afford.  He  appears  to  have
sketched  his  history  of  the  earlier  times  from  the
representations  upon  the  walls  of  the  temple.*
From  written  and  traditionary  knowledge  he  must
have  learned  several  points  too  well  authenticated
to  be  called  in  question ;  and  correcting  the  one
by  the  other,  and  at  the  same  time  blending  them
as  usual  with  Mythology,  he  has  produced  the
strange  history  before  us.

"Ihe  first  fragment  preserved  by  Alexander
Polyhistor  f  is  extremely  valuable,  and  contains
a  store  of  very  curious  information.  The  first
book  of  the  history  apparently  opens  naturally
enough  with  a  description  of  Babylonia.  Then
referring  to  the  paintings,  the  author  finds  the
first  series  a  kind  of  preface  to  the  rest.  All  men
of  every  nation  appear  assembled  in  Chaldaea  :J
among  them  is  introduced  a  personage  who  is
represented  as  their  instructor  in  the  arts  and
sciences,  and  informing  them  of  the  events  which
had  previously  taken  place.  Unconscious  that
Noah  is  represented  under  the  character  of
Oannes,  Berossus  describes  him,  from  the  hiero-
glyphical  delineation,  as  a  being  literally  com-
pounded of  a  fish  and  a  man,  and  as  passing  the
natural,  instead  of  the  diluvian  night  in  the  ocean,
with  other  circumstances  indicative  of  his  cha-
racter and  life.

*  See  pp.  22,  24.  fp.  21.  {  p.  22.


mmtmmmmintHmumtt


k


Xll


\\\


The  instructions  of  the  Patriarch  are  detailed
in  the  next  series  of  paintings.  In  the  first*  of
which,  I  conceive,  the  Chaos  is  pourtrayed  by
the  confusion  of  the  limbs  of  every  kind  of  animal:
the  secondt  represents  the  creation  of  the  uni-
verse :  the  third  the  formation  of  mankind :  others
again  that  of  animals,  and  of  the  heavenly  bodies.

The  second  book  J  appears  to  have  compre-
hended the  history  of  the  ante-diluvian  world  :
and  of  this  the  two  succeeding  fragments  §  seem
to  have  been  extracts.  The  historian,  as  usual,
has  appropriated  the  history  of  the  world  to
Chald'cea.  He  finds  nine  persons,  probably  re-
presented  as  kings,  preceding  Noah,  who  is  agam
introduced  under  the  name  Xisuthrus,  and  he
supposes  that  the  representation  was  that  of  the
first  dynasty  of  the  Chaldaean  kings.  From  the
universal  consent  of  history  and  tradition  he  was
well  assured  that  Alorus  or  Orion,  the  Nimrod
of  the  Scriptures,  was  the  founder  of  Babylon
and  the  first  king  :  consequently  he  places  him  at
the  top,  and  Xisuthrus  follows  as  the  tenth.  The
destruction  of  the  records  by  Nabonasar||  left
him  to  fill  up  the  intermediate  names  as  he  could:
and  who  are  inserted,  is  not  easy  so  to  determine.^

♦  p.  24.       t  P-  *5-       +  P-  ^^-       §  PP-  ^^'  ^^-     I'  P-  ^^•
%  In  the  Syriac  Chronicle  of  Bar-Hebraeus,  the  names  in  the
catalogue  are  given  to  certain  recluses  of  the  line  of  Seth,  called
the  Sons  of  God,  who  lived  upon  Mount  Hermon,  and  afterwards
apostatized  and  became  the  fathers  of  the  Giants.


xin

Berossus  has  given  also  a  full  and  accurate
description  of  the  deluge,*  which  is  wonderfully
consonant  with  the  Mosaic  account.  We  have
also  a  similar  account,  or  it  may  be  an  epitome
of  the  samet  from  the  Assyrian  history  of  Abyde-
nus,  who  was  a  disciple  of  Aristotle,  and  a
copyist  from  Berossus.  I  have  given  also  a  small
extract  J  from  the  Fragments  of  IMicholaus  Da-
mascenus,  relative  to  the  deluge  and  the  ark,
whose  wreck  is  said  by  him  as  well  as  Berossus,
Chrysostom,  and  other  writers,  to  have  remained
upon  Ararat  even  at  the  very  time  in  which  they
wrote.

Mankind  appear  to  have  dwelt  some  time
in  Armenia,  and  the  Patriarch  allotted  to  his
descendants  the  different  regions  of  the  earth,
with  commands  to  separate  into  distinct  commu-
nities. His  injunctions,  however,  were  disobeyed,
and  great  numbers,  perhaps  all  the  human  race,
started  from  Armenia  in  a  body,  and,  according
to  the  Scriptures,  journied  westward,  but  accord-
ing to  Berossus,  travelled  by  a  circuitous  route
to  the  plains  of  Shinar.  By  combining  the  two
narratives,  we  may  conclude  that  they  followed
the  winding  course  of  the  Euphrates,  till  they
halted  upon  those  celebrated  plains,  where  the
enterprising  spirit  of  Nimrod  tempted  him  to  as-


p.  26.


f  p.  37.


+

+


p.  49.


n


ii


1


XIV


XV


pire  to  the  dominion  of  the  world,  and  to  found
the  Tower  and  City  of  Babel  as  the  metropolis  of
his  future  universal  empire.

Upon  the  Tower  of  Babel  and  the  events  con-
nected with  it,  will  be  found  some  very  interest-
ing fragments  from  Abydenus,*  from  Hestiaeus,!
a  very  ancient  Greek  writer,  from  the  Babylonian
Sibyl,]:  and  from  Eupolemus.§  I  have  added  also
a  curious  extract  from  the  Sibylline  oracles. ||  In
these  fragments  are  detailed  the  erection  of  the
Tower,  the  dispersion  of  its  contrivers,  and  the
confusion  of  the  languages ;  with  the  additional
circumstances  of  the  violent  destruction  of  the
building,^  and  the  Titanian  war,  which  forms  so
remarkable   an    event  in    all    traditions    of    the

heathens.

Previously  to  the  erection  of  the  Tower,  men
appear  very  generally  to  have  apostatized  from
the  patriarchal  worship.  About  this  time  a  fur-
ther deviation  from  the  truth  took  place;  and
upon  the  first  and  more  simple  corruption  was
engrafted  an  elaborate  system  of  idolatry.     Some

•p.  34.       fp.  50.         }p.  50.         §p.  57.  ||p.  51.

f  Upon  the  rebuilding  of  Babylon,  the  Tower  was  completed
most  probably  on  the  original  plan.  It  is  described  by  Hero-
dotus as  a  pyramid  of  eight  steps,  about  seven  hundred  feet  high.
Its  ruins,  which  are  still  known  upon  the  spot  as  the  Birs  Nem-
brod,  or  the  tower  of  Nimrod,  are  described  by  Sir  R.  K.  Porter,
as  a  prodigious  pile  of  unburnt  bricks  cemented  with  mud  and
reeds  in  horizontal  layers,  still  rising  to  the  enormous  height  of
about  two  hundred  and  fifty  feet.


account  of  these  deviations  will  be  found  in  the
extracts  from  Epiphanius,  Cedrenus,  and  the
Paschal  chronicle.*  What  is  mentioned  under
the  name  of  Barbarism,  was  probably  the  pri-
meval patriarchal  worship.  It  was  succeeded  by
a  corrupted  form  of  superstition  which  is  known
among  the  ancients  under  the  name  of  Scuthism,
or  Scythism,  which  was  most  prevalent  from  the
flood  to  the  building  of  the  Tower.  The  new
corruption,  at  that  time  introduced  by  Nimrod,
was  denominated  lonism,t  or  Hellenism  :  and
both  are  still  flourishing  in  the  East  under  the  well-
known  appellations  of  Brahmenism  and  Budd-
hism ;  whose  priests  appear  to  have  continued  in
an  uninterrupted  succession  from  the  Brahmanes
and  Germanes,  the  philosophical  sects  of  India
mentioned  by  Megasthenes  J  and  Clitarchus.^

By  the  introduction  of  a  more  degenerate
superstition,  Nimrod  appears  to  have  aimed  at
the  establishment  of  an  universal  monarchy  in
himself  and  his  descendants,  of  which  Babylon
was  to  have  been  the  metropolis,  and  the  Tower,
the  central  temple  of  their  idolatries.     All  who

*pp.  53,  55,  56.
\  Most  probably  derived  from  lone :  for  the  worship  of  the
great  Goddess,  or  universal  Mother,  was  then  introduced,  as  well
as  Idolatry.     It  signifies  also  a  Dove,  which  was  the  standard  of
the  Assyrian  Empire.

}p.  224.     §  p.  229.


HI


m\


if'


i!


m


I  t


XVI

attended  him  seem  to  have  entered  into  the  pro-
ject, so  far  as  he  might  have  thought  proper  to
divulge  it,  and  to  have  assisted  in  the  erection  of
the  tower  and  city.  But  subsequent  events  shew
that  the  proposed  form  of  government  and  system
of  theology,  though  asquiesced  in  by  the  majority,
did  not  command  universal  approbation.  And
the  whole  project  was  marred  by  the  miraculous
interposition  of  the  Almighty.

What  concurring  circumstances  might  have
operated  to  the  dispersion,  we  have  no  clue  to  m
the  narrative  of  Moses.      He  mentions  the  mira-
culous confusion  of  the  languages,  and  that  the
Lord  scattered  the   people  abroad  from  thence
upon  the  face  of  all  the  eartli ;  and  they  left  off  to
build  the  city.     But  if  we  may  credit  the  heathen
accounts   above    referred    to,    with     which    the
Hindoo,  and    indeed  almost  every   remnant  of
traditionary  lore  concur ;  a  schism,  most  probably
both  of  a  political  and  religious  nature,  was  the
result ;  a  bitter  war  was  carried  on,  or  at  least  a
bloody  field  was  fought;  from  which  the  Scuths,
defeated  and  excommunicated  by  their  brethren,
betook  themselves,  in  haughty  independence,  to
the  mountains  of  Cashg-ar  and  the  north  :*  whilst
some  violent  and  supernatural  catastrophe,    by
the  overthrow  of  the  Tower,  completed  the  dis-
persion.

*  See  Faber,  Lib.  VI.  c.  4..


xvn

The  Scythic  nations  became  very  generally
Nomade,  but  sometimes  settled  in  various  parts.
Of  what  family  they  were  has  been  a  subject  of
long  and  intricate  dispute.  The  ancient  chrono-
logists  have,  almost  without  exception,  supposed
them  of  the  race  of  Japhet,  the  eldest  son  of  Noah :
that  they  w  ere  the  sons  of  Cush  has  also  been  in-
sisted on  with  great  learning  and  ingenuity.*  But
if  all  the  nations,  or  even  the  upper  classes  of  those
nations,  which  bear  the  name,  be  the  sons  of
Cush,  one-third  of  the  present  human  race  must
be  the  descendants  of  that  patriarch.  Indeed,
before  the  introduction  of  lonism,  Epiphanius
and  others  appear  to  have  included  all  mankind
under  the  name  of  Scuths.  The  first  apostacy
might  have  been  introduced  by  Cush,  and  its

*  The  term  Scuth,  which,  with  the  prefix,  is  supposed  to  be
the  same  as  Cuth  or  Cush,  the  root  of  the  names  Chusas
Chasas  Cassians  Cusaeans  or  Chrusaeans,  Chusdim  Chasdim
or  Chaldaeans,  Cotti  or  Goths  and  many  others,  appears  too
general  for  a  patronymic.  All  the  northern  nations  were  Scuthic,
the  Scuths  of  Touran.  The  Scuths  of  Iran  occupied  the  entire
Asiatic  Ethiopia,  containing  the  Iranian  territories  of  the  As-
syrian Empire,  extending  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Indus,  and
from  the  Caspian  to  the  Ocean.  African  Ethiopia  or  Nubia  with
the  adjoining  territories  was  also  Cuthic.  There  were  Indo-
Scythae,  Celto-Scythae,  and  even  lonic-Scythse.  The  Belgae  in
Gaul,  the  Pelasgi  in  Greece,  the  Sacas  or  Saxons,  the  Pelestim
Philistim  and  Phoenicians,  the  Sarmans  Sarmatians  and  Germans
were  Scuths.  In  short,  the  term  is  to  be  found  in  every  corner
of  the  earth,  and  may  be  traced  in  America  and  in  Lapland,  as
well  as  in  China  and  Japan.

d


I


XVlll


Ifl


!|


|i


followers  have  borne  his  name;  which  the  suc-
ceeding heresy  of  Nimrod  could  not  obliterate.

The  Scythian  nations  of  Touran  and  the
North  were  generally  addicted  to  the  Scythic  su-
perstition ;  and  whenever  they  rolled  back  the
tide  of  war  upon  their  ancient  rivals ;  the  idols
temples  and  cities  were  the  objects  upon  which
they  satiated  their  revenge.  They  were  esteemed
excommunicated,  and  of  the  Giant  race,  Ne-
phelim,  Rephaim  and  Anakim.  The  Scuths  of
Iran  were  also  of  the  Giant  race,  with  Nimrod
as  their  chief.  Of  the  Titanian  war  there  appears
to  he  a  double  aspect.  When  the  Scuths  of
Touran  are  the  Giants,  the  war  between  them
and  the  lonim  is  the  subject  of  the  legend  ;  and
they  are  the  Giants  cast  out  into  Cimmerian
darkness,  and  buried  under  mountains.  The
other  view  presents  both  parties  conjointly  before
the  schism,  as  the  Nephelim,  Apostates  or  Giants,
engaged  in  carrying  on  the  war  against  Heaven
itself.  And  in  these  accounts  we  find  more  fre-
quent allusions  to  the  Tower  and  its  supernatural
overthrow.

The  catastrophe  at  Babel  completed  the  dis-
persion. On  the  division  of  the  earth  and  plant-
ing of  the  nations,  there  are  some  very  curious
notices  extant.*  But  whether  Nimrod  and  his
immediate  adherents  survived,  and  retained  pos-

*  pp.  50,  52.


XIX

session  of  Babylon,  or  transferred  their  seat  of
government  to  Nineveh  and  founded  the  great
Iranian  empire,  or  whether  that  empire  and  city
were  founded  by  Assur  and  the  sons  of  Shem,  is
still  a  subject  of  dispute.  We  find  Nimrod,  how-
ever, under  the  well-known  title  of  Alorus,  at  the
head  of  the  two  Chaldaean  dynasties,*  mentioned
above:  but  these  appear  rather  to  refer  to  the
antediluvian  patriarchs  than  to  the  proper  kings
of  Chaldaea.

The  first  dynasty  of  Chaldaean  Kings  J  is
placed  by  almost  all  chronologists  as  the  first
Iranian  dynasty,  that  of  Nimrod  under  the  name
of  Evechius,  and  his  immediate  descendants,
Evexius  is  also  placed  by  Polyhistor  as  the  first
Chaldaean  king.§  The  dynasty  of  the  Arabian
kings  of  Chaldaea  II  is  placed  by  Eusebius,  Syn-
cellus  and  others,  as  well  as  by  Berossus,  next  in
the  order  of  succession.  They  have  likewise  been
supposed  to  be  a  Scythic  nation,  which  broke  in
upon  the  empire  from  the  Scythian  settlements
of  Cashgar,  and  obtained  possession  either  of  the
entire  empire,  or  only  of  the  city  of  Babylon,
during  the  period  of  its  desolation,  with  the
plains  of  Shinar  and  the  country  round  the  head
of  the  Persian  gulf,  from  whence  they  were  ex-
pelled, and  discharged  themselves  upon  Palestine


pp.  30,  32,     See  also  p.  170.
+  p.  59.


§  p.  68.


tp.  67.


XX


XXI


!'


Ill


I


I


as  the  Palli  or  Philistines,  and  upon  Egypt  as
the  Hycsos  or  Shepherd  Kings.*

Next  in  succession,  according  to  Eusebius
and  Syncellus,  or  perhaps  contemporary  with
the  preceding,  came  the  long  line  of  the  great
dynasty  of  the  Assyrian  Kings,  who  held  the
empire  of  the  world  for  ten  or  twelve  centuries,
till  their  dominion  was  wrested  from  them  by
the  Medes  in  the  time  of  Thonus  Concolerus,
the  Sardanapalus  of  the  Greek  historians.  The
different  catalogues  of  the  great  Assyrian  suc-
cession that  are  extant,  will  be  found  among  the
Dynasties-t  The  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  em-
pire was  followed  by  several  years  of  universal
anarchy,  bloodshed  and  revolution.  And  it  is  as-
certained, that  it  was  during  this  scene  of  con-
fusion that  Jonah  was  sent  upon  his  mission  to
stop  its  progress  at  Nineveh.

Arbaces,  the  leader  of  the  Median  insurrec-
tion, though  he  succeeded  in  throwing  off  the
Assyrian  yoke,  appears  to  have  failed  in  his  at-
tempt to  establish  his  own  sovereignty :  nor  was
the  Median  kingdom  fully  consolidated  till  the
reign  of  Deioces.  The  catalogues  of  the  Median
kings  will  be  found  among  the  Dynasties.
Under  Phraortes  and  Cyaxares  the  Medes  ex-
tended their  dominion  over  great  part  of  Asia,  but
under  Astyages,  who  was  defeated  and  captured


1G9.


f  From  p.  G9.


by  Cyrus,    the  kingdom  merged  in  the  Persian

empire.

The  Babylonians  acquired  a  temporary  inde-
pendence at  the  fall  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  but
after  two  or  three  short  reigns  they  were  subdued
by  Senecherib.*  Syria  also  became  an  inde-
pendent kingdom,  and  prospered  for  a  time,  till
again  reduced  under  the  Assyrian  yoke.  Persia
at  the  same  time  arose,  and  alone  maintained  its
independence  against  the  growing  power  of  the
Medes  and  the  new  Assyrian  dynasty,  till  the
successes  of  Cyrus  raised  it  above  them  all,  and
vested  the  empire  of  the  world  in  the  Persian
race.

The  Assyrian  empire  revived  under  Nabo-
nasar,  supposed  to  be  the  same  with  the  Salma-
nasar  of  the  Scriptures.  Of  this  dynasty  three
several  catalogues!  will  be  found,  the  Ecclesi-
astical and  Astronomical  canons  preserved  by
Syncellus,  and  the  celebrated  canon  of  Ptolemaeus,
besides  some  other  notices  of  the  successors  of
Nabonasar,  among  the  supplemental  Chaldaean
fragments.  The  first  princes  of  the  line  appear  to
have  fixed  their  residence  at  Nineveh,  and  among
them  we  may  recognize  the  Tiglath  Pileser,
Senecherib,  and  Esar  Haddon  of  the  Scriptures.
Their  race  appears  to  have  terminated  in  Saracus,
another  Sardanapalus.     NabopoUasar,  a  success-


*  pp.  61,  63.


t  p.  78.


li


XXll


XXlll


!    <


^1


^i


fill  rebel,  began  the  last  line  of  the  Assyrian  and
Chaldaean  monarchs.*  He  transferred  the  seat  of
empire  to  Babylon,  and  in  his  reign,  his  cele-
brated son,  Nebuchadnezzar,  extended  his  con-
quests over  the  bordering  kingdoms  of  the  north
and  west,  by  the  reduction  of  Syria,  Phoenicia,
Judaea,  Egypt,  and  Arabia;  an  accurate  account
of  which  is  transmitted  by  Berossus.f  On  the
death  of  his  father,  Nebuchadnezzar  succeeded
to  the  throne.  Concerning  him  we  have  several
very  interesting  fragments  from  Berossus,t  and
one  from  Megasthenes.f  In  these  are  detailed
the  splendor  of  his  works  at  Babylon,  its  cele-
brated walls,  and  brazen  gates  ;  its  temples,  pa-
laces, and  hanging  gardens.  The  prophesy  of
Nebuchadnezzar,^  probably  alludes  to  the  public
notification  of  Daniel's  interpretation  of  his  vision.
His  successors,  till  the  overthrow  of  the  empire
by  Cyrus,  are  given  by  Berossus  and  Megas-
thenes,  and  will  be  found  also  among  the  dynas-
ties. II  Among  his  four  immediate  successors  we
must  find  Belshazzar,  and  Darius  the  Mede.  The
latter  has  been  generally  supposed  to  be  Nabon-
nedus,  though  some  have  endeavoured  to  identify
him  with  Cyaxares.  The  conquest  of  the  Me-
dian, Chaldaean,  and  Assyrian  dominions  by
Cyrus,  grandson  of  Astyages,  and  the  nephew  of
Nebuchadnezzar,  brings  down  the  history  to  the


*  p.  59.
§  p.  45.


f  p.  37 J  38.


p.  44.


II  pp.  40,  45,  80,  81.


authentic  records  of  Grecian  literature.  The
Persian  line,  the  successors  of  Cyrus,  will  be
found  in  several  different  places,  both  among  the
Chaldaean  and  Egyptian  fragments.

The  intense  interest  which  Egyptian  history
has  excited,  from  the  discovery  of  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  Hieroglyphics,  has  induced  me  to
spare  no  labour  or  expence  in  rendering  this  part
of  the  work  as  perfect  as  circumstances  would
allow.

The  Laterculus  or  Canon  of  the  Kings  of
Thebes,*  was  compiled  from  the  archives  of  that
city,  by  Eratosthenes,  the  librarian  of  Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus.  It  is  followed  by  the  Old  Egyptian
Chronicle,  with  a  Latin  version  of  the  same,
from  the  Excerpta  Barbara,  and  another  from  the
Armenian  Chronicle  of  Eusebius:  they  contain
a  summary  of  the  dynasties  of  Egypt.  To  these
succeed  the  Egyptian  dynasties  of  Manetho,t
whose  introductory  letter  to  king  Ptolemaeus,
given  in  a  subsequent  page,]:  explains  the  nature
of  his  work,  and  the  materials  from  whence  it
was  compiled.  I  have  placed  the  six  different
versions  of  the  Dynasties  of  Manetho  that  are
extant  confronting  each  other.  The  Canon  of  the
kings  of  Egypt  from  Josephus,§  I  have  compiled
from  the  historical  fragments  of  Manetho  :  ||  and


*  p.  84.


t  p.  94.  +p.  171.

II  pp.  170  and  173.


§  p.  136.


M     I


XXIV


XXV


»]


illl


lli


mw


I  have  thrown  it  into  the  form  of  a  Canon  to  faci-
litate comparison.  I  have  next  given  a  very  im-
portant Canon,*  tlie  first  part  of  vvhicli,  from
Mestraim  to  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  dynasty,
is  preserved  by  Syncellus  only  :  from  the  begin-
ning of  the  eighteenth  it  is  continued  also  in  the
fragments  of  Eusebius :  and  from  hence  to  the  con-
clusion, four  different  versions  of  it  will  be  found.
To  these  are  added  the  Canons  of  all  the  kings
of  Egypt,  mentioned  by  Diodorus  Siculusf  and
IIerodotus4  They  were  originally  compiled  by
Scaliger,  but  1  have  corrected  them  and  given
them  with  several  very  important  additions  in
the  original  words  of  the  authors,  instead  of  in  the
words  of  Scaliger  himself.  They  are  followed  by
the  Canon  of  Theophilus  Antiochenus.§  And
after  several  very  important  chronological  ex-
tractsll  upon  the  antiquities  of  Egypt,  I  have  com-
pleted the  Dynasties,  with  a  Canon  of  the  early
Egyptian,  Chaldaean,  and  Assyrian  Kings,  from
the  Syriac  Chronicle  of  Bar-Iiebrajus :  ^  which  I
have  placed  beside  each  other  as  they  are  syn-
chonized  by  that  author,  and  given  them  in  the
English  letters  corresponding  to  the  Syriac,  in-
stead of  adopting  the  Latinized  names  of  the
translators.

I  have,  therefore,  comprised  in  this  part  of


*p.  139.  fp.  148.

lip.  159.


+  154.


§p.  158.


IF  p.  170.


the  work,  no  less  than  nineteen  catalogues  of  the
Egyptian  kings,  with  all  the  various  readings
that  occur  in  the  different  versions  of  the  same.
They  have  been  compiled  with  the  greatest  care,
and  I  have  purposely  abstained  from  all  reference
to  the  Hieroglyphics,  that  I  might  not  be  misled
by  any  preconceived  opinion.

At  a  time,  when  indefatigable  research  is  every
day  bringing  to  light  new  and  interesting  circum-
stances, it  would  be  absurd  to  attempt  to  give
any  thing  but  the  roughest  outline  of  Egyptian
history.  I  shall  merely  observe,  then,  that  after
the  dispersion  from  Babel,  the  children  of  Miz-
raim  went  off  to  Egypt,  of  which  they  appear  to
have  continued  some  time  in  undisturbed  posses-
sion. Menes  Misor  or  Mestraim,  the  Mizraim
of  the  Scriptures,  and  planter  of  the  nation,  is
naturally  placed  as  the  first  sovereign  of  the  united
realm,  at  the  head  of  all  the  catalogues.  And
perhaps  the  dominion  of  Athothis  was  equally
extensive ;  for  his  name  occurs  in  the  Laterculus
of  Eratosthenes,  and  as  the  Thoth  or  Taautus  of
Sanchoniatho.  After  him  the  country  seems  to
have  been  divided  into  several  independent  mo-
narchies, some  of  whose  princes  may  perhaps  be
found  among  the  fourteen  first  dynasties.  That  the
country  was  so  divided,  and  that  the  first  dynasties
were  not  considered  successive  by  the  ancients,  we
have  the  authority  of  Artapanus*  and  Eusebius.

*p.  162.


il


f  :


XXVI


xxvu


liii)


!'


The  first  historical  fragment  of  Manetho,*
from  Josephiis,  gives  an  account  of  the  invasion
and  expulsion  of  a  race  of  foreigners,  who  were
styled  Hycsos  or  Shepherd  kings ;  whose  princes
are  identified  with  the  seventeenth  dynasty  of  all
the  Canons  except  that  given  by  Syncellus  as  the
canon  of  Africanus,  in  which  they  are  placed  as
the  fifteenth.     Of  what  family  they  were,  whence
they  came,  and  to  what  country  they  retired,  have
been  the  subjects  of  almost  as  many  hypotheses
as  writers ;  1  shall  not  venture  a  remark  upon  a
problem,  of  which  there  is  every  reason  shortly
to  expect  a  satisfactory  solution.     Josephus  and
the  Fathers  confound  them  with  the  Israelites,
who  appear  rather  to  be  referred  to  by  the  second
fragment!  as  the  lepers,  who  were  so  cruelly  ill-
treated  by  the  Egyptians,    and  afterwards  laid
waste  the  country,  assisted  by  a  second  invasion
of  the  Shepherds.      To  these  fragments  I  have
subjoined  sixj  other  very  curious  notices  of  the
exodus  of  the  Israelites  and  the  final  expulsion  of
the  Shepherds  ;  which  events  appear  to  have  been
connected  with  one  another,  as  well  as  with  the
emigration   of  the   Danaan  colonies  to  Greece,
not  only  in  time,  but  by  circumstances  of  a  poli-
tical nature,§  and  to  have  occurred  during  the
sovereignty  of  the  eighteenth  dynasty.     Tacitus
has  also  noticed  the  exodus,  but  in  terms  evi-

*p.l71.     tp.l76.      Jp.   182.     §  See  also  the  note  top.  166.


dently  copied  from  some  of  those  which  I  have
given :  we  have  but  few  and  scanty  notices  of  the
kings  of  Egypt,  even  in  Diodorus  and  Hero-
dotus. Its  conquest  by  Nebucchadnezzar  is  re-
lated by  Berossus,*  and  after  two  or  three  tem-
porary gleams  of  independence,  it  sunk  at  length
into  a  province  of  the  Persian  empire,  and  from
that  day  to  the  present,  according  to  the  denun-
ciation of  the  prophet,!  Egypt  has  been  the
basest  of  kingdoms,  and  under  the  yoke  of
strangers.

The  Tyrian  Annals  are  fragments  which  were
quoted  by  Josephus  from  the  lost  histories  of
Dius  and  Menander.  They  agree  perfectly  with
the  scriptural  accounts,  and  furnish  some  par-
ticulars in  addition.  The  correspondence  of
Solomon  and  Hiram,  the  foundation  of  Carthage,
and  the  invasion,  conquests,  and  repulse  of  Sal-
manasar ;  the  siege  of  Tyre  by  Nebuchadnessar,
and  its  subsequent  government  under  judges,  are
historical  additions  of  great  interest  and  import-
ance.

The  Periplus  of  Hanno  is  an  account .  of  the
earliest  voyage  of  discovery  extant.  It  was  taken
from  an  original  and  apparently  official  document
which  was  suspended  in  the  temple  of  Saturn,  at
Carthage.     Falconer  has  edited  it  as  a  separate


p.  37.


f  Ezek.  29.


XXVllI


XXIX


III  I '


"  (


Hi


III'


work,  and  j^iveH  two  dissertations  on  it;  the  first,
explanatory  of  its  contents;  and  the  second,  a
refutation  of  Dodwell's  rejections  on  its  authen-
ticity. I  have  followed  Falconer  both  in  his  text
and  translation.  With  re^spect  to  its  ii^e,  Fal-
coner agrees  with  Bougainville  in  referring  it  to
the  sixth  century  before  the  Christian  era.

The  Periplus  is  prefaced  l)y  a  few  lines,  re-
citing a  decree  of  the  Carthaginians,  relative
to  the  voyage  and  its  objects  :  and  is  then
continued  by  the  commander,  or  one  of  his
companions,  as  a  narrative,  which  commences
from  the  time  the  fleet  had  cleared  the  Straits  of
Gibraltar.  Bougainville  has  given  a  chart  of  the
voyage,  which  may  be  found,  together  with  the
corresponding  ma|)s  of  l*tolema'Us  and  D'Anville,
in  Falconer's  treatise.  It  may  be  suflicient,  how-
ever, to  remark  that  Thymiaterium,  the  first  of
the  colonies  planted  by  llanno,  occupies  a  posi-
tion very  nearly,  perhaps  precisely  the  same  with
that  of  the  present  commercial  city  of  Mogadore.
The  promontory  of  Soloeis  corresponds  with  Cape
Bojador,  nearly  opposite  to  the  Canaries.  Cari-
contichos,  Gytte,  Acra,  Melitta  and  Arambys
are  placed  between  Ca[)e  Bojador  and  the  Rio
d'Ouro  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  Lixus.
Cerne  is  laid  down  as  the  island  of  Arguin  under
the  southern  Capti  Blanco  :  the  river  Chretes
perhaps  is  the  St.  John,  and  the  next  large
river  mentioned   is  the  Senegal.     Cape   Palmas


and  Cape  Three  Points,  are  supposed  to  corres-
pond respectively  with  the  Western  and  Southern
Horns,  and  some  island  in  the  bight  of  Benin,
with  that  of  Gorillae.  Vossius,  however,  sup-
poses the  Western  Horn  to  be  Cape  Verd,  and
the  Southern,  Cape  Palmas,  in  which  case  the
Sierra  Leone  will  answer  to  the  Ochema  Theon
the  Chariot  of  the  Gods.

The  description  of  the  Troglodyta?,  as  men
of  a  different  form  or  appearance,  may  imply  a
change  from  the  Moresco  to  the  Negro  race.
Some  passages,  quoted  by  Falconer  from  Bruce's
travels,  explain  the  extraordinary  fires  and  nightly
merriment  which  alarmed  the  voyagers,  as  cus-
toms common  among  many  of  the  negro  tribes,
and  which  had  repejitedly  fallen  within  the  scope
of  his  own  observations.  The  Gorillae  are  sup-
posed to  be  large  monkeys  or  wild  men  as  the
name  avSpumoi  aypm  may  in  fact  import.

The  Periplus  is  followed  by  a  strange  account
of  the  African  settlements,  from  the  books  of
Hiempsal  king  of  Numidia,  preserved  by  Sallust.

Of  the  Indian  fragments  of  Megasthenes,  the
most  remarkable  has  already  been  referred  to.
In  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  Philosophical
sectSjf  into  the  Bralimanes  and  Germanes,  we
may  doubtless  recognize  the  predecessors  of  the

♦p.  224.


f   li


XXX


XXXI


present  Brachmans  and  Buddhists  of  Hindostan.
They  are  likewise  mentioned  by  Clitarchus  *  as
the  Brahmanes  and  Praranse.  The  castes  of  India
are  also  described  at  length,!  and  have  continued
with  some  variations  to  the  present  day.  The  an-
tiquity of  such  a  division  is  very  great,  and  per-
haps originated  at  the  dispersion,  as  it  prevailed
chiefly  among  the  Ionic  nations,  while  the  Scythic
tribes  prided  themselves  upon  their  independence,
and  the  nobility  of  the  whole  race.  Megasthenes
is  reputed  to  have  been  a  Persian,  and  an  officer  in
the  army  of  Alexander  in  his  expedition  to  India,
and  was  employed  upon  several  negociations  of
consequence.

I  have  next  given  two  short  notices  of  some
celebrated  islands  in  the  Atlantic  and  Indian
oceans.  The  first, |  upon  the  Atlantic  island,  is
quoted  by  Proclus,  from  the  Ethiopic  history  of
Marcellus,  in  illustration  of  the  passages  of  Plato
in  the  Timajus  relative  to  the  same.  Some  have
looked  upon  the  relation  as  worthy  of  credit,  and
confirmed  by  the  broken  nature  of  all  the  islands,
which  lie  scattered  between  the  old  and  the  new
world,  regarding  them  as  relics  of  a  former  tract
which  has  been  absorbed.  The  second  fragment
from  Euemerus  may  relate  to  the  islands  in  the
Indian  Archipelago  ;  though  it  is  highly  probable


p.  229.


fp.  216.


X  p.  233.


that  both  may  refer  only  to  the  White  island  of
the  West,  so  celebrated  in  the  Mythological  le-
jrends  of  almost  all  nations,  and  in  none  more
than  in  the  antiquities  of  the  British  islands.

As  I  profess  not  to  enter  into  the  details,  but
merely  to  provide  as  it  w  ere  the  raw  materials,  I
shall  dwell  but  little  upon  Chronology.  By  far
the  most  authentic  record  that  has  come  down  to
us  is  the  Canon  of  Ptolemaeus.*  It  commences
from  the  Chaldaean  era  of  Nabonasar,  and  is
continued  to  the  conclusion  of  the  reign  of  Anto-
ninus Pius.  In  calculating  its  chronology,  how-
ever,  it  mUst  be  observed,  that  although  it  starts
from  this  Chaldaean  era,  its  years  are  the  Sothoic
years  of  Egypt,  consisting  only  of  three  hundred
and  sixty-five  days,  without  any  intercalation.
Among  the  Chronological  fragments  at  the  end
of  the  work  will  be  found  the  passage  of  Censo-
rinus,t  so  important  in  determining  the  celebrated
epochs  of  ancient  history ;  and  likewise  an  ex-
tract from  Theon  Alexandrinus,^  from  the  ma-
nuscripts of  the  King  of  France,  partly  cited
by  Larcher  in  his  translation  of  Herodotus.  §  For
the  complete  extract,  I  beg  leave  to  return  my
thanks  to  Mons.  ChampoUion  Figeac,  and  Mons.
Hase  librarian  to  the  king.  Several  useful  chro-
nological passages  will  be  found  scattered  over

*  p.  83.       t  p.  324.         X  P-  329.       §  Vol.  ii.  p.  556.


I'  I


XXXll


XXXlll


)'  I )!


M


the  work  :  some  also  are  collected  at  the  end  of
the  Dynasties.*  I  have  added  also  two  short
notices  of  the  Sarus  and  Nerus  of  the  Chal-
daeans.t

It  is  remarkable,  that  the  three  ;^reat  eras  of
ancient  history  commence  within  thirty  years  of
one  another,  and  are  commonly  fixed.

The  first  Olympiad,  B.  C.  777.

The  fonndation  of  Rome,  B.  C.  753.

And  the  era  of  Nabonasar,  B.  C.  747.

The  commencement  of  the  rei^n  of  Diocle-
sian  is  determined  by  the  observed  and  calculated
eclipses  to  be  in  the  year  A.  D.  284.  The  begin-
ning of  the  great  Sothoic  period  of  1 04 1,  Sothoic
or  vague  years,  equivalent  to  1040  Julian  years,
is  fixed  about  the  year  B.  C.  1321,  or  1325.  Dur-
ing this  great  embolismic  period,  the  first  day  of
the  Egyptian  year,  called  Thoth,  from  the  omission
of  th^  intercalation  of  the  quarter  of  a  day  in  each
year,  recedes  through  every  day  of  the  year,  till
it  arrives  at  the  point  whence  it  originally
started,  and  again  coincides  with  the  Heliacal
rising  of  the  Dogstar.

Having  thus  brought  down  the  ancient  his-
tory of  the  world  as  contained  in  the  fragments
to  the  times  of  Grecian  record,  I  shall  endeavour,
in  like  manner,  to  trace  a  faint  outline  of  its
Theology.


pp.  .'JSS,  32d.


f  p.  328.


From  Babel,  the  centre  of  their  abominations,
the  heathens  carried  off  the  same  objects  of  ado-
ration, the  same  superstitious  observances,  and
the  same  legendary  tales,  which,  however  varied
and  confused,  may  without  difficulty  be  identified
throughout  the  world.  Among  the  pastoral
tribes,  the  Scythic  doctrines  almost  universally
prevailed  ;  yet  in  subsequent  times  they  also  fell
into  idolatry  :  while  the  Ionic  nations  carried  their
additions  and  corruptions  to  such  a  length,  that
the  original  and  more  simple  doctrines  became
obliterated  among  tfie  vulgar ;  and  were  retained
only  by  the  philosophers  and  priests,  and  some-
times were  even  re-im[)orted  from  abroad.  The
more  elaborate  corruptions  of  lonism  appear  to
have  prevailed  originally  in  the  Iranian  territories
only,  and  to  have  passed  to  India  and  to  Egypt,
to  have  spread  themselves  with  civilization  over
Greece,  and  subsequently  over  the  whole  Roman
world.  By  foreign  conquest  and  other  circum-
stances, the  two  systems  were  often  amalgamated
into  one.  The  more  elaborate  and  corrupted
form  of  lonism  and  idolatry  would  catch  the
attention  of  the  casual  observer  as  the  religion  of
the  land;  while  the  deeper  doctrines,  which  re-
tained much  of  their  primitive  simplicity,  were
wrapped  in  mystery,  and  communicated  only  to
the  initiated.

Most  nations,  in  process  of  time,  became  more
attached   to    particular  parts,  and  retained   but

f


I   :i


XXXIV


III


I


fragments  of  the  general  system.  But  it  is  still
in  existence,  and  preserved  almost  entire,  both  in
its  Scythic  and  Ionic  form,  as  the  Buddhism  and
Brahmenism  of  Hindostan.  By  comparing  all
the  varied  legends  of  the  west  and  east  in  con-
junction, we  may  obtain  the  following  outline  of
the  theology  of  the  ancients.

It  recognizes,  as  the  primary  elements  of  all
things,  two  independent  principles,  of  the  nature
of  male  and  female.  And  these,  in  mystic  union
as  the  soul  and  body,  constitute  the  great  Her-
maphroditic deity,  the  One,  the  Universe  itself,
consisting  still  of  the  two  separate  elements  of  its
composition,  modified,  though  combined  in  one
individual,  of  which  all  things  were  regarded  but
as  parts.  From  the  two,  or  more  frequently
from  the  male,  proceeded  three  sons  or  Hypos-
tases ;  which,  when  examined  severally,  are  each
one  and  the  same  with  the  principle  from  which
they  sprung :  but  when  viewed  conjointly,  they
constitute  a  triad,  emanating  from  a  fourth  yet
older  divinity,  who,  by  a  mysterious  act  of  self-
triplication,  becomes  three,  while  he  yet  remains
but  one,  each  member  of  the  triad  being  ulti-
mately resolvable  into  the  monad  .*  With  this  is
connected  the  doctrine  of  a  succession  of  similar
worlds.  At  the  conclusion  of  each  revolving
period,    the   world   is   dissolved,   alternately   by

*  See  Faber  at  length  upon  this  subject,  Pag.  Id.  Vol.  II.


XXXV

flood  and  fire ;  and  all  its  varied  forms  and  parts
are  absorbed  into  the  two  primeval  principles,
which  then  remain  in  the  loveliness  of  their  exist-
ence. After  a  certain  interval  their  re-union
commences,  and  with  it  the  reconstruction  of
another  world.  As  before,  the  first  production  of
this  world  is  the  triad,  and  the  same  heroes  and
persons  re-appear ;  and  the  same  events  are  again
transacted,  till  the  time  arrives  for  another  dis-
solution. Such  was  the  system  in  its  original
form ;  it  was  a  foundation  of  materialism,  upon
which  was  raised  a  superstructure  of  idolatry.

The  most  remarkable  feature  in  the  heathen
theology  is  the  multiplicity  of  its  gods.  The
easy  temper  of  polytheism,  as  it  has  been  called,
hesitated  not  to  adopt  the  divinities  of  the  sur-
rounding nations ;  while  the  deification,  not  only  of
heroes  and  kings,  but  of  the  virtues  and  vices,
with  the  genii  of  the  wopds  and  waters,  moun-
tains and  cities,  contributed  to  introduce  new
and  strange  inmates  into  the  Pantheon.  But  if
we  eject  these  modern  intruders,  if  we  restore  to
their  original  seats  the  imported  deities,  such  as
Pan  to  Arcadia,  Hermes  to  Egypt,  Osiris  to
Memphis,  Hercules  to  Tyre,  and  Dionysus  to
India ;  and  if  we  investigate  the  origin  of  each,
we  shall  find  every  nation,  notwithstanding  the
variety  of  names,  acknowledging  the  same  deities
and  the  same  system  of  theology  :  and,  however
humble   any   of  the  deities  may  appear  in  the


II


XXXVl


I'!


n


Pantheons  of  Greece  and  Rome,  each,  who  has
any  claim  to  antiquity,  will  be  found  ultimately,
if  not  immediately,  resolvable  into  the  original
God  or  Goddess,  into  one  or  other  of  the  two
primeval  principles.

In  conducting  such  an  investigation,  a  very
singular  circumstance  presents  itself  in  the  mani-
fold character  of  these  deities.  Their  human  or
terrestrial  appearance,  as  mere  mortals  deified  is
the  most  obvious ;  as  the  sun,  moon,  elements,
and  powers  of  nature,  they  assume  a  celestial  or
physical  aspi'ct.  And  if  we  turn  to  the  writings
of  the  philosophers,  we  shall  find  them  sustain-
ing a  character  more  abstract  and  metap/ii/sicaL
Yet  under  all  these  diflerent  forms,  the  same
general  system  is  preserved.

In  his  terrestrial  character,  the  chief  Hero
God,  under  whatever  name,  is  claimed  by  every
nation  as  its  progenitor  and  founder.  And
not  only  is  he  celebrated  as  the  king  of  that
country  in  particular,  but  of  the  whole  world.
He  is  exposed  to  some  alarming  danger  from  the
sea,  or  an  evil  principle  or  monster  by  which  the
sea  is  represented.  He  is  nevertlieless  rescued  by
some  friendly  female  aid,  sometimes  concealed  in
a  cavern  or  in  the  moon,  or  preserved  in  a  death-
like sleep,  borne  upon  a  snake,  or  floating  on  an
island  or  a  lotus,  though  more  frequently  in  a  boat
or  ark.  At  length  he  awakens  from  his  slumber,
subdues  his  enemy,  and  lands  upon  a  mountain.


xxxvu

He  then  reorganizes  the  world,  and  becomes  him-
self the  father  primarily  of  three  sons,  and  through
them,  of  the  human  race ;  not  unfrequently  with
some  allusions  to  the  dove  and  rainbow.  In  fact,
in  his  human  character  he  was  the  great  father  of
mankind ;  but  he  may  not  only  be  identified  with
Noah  but  with  Adam  likewise.  The  one  was
looked  upon  as  the  re-appearance  of  the  other,
and  both  an  incarnation  of  the  Deity.

In  his  immediate  celestial  character  the  God
is  universally  held  to  be  the  Sun ;  but  the  cha-
racter of  the  great  Goddess  is  of  a  more  complex
description.  As  the  companion  of  the  man,  she
is  the  ark ;  which  was  regarded  not  only  as  his
consort,  but  liis  daughter,  as  the  work  of  his  own
hands ;  and  his  mother,  from  whose  womb  he
again  emerged,  as  an  infant,  to  a  second  life;  and
his  preserver  during  the  catastrophe  of  the  de-
luge. As  the  companion  of  the  Sun  she  is  either
the  t^arth  or  moon :  not  that  the  distinctions  be-
tween the  human  and  celestial  characters  are
accurately  maintained ;  for  they  are  so  strangely
blended  together,  that  the  adventures  applicable
to  one  are  fre(|uently,  and  sometimes  purposely,
misapplied  to  the  other.  Thus,  whilst  the  Man
is  said  to  have  entered  into,  been  concealed  in,
and  have  again  issued  from  the  ark,  the  moon,
and  the  earth,  indifferently,  the  Sun  is  fabled  to
have  been  plunged  into  the  ocean,  to  have  sailed
upon  a  lotus,  to  have  taken  refuge  in  a  floating


XXXVlll


XXXIX


|i!i


10


V  V  1     i


PI


i:    !f


illjiH


island,  and  to  have  dwelt  upon  a  sacred  mountain
left  dry  by  the  retiring  flood.*

It  has  been  often  remarked,  that  the  Theo-
gonies  and  Cosmogonies  of  the  heathens  were
the  same.  In  addition  to  those  naturally  con-
stituting  a  part  of  the  work,  I  have  given  the
most  remarkable  of  the  Hermetic,  Orphic,  and
Pythagorean  accounts;  which  will  be  found,  with
the  celebrated  collection  from  Damascius,  under
a  separate  head.f  By  comparing  these  with  the
Cosmogonies  of  Sanchoniatho,  Berossus,  and  the
rest,  we  may,  without  much  difficulty,  arrive  at
the  following  conclusion :  that  the  Ether  and
Chaos,  or,  in  the  language  of  the  Philosophers,
Mind  and  Matter,  were  the  two  primeval,  eternal,
and  independent  principles  of  the  universe ;  the
one  regarded  as  a  vivifying  and  intellectual  prin-
ciple, the  other  as  a  watery  Chaos,  boundless,  and
without  form :  both  which  continued  for  a  time
without  motion,  and  in  darkness.  By  a  mystic
union  of  the  two  was  formed  the  great  Herma-
phroditic deity,  the  One,  the  universal  World ;  of
which  the  Chaotic  matter  presently  became  the
body,  and  the  Etherial  Intellectual  principle  the
souL  As  soon  as  the  union  had  commenced,
from  the  Ether  sprung  forth  the  triad,  Phanes  or
Eros,  a  triple  divinity,  the  most  prominent  cha-
racter of  which  was  Light  He  was  the  same
with  the  Soul  of  the  World,  and  the  Intelligible


See  Faber,  Pag.  Id.


f  p.  283,  and  following.


triad  so  largely  insisted  upon  by  the  Platonists.
The  gross  chaotic  elements  of  Earth  and  Water
were  formed  into  the  terraqueous  globe,  while  the
disposing  Ether,  in  the  character  of  Phanes,  un-
der some  three  of  the  conditions  of  Light,  Air,
Heat,  Fire,  Ether,  Flame,  or  Spirit,  composed  a
physical  trinity  concentred  in  the  Sun,  the  soul
and  ruler  of  the  world.  Or,  according  to  the
more  refined  speculations,  it  consisted  of  a  trinity
of  mental  powers,  in  which  the  Understanding,
Reason  or  Intellect,  the  Soul,  Passions,  Feelings
or  Affections,  Power,  Counsel  or  Will,  are  va-
riously combined.  Viewed,  therefore,  either
under  a  physical  or  metaphysical  aspect,  it  is
still  a  triad  subordinate  to,  and  emanating  from
the  more  ancient  Intellectual  Ether,  and  into
which  each  person  of  the  triad  is  again  re-
solvable.*

With  respect  to  the  Physical  triad,  by  com-
paring the  heathen  accounts  with  similar  passages
in  the  Scriptures,  though  not  decisive,  yet  so
preponderating  does  the  evidence  appear  to  me
upon  this  point,  that  if  the  school  of  Hutchinson
had  not  failed  to  establish  their  very  elegant  hy-
pothesis, as  to  the  fact  that  the  Fire,  Light,  and
Spirit  or  Air,  were  only  three  different  condi-
tions of  one  and  the  same  etherial  fluid,  appear-
ing as  Fire  at  the  orb  of  the  Sun,  as  Light  pro-

♦  See  the  Inquiry  at  the  end.


Pi


1


xli


n


1


ceedinj;  from  it,  and  as  Spirit  returning  to  it,
I  should  not  have  hesitated  to  subscribe  to  the
opinion  that  such  was  the  original  trinity  of  the
Gentiles ;  a  triad,  nevertheless,  subordinate  to  a
monad,  which  existed  in  tin;  form  of  Ether  pre-
viously to  its  assuming  such  conditions.

The  Metaphysi(!al  speculations  of  the  anci(*nts
upon  this  subject  can  only  be  derived  by  analo-
gical reasoning  from  contcMuplation  of  the  micro-
cosm of  man.  To  point  out  the  close  analogy
[)reserved  in  this  particular  between  the  Meta-
physical and  Physical  system  before  explained  J
would  observe,  that  Man  is  a  being  comjiounded
of  an  lnt(41ectual,  and  of  a  Material  substance,
both  of  which  were  conceived  by  the  ancients  to
have  pre-existed,  before  tliey  be(;ame  united  in
the  compound  incHvidual  animal,  the  Man.  When
thus  united,  they  ap[)ear  to  have  conceived  a
triad  of  intellectual  powers,  the  Intellect,  the
Affections  Feelings  or  Emotions,  and  the  Will
or  Power  of  action.  Tint  for  further  illustration
of  these  matters,  and  for  such  proof  as  can  be
produced,  I  must  refer  to  the  disquisition  at  the
end.

Upon  this  subject,  therefore,  I  cannot  agree
with  Mr.  Faber  in  supposing  that  the  trinita-
rian  speculations  of  the  Heathens  originated  in
the  coincidence  of  Adam  and  Noah  being  each
the  father  of  three  sons ;  for  of  the  three  dis-
tinct analogical  systems  the  Metaphysical,  of  the


Mind  with  its  Faculties,  and  Matter, — the  Physi-
cal, of  the  Ether  with  its  conditions,  and  the
Chaos, — and  the  Human,  of  the  Patriarch  with
his  three  sons,  and  the  universal  mother  the  Ark
or  Earth, — the  hist  analogy  is  not  only  the  most
imperfect,  but  according  to  all  historical  ac-
counts, Demonolatry  was  introduced  subsequently
to  the  worship  of  nature  and  the  elements.

From  the  widely    dispersed  traditions  upon
the  subject,  it  is  manifest  that  the  circumstances
of  the  creation  and  th(^  deluge  were  well  known
to  all  mankind  previously  to  the  dispersion.    And
the  writings  of  Moses  give  to  the  chosen  people,
not  so  much  a  ncnv  revelation  as  a  correct,  authen-
ticated and  inspin^d   account  of  circumstances,
which    had  then  become    partially  obscured  by
time  and  abused  by  superstition.     The  formless
watery  Chaos  and  the  Etherial  substance  of  the
heavens,  enfolding  and  passing  over  its  surface
as  a  miglity  wind,  are  the  first  principles  both  of
the  sacred  and  profane  cosmogonies;   but  they
are  reclaimed  by  Moses  as  the  materials,  created
by  the  immediate  agency  of  an  Almighty  power.
The  subsecjuent  process  of  formation  so   com-
pletely corresponds  in  both  systems,  that  if  they
were  not  borrowed  the  one  from  the  other,  (a  po-
sition which   cannot  be  maintained,)  they   must
each  have  been  ultimately  derived  from  the  com-
mon source  of  revelation.     Similar  considerations
upon  the   traditions  of  a  Trinity,  so   universal


'  <


1';l   ^

h    *.


xlii


xliii


I  I


!    I


ill  1(1!


among  the  nations,  and  an  examination  of  what
that  Trinity  was  composed,  forces  upon  me  the
conviction,  that  the  trinitarian  doctrine,  as  it  is
now  believed,  was  one  of  tlie  original  and  funda-
mental tenets  of  the  Patriarchal  religion;  that  the
analogy  between  the  Microcosm,  as  pointed  out,
and  the  then  current  accounts  of  the  creation,
became  the  stumbling  block,  which  set  mankind
to  refine  upon  the  truth ;  that  hence  they  fell  into
the  errors  of  attributing  eternity  to  matter,  of
placing  a  Monad  above  the  Trinity,  with  the
Pantheistic  opinion  that  the  Deity  was  no  other
than  the  universe  itself.  The  doctrine  of  the
succession  of  worlds,  the  Metempsychosis,  and
Demonolatry  would  follow  naturally  enough  by
an  extension  of  their  system  from  the  particular
circumstances  of  the  creation  to  those  attendant
upon  the  deluge.  By  the  pride  of  false  philo-
sophy they  forsook  the  truth  of  revelation,  and
sunk  into  materialism,  into  the  worship  of  the
elements,  of  man  and  beasts,  and  into  idolatry
with  all  its  attendant  abominations.  *When
they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not  as  God ;
neither  were  thankful ;  but  became  vain  in  their
imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  dark-
ened. Professing  tliemselves  to  be  wise,  they
became  fools ;  and  changed  the  glory  of  the  in-
corruptible God  into  an  image  made  like  to
corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four-footed
beasts,    and   creeping   things.     Wherefore,   God


gave  them  up  to  uncleanness  through  the  lusts  of
their  own  hearts.'*


To  reclaim  a  world  so  fallen,  the  great  mani-
festations of  the  Almighty  from  time  to  time  have
taken  place,  not  only  at  the  most  civilized  as
well  as  celebrated  periods  of  history,  but  upon
the  spots  then  best  calculated  for  the  general  dis-
semination of  truth  among  the  heathens.  The
geographical  situation  of  Palestine,  chosen  it
may  be  for  the  seat  of  universal  empire,  is  the
most  remarkable  upon  earth  for  the  facility  of
communication  which  it  affords  with  every
quarter  of  the  globe.'  At  the  time  of  the  Advent,
it  formed  as  it  were  the  boundary  of  the  rival
empires  of  Rome  and  Parthia,  subject  to  Rome,
but  holding  an  intimate  connexion  with  its  colo-
nial offspring  within  the  Parthian  dominions.
And  its  situation  was  at  that  time  not  more  ex-
cellently adapted  for  the  universal  diffusion  of
the  Gospel,  both  in  the  East  and  West,  than
it  was  for  the  general  instruction  of  mankind,
in  times  of  old,  when  it  formed  so  considerable
a  part  of  the  high  road  of  communication  between
the  empires  of  Egypt  and  Assyria.  About  the
time  of  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  the  most  brilliant
epoch  of  Egyptian  history,  the  Exodus  of  the
Israelites  was  effected  :  and  the  fame  of  the  mi-

*  Romans,  i.  21.


xliv


xlv


mi  iiini  I'.


^1'


'I


;H!!ii;|


ill


raculous  exploits  of  Moses  and  Joshua  was
wafted  with  the  Danaan  colonies  to  Greece,  with
the  fugitive  Canaanites  to  the  West,  and  carried
by  the  Israelites  themselves  into  the  East.
During'  the  revolutionary  violence  consequent
upon  the  downfall  of  the  ancient  Assyrian  em-
pire, the  same  merciful  Providence  kept  up  a
communication  with  the  kingdoms  which  sprung
out  of  its  ruins,  by  the  mission  of  Jonah  to  Ni-
neveh, by  the  connexion  of  the  princes  of  Sa-
maria with  Syria,  and  by  the  dispersion  of  the
ten  tribes  over  tlie  territories  of  the  Medes  and
Assyrians  by  Salmanasar :  and  upon  the  full
re-establishment  of  the  empire  at  Babylon,  a
knowledge  of  the  truth  was  diffused  far  and  wide
by  the  captivity  of  the  Jews  themselves.

The  conversion  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the
decrees  of  himself  and  his  successors,  both  of  the
Assyrian  and  Persian  line,  in  favour  of  the  truth,
must  have  been  attended  with  at  least  some  tem-
porary effect  upon  tlie  religious  and  philosophical
sentiments  of  the  East.  And  such  an  effect  may
be  clearly  traced  in  the  very  general  reformation
of  the  systems  and  superstitions  which  about  this
period  took  place.

Among  the  Persians,  themselves  a  Scythic
people,  this  reformation  appears  to  have  re-ani-
mated their  zeal  and  enmity  against  the  temples
and  idolatry  of  their  Ionian  rivals.  It  may  also
have  led  them  to  convert  the  two  independent


principles  of  Mind  and  Matter  into  spiritual
agents  in  opposition  to  one  another,  and  to  have
revived  the  unmingled  worship  of  the  Sun  and
Fire,  at  first  but  as  an  emblem  and  image  of  the
Supreme,  though  it  soon  again  degenerated  into
the  Sabaism  of  old.  The  reformation  may  be
traced  through  Assyria,  India,  China  and  Egypt,
and  in  those  amendments  and  refinements  which
were  shortly  afterwards  imported  by  Pythagoras
into  Greece.

A  summary  of  the  Pythagorean  doctrines  will
be  found  in  the  commencement  of  the  celebrated
treatise  of  Timaeus  Locrus.*  It  may  be  observed,
that  the  Pythagorean  speculations  have  a  tacit
reference  to  the  ancient  classification  of  Causes,  as
the  Efficient,  the  Formal  or  Ideal,  the  Material
and  the  Final.  In  conformity  to  this  division  we
find  introduced  between  the  two  ancient  inde-
pendent principles  of  Mind  and  Matter,  the
world  of  Forms  or  abstract  Ideas,  to  which  is
attributed  an  eternal  subsistence,  if  not  an  exis-
tence independent  of  the  Mind  ;  whilst  the  raya^ov
Good  in  the  abstract,  the  summum  bonum,  the
great  final  cause,  became  the  subject  of  perpetual
discussion  and  inquiry  among  all  succeeding  phi-
losophers.

The  Forms  and  Matter  were  now  substituted
for  the  ancient  Duad  ;   superior  to  which  was

*  I  have  given  it  p.  301.


It  I


'il


L


l«l


I


.t


if


i  i


fi   ;i    .

■  it-


!


xlvi

placed  the  Efficient  Cause  as  the  Monad,  Deity,
or  Demiurgus.  This  Diiad  was,  nevertheless,  re-
garded as  two  eternal  and  independent  principles,
and  by  their  combination  the  Deity  formed  the
Sensible  world,  a  living  animal,  composed  of  soul
and  body.  Subordinate  to  the  duad  is  the  Py-
thagorean Triad,  occupying  the  same  relative
situation  with  respect  to  the  duad  as  in  the  more
ancient  systems.  By  this  introduction  of  the
Ideal  world,  and  the  elevation  of  the  deity  above
the  duad,  t-he  system  lost  something  of  the  gross
materialism  which  had  hitherto  obtained,  but  it
lost,  at  the  same  time,  all  knowledge  of  the  an-
cient triad,  which  was  now  replaced  by  such
triads  as  were  more  conformable  to  the  Pytha-
gorean mode,  and  of  which  the  persons  were  often
subordinate  to,  or  comprehended  within  each
other,  as  genera  and  species.*

The  doctrines  of  Plato  differ  only  in  refine-
ment from  the  preceding.  If  we  admit  the  Par-
menides  and  the  Timaeus  to  embrace  his  com-
plete system,  God  and  Matter,  two  originally  in-
dependept  principles,  are  held  to  be,  as  it  were,
the  extremities  of  that  chain  of  being  which  com-
poses the  universe.  Subordinate  to  the  God,  we
have  the  Intelligible  world  of  Ideas  or  the  Forms,
commencing,  as  the  latter  Platonists  insist,  with
the  Intelligible  triad  :  but  whether  Plato  regarded

*  See  the  Pythagorean  fragments,  p.  301.


xlvii

this  world  of  Ideas  in  the  abstract  as  subsisting
only  within  the  mind  of  the  Deity,  or  whether  he
attributed  to  it  a  distinct  existence*  without  the
Mind,  comprehending  different  orders  of  divine
super-essential  beings,  may  well  be  questioned.
Wlien  the  Deity  or  Demiurgus  thought  proper  to
compose  the  world,  he  looked  to  this  ideal  world
as  the  exemplar,  in  whose  likeness  he  constructed
his  new  work.  He  impressed  the  disordered
material  Chaos  with  the  Forms,  and  rendered  the
world  a  living  animal,  after  the  pattern  of  its  ideal
prototype,  consisting  of  a  soul  endued  with  Intel-
lect, and  of  a  body  of  which  all  beings  compre-
hended in  it,  Gods  Men  Animals  or  material
species,  are  but  the  concrete  individuals,  of  which
the  abstract  ideas  unalterably  subsist  in  the  intel-
ligible world.  Though  still  supposed  to  continue
in  existence,  the  Deity,  as  in  the  more  ancient
systems,  retires  as  effectually  from  the  stage  as
did  the  ancient  Ether  when  superseded  by  the
Phanes.  And  all  the  mundane  operations  are
carried  on  as  before,  by  the  Soul  of  the  world.

While  the  Stoics  and  other  schools  retained
the  ancient  doctrines,  and  looked  not  further  than

*  Existence,  according  to  the  ancients,  implies  essence ;
whereas  the  Ideal  world  was  deemed  super-essential :  but  I  am
compelled  to  use  the  words  to  make  myself  understood ;  for  the
English  language  has  not  been  sufficiently  accommodated  to
these  metaphysical  subtleties  of  the  Greeks  to  supply  the  requi-
site terms.


■'  I


xlviii


xlix


11


'i


II  li


I


pf


fn


1  I


the  world  itself,  it  is  true  that  the  Pythagoreans
and  Plato  held  a  God  superior  to  the  world  ;  but
it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  they  entertained
a  sublirner  conception  of  their  great  immediate
efficient  cause,  the  Soul  of  the  world,  or  indeed
of  Soul  in  general,  than  the  gross  materialism  of
a  subtile  ether.  They  discouraged,  likewise,  the
tenet  of  the  succession  of  worlds ;  though  it  was
subsequt^ntly  revived  by  the  later  Platonists,  by
whom  the  Deity  was  supposed,  at  the  predestined
time,  to  swallow  up  the  world,  first  the  sensible,
then  the  Ideal,  and  lastly  Phanes  the  Intelligible
triad,  and  to  remain  in  the  solitude  of  his  unity.

Much  as  has  been  said  upon  the  Platonic
trinity  I  must  confess  that  1  can  find  fewer  traces
of  that  doctrine  in  the  writings  of  Plato  than  of
his  less  refined  predecessors,  the  mythologists.  I
have  given  such  extracts  as  appear  to  me  to
relate  to  the  subject,  together  with  a  fragment  of
Amelius*  which  expressly  mentions  the  three
kings  of  Plato  as  identical  with  the  Orphic  trinity.
Dr.  Morgan,  in  his  essay  upon  the  subject,  satis-
factorily refutes  the  notion,  that  Plato  regarded
the  Logos  as  the  second  person  of  the  trinity  :  t

*  p.  305.

-f  The  celebrated  passage  in  the  Epinomis  of  Plato  Sw/aTrort-
Xwv  McrfM)/  ov  era^c  \oyo^  o  irdyruv  ^fioraro^  oparoVf  usually  rendered,
**  Perfecting  the  visible  world,  which  the  word,  the  most  divine
of  all  things,  made,"  refers  to  a  very  different  subject.  The
inquiry  in  this  part  of  the  dialogue  relates  to  the  knowledge  of
number,  without  which  it  is  asserted  a  man  cannot  have  Xoyo^


and  upon  this  refutation  he  denies  that  Plato
held  the  doctrine  at  all,  more  particularly,  as  from
the  time  of  Plato  to  that  of  Ammonius  Saccas
in  the  third  century,  no  disciple  of  his  school
seems  to  have  been  aware  that  such  a  doctrine
was  contained  in  his  writings.  Perhaps,  how-
ever, we  may  trace  some  obscure  allusions  to  it
in  the  beginning  of  the  second  hypothesis  of  the
Parmenides  and  in  the  passages  which   I  have

reason;  and  if  destitute  of  reason,  he  cannot  attain  wisdom.
The  God,  which  imparted  to  man  the  knowledge  of  numbers,  is
the  Heaven,  for  there  are  eight  powers  contained  in  it  akin  to
each  other,  that  of  the  Sun,  of  the  Moon,  &c.  to  whom,  he  says,
must  be  assigned  equal  honour — "  For  let  us  not  assign  to  one
the  honour  of  the  year,  to  another  the  honour  of  the  month,  and
to  others  none  of  that  portion  of  time,  in  which  each  performs  its
course  in  conjunction  with  the  others,  accomplishing  that  visible
order  which  rekson,  the  most  divine  of  all  things  (or  of  the  Uni^
verse^)  has  established.

The  no  less  celebrated  passage  from  the  Philebus,  "On  yoZ^
€<TTt  y€vo^<rTr}q  tov  itavruv  ahiovy  by  which  it  is  supposed  that  the
consubstantiality  of  the  Logos  with  the  first  cause  is  asserted,
relates  to  the  human  mind,  and  is  the  conclusion  of  an  argument
which  proves,  that  as  ordinary  fire  is  derived  from  the  elemental,
and  the  human  body  from  the  elemental  body  of  the  world,  so  is
the  human  mind  akin  to,  or  of  the  same  nature  with  the  Divine
mind,  or  Soul  of  the  universe,  the  cause  of  all  things.  These
and  other  less  celebrated  passages  of  Plato,  when  examined  in
conjunction  with  this  context,  afford  us,  as  Dr.  Morgan  justly
observes,  no  more  foundation  for  supposing  that  Plato  held
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  than  the  following  very  curious  pas-
sage, which  he  produces  from  Seneca,  gives  us  ground  to
suppose  that  it  was  held  by  the  Stoics  :  "  Id  actum  est,  mihi
crede  ab  illo,  quisquis  formator  universi  fuit,  sive  ille  Deus  est

h


I


li


given  ;*  though  in  the  latter  the  doctrines  appear
rather  to  refer  to  the  Monad  and  Duad  than  to
the  genuine  trinity  of  the  ancients.  So  for  from
any  such  doctrine  being  maintained  by  the  Py-
thagoreans or  in  the  Academy,  we  find  only
such  vague  allusions  as  might  be  expected  among
philosophers,  who  reverenced  an  ancient  tradition,
and  were  willing,  after  they  had  lost  the  substance,
to  find  something  to  which  tliey  might  attach  the
shadow.

The  error  which  Dr.  Morgan  has  refuted,  took
its  rise  with  the  fathers  of  the  Church  in  the  se-
cond century.  They  were  led  into  the  mistake
by  the  word  Logos,  used  by  Plato  and  St.  John,
and  made  the  Platonic  Trinity  to  consist  of  God,
the  Logos,  and  the  Soul  of  the  world,  and  this
in  spite  of  all  the  professed  followers  of  Plato,
who,  however  they  might  vary  among  them-
selves, uniformly  insisted  upon  placing  the  Mo-

potens  omnium^  sive  incorporalis  ratio  ingentium  operiim  artifex,
sive  divinus  spiritus  per  omnia  maxima  minima,  aequali  intentione
diffusus,  sive  fatum  et  immutabilis  causarum  inter  se  cohaeren-
tium  series."!  To  tlie  observations  from  Dr.  Morgan's  work,  I
may  venture  to  add  that  the  word  Logos,  as  used  by  St.  John
and  Plato,  has  two  very  distinct  significations.  By  the  latter.
Reason  in  general  is  implied,  whereas  St.  John  uses  it  as  a  trans-
lation of  the  Hebrew  dbr,  the  Word  signifying  also  a  thing  or
person  revealed,  and  if  at  all  in  the  sense  of  reason,  which  may
be  implied  from  the  commentaries  of  the  fathers,  not  for  reason
in  general,  but  for  the  particular  faculty  so  called.

*  p.  304.  t  Consol.  ad  Helv.  c.  8.


nad  and  Duad,  or  at  least  a  Monad,  above  their
Triad.

In  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  Philo,
an  Alexandrian  Jew,  had  attempted  to  expound
the  Scripture  on  Platonic  principles ;  and  after  the
promulgation  of  the  Gospel  many  of  the  fathers
warmly  adopted  the  same  mode  of  exposition.
The  different  sects  of  the  Gnostics  went  far  be-
yond the  Grecian  sage,  and  sought  in  the  East
the  doctrines,  to  which    they  looked   upon    the
writings  of  Plato  merely  as  essays,  introductory  to
the  sublimer  flights  of  the  Oriental  mysticism :
and  tliey  treated  his  followers  with  that  contempt,
against   which   the   vanity   of  a  philosopher   is
seldom  proof;  and  as  long  as  these  schools  exist-
ed, a  bitter  enmity  prevailed  between  them.    The
Gnostics  gave  at  once  a  real  existence  to  the  Ideal
world,  and  continuing  the  chain  of  being  from
the  Supreme,  through  numerous  orders  of  Eons,
personified  abstract  ideas,  of  which  the  second
and  third  persons  of  the  Trinity  were  the  first
and  second  Eons,  and  from  thence  to  the  lowest
material   species,    founded    that    daring   heresy
which  so  long  disturbed  thetranquiliity  of  Chris-
tendom :    and  with  this   spurious   Platonism  of
the  fathers  the  Arian*  heresy  is  likewise  intimately
connected.

*  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  Arian  and  Orthodox  illustra-
tions of  Eusebius  and  Epiphanius.  The  former  illustrates  the
Trinity  by  the  Heaven,  the  Sun,  and  the  Spirit;  or  the  Heaven,  the


lii

But  the  internal  heresies  of  the  Church  were
not  the  only  ill  effects  which  the  misguided  zeal
of  the  fathers,  in  forcing  upon  Plato  the  doctrine
of  the  Trinity,  brought  about.  Though  it  is  pos-
sible, that  by  pointing  out  some  crude  similarity
of  doctrine,  they  might  have  obtained  some  con-
verts by  rendering  Christianity  less  unpalatable
to  the  philosophical  world  of  that  day,  yet  the
weapon  was  skilfully  turned  against  them,  and
with  unerring  effect,  when  the  Pagans  took  upon
them  to  assert  that  nothing  new  ha<l  been  revealed
in  Cliristianity ;  since,  by  the  confessions  of  its
very  advocates,  the  system  was  previously  con-
tained in  the  writings  of  Plato.

In  the  third  century,  Ammonius  Saccas,  uni-
versally acknowledged  to  have  been  a  man  of
consummate  ability,  taught  that  every  sect.
Christian,  Heretic  or  Pagan,  had  received  the
truth,  and  retained  it  in  their  varied  legends.  He
undertook,  therefore,  to  unfold  it  from  them  all,
and  to  reconcile  every  creed.  And  from  his  ex-
ertions sprung  the  celebrated  Eclectic  school  of
the  later  Platonists.  Plotinus,  Amelias,  Olym-
pius,  Porphyrins,  Jamblichus,  Syrianus,  and
Proclus,  were  among   the  celebrated  professors

Sun,  and  the  Moon,  the  two  latter  as  the  leaders  of  innumerable
host  of  spirits  and  stars,  evidently  derived  from  the  prevailing
notions  of  the  Fathers  relative  to  the  Platonic  trinity ;  whilst
Epiphanius  declares,  that  this  great  mystery  is  properly  under-
stood as  Fire,  Light,  and  Spirit  or  Air  reveal  it  to  us.


f™


1...
ni


who  succeeded  Ammonius  in  the  Platonic  chair,
and  revived  and  kept  alive  the  spirit  of  Paganism,
with  a  bitter  enmity  to  the  Gospel,  for  near  three
hundred  years.  The  Platonic  schools  were  at
length  closed  by  the  edict  of  Justinian ;  and  seven
wise  men,  the  last  lights  of  Platonism,  Diogenes,
Hermias,  Eulalius,  Priscianus,  Damascius,  Isido-
rus  and  Simplicius  retired  indignantly  from  the
persecutions  of  Justinian,  to  realize  the  shadowy
dreams  of  the  republic  of  Plato,  under  the  Persian
despotism  of  Chosroes.*

From  the  writings  of  these  philosophers  is
collected  the  bulk  of  the  Oracles  of  Zorcaster.t
A  few  of  them  were  first  published  by  Ludovicus
Tiletanus  at  Paris,  with  the  commentaries  of
Pletho,  to  which  were  subsequently  added  those
of  Psellus.  Chief  part  of  them,  however,  were
collected  by  Franciscus  Patricius,  and  pub-
lished with  the  Hermetic  books  at  the  end  of
his  Nova  Philosophia.  To  the  labours  of  Mr.
Taylor  we  are  indebted  for  the  addition  of  about
fifty  more,  and  for  the  references  to  the  works
from  whence  all  were  extracted.  I  have  arranged
them  according  to  the  subjects,  which  are  said  to
be  occultly  discussed  in  the  Parmenides  of  Plato,
viz.  :  Cause  or  God,  the  Ideal  Intelligible  or
Intellectual  world,  Particular  Souls,  and  the
Material  world.      And  I  have  placed  under  a

*  For  the  particulars  of  this  philosophical  transaction  see
Gibbon,  c.  xl.  f  p.  239.


liv


m


m


S"


separate   head    the    Magical    and    Philosophical
precepts  and  directions.     There  can  be  no  ques-
tion but  that  many  of  these  Oracles  are  spurious ;
all  those,  for  instance,  which  relate  to  the  Intelli-
gible and  Intellectual  orders,  M^hich  were  con-
fessedly obtained  in  answers  given  by  daemons,
raised  for  that  purpose  by  the  Theurgists  ;*  who,
as  well  as  all  the  later  Platonists,  made  preten-
sions to  magic,  not  only  in  its  refinements,  which
they  were  pleased  to  designate  Theurgy,  but  also
in  that  debased  form  which  we  should  call  com-
mon   witchcraft.       Nevertheless,   several    of  the
Oracles    seem   to   be   derived   from    more    au-
thentic sources,  and,  like  the  spurious  Hermetic
books  which  have  come  down  to  us,  probably
contain  much  of   the  pure   Sabiasm  of  Persia,
and  the  doctrines  of  the  Oriental  philosophy.

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  give  I  fear  a  very
imperfect  outline  of  ancient  history  and  theology.
But,  as  it  is  intended  rather  to  assist  the  reader
through  such  an  heterogeneous  heap  of  materials,
by  bringing  forward  the  most  prominent  parts
and  connecting  them  with  one  another,  I  trust
its  errors  will  be  excused,  as  they  may  be  cor-
rected by  the  readers  better  judgment  from  the
materials  themselves  before  him.     In  closing  the

*  The  Theurgists  were  the  two  Julians,  the  father  called
Chaldaeus,  the  son,  Theurgus.  They  flourished  in  the  reign  of
Marcus  Antoninus,  and  were  the  first  who  delivered  the  oracles
upon  the  Intelligible  and  Intellectual  orders.


Iv

subject,  I  beg  to  offer  my  sincerest  thanks  to
Isaac  CuUimore,  Esq.,  to  whose  deep  and  exten-
sive chronological  researches,  I  am  indebted  for
references  to  several  very  important  passages  in
the  following  work,  which  had  escaped  my  notice.

It  is  needless  to  take  notice  of  the  numerous
forgeries,  which  have  been  issued  as  the  produc-
tions of  the  authors  of  these  frasrments.  There
is  a  complete  set,  which  was  composed  in  Latin
by  Annius,  a  monk  of  Viterbo.  But  it  is  a  sin-
gular circumstance,  and  one  which  might  be
urged  with  great  force  against  the  genuineness  of
almost  the  whole  collection,  that  not  only  the
original  works  have  perished,  but  those  also,
through  whose  means  these  relics  have  been
handed  down.  With  the  exception  of  these  frag-
ments, not  only  have  Sanchoniatho,  Berossus,
and  the  rest  passed  into  oblivion ;  but  the  pre-
servers of  their  names  have  followed  in  the  same
track,  and  to  a  more  unusual  fate.  The  frag-
ments of  Philo,  Abydenus,  Polyhistor,  Dius,
and  others,  are  generally  not  those  of  their  own
works,  but  extracts  from  their  predecessors.

It  is  necessary  also  to  advert  to  the  nume-
rous errors  which  will  be  found  in  every  sheet.
The  fragments  have  been  exposed  to  more  than
the  common  risks  and  accidents,  to  which  all
ancient  writings  have  been  subject.  They  have
been  either  copied  from  the  rude  annals  of  anti-


Ivi


,ij


quity,  or  sketched  from  historical  paintings  or
hieroglyphic  records,  they  have  been  sometimes
translated  from  the  sacred  into  tUe  common  lan-
guage of  the  place,  and  again  translated  into
Greek ;  then  passed  in  citation  from  hand  to
hand,  and  lie  widely  scattered  over  the  works
principally  of  the  fathers,  and  the  writers  of  the
Lower  empire.  It  is  matter  of  surprise  then,  not
that  they  abound  in  error  and  uncertainty,  but
that  so  much  of  them  has  been  preserved.

Several  of  these  fragments  are  to  be  found  in
two  or  three  different  authors,  each  of  whom
contains  a  different  version  of  the  same,  differing,
not  so  much  in  the  outline,  and  in  the  general
flow  of  words,  as  in  those  technicalities  and  va-
riations of  termination,  which  were  necessary  to
adapt  them  to  the  author's  style;  and  it  has  been
a  source  of  some  little  perplexity  to  determine
which  of  these  various  readings  to  prefer.

To  Eusebius,  Syncellus  and  Josephus,  we
are  largely  indebted  for  these  relics  of  antiquity.
For  Josephus  I  have  followed  Hudson's  edition.
The  Cologne  edition  of  the  Praeparatio  Evange-
lica  of  Eusebius  is  often  considered  the  best :  but
upon  close  inspection  and  comparison  I  have  been
induced  to  prefer  the  text  of  Stephanus.  With
the  exception  of  a  mutilated  translation  into
Latin  by  Hieronymus,  Eusebius'  Chronicle  was
lost.     Under  that  title,  however,  Scaliger  com-


Ivii


piled  a  very  portly  folio,  which,  with  some  other
Chronicles,  contains  a  collection  of  all  the  frag-
ments of  the  Greek  text  of  Eusebius,  that  could
be  found.     The  recovery  of  the  Armenian  trans-
lation of  this  Chronicle  is  a  great  acquisition.    It
is  regarded  upon  the  Continent  as  perfectly  au-
thentic ;  but  I  am  not  aware  that  it  has  been  ex-
amined or  reviewed  in  England.  To  compress  as
much  as  possible  all  unnecessary  observations  upon
the  subject  of  materials,  editions  and  abbrevia-
tions, I  have  given  at  the  end  a  list  of  the  authors
cited,  which  will  answer  at  once  the  several  pur-
poses of  an  index  to  the  abbreviations,  and  to  the
editions  I  have  used  or  referred  to,  as  well  as  to
the  manuscripts  and  other  sources  from  which
some  of  those  editions  have  been  formed,  or  which
have  been  consulted  in  the  compilation  of  the
work.     I  have  likewise  given  it  the  form  of  a
Chronological   index,    by   adding    the   times   in
which  the  authors  referred  to  flourished,  that  the
reader  may  judge  what  degree  of  credit  may  be
reposed  in  each.

The  matter  contained  in  these  fragments  is
the  only  merit  to  which  they  can  pretend.  I  have
chosen  what  appeared  to  me  the  most  genuine
text,  independent  of  all  theory  and  system,  and
have  given  all  the  various  readings  of  any  conse-
quence I  have  met  with.  I  have  retained  Mr.
Falconer's  translation  of  Hanno's  Periplus ;  and
with  this  exception,  and  some  few  of  the  most

1


li


Iviii

obscure  of  the  oracles  of  Zoroaster,  which  are
due  to  Mr.  Taylor,  I  must  be  answerable  for  the
rest.  For  the  many  errors  in  which  they  must
abound,  I  beg  leave  to  apologize  and  claim  in-
dulgence. The  broken  and  confused  state  of
many  of  the  fragments,  preclude  the  possibility  of
giving  any  translation,  except  upon  conjecture.
Many,  such  as  the  Orphic  fragment  from  Malala,*
and  that  from  Amelius,t  have  exercised  tlie  talent
and  ingenuity  of  some  of  the  ablest  commentators,
none  of  whom  perhaps  will  be  found  to  agree.  In
such  cases,  1  have  patiently  compared  their  opi-
nions, and  endeavoured  to  investigate  the  circum-
stances under  which  the  fragments  were  written
and  have  been  preserved,  and  what  connexion
they  have  with  the  passages  among  which  they
are  introduced,  and  to  give,  what  to  the  best  of
my  judgment  is,  the  truth.

At  the  conclusion  of  this  work  1  have  added  a
disquisition,  which  was  originally  designed  merely
to  explain  and  illustrate  what  I  conceive  to  have
been  the  ancient  Trinity  of  the  Gentiles  :  but  in
the  progress  of  inquiry  I  found  it  impossible  to
do  justice  to  the  opinion  without  speaking  largely
upon  ancient  and  modern  science.  To  compress
it,  therefore,  as  much  as  possible,  and  to  give  it
something  of  a  connected  arrangement,  1  have
thrown  it  altogether  into  the  form  of  an  inquiry


lix

into  the  Method,  Objects  and  Result  of  an-
cient and  modern  Philosophy.  And,  as  in  this
work  I  have  endeavoured  to  bring  forward  several
historical  and  theological  documents,  which  had,
in  a  manner,  retired  from  public  view,  I  trust
that  such  an  inquiry  will  not  be  deemed  alto-
gether misplaced,  and  that  I  shall  be  excused  in
an  attempt  to  draw  from  the  same  store-house  of
antiquity  some  speculations,  which  have  been  too
generally  slighted  or  overlooked  by  the  Meta-
physician and  the  Philosopher,  but  which  I  be-
lieve may  tend  to  the  advancement  of  science,
even   amid  the  brilliant  discoveries    of  modern

times.

With  respect  to  the  fragments  themselves,  the

classical  reader  will  find,  I  fear,  but  poor  amuse-
ment in  perusing  a  half  barbarous  dialect,  replete
with  errors  and  inconsistencies :  to  the  student  of
divinity,  however,  they  may  not  be  altogether
unacceptable  or  devoid  of  interest :  and  to  the
inquirer  after  ancient  history  and  mythology,  it
must  be  useful  to  have  collected  into  one  small
volume,  the  scattered  relics  for  which  he  must
otherwise  search  so  widely.


*  p.  29G.


t  p.  305.


THt:


THEOLOGY  OF  THE  PHCENICIANS;


FROM


SANCHONIATHO.


ii


SANCHONIATHO.


THE  COSMOGONY.


m


m


THN  tSv  oXuv  apx^v  ^«-
rtKferai  depa  ^o4>to8>j  xai
nrveviJLaruZvj,    r,     -ttvo^    a'po^

€p€^ul«;'  Tavra  he  elvai
atceipa,  xai  Sia  ttoXw  aiwva
jix^  e^fiv  itepaq.  Ore  8e,
(<fy^<nv)r,pda-^r}  to  TrveS/x-a  tSv
tS/wv  a^X^"*  >"*»  c-yeveTO  cvy-
y.pa<ri^f  ^  irXotai  €X6/y>j  ckXij^Ttj
ToSro?*  avT>j  8e  a/JX^j  xxtVew^
airavTwv*  awro  8e  oCx  iyivutme
T^v  a^oiJ  xTiViV*  xa*  €x  t^^

ai^TOU  OT/jtXTTAOX^C  ToS  TnCVfAa^

TO?  eycvcTo  Mwt.  toi/to'  Tive?
<paariv  JXt/v,  ot  Se  CSaTeSSoK?
fAi^eu^  (Ti^ypiv*  Kai  ex  Tai^rij^
iyiviTO  tcaa-cfi  aTiopa  xTArco,'?,
xai  yevecrii  ruv  oKuv,


He  supposes  that  the  beginning  of  all
things  was  a  dark  and  condensed  windy
air,  or  a  breeze  of  thick  air  and  a  Chaos
turbid  and  black  as  Erebus :  and  that
these  were  unbounded,  and  for  a  long
series  of  ages  destitute  of  form.  But
when  this  wind  became  enamoured  of
its  own  first  principles  (the  Chaos),
and  an  intimate  union  took  place,  that
connexion  was  called  Pothos  :*  and  it
was  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of
all  things.  And  it  (the  Chaos)  f  knew
not  its  own  production  ;  but  from  its
embrace  with  the  wind  was  generated
Mot ;  which  some  call  Ilus  (Mud),  but
others  the  putrefaction  of  a  watery
mixture.  And  from  this  sprung  all
the  seed  of  the  creation,  and  the  gene-
ration of  the  universe.


1  li


*  This  union,  among  the  Heathens,  and  particularly  among  the  Phoenicians,
was  symbolized  by  an  Egg  enfolded  by  a  Serpent,  which  disjunctwely  represented
the  Chaos  and  the  Ether,  but,  when  united,  the  hermaphroditic  first  principle  of
the  Universe  Cupid  or  Pothos.

t  "  Wind  knew  not,  &c."     Vig.  Col.  Orel.  Cumb.  &c.


'I
J'l


I


m


m


§


ai<r


lANCHONIATHO.

'HvSeTiva^waojJx  cxovra  And  there  were  certain  animals
^via-iv,  i^  a>v  iyevero  t,ua  without  sensation,  from  which  intelli-
mpa,  x«i  iKXri^yj  Za>r/>a(nj.wiv,  gent  animals  were  produced,  and  these
TOUT  ea-riv  ovpcuvov  y.ciToitrai.  were  called  Zophasemin,  that  is,  the
xai  aveTrXao-a^T?  o/xo*V  «oiJ*  overseers  of  the  heavens;  and  they
(Tx^.aaT*,  m)  tliXaiJi^e  M«t,  were  formed  in  the  shape  of  an  egg :
pui<;  T€  xai  crcXijv^j,  arrepfi  and  from  Mot  shone  forth  the  sun,
t€  xal  ao-Tpa  [AtydXa.  and  the  moon,  the  less  and  the  greater

stars.
Kat  ToiJ  aepot;  havyd-  And  when  the  air  began  to  send
cavToq,  tui  itripua-iv  xa*  t^?  forth  light,  by  its  fiery  influence  on
^aXaTOTj^f  xai  t^?  7??  the  sea  and  earth,  winds  were  pro-
iyevero  ntvfvu.a.ra  xa*  vc(/»j,  duced,  and  clouds,  and  very  great  de-
xa«  uvpanuv  vharecv  fxeyta-rai  fluxions  and  torrents  of  the  heavenly
xaTa(^pat  xct*  xtVe^.  Ka<  waters.  And  when  they  were  thus  sepa-
i'ir€ih)}  he-Kpi^fi  xa*  rov  IS/ow  rated,  and  carried  out  of  their  proper
romv  Sicxw^/o-Sr^j  Sia  ttjv  places  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  all
rov  ijXiov  TtvpuTiVf  xa)  wavTa  met  again  in  the  air,  and  were  dashed
avyfivryja-e  iidXtv  iv  depi  rdh  against  each  other,  thunder  and  light-
ro7<rh€f  xa*  cxnifpalav,  jSpo-     nings  were   the   result :    and  at  the

sound  of   the    thunder,    the  before-
mentioned    intelligent    animals   were
aroused,   and   startled   by  the   noise,
and  moved  upon  the  earth  and  in  the
sea,  male  and  female.    (After  this  our
xa<    ^xivtj^ij  ej/   T€   yri   xa*     author  proceeds  to  say :)  These  things
SraXao-crij  §  d^piv  xa*  ^r{ku»     were  found  written  in  the  Cosmogony
(TowTo*^  k^^  0  avToi  trvyypa.'     of  Taautus,  and  in  his  commentaries,
«ptv(;  i'rrt(f>€p€i  Xtyuv)  Tau^     and  were  drawn  from  his  observations
evpe^ri     iv    t^    ¥.o<TfAyyQvi(f     and  the   natural  signs  which  by  his
yeypafAfAfva     Taathov     xa*     penetration  he  perceived  and  disco-
To7i  ixapov  vTcoiM^-^fjLaa-iVf  ex     vered,  and  with  which  he  has  enlight-
T€  o-roxaO'fMJv  xa*  rfycfxvjpiuv,      ened  US.
uv  kupoK^v  avrov  ^  htdvoiatt
xa*  €vp€f  xa*  iqfMv  i<f)urKT€v,


vrai  T€  direTeXea-^fricrav  xa*
a^T/jaTra*,  xa*  irpo^  tov
ttdTayov  rSv  ^povruv  itpoyey-
pafAuiva'j^  voepa,  ^5a  iypvjyi-
pyi<T€Vi  xa*  Ttpoq  tov  >j%ov  i-rcTvprjf


SANCHONIATHO.  ^

CZ^<;rorkoi<;ovifA,^rarZv  (Afterwards,  declaring   the  names

AveW  oVciv,  NoW  xa)  Bo-  of  the  winds  Notus,  Boreas,  and  the

pe'ovxa)TSvXo*^5v€,r*X€V«.)  rest,  he  makes  this  epilogue  :)— But

»AXX*  o2;to*V^  ^pSro*   i4.*6'-  these  first  men  consecrated  the  pro-

p.^^av,  X*)  T^^  ri,  ^Xa^TT^'-  ductions  of  the  earth,  and  judged  them

/xaTa,  xa)   ^eok   eviiAicav,  gods,    and    worshipped  those  things,

xa)  i:po<Ter^^vovv  ravra,  d<p'  upon   which   they   themselves  lived,

Sv  airot  T€  8*€7/vovTo,   xa)  and  all  their  posterity,  and  all  before

«*'  Iro^evo*,  xa)  cl  i:pl  air^v  them ;  to   these  they  made  libations

«^vTe^,  xa)  xoa«  Ka)  eV*^.;-  and  sacrifices.    (Then  he  proceeds  :—

<rui  i-nolovv    (xa)   i^^xiy,^'  Such  were  the  devices  of  their  wor-

A^Ta*  V  ?(rav  al  l^lvo^ai  t^«  ship  in  accordance  with  the  imbecility

,rpo(rxuvi,V€a?«,     S^*a*     t5v  and    narrowness    of   their    souls.)—

ainZv  (i(r&evf*V    ^oCi   y^vxriq  Euseh,  Pr(sp.  Evan.  lib.  I.  c.  10.
aToX/Aii^.)


THE  GENERATIONS.


E*Ta  (^MJO"')  7€7€v^<rSra*  ex
TOi;  KoXir/a  dvefAOVy  xa)  711-
vaiM^  avrov  Baau,  toSto  oe
vvyira  epi/.'/jverjen,  AtZva,  xa*
Jlpwroyovov  ^vrjrovq  avhpa^t
ovru  xaXowjOcevou^,  evpeTv  Se
tov  A*wyaf  tvjv  a-Jro  t«v
SevS^wv  rpotp-^v'

Ex  toi/twv  Tol^  yivoy.ivovq
xX^^^va*  Te'vo?  xa)  Teveav,
xa)  olx^ca*  tt;v  $oiv*x7jv.
avyjMiv  8e  yivo{iivuv,  raq
•//ipa.^  opcyfiv  e^  oupavo^^
irpo^  TOV  ifjXiov.  toiJtov  7ap,


Of  the  wind  Colpias,  and  his  wife
Baau,  which  is  interpreted  Night,
were  begotten  two  mortal  men,  jEon
and  Protogonus  so  called :  and  ^on
discovered  food  from  trees.


The  immediate  descendants  of  these
were  called  Genus  and  Genea,  and
they  dwelt  in  Phoenicia:  and  when
there  were  great  droughts  they  stretch-
ed forth  their  hands  to  heaven  towards
the  Sun ;  for  him  they  supposed  to  be


*  tvoD,  omitted  in  Ed.  Col.
X    Trpoyty^'x/uitov.     Or.


f  ^aXirrvig.  Or.
§  l&aX^TTij.  Or.


•  Bochart  proposes  Bdtaur.

t  tV  Alwm.  Cumb.— Philo  and  Orellius  prefer  tIk     Faber  proposes  also

to  read  Aiwa  wptoT6yovov  above.


SANCHONIATHO,


w


ovpavov  wpioVf  BecXo-aftifjv
xaXoiJvTf^,  0  i<m  irapa  *o/-
vtft  "Kvpioq  ovpavov,  Zfv^  8c
irap*  "EXX-fjO-i.

AluvO(;  xai  np«T070voi;  ^cvvj-
Srijyat  al^iq  vctiBcK;  ^vtjtoI^,
0T5   cTvai    ovouuxra    ^w^    jca*

^x    icaparpi^^    IvKav    eupw

in  pi  xa*  T^v  xp^o-iv  i^l^a^av,

Ttovq    8e    eyeyvrjO'av    ovroi

fji.€y€^€i  re  xai  uirf /Jo^^  ycpeia--

o/)€criv  c-TrcTcSrTj,  ojy  €v.pdrri<Tavy
ftS  ^f  avTUV  yikfj^rjva.i  to
Kda-a-iovyX  ^**  '''•''  ^^^otvotf
xa*  Tov  *AyT»X//5a»/ov,   xa*  to

*Ex  Toyrwy,  ((^aiv,)  c-ycv-
y^^rja-av  MrifApoviM^  xai  o§
'Tt/z^f^avio^.  dito  iA.rjr€puv  ^€1
(jcfr/jo-iVf)  ixprjfjuirii^ov  ruv
rore  ywaiv.uv  dvai^rjv  fxKryo-
[/.evuv  01^  av  tvri/j^oicv.  Ltra,
(^<r<,)  TOV  *T\povpdviov  o»x^-
crat  TvpWf  naXv^a^  re  e-jrivo^-
(rai  aTTC  yuiXd[Jt.av  xal  %fpvuy  xat
ntaicvpcov.  crraaida-at  8c  Trpo^
TOV  a8cX^oy  OiJ(ra»oy,  oj  orxcmjv
Ty  a'v[jux.ri  irpuroq  ix  hepiAd-
ruif  coy  tc^t/O-c    avXka^eiy  \\


God,  the  only  lord  of  heaven,  calling
him  Beelsamin,  which  in  the  Phoeni-
cian dialect  signifies  Lord  of  Heaven,
but  among  the  Greeks  is  equivalent
to  Zeus.

Afterwards  by  Genus  the  son  of
^on  and  Protogonus  were  begotten
mortal  children,  whose  names  were
Phos,  Pur,  and  Phlox.  These  found
out  the  method  of  producing  fire  by
rubbing  pieces  of  wood  against  each
other,  and  taught  men  the  use  thereof.

These  begat  sons  of  vast  bulk  and
height,  whose  names  were  conferred
upon  the  mountains  which  they  occu-
pied :  thus  from  them  Cassius,  and
Libanus,  and  Antilibanus,  and  Brathu
received  their  names.


Memrumus  and  Hypsuranius  were
the  issue  of  these  men  by  connexion
with  their  mothers  ;  the  women  of
those  times,  without  shame,  having  in-
tercourse with  any  men  whom  they
might  chance  to  meet.  Hypsuranius
inhabited  Tyre  :  and  he  invented  huts
constructed  of  reeds  and  rushes,  and
the  papyrus.  And  he  fell  into  enmity
with  his  brother  Usous,  who  was  the
inventor  of  clothing  for  the  body  which
he  made  of  the  skins  of  the  wild  beasts
which   he   could    catch.     And   when


♦  yivovg  "  of  the  race  of  ^on,  &c."     Or.

X  Kdatov.  Plin.  Jahl.  Or.  &c.  §    6   xa).  St.


f  xpfiTTovas.      Or.
11  ffvWaSw  .     Or.


SANCHONIATHO.


^fipiuy    evp€.      *Pay^aiuy   8c
yevofxeyuv  tfx^puv  xa*   uvcv-
udruy,  icaparpi^eyra  rd  iy
T^  Tvpu  8cv8pa  Ttvp  dvdypai,
not  rrjy  auro^i  vKrjv  narauf)-
Xc'lai.    ley^pov   8c   Xa^of/^voy
rov  Ov<TUoy  xai  onroxXaScf  crav-
Ta,*     <apuroy     roX[Ar](Tai     fU
SraXao-o-ay  "f"    ifA^viyai*    dvie-
pSrai  8e  tva  a-rrjXa^  irvpi  re
xa*  TTvcu/xaTt,  xa*   icpoa-xvy/j-
<ratj  afAM  he  enrcySciV  avraT^
cf  uy  Yjypeve  ^vjpiuy.   ro^ruv
8c  reXtvtijO-dyTuvt  rovq  duo-
Aetfji^evruq     (^(pfjO-T)    pd^hovq
avrotq    d<pt€piia'aHf    xa*    Ta^
TTijXa^  irpoayivyely,  xa*  tov-
Toi^  eoprd^  dyeiy  xaT*  cto^.

Xpoyoi^  8c  v<rrepov  TroXXorij
dtto  T^^  'T\l/ovpayiov  yevedq
yeyea-^ai  *Ayp€a,  xa*  'A>a€a,
TOL'^  dXieia^  xa*  aypaq  ei/pe-
rd^f  c?  uy  xXvjSriJya*  dypevrdq
xa*  d\te7<;.

*Ef  uy  yeye<r^cn  8uo  a8cX-
f^if^,  (T^vipov  evperd^j  xa*
TT}^  rovTOV  epyeurla^'  uy  ^d-
repoy  rov  'X.pvo'up  Koyovq  dcrnc^-
e-aiy  xa*  evuid^  xa*  [Mivreux^'
c*ya*  8c  rovrov  tov  H^a*-
(TToy.  evpeTy  8c  xa*  ay%i<r~
rpoVf  xa*  8cXcap,  xa*  op/>c*ay,
xo*  arx^hiaut'  icpvroy  re  ttdy-
ruv  dy^puTiuv    iikeva-ai*    8to


there  were  violent  storms  of  rain  and
wind,  the  trees  about  Tyre  being  rub-
bed against  each  other,  took  fire,  and
all  the  forest  in  the  neighbourhood
was  consumed.  And  Usous  having
taken  a  tree,  and  broken  off  its  boughs,
was  the  first  who  dared  to  venture  on
the  sea.  And  he  consecrated  two  pil-
lars to  Fire  and  Wind,  and  worship-
ped them,  and  poured  out  upon  them
the  blood  of  the  wild  beasts  he  took
in  hunting :  and  when  these  men  were
dead,  those  that  remained  consecrated
to  them  rods,  and  worshipped  the  pil-
lars, and  held  anniversary  feasts  in
honour  of  them.


And  in  times  long  subsequent  to
these ;  were  born  of  the  race  of  Hypsu-
ranius, Agreus  and  Halieus,  the  inven-
tors of  the  arts  of  hunting  and  fishing,
from  whom  huntsmen  and  fishermen
derive  their  names.

Of  these  were  begotten  two  brothers
who  discovered  iron,  and  the  forging
thereof.  One  of  these  called  Chrysor,
who  is  the  same  with  Hephaestus,
exercised  himself  in  words,  and  charms
and  divinations  ;  and  he  invented  the
hook,  and  the  bait,  and  the  fishing-
line,  and  boats  of  a  light  construction  ;
and  he  was  the  first  of  all  men  that
sailed.  Wherefore  he  was  worshipped


t|.


♦  BTOxXaStyovra.  Or.


f  JaXotrrav.  Or.


8


SANCHONIATHO.


Kiv

1

ffi

11'
•

i    •
1'  1

Jl

i

i


xai  d,i  ^eiv  aCriv  />i€Ti  ^«-  a^er  his  death  as  a  God,  under  the

vaTov  ici^dff^'n^Ttf.v  xaXercr-  name  of  Diamichius.-    And  it  is  said

^a,   8€    airh    xai   Aia/*/-  that  his  brothers  invented  the  art  of

X^cv.*     Oi  §€  TOK  aSf?^<^i'?  building  walls  with  bricks.

Mer^  rauTct  ^x  tov  yeVov?  Afterwards,  of  this  race  were  born

Tou'roi;  7€v€V^ai  v€av/8a«  8t;'o.  two  youths,  one  of  whom  was  called

xaXer^r^a*  $€  aCrSv  t^v  ^cv  Technites,  and  the  other  was  called

T€xv/ttjv,  t^v  8e  r^'ivoy  A^toV  Geinus  Autochthon.  These  discovered

;^ova.     OJto*   ^TTfy^jcray  t^  the  method  of  mingling  stubble  with

7r>jXaJ  T^J?  tta/v^ow  trv/x/xiyw'eiv  the  loam  of  bricks,  and  ol  baking  them

^fvily  xai  tZ  Wv  a^T^«t  i"  **^^  «""  '   ^^^^  ^^'"^  ^^^^  *^^  ^"^®""

repaaUiV  aXka  xct*  o-Teya;  tors  of  tiling.

'Atto  Tot^rwv  ^^cvovTo  €Tfpoi,  By  these  were  begotten  others,  of

uv  0  [A€v  'Aypoi  inaXeho,  o  whom  one  was  named  Agrus,  the  other

8e  *Aypovripoi  y}  'Ayporrj^,  ol  Agrouerus    or  Agrotes,  of  whom  in

xai  lUvov  uva$  fMKa  <r€€d<T''  Phoenicia  there  was  a  statue  held  in

[juov,  xai  voov  ^vyo(popoviA€yw  the  highest  veneration,  and  a  temple

«v  *o«v/x»i-   irapa  li  Bv^Xi-  drawn  by  yokes  of  oxen  :  and  at  By-

o^qX  ^^aiphut;  SieZv  o  fj^iy^a--  blus  he  is  called,  by  way  of  eminence,

roi  ovoiAai;€Tar  iitei^ria-av  8e  the  greatest  of  the  Gods.     These  ad-

cZroi  ad'Accq  iipo<rrt^€vcii  tok  ded  to  the  houses,  courts  and  porticos

omo*?,  xai    ripi^oKaut  xai  and   crypts :   husbandmen,  and  such

as  hunt  with  dogs,  derive  their  origin
from  these :  they  are  called  also  Aletae,
and  Titans.

From  these  were  descended  Amy-

voy  xai  Mayoy,  ol  y^enitnlav  nus  and  Magus,  who  taught  men  to

x«/*a^  xai  woijiAya^.  construct  villages  and  tend  flocks.

'Aire  Tow'rwy  yivea^m  Mi-  By  these  men  were  begotten  Misor

(Tup    xai    2y8tx,   Tot;T€<TT«y  and  Sydyc,   that   is,  Well-freed  and


ffirfiKQi.ia*  «x  ToyTojy  ayporai
xai  avvriyoi,  O^toi  8e  'AXij-
rai  xai  Tixay^^  xaXot^yrat.

Alto  ro^Tuv  y€ve(T^ai  A[av-


•  Ai'a  fiuKUiov.     Mont.  t  «wTouf.    Or.

+  fliexioif.     Vig.  Col.  St.


SANCHONIATHO.


eJjAirrov  xai  SiVaiov*  oSroi  t^  Just:  and  they  founa  oyt  the  use  of

zQv  dho<i  xff^<Tiv  dpov.  salt.

'Atto  Uiaoip  Tdcivroi,   o«         From  Misor  descended  Taautus,  who

elpe  t'^iv  Toiv  Tipc^Tuy  o-Toix^^c^y  invented  the  writing  of  the  first  let-

ypcKjr^iy'    %v    AiV^TiOi   /x^y  ters :  him  the  Egyptians  called  Thpor,

0aifid/J,*'AXc^ay8p€K8e©&'l^,  the  Alexandrians   Thoyth,    and    the

"EXXvjyf?  l\  'Ep/x^y  €wiX€<ray  Greeks    Hermes.     But   from    Sydyc

U  8e  Toy  2u8i/x,  AUavcovpoi  descended  the  Dioscuri,  or  Cabiri,  or

^  Kd^eipci  71    Kopv^ayrc?  i^  Corybantes,    or    Samothraces :    these

laixo^pj:^^.    oSto/,  (</«jo-«,)  (he  says)  first  built  a  ship  complete.
V pur 01  TiKoTov  tvpov-

*Ex  rovruv  yeyovcKTiv  cre-
poi,  0?  xai  ^oTuvcx.^  €vpovt  xoti


From  these  descended  others,  who
were    the    discoverers    of   medicinal
Tvjv  T£y  SaxeTwy  U(riv  xai     herbs,  and  of  the  cure  of  poisons  and


Kara  zoviovq  yiverai  ri^
•EXwiJy  Y.QXovy.fvoq  Txpia-roit
xai  ^i^Xcta  Xcyo/xeyij  Bv}pov^'
Oi  xai  xary'xovy  Trcpi  Bt^^Xoy.

'E^  wv  ycyyaxai  'ETr/yeiOi;  iij


of  charms.

Contemporary  with  these  was  one
Elioun,  called  Hypsistus,  (the  most
high) ;  and  his  wife  named  Beruth,
and  they  dwelt  about  Byblus.

By  these  was  begotten  Epigeus  or
AyTox^wy,oyiJo-T€/}ovexaXeo-ay  Autochthon,  whom  they  afterwards
Ovpayov  uq  die'  ainov  xai  to  called  Ouranus  (Heaven)  ;  so  that
vT:\p  rjfjwi  a-Toix^Tov,  II  vvtp-  from  him  that  element,  which  is  over
^o'KY,v  Toy  xaXXoy?  oyof/u^etv  US,  by  reason  of  its  excellent  beauty
ovpavov.  Tivvdiai  U  Tovrcp  is  named  heaven :  and  he  had  a  sister
d^hcpr,  €x  T«y  vpoeiprji^evwy,  of  the  same  parents,  and  she  was
r}  xai  ixX-i^ri  TiJ,  xai  5ia  to  called  Ge  (Earth),  and  by  reason  of
xaXXo?  au'  aCx^;,  (<^>jo-iy,)  her  beauty  the  earth  was  called  by  the
€xaX€<ray  T»jy  ofAwyviAov  yf^v.        same  name.

'O  Se  TouTcwy  •Kq.irip  o  Hypsistus,  the  father  of  •  these,
"Tipio-TOi  €x  o-tjtAjSoX^?  ^tip'wv  having  been  killed  in  a  conflict  with
TcXeuTija-a?  oupiepu^iif  $  xai  wild  beasts,  was  consecrated,  and  his
Xodq  xai  ^va-iaq  ol  itaThq  children  offered  libations  and  sacri-
fices unto  him.


eTcXeo'ay*


*  bww^f     Mont.     Or.


m


i:


m


m


10


SANCHONIATHO.


SANCHONIATHO.


11


Kai  €^  aXXwv  Se  jaiA€TUV
0  Ovpavoq  iro^^V    «<^X«    7^'


na/)aXct^«v  §€  ^  oepavo?  But  Ouranus,  succeeding  to  the
t5jv  roZ  ^arpU  apxV,  "y^'^*^  kingdom  of  his  father,  contracted  a
Jpli  ydfAoy  tV  a56A</>^v  I^v,  marriage  with  his  sister  Ge,  and  had
xai  7ro;€rT*i  €|  aiT^i  ^«^*?  ^y  her  four  sons,  Ilus  who  is  called
S'  *'lXov  T^v  xai  KpoW,  xai     Cronus,  and  Betylus,  and  Dagon,  which

signifies     Siton     (Bread-corn,)     and

Atlas.

But  by  other  wives  Ouranus  had

mucli  issue  ;  at  which  Ge,  being  vexed
vc^v'  Zih  Kai  piaA6ua/vot;(ra  and  jealous  of  Ouranus,  reproached
^  r;?,  rov  OCpavov  ^>jXoti;-  him  SO  that  they  parted  from  each
ntovac  ^x^Ki^fv,  c5;  xai  8ia-  Other:  nevertheless  Ouranus  returned
cTT^va*  aXX^'Xa.v.  'O  Se  to  her,  again  by  force  whenever  he
Odpavk  airox^P^Va^  a^r^?,  thought  proper,  and  having  laid  with
ixha  ^/a?,  tre  xcii  ^^ou'Xtro  her,  again  departed :  he  attempted
Hi^v,  xai  <jrX»j(ri4^a.v  airri  also  to  kill  the  children  whom  he  had
^ciXiv  ^TrrjXX^TTCTo,  .Vxt/-  by  her;  but  Ge  often  defended  her-
p€»  8e  xQci  Tol«  (^  aCr^?  self  with  the  assistance  of  auxiliary
ntat^ai  ^ia(p^€(p€iv.  t^  Sc  powers,
r^y      dixvvea-^ai      iroXXaxi?,

Ei'i  av8pa«  Be  TrpoeXSr^v  o         But  when  Cronus  arrived  at  man's

Kpivoi  'EpfJiri  T$  Tpi<riA€yl<rr(p  estate,  acting  by  the  advice  and  with

<rvf>c/3oi;'Xy  xa*  jSo^j^ira;  %/>«/[*€-  the  assistance  of  Hermes  Trismegis-

yo?-  (oSto?    y^p    ?v    a^Toi)  tus,  who  was  his  secretary,  he  opposed

ypa[jLixar€li;y)   tov      irarcpa  himself  to  his  father  Ouranus,  that  he

Ovpavlv   dixvvfTaiy   Ti[xupSv  might  avenge    the    indignities  which

rrj  fXTirpL  had  been  offered  to  his  mother.

Kpo^ov  8e  7/vovTai  irarSc^,         And  to  Cronus  were  born  children,

n€p<r€<l)oyyj  xai  'aSttjkS.     *H  Persephone  and  Athena  ;  the  former

fMvovy  Ttpurti  itdp^eyoq  in-  of  whom  died  a  virgin;  but,  by  the

Xf  yra*  Tr,<;  U  *A&>jva?  yvauri  advice  of  Athena  and  Hermes,  Cronus

xaJ     'E/),aoiJ     xaTctrxctWc  made  a  scimitar  and  a  spear  of  iron .

Kfo'vo?  €K  o-*Si7pou  a/3Tnjv  xa*  Then  Hermes  addressed  the  allies  of

Ufv"  ilra  0  *E^/tx^^  To?^  to5  Cronus  with  magic  words,  and  wrought


Kpo'v..     <rv,x/>c^XOK     X^v,  in  them  ^  keen  desire  to  make  war

t^y,ta,    haX^x^^U    ^i^ov  against  Ouranus  in  behalf  of  Ge.  And

e*ve7ro/,«  Tor«  *  xar'  Ovpa-  Cronus  having  thus  overcome  Ouranus

v^vf   fjidxyiii^k  -r^?  r^?-  in  battle,  drove  him  from  his  kingdom,

xai  o0T«  Kpo'vo^  T^v  oe^av^v  and   succeeded   him  in   the   imperial

^oXe>y  cTvfM^aX^^  r^i  d.p^^  power.  In  the  battle  was  taken  a  well-

^Xa«,  xai  tV    pa(7iX€/i»v  beloved  concubine  of  Ouranuswho  was

SicBc'^aro.    ^^Xo,    U   h  t^  pregnant ;  and  Cronus  bestowed  her

V-^-m  •'^a*  ^  eir€>acrT05  tou  in  marriage  upon  Dagon,  and,  whilst

Olpay<A>   c^oiTo,;   iyv^^i^^  she  was  with  him,  she  was   delivered

oUa,  V  €V8/S«o'»v  •  Kpo'voi  of  the  child  which  she  had  conceived

fl«  7^/xov  ry  AaySw  r/xrei  by  Ouranus,  and  called  his  name  De-

l(  vapa  TOVT<f,  0  xara  ya<r-  marous.

tpOf    €^      OvpCWOV    €(f>€p€Vf     0

xa*  «xaX«r€  Atj/xapoi/y.

'EirirovVoi^aKpoWTfrxo?  After    these    events   Cronus    sur-

1:fpi^<i^^.€^Tr^  eavrov  oW-fiiTu,  rounded  his  habitation   with  a  wall,

Kai  itpuT-nv  woXiv  xT/^€i  tV  and  founded  Byblus,  the  first  city  of

iit\  ^otyuKfji  Bi/'jSXov.     M£Ti  Phoenicia.  Afterwards  Cronus  having

-ravTu  Tov  d^eKcpov  tov  thiov  conceived  a  suspicion  of  his  own  bro-

"ArXavra  vitoyo-^a-aq  o  Kpovo^y  ther  Atlas,  by  the  advice  of  Hermes,

jutcTa  7v«/x^5  Toy  'E/jjixoi;  ct?  threw  him  into  a  deep  cavern  in  the

/3a^o«  7^?   ifji^aKecv  xaT€-  earth,  and  buried  him.

Kara  towtov  tov  J  xpo-  At  this  time  the  descendants  of  the

vov   oi   dito  tSv  Aio<rxoi;/)&)y  Dioscuri,  having  built  some  light  and

<rxfB/a?  xcti  irXora  (Tw^evTe^,  other  more  complete  ships,  put  to  sea ;

eirXttcray.    xai    iycpupevreq^  and  being  cast  away   over    against

xara   to  Kaco-iov  o/jo?  vaov  Mount  Cassius,  there  consecrated  a

avTo^i  d(f)t€puaaym  temple.

O*  5€  <rt!iJLiAaxoi  "iXov  rov  But  the  auxiliaries  of  Ilus,  who  is

Kpovoi;  *EX«€V  II  €ir€xX>j^>j-  Cronus,  were  called  Eloeim,  as  it  were,

<ray,    «$    av    Kpmoi,    olroi  the  allies  of  Cronus ;  being  so  called

?cray  olXeyo/xfyoi  dito^Kp^vov.  after  Cronus.     And  Cronus,  having  a


-   T^y.     vyr.  t  Oupawu.     Vig.  Marg.     ^pa*ou.  Col.  Marg.

J  toCto^  y)6vou.    Or.       §,  ixxpi^tvTts.  Or.         ||  'EXo**/*.  Or.         If  i»r^.  St.


*  Trig.     Or.


U


,'i


12


SANCUONIATIIO.


SANCHONIATHO.


IS


ii


illi;


7ra»^o<    7€yo/A€vo^,  itrrfpvia-ev.

m<ivra<i  ireTrX^x^****  ^<o^*J '''')''

Xpovov  U  ifpQ'iovroi  ()jJ/)avo;
^v  ipvy^  TvyxdvuVf  ^vyaripa

aVTQV       'irdp^€VOV      ^AtTTdpTtJV

fxt^^    htpwv    avryi<;   a(SeAf/>wv

Tov  Kpo'vov  AvcXciV  tTTOTrcaTrei*
a^  xa«  ^Awv  0  Kp<ivo<;  xou^i-
8/a?  yaixera^  ahhfiCK;  ova-a<;
iicoiria-arQ.  Tvov^  t(  o  Ovpa-
vlq  i'nn<rrpar€ij€i  Kara  tov
Kpovov  EifAapfAevviv  xci»  Clpocv
fM^  ir^puv  cvfjifjidxaiv .  xai
tavTa^  i^oiyi€iei}(rd[/.(vo(;  o
Kpovo^  nap*  eavr^  xaTcVx^v.
"Eti  8e,  (pviciv,  €'Jtf>oria-€  ^ioq
OCpavo^  BaiTvXia,  X/^ou<
ijAypvx^v^   aT7xaK>](r«^/A€vo;.

Kpovo)     fie     iycvovro     dtto
*A<rrdptif}^    ^vyaript^    eirr^

qraXiV  toj  at/TO?  yivovTai  uTto
"Pta^  mou^eq  IittA,  wv  o
ytUTaroq  ufxa  t^  yey^crei
Buf)i(pu^rj*  xctt  a'TTo  Atc^v);^
^TijXeiai*  xa*  Atto  'Aa-Tdprvjq
itdKiy  a^fivcq  Svo,  flo^oc  xa*
"Epuq.


son  called  Sadidus,  dispatched  liim
with  his  own  sword,  becanse  he  held
him  in  suspicion,  and  with  his  own
hand  deprived  his  child  of  life.  And
in  like  manner  hb  cut  off  the  head  of
his  own  dauji^hter,  so  that  all  the  gods
were  astonished  at  the  disposition  of
Cronus.

But  in  process  of  time,  whilst
Ouranus  was  still  in  banishment,  he
sent  his  daughter  Astarte,  being  a
virgin,  with  two  other  of  her  sisters,
Rhea  and  Dione,  to  cut  off  Cronus  by
treachery  ;  but  Cronus  took  the  dam-
sels, and  married  them  notwithstand-
ing they  were  his  own  sisters.  When
Ouranus  understood  this,  he  sent
Eimarmcne  and  Hora  with  other
auxiliaries  to  make  war  against  Cro-
nus :  but  Cronus  gained  the  affections
of  these  also,  and  detained  them  with
himself.  Moreover,  the  god  Ouranus
devised  Baetulia,  contriving  stones  that
moved  as  having  life.

And  by  Astarte  Cronus  had  seven
daughters  called  Titanides,  or  Arte-
mides  ;  by  Rhea  also  he  had  seven
sons,  the  youngest  of  whom  was  con-
secrated from  his  birth  ;  also  by  Dione
he  had  daughters ;  and  by  Astarte
again  he  had  two  other  sons,  Pothos
and  Eros.


clrw  xa*  dporpovy  iv-'^ri^V
Zct?  'ApoTpiOC*

2t/8t;Xy      8€      T^      X€70^€VW

5»xa/f,  /t>i/a  T«v  TiTav/fiwv
cw€>.^ova-a.  yevv^  tov  *  AerxXij-
iriov.  'E7ei/vij^Tj(ray  §€  xa*
iv     n€pa«V*      Kpova)     rp(7i

irarp),  xai  Z<i/<;  B^Xo?,  xai
'AiroXXwy.

Kara  rovrovq  ylvowai
n«vTo^  xai  Tv(/)wv  xai  N>j-
ptv^f  nrarvip  UoytoV  dito  8f
rttv  Hoyrov  ytviTat  2«8«y.  t\
xo^  tnep^oXriv  ti<puna<i
vpurvi  CfM^ov  e^^q  flpe,  xai
Tloceituv,

TS  he  AvjfAapovvri  yiverai
MfX/xap^o?  0  xai  'HpaxX^?.
Elra  irdKiv  Oipavoi  itoKe-
fjicT  novTfiu,  xai  ditoa-raq  A»j-
uapovyri  Trpoo'TtfJcxai  circic*
T6  Tioyru  6  ^tifAapwJi^  rpo-
iiovrai  re  \  avrov  o  Uivroq'
0  8f  ^rjfjutpovq  (fnr^i  ^v<rtav
Yjv^aro,

"Erei  he  rpiaMO-rS  hevrepcp
r^q  iavrov  y.parr^<7tuq  xa*
jSao-iXcwt^,  0  "VKoq  toSt*  ^<rT«v
«  Kporoc  Ovpavov  rlv  marepa
Xoxwaq  €v  rvn^  rivi  fAtcro-
yc/y,  tea*  ha^uv  itcoxelpiov
exTc^ct     avrcv     rcc    aioota


And  Dagon,  aftef  he  had  found  out
bread-corn,  and  the  plough,  was  called
Zeus  Arotrius.

To  Sydyc,  who  was  called  the  just,
one  of  the  Titanides  bare  Asclepius :
and  to  Cronus  there  were  born  also  in
Persca  three  sons,  Cronus  bearing  the
same  name  with  his  father,  and  Zeus
Belus,  and  Apollo.

Contemporary  with  these  were  Pon-
tus,  and  Typhon,  and  Nereus  the
father  of  Pontus :  from  Pontus  de-
scended Sidon,  who  by  the  excellence
of  her  singing  first  invented  the  hymns
of  odes  or  praises  :   and  Poseidon.

But  to  Demarous  was  born  Meli-
carthus,  who  is  also  called  Heracles.

Ouranus  then  made  war  against
Pontus,  but  afterwards  relinquishing
the  attack  he  attached  himself  to  De-
marous, when  Demarous  invaded
Pontus  :  but  Pontus  put  him  to  flight,
and  Demarous  vowed  a  sacrifice  for
his  escape.

In  the  thirty-second  year  of  his
power  and  reign,  Ilus,  who  is  Cronus,
having  laid  an  ambuscade  for  his
father  Ouranus  in  a  certain  place  si-
tuated in  the  middle  of  the  earth,  when
he  had  got  him  into  his  hands  dis-
membered him  over  against  the  foun-


♦  Uapoa'a.     Vig.  Col.


t  Ih     Or.


•    rxjriirXrfj^Siti.      St.


14


SANCHONIATHO.


SANCHONIATHO.


15


1


m


m


<t-


<Tvv€yyv<;  nviyZv  rt  m)  wora-  tains  and  rivers.    There  Ouraniis  was

fjLuv.  ev^a  oupKpu^ri  o  Ovpa-  consecrated,  and  his  spirit  was  sepa-

M^,  xai  aTryjprla^ri  avzov  to  rated,    and    the    hlood    of    his    parts

7rv€i;/*a,xaJair€(rTafev  aCroiJ  flowed  into    the    fountains   and    the

TO  alfAo,  ruy  aiSo/wv  €»<  ru^  waters  of  tlie  rivers ;  and  the  place,

itriya^  xa*  tSv  itorafA-Zv  ra  which  was  the  scene  of  this  transac-

Jlgara,  xai  fxexp^  rovTov  hei-  tion,  is  shewed  even  to  this  day.

xvvTai  TO  xupiov.

{UaXiv  Se  0   <Tvyypou\mi<i  (Then   our    historian,    after    some

tov'toj?  iitu^tpu  fAt^'  €T€pa  othcr    thiugs,   goes   on    thus:)     But

A€ycoy.)   'Ao-xapTTj  U  ij  p-  Astarte  called  the  greatest,  and  De-

7/<mj,   )iat  Z€vq  i^rifxapovi,  marous  named  Zeus,  and  Adodus  who

xal.  "ASwBo^   jSaffiXcl?  ^colv  is  entitled  the  king  of  gods,  reigned

^jSao-iXet/ov  t>j;  x^pa?  Kpo'vou  over  the  country  by  the  consent  of

yveiiAji'  ri  8c  'Aa-rdpTTj  iite-  Cronus  :    and  Astarte  put  upon  her

^>jx€  rri  /$«V  xcc^aXTj  ^aai-  head,  as  the  mark  of  her  sovereignty,

Xc/a?    •napdtT'fiiA.ov    xe(/)aXiy  a  bull's  head  :  and  travelling  about  the

ravpov'  iKpivoaiovtra  8e  ttjv  habitable  world,  she  found  a  star  fall-

olMviAivfjVt    €vp€v     af/joTTc-nj  ing  through  the  air,  which   she   took

aaxtpa,*  ov  xai  avcXo/xevij  iv  up,  and  consecrated  in  the  holy  island

Tvp^  rri  a.yl(j.  vf\<T(^  d(pi€pu<T(.  of  Tyre :  and  the  Phoenicians  say  that

T>jv   tf   *A(rrdprv}v    Wvmc^  Astarte  is  the  same  as  Aphrodite.

TTjV  *A(ppohhv}v  fivai  Xeyovo"*.

Kcti  0  Kpovo^  §€   'rrepi'tuv  Moreover,  Cronus  visiting  the  dif-

tV  oUovfxivfjv  T^  'A^ijv^T  t^  ferent  regions  of  habitable  world,  gave

cauTou   ^yyctrpi  8/8a'<Ti   t^;  to  his  daughter  Athena  the  kingdom

*ATTm^s     T»jv      ^a(Ti\uav.  of  Attica  :  and  when  there  happened

Ao/,uou  Se  y(VQ[Mvov  xal  <^o-  a  plague  with  a  great  mortality,  Cro-

paq,  Tov  (avTov  (Aoyoytyri  viw  nus  offered  up  his  only  begotten  son

Kpo'vo^   Ovpai>$    irarpl    oXo-  as  a  sacrifice  to  his  father  Ouranus,

Y-apnol,  xal  ik  allala  itipi-  and  circumcised  himself,  and  compel-

T€/xv€Ta«,  TavTo  iroi^o-ai  xal  led  his  allies  to  do  the  same  :  and  not

raijq   a.\/^  avr^    <TvfA.iAax<iV(;  long  afterwards  he  consecrated  after

xaravciTxao-ai*  xal  /lcct*  av  his  death  another  of  his  sons,  called


woXt  eTfpov  <f.vrw  'natlcc  dnto
*?€«<»  ovoiAoC^ofji^vov  Mov^
Snto^avoyra,  oupi€po7'  Bdycc-
tov  8c  toStov  xal   YlKairuva

Kal   cttI   tovtok;  o  K/jovo;

BUjSXOV     l^tV    TTJV  TToXiV   S^c^

BaaXTt8i,  tri  xal  Aiwvtj
8/8&xr*,  BvjpuToy  8e  UotrettZyt
xal  KajSijpo/?  'Ay/JOTai?  tc
xal  aXicSo-tv,   o*   Kal  Hovtov

&^i€pa>(TaV'

Y{p\  8c  TotyTwv  ^co^  Taaw-
Toq  fAi[Ayj(rdiMVQq  tov  O^pavov,
Twv  Srewv  oa//Ci<  Kpo'vov  tc  xal
AaySvo^,  xal  tSv  Xoi-TrSv  8«c-
Tt/Trwcrcy  toi/?  tcpot?  TaUy  <rTO<-
j^c/wv    %apaxT^pa^.    cttcvotjo-c
8c   xal  Ty  Kpo'vy  trapoi(rr)iAa
j3a(riXc/a5,  o[/.[Aara  reccrpcpa
ex   t5v  ijXTrpoT^iuv  xal   tSv
OTfiC^/aJV  iMpuv'  8w)  8e  ^o-y%^
fAvovrat    xal    ^ttI  t5v    w/awv
itrepac    r€(r<rapa'  hvo  f^tv  rhq
IttTdfJievaf  8uo  8c  w^  v^iiAeucc,
To    8e    (riifx^oXov    »jv,    circiSvj
K/jo'vo?  xo</i«tf/A€vo^  cjSXcirc,  xa*
iypvjyopu^  iycoifjiaro'  xal  ctt*
tSv  Ttrepuv  ofJLoluqf  ari  dvw
"jraw^acvo^  fwTaTO    xa*  iTTTa-
/Acvo;     avc7rat;CT0.      To?;    8€
Xotirorif     ^€or(f    8i/n     cxacrrw
irrepufMiTa  ^irl  t&'v  Uf/.uVf  u^


Muth,  whom  he  had  by  Rhea ;  this
(Muth)  the  Phoenicians  esteem  the
same  as  Death  and  Pluto.


uffTtclav.


Boch.


After  these  things,  Cronus  gave  the
city  of  Byblus  to  the  goddess  Baaltis,
which  is  Dione,  and  Berytus  to  Posei-
don, and  to  the  Caberi  who  were  hus-
bandmen and  fishermen:  and  they
consecrated  the  remains  of  Pontus  at
Berytus.

But   before  these  things   the   god
Taautus,  having  pourtrayed  Ouranus,
represented  also  the  countenances  of
the  gods  Cronus,  and  Dagon,  and  the
sacred  characters  of  the  elements.  He
contrived  also  for  Cronus  the  ensign
of  his  royal  power,  having  four  eyes
in  the  parts  before  and  in  the  parts
behind,  two  of   them  closing   as   in
sleep;  and  upon  the  shoulders  four
wings,  two  in  the  act  of  flying,  and
two   reposing   as  at   rest.     And  the
symbol  was,  that  Cronus  whilst  he  slept
was  watching,  and  reposed  whilst  he
was  awake.    And  in  like  manner  with
respect  to  the  wings,  that  he  was  fly-
ing whilst  he  rested,  yet  rested  whilst
he  flew.   But  for  the  other  gods  there
were  two  wings  only  to  each  upon  his
shoulders,  to  intimate  that  they  flew
imder  the   controul  of  Cronus ;  and

•  nj   &i«.     Or.


If  •♦


I,


f


j(}  SANCHONIATHO.

^  crt^wWavTo  T«  Kpovy-  there  were  also  two  wings  upon  the
Kai  airS  5^  ^^Xiv  €»7ri  r??  head,  the  one  as  a  symbol  of  the
x€(/)aX^/  TTTepa  6«;o,   Iv   eTri     intellectual   part,  the  mind,  and  the


SANCHONIATHO.


17


or*


Tou   yiyefAOviycurarov    vou,  xai

*EX&«y  Se  o  Kpovo?  €«5
NoTOw  y^upavy  aitafxay  ttjv
AtyyirTov  eStuvce  ^ew  Taatxy,
OTTW^  ^aa-iXiiof  ainu  y€VT,Tai.

xas*  o'ySoo?  avruv  aSeX^o^
*Ao-xX>jiiio<,  (i«  aCro^  cvstc*-
XoTo  ^€0^  TaauToj.

TaSra  wavra  o  @cil3iaivoi

yeyovoTuv  ^ojv/xwy  Upocpcufxyii


Other  for  the  senses.

And  Cronus  visiting  the  country  of
the  south,  gave  all  Egypt  to  the  god
Taautus,  that  it  might  be  his  king-
dom.

These  things,  says  he,  the  Caberi,
the  seven  sons  of  Sydyc,  and  their
eighth  brother  Asclepius,  first  of  all
set  down  in  the  records  in  obedience
to  the  commands  of  the  god  Taautus.


All  these  things  the  son  of  Thabion,
the  first  Hierophant  of  all  among  the
Phoenicians,  allegorized  and  mixed  up
aKKfiyopyia-ai  Tor«  re  (f*v(TiycoTq  with  the  occurrences  and  accidents  of
wu  x«(r/i*«xoK  Ttai^ea-iv  a^a-  nature  and  the  world,  and  delivered
IA.i^ai  itapilxY-i  TOK  wa'fl-t  to  the  priests  and  propheU,  the  super-
%a\  reXcTuv  ytaTapxovfft  itpo-  intendants  of  the  mysteries :  and  they,
^rai<;'  oi  8e  tov  tv(^v  a.xiU^v  perceiving  the  rage  for  these  allego-
Ia.  ntavToq  imvoQvvTeqy  roT^  ries  increase,  delivered  them  to  their
avrZv  haUxoii  tiapeBuio-ay  successors,  and  to  foreigners:  of  whom
xai  rc7<;  cTrctcaxTOK*  «"  €*i  one  was  Isiris,  the  inventor  of  tlie
^  xai  "Wipiit  TU.V  ipivv  ypxiA-  three  letters,  the  brother  of  Chna  who
/xarojy  (i/jer^j?,  a5«?u/)o^  X>a  is  called  the  first  Phoenician. — Euseb.
TOW  vpuTov  iJL€Tovo(A.ua-^evTOi     Prcep.  Evan,  lib.  I.  c.  10.


OF  THE  MYSTICAL  SACRIFICE  OF  THE  PHOENICIANS.

"E^oq  ijv  TQi(;  traXaioti  iv         It  was  the  custom  among  the  an-
raiq  (AtydKaK;  <rvfjL(f)opa,7<;  twv     cicnts,   in  times  of  great  calamity,  in


xoSuvftW,  eon)  rrj^  •adyrtM
<f)dopai,ro  r(yainii*.€vov  rSv  rex-
vuvf  rov^  xpaToUvrac  ?  voXew^
ri  e^vovit^U  <r<l>ay^^  ittMoyai
Xvrpov  ro7<;  rifAUpoTt;  ialiM(ri,
xaT«r<^TT0VT0  §€  ol  8i8o/A€-
voi  /AW<rT<x«?.  KpoVoc  roliivv,
oy  Oi  ♦o/yix€5  *I<r/)a^X  *  nrpoa-
ayop€^ova-if  |3afl-iX«/«v  tij?
Xupoiff  Kou  trtepw  /xrr^  Ttjv
TOW  ^iov  TcXeinr^  cJ^  Toy  tow
Kpo'you  darripa  yux^iepu^eiif
a  ivixcopicii  Nt/fx^Mj?  *Av«-

fAOvvyer^y  ov  ^la,  rovro  *l€oy5
iyidkovVf  tow  (Mvoyevov^  ovruq
€Ti  Ku)  yvv  }ia>jiiviA€vov  tiapa
TO?;  ^om^tf  vuvB^yuv  ^x  «o-
XefMv  fuyltrtav  wxreiXfjiporuv
T^y  x^pcuff  ^awtXix^  xoa"/xij-
ca^  (T^ij/xaT*  Toy  vlov,  ^ui/.oy
T€  xaTaoTC€ua<ra/*€V05  xaTe-
^uo-cy.


order  to  prevent  the  ruin  of  all,  for  tl\e
rulers  of  the  city  or  nation  to  sacrifice
to  the  avenging  deities  the  most  be-
loved of  their  children  as  the  price  of
redemption  :  they  who  were  devoted
for  this  purpose  were  offered  mysti-
cally. For  Cronus,  whom  the  Phoe-
nicians call  II,  and  who  after  his  death
was  deified  and  instated  in  the  planet
which  bears  his  name,  when  king»
had  by  a  nymph  of  the  country  called
Anobret  an  only  son,  who  on  that  ac-
count is  styled  leoud,  for  so  the  Phoe-
nicians still  call  an  only  son :  and
when  great  dangers  from  war  beset
the  land  he  adorned  the  altar,  and  in-
vested this  son  with  the  emblems  of
royalty,  and  sacrificed  him. — Euseb,
Prcep.  Evan,  lib.  I.  c.  10.— lib.  IV.
c.  17.


OF  THE  SERPENT.


TV  /*€"  o"^"  '"^^  ApaxovTO?
^^<riv  xa*  Twy  o(p€uv  avroq
i^i^elaa-ev  o  TaauTO^,  xat
IX€T  avTov  al^ii  *omxf?  re
xat  Alyvirnoi,  7ry€V/*aT<xw-
TaToy  yap  to  tfiov  iravruv
ray  €pTt€Tuv  xcm  irvpu^eq  wir*


Taautus  first  attributed  something
of  the  divine  nature  to  the  serpent  and
the  serpent  tribe;  in  which  he  was
followed  by  the  Phoenicians  and  Egyp-
tians. For  this  animal  was  esteemed
by  him  to  be  the  most  inspirited  of
all  the  reptiles,  and  of  a  fiery  nature ;


•  IX  or  IXvj.  Marsham.  Dry.  Fab.— Israel  Boch.  Seal.


t  'AvojSfjtT  Or.


\  ^  •


III


[•■


m


18


SANCHONIATHO.


airov  itapeU^rj'  %af  o*  xaJ  inasmuch  as  it  exhibits  an  incredible

Ta^o?  dwjces^XfiTQv  ha  tqv  celerity,  moving  by  its  spirit  without

wvcc/xaro^  'jcapia-rtia-it  xccpU  either  hands,  or  feet,  or  any  of  those

woSSy  T€  xai  xeipZv,  yj  aWov  external  members,   by    which   other

rivlq  Tuv  efoj^ev,  cf  uv  la  animals  effect  their  motion.     And  in

Xoiira  ^5ct  raq  ycivri<T€ii  icoieT-  its  progress  it  assumes  a  variety  of

rai'  aal  'noi^iKicv  <rxy}y-druv  forms,  moving  in  a  spiral  course,  and

rijitovi  dmreXfT,   xai  xara  darting  forward  with  whatever  degree

TTjif  Ttopuav  cXmo€i8er?   e^c*  of  swiftness  it  pleases.  It  is  moreover

Ta?  opjixa^,  cy  0  BovXerai  long-lived,  and  has  the   quality  not

rdxo(;'    xa*  troKvxponuTarov  only  of  putting  off  its  old  age,  and  as-

U  ea-riv  ov  fjLovov  r$  cxSuo-  suming  a  second  youth,  but  of  receiv-

|i*€vov  Tc  yijpai;  vca^civ,  aX>^  ing  at  the  same  time  an  augmentation

yea)  av^vi<Tiv  iitilexea-^ai  f/^i-  of  its  size  and  strength.    And  when  it

%oya.  7r6(/)wxc.  xai  iicei^av  to  has  fulfilled  the  appointed  measure  of

upia-fxivov    {Airpov   '7tX-/ipaf<rri,  its  existence,  it  consumes  itself;   as

€K   eavTQv   dvaXiffycerai,  u^  Taautus  has  laid  down  in  the  sacred

iv  ra7q  Upatq  oiMiaq  a^Toq  o  books ;  upon  which  account  this  animal

Tdavroq  yiareraU  ypoupalq'  is  introduced  in  the  sacred  rites  and

Sio  xat   h   Upoii  rovTo  rl  mysteries. — Euseh,  Prcep,  Evan,  lib.  I,

tfiiw  Y.CU  €v  fMoryip'm^  ot/a-  C.  10.
vapeiX-^TTTat,


FRAGMENTS


OF


CHALDiEAN  HISTORY,


FROM


BEROSSUS,  ABYDENUS,


AND


MEGASTHENES.


m


•


1;    '


'(   !


(J  St.


'  v\


ir


llfi^


.  1


BEROSSUS:


FROM  ALEXANDER  POLYHISTOR.


OF  THE  COSMOGONY  AND  DELUGE.


BHPOSSOS  he  iv  t^  irpwTTj
tSv  Ba^vXuvianuy  ^o"i  ye-
yea^Qii  fJ^v  avTov  xara
'AXelctvSpov  Tov  ^iX/wToy  rryv
^Xix/av.  avaypcupas  Se  iroX-
XSv  €v  Ba/5uX£vt  ^Xdca-ea--
^ai  fAfta  woXXiJ^  i<ttt[A€A€ia^
anto  iruv  irov  vnep  (/.vpidhuv
U*  nceptexoijcra^  xP^vov'  ttc-
pitX€iif  86  Ta?  oofccypaup^q  "f
itrcoptaq  trip)  toi;  c^pavou  xai
^aXactnj^  xa«  ntpearvyovta^
xai  ^aviXim  "mu  tSv    xar'

Kai  Trp&Toy  /ucv  tv/v  BajSv-
XA;y/ib;v  J  <yi7V  ^n^i  y.€7<rK(at
€xi  Tou  T/<yp(Bo(  xai  Ewppdrov
'noTd.fAov  iJi€(n^,  <ptjnv  he  avrriv
irvpov^  aypiwq  xai  xpt&a^
xai  ft'Xpoy§  xat  oT^ca/^ov  ||
xai  Taj  «y  toTj  eXeo"*  tpvo^e-


Berossus,  in  the  first  book  of  his
history  of  Babylonia,  informs  us  that
he  lived  in  the  age  of  Alexander  the
son  of  Philip.  And  he  mentions  that
there  were  written  accounts,  preserved
at  Babylon  with  the  greatest  care,
comprehending  a  period  of  above  fif-
teen myriads  of  years  :  and  that  these
writings  contained  histories  of  the
heaven  and  of  the  sea ;  of  the  birth
of  mankind;  and  of  the  kings,  and  of
the  memorable  actions  which  they  had
achieved.

And  in  the  first  place  he  describes
Babylonia  as  a  country  situated  be-
tween the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  :
that  it  abounded  with  wheat,  and  bar-
ley, and  ocrus,  and  sesame  ;  and  that
in  the  lakes  were  produced  the  roots
called  gongae,  which  are  fit  for  food,


*  hx9.irivrt     Go. — Ducentis  et  quindecim.     Eu.  Ar.

f  Go.  m.  inserts  xa).  J  BafivKwviav  Go.

§  %«» »  Vulg. — Eu.  Ar.   inserts,  lentem,  pulse.  |]  claofiov  Go.


22


BEROSSUS.


•11


it


IA<£Cfi(T^ai      avra^     yt/yya^*

ravra^  yipi^ai^,   ylvia^ai  he

Xoiira  axp^pva  ycexl  ly^iSaq
xai    opfcc   %f^7ara    re    xai

jM,ev  xtxra  t»jv  Apa^lav  jwc/ttj
avx^pd  T€  xa«  uKapira,  ra
5c  ayrtKtt[A€va  tj  *Apapi^
opuvd  Tc  xai  ci^pa."!*

wX^^oj  Stv^puTsuv  y€V€a'^ai
aXXocSrywv  xaTO<x>jo-a>Ta)y  t^v
XaXSa/av*  ^^y  Sc  a^TOi*^
araxTw^  utrvep  ra  triplet,

*Ey  Sc  Tfi?  itpuTcp  iviavT^
f\>ayrivat  iyi  rvj^  ipv^pa^  S'a-
Xaffo^oj^  xara  xoy  ofMpovvTa
ToVoy  T^  Ba^tXwy/^t  ^Soy
cuppevov"^  ovofMtTi  'ildvyyjv,
xo^uq  xat  'AiroXXoBftj^o^  ic-
Topr}<r€f  TO  fjt.ev  nXov  <tu[aq.
«Xoy||  Jx^to^,  tTTo  8c  T^y
xc^aX^y  %apa%((f)vyiv7av  aX-
X:jy  xc^aX^y  ^Troxarw  t^^
Tou  Ix^vot;  MipaXTfi,  xal
iroBaq  ofMiu^  df^puTtov,  ira-
pQ.'iC€(f)woTai   tt  €x  Tyji  oCpdi

^y^y  dv^puTTOv,  rrjv  8c  cIxoW
aCroS  cT<  xai  yJJy  dieKpiXda--

0"C(r3"a<.


•  Sc-icr^/W^ov.  Vulg.         f  Go.-«>of a  Vulg.  J  a^f.v  c\  Is.  Voss.

§  Endowed  with  Bry.—Terribilem  feram  Eu.  Ar.  ||  ^■^^wy  A.— Eu.


and  in  respect  to  nutriment  similar  to
barley.  That  there  were  also  palm
trees  and  apples,  and  a  variety  of
fruits ;  fish  also  and  birds,  both  those
which  are  merely  of  flight,  and  those
which  frequent  the  lakes.  He  adds,
that  those  parts  of  the  country  which
bordered  upon  Arabia,  were  without
water,  and  barren ;  but  that  the  parts
which  lay  on  the  other  side  were  both
hilly  and  fertileJ

At  Babylon  there  was  (in  these
times)  a  great  resort  of  people  of
various  nations,  who  inhabited  Chal-
daea,  and  lived  in  a  lawless  manner
like  the  beasts  of  the  field.

In  the  first  year  there  appeared,
from  that  part  of  the  Erythrjean  sea
which  borders  upon  Babylonia,  an
animal  destitute§  of  reason,  by  name
Cannes,  whose  whole  body  (according
to  the  account  of  Apollodorus)  was
that  of  a  fish ;  that  under  the  fish's
head  he  had  another  head,  with  feet
also  below,  similar  to  those  of  a  man,
subjoined  to  the  fish's  tail.  His  voice
too,  and  language,  was  articulate  and
human ;  and  a  representation  of  him
is  preserved  even  to  this  day.


BEROSSUS.


23


TOVTO     Sc,    <f>Vl<ri,    TO  l^UOVf

rrjv    [A€v    ifjfJLfpav     hiazpi^eiv
[Mrd    Twy    avKlpumuv,    oySc-
jxiav*  Tptkp^y  'jtpo(r<f>€po[ji.€vov'
vapahtBoifai  re  roT^  dv^puxoiq
ypauf/.dTuv  xct*  fAa^rjyiAruy
ycai  rexvuv    'jravroZaituv    ifji.-
i:€ipiav,  xa*  itoXeuv  (rwoiycio"
fMv^  "f  teal  Upuv  i^pij<r€igf  ycou
Wfxuv     ela-rjy^a-eiq    xai    ycftj-
fA,€rpiav  h^d<ryi€i}>,  xai  (ntep-
fiotra  xai   yiapirSv  arwvayujya.q
viroScixyt/yai,      xai       (ryyo'X&;^
wayra     ra     ntph^     ^fAepcocriv
avrjMyra  ^lov^   Trapahi^ovai
roi^  dv^puTTOK;.   dico    8c  tow
Xpoyov  iY.emv  oihh  aKKo  tee-
pia-<rh     evpe^ijyai,      rov     8e
^Xiou  hvyavToq   to  )^uqv  rov-
royi  ^Cldvyyjv   hvvai   itaMv  elq
Trjv  ^dXuar<rav,  xai  Ta^  yi;x-
Taj  iy  tS  iceXdyei  §  StaiTao--
^at*  eivai  ydp  avro  \\  d/jubi-
^ioy.      va-repoy     8c    (fiay^yai
TiUi  erepa  Xfim.  tiAoia  rovr^,^
rep),  uv  ev  tj  tZy  ^aa-iKeuv
dyaypoufyfi     <h°'^      ^Xutreiy.
Toy    he   'Cldyyyjy  tcep)   yeyedq
y-al     icoKixetaq   ypdypai    nal
nrapoMyai    royhe  Toy   Xoyoy
TOiV  dv^puTtoiq,

Teyear^ai  (fn}<r'i   xP^yoy,   iy
9   fo  iray   (txoto?    xai    Shup

€!mi,     xai     iy      TOlJTOl^     }^S(}C

*  finhfuou  Go.  f

J  ^/ov  Go — To5  /S/oy  Sc.
II  ocirh  Go.


This  Being  was  accustomed  to  pass
the  day  among  men ;  but  took  no  food
at  that  season  ;  and  he  gave  them  an
insight  into  letters  and  sciences,  and
arts  of  every  kind.  He  taught  them
to  construct  cities,  to  found  temples,
to  compile  laws,  and  explained  to  them
the  principles  of  geometrical  know-
ledge. He  made  them  distinguish  the
seeds  of  the  earth,  and  shewed  them
how  to  collect  the  fruits ;  in  short,  he
instructed  them  in  every  thing  which
could  tend  to  soften  manners  and
humanize  their  lives.  From  that  time,
nothing  material  has  been  added  by
way  of  improvement  to  his  instruc-
tions. And  when  the  sun  had  set,  this
Being  Cannes,  retired  again  into  the
sea,  and  passed  the  night  in  the  deep;
for  he  was  amphibious.  After  this
there  appeared  other  animals  like
Cannes,  of  which  Berossus  proposes
to  give  an  account  when  he  comes  to
the  history  of  the  kings.  Moreover
Cannes  wrote  concerning  the  genera-
tion of  mankind ;  and  of  their  civil
polity  ;  and  the  following  is  the  pur-
port of  what  he  said  :


I'


"  There  was  a  time  in  which  there
existed  nothing  but  darkness  and  an
abyss  of  waters,  wherein  resided  most

Go.  m. — nvauxia-fjLoric  Go. — trvvaixicfiovs  A.
§  Goar  substitutes  ixtZ
^  Tour*»  Go.


fi


u


BEROSSUS.


'


ill'


T€paru^t  Kcu  eIS«^K*  rati  hideous  beings,  which  were  produced

2Wa^  exwra  f  ^6i«y<iv€i(r^cu.  of  a  two- fold  principle.     There  ap-

Siv^puirovf     yap     hmpov^  peared  men,  some  of  whom  were  fur-

yetfyfj^rivai,  iviovi  8e  xa»  t€-  nished  with  two  wings,  others  with

Tpaircipovi  %ou  hmpca-umvi'  four,  and  with  two  faces.     They  had

xai   a-Sua  fjihf  t^oyrai  €y,  one  body  but  two  heads :  the  one  that

xe<pa>2t(;  8e  hvo,  av^peiauf  re  of  a  man,  the  Other  of  a  woman  :  and

xat  ywaixelavf  xat  aMoTd  likewise  in  their  several  organs  both

T€  Sio-o-a,  J  appev  nai  Sr^Xw*  male  and  female.  Other  human  figures

xai  kripovq  av^puitov;   toIj  were  to  be  seen  with   the  legs  and

fAtv  alyZv  (TKtXri  xa)  yupara  horns  of  goats  :  some  had  horses'  feet :

cxovraf,  toi*^  8c  Imsimlaqy  while  Others  united  the  hind  quarters

Tohi  St  rot  o'jri(rco  fj(^v  §  fAcpti  of  a  horse  with  the  body  of  a  man,

tTntuVf  ra  U  «/*7rpo<rS"ey  ay-  resembling  in   shape    the   hippocen-

KfpuTTuy,  ot<    IvKOMyravpovi  taurs.   BuUs  likewise  were  bred  there

T^v  Ihiav  elvai,  ^uoyoirrj^riyai  with  the  heads  of  men ;  and  dogs  with

Se  xa*  raipw^  av^pwvuv  xc-  fourfold  bodies,  terminated  in  their

(/>aXa(  c%ovTa$    Ka)    wivai  extremities  with  the  tails  of  fishes :

rtr pa<TufMTw<it    cvpa^    «%-  horscs  also  with  the  heads  of  dogs :

^t/o^ll  ^K  ruv  QTria-^ev  fMpSv  men  too  and  other  animals,  with  the

€x«vTaj,  yuu  Vintovi  }cwoK€(pd-  heads  and  bodies  of  horses  and  the

Xovff    xal    dyKipuKWi,  yaI  tails  of  fishes.     In  short,  there  were

htpa  tfia  rc€(l>aXaq  fx^y  xo*  creatures  in  which  were  combined  the

a-ufxara    Hitituv     ix^vra,  If  limbs  of  every  species  of  animals.    In

avpui  he  ly^vuv,   xoi  aXXa  addition  to  these,  fishes,  reptiles,  ser-

8€  "CfZa  iravTohaitZy  ^vjpiuv  pents,  with  Other  monstrous  animals,

lMp(j)ai  exovra.  'tfpoq  U  rot/-  which  assumed  each  other's  shape  and

TOi^  Ix^ijoi  xflM  ipmra  xau  countenance.     Of  all  which  were  pre-

&^eif  xai  dXka  Xfioa  itXtiova  served  delineations  in  the  temple  of

^aviAa<rTa)ia)'j[apyi>Xayix€ya  Belus  at  Babylon.
ra^  o4'(ii  aW-qXcoy  exovra'  u>
xo}    TOf   c/xoVof   ev   rS  rw
BrjXw  yaS  owaKiTcr^at,**

•  iBio<pv,7(  Rich.— i^^.r;  Sc.— owVo^irf  Mac.  f  t^ovra;  Go.

J  SiTTa,  Go. — duas  quoque  naturas.     Eu.  Ar.

§  xai  Ti  fi)»  intau)  Go.  m.

II  Eu.— I'x^'a;  Vulg.  ^  »x"^«f  A.             •*  Avixi/Tw  Go.


m !


BEROSSUS.


25


*A/>X€<y*  8e  ToJray  itdvruv
yvvou%a  tj  QVQ[/.a  'OfMpwKOt'T
€iyai  he    toZto  J    XaXSaVcTi
fxey     QaXar^f     'EXXojv^tt*
•  he    (Ae^epfAi^yeiJta-Kfai  ||    ^d-
Xacrera,  xara  he  l(roypi^y  ^
aeX'^yr}-  ovru^    he    ray   oXwv
ffvyea-Tfiwiruy      iitayeX^ovra
B^Xov    (rxicrai    t^v    ywaTxa
[AetT^yf  xai  to  fxey  rifxiav  av-
T?jf  <K(ivt\<Tai  yt\Vt  TO  he   aXXo
y[[ji.i(TV    ovpavoyf     xa*     Ta    ev
a[?T^  ^ola   d(f)ayi<Tai.   dWvj-
yopixS^  he  (fyrjo-i  toUto  ttedtv-
(TwXo'y^o'Srai.'j"!"     D'ypou   "yap
ovTOj  Toy  vayroq  xat  ^wwv  ev
avry  yeyeyvrifxeyuv,  toutovJ J
Tov  Stcov  dtpe'ke7y    t^v    eay-
Toy  §§   iie<paKv}Vf  xai  to  pyev
a</*a||||   Toy^   aXKovq  ^eovq
ipvpda-ai  t55  7^,  xai  SiawXa-
<ra*  T«y^  dv^puicovq'  hi  0  ^^
yoepovi  Tc  €<ya*  xai  (Ppoy^a-euq
^eiaq  /xcTcxe/v.  tov  8e  B^Xov,
ov  Aia  fxe^epfjLrjveiJOva-tf  {jue<Tov

Tf/AOVTa     TO      CXOTO^    ^W^/cTat

T^v  xai  oypav^v  aw*  aXXifXwy,
xai  htard^ai  tov  xoa-fAoy'  ra
he  ^ua  oix.  eyeyKoyra  t^v  tow


The    person,  who   presided    over
them,  was  a  woman  named  Omoroca;
which   in  the  Chaldaean  language  is
Thalatth;§  in   Greek  Thalassa,    the
sea  •  but  which  might  equally  be  in-
terpreted the  Moon.   All  things  being
in  this  situation,  Belus  came,  and  cut
the  woman  asunder :  and  of  one  half
of  her  he  formed  the  earth,  and  of  the
other  half  the  heavens;    and  at  the
same    time    destroyed    the    animals
within  her.**     All  this  (he  says)  was
an  allegorical  description  of  nature.
For,  the  whole  universe  consisting  of
moisture,   and  animals  being   conti-
nually generated   therein,   the  deity
above-mentioned    took  off  his   own
head :    upon   which   the   other   gods
mixed  the   blood,  as  it  gushed  out,
with  the  earth  ;  and  from  thence  were
formed  men.     On  this  account  it  is
that  they  are  rational,  and  partake  of
divine  knowledge.      This  Belus,  by
whom  they  signify  Jupiter,***  divided
the    darkness,     and     separated    the
Heavens  from  the  Earth,  and  reduced
the  universe  to  order.     But  the  ani-
mals, not  being  able  to  bear  the  pre-
valence of  light,  died.     Belus  upon


X


L^


*  «fX"  Go.  f  Ofxog&xa  Go.— Oyu^f xa  So. — Marcaja  Eu.  Ar.

J  roijTa,  Go.  §  Thalaatha  Eu.  Ar.

II  Sc.—/it^e§fxnvt6(Tai  Vulg.  ^  Eus.  Ar.  omits.

••  "  In  the  abyss."     Bry.— «  Which  had  composed  her  empire."     Fab.
— quae  in  ipsa  erant  Eu.  Ar.

ft  A. — Sc. — ^^iv  ^vffio\Qyt7(T^at  Go.  XX  roCrwv  Sc.

§§  aurris  Go.  m.  ||  ||  ffoJ/ta  Go.  ^%  ha  Go.— 8*^  Sc.

••*  Dis  Bry.— Dis  or  Pluto  Fab.— Dios  Eu.  Ar.


1$


1:1

^;M^i')


iM:


*     !


26

Ih^vra  ^  rov  BiJXoy  y/o^cD/
IfprifAcy  xai  K<i/)7r!X^^ov  xeXfV'
crui  €vl  rSy  S^f oJy  t^v  yi€(ftaXr}V
a<ft€Xoyrt  tacvrov  Ty  airop'
pv€m  oifAart  (jivpa.a'at  rvjv
yrjv  xa«  hiav^oia-ai  ayBpa-
vovq  Ka)  ^rjpia  rot  hvydfMva,
Tflv  aepat  tptpeiy'  aitor€Ki<rai
8c  rov  BrjXoy  ytctl  acrrpa  xaJ
TjKtov  xa*  o-eX'^>ijy  not  rol^
it€vr€  irXav^rccq.  (raZrdc  (pyj-
<riy  y  o  JJoXvta-Tap  'AXefav-
8^0  J  Toy  Bi7jja)ff"<ray  gy  tJ
flr^ftrr^j  ^a<rK€iy.^)

*Ey  8c  T^  8<vTejp^  Toi'^
8€xa  ^a<TiX€ti;  ruy  XaK^aiav
KOI  rov  %piyw  t^c  ^aca-iXeiat;
avrSvf  (rdpovq  ixaroy  elkKoa-iVf
ffTOt  iruy  fAvpid^af  rea-a-apd-
moyra  rpeTq  xaJ  8i/o  ^iXiaSa^,
c«^  Toi/  xaTaxXt(7/*oS,§  Xe-
7€<  7a/)  0  ajJTOj  'AXc^ayS^s;
«?  airo  T/jt;  ypoKJnjq  rZv  XaX-
8a/(»y  av^tq  vapaycartuy  airo
T(*u  ]|  ivdrov  ^ac(nX€uq*Aphd-
Tou  cVi  Toy  Sexaroy  Xfyofji^yw
Kap*avTo7q  Bitfrov^pov  otruq'

*Aphdrov  Sc  TcXfVT^crctyTof^
Toy  vioy  avrov  Bta-ov^poy**
^aa-iXfua-ai  a-dpovq  lycruxat-
Scxa*    ^irtj-j-    Totfroy    f*.iyex.»


6ER0SSUS.

this,  seeing  a  vast  space  unoccupied,
though  by  nature  fruitful,  commanded
one  of  the  gods  to  take  off  his  head,
and  to  mix  the  blood  with  the  earth  ;
and  from  thence  to  form  other  men
and  animals,  which  should  be  capable
of  bearing  the  air.*  Belus  formed
also  the  stars,  and  the  sun,  and  the
moon,  and  the  five  planets.  (Such,
according  to  Polyhistor  Alexander,  is
the  account  which  Berossus  gives  in
his  first  book.)


BEROSSUS.


27


(In  the  second  book  was  contained
the  history  of  the  ten  kings  of  the
Chaldaeans,  and  the  periods  of  the
continuance  of  each  reign,  which  con-
sisted collectively  of  an  hundred  and
twenty  sari,  or  four  hundred  and
thirty-two  thousand  years;  reaching
to  the  time  of  the  Deluge.  For  Alex-
ander, enumerating  the  kings  from
the  writings  of  the  Chaldaeans,  after
the  ninth  Ardates,  proceeds  to  the
tenth,  who  is  called  by  them  Xisuthrus,
in  this  manner :)

After  the  death  of  Ardates,  his  son
Xisuthrus  reigned  eighteen  sari.  In
his  time  happened  a  great  Deluge  ;
the  history  of  which  is  thus  described.


•  Light  Bry.  f  Go.  om.  (p,^,,.

§  Ma(pipu  Go.  m.  II  Go.  om.  roC


t  9«<rx«i.     Go. — Sc.
^  Otiarte  defuncto,  Eu.  Ar.
ft  xa)  •«•}  Go.  m.


yiarayiKv<rfJM>  ycycVQfai.  ova-  The  Deity,  Cronus,  appeared  to  him

yeypd^ou  *    8f  Toy    Xoyoy  in  a  vision,  and  warned  him  that  upon

ouT4)^*  Toy  Kpovoy  avr^  y.qlt»  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month  Daesius

Toy  wryoy  iirioTdyra  <pdyai  there  would  be  a  flood,  by  which  man-

{Atiyoi  La^<r^w\  irc/tximj  xai  kind  would  be  destroyed.     He  there-

hxdr^  roivi  ay^puitavq  vm  fore  enjoined  him  to  write  a  history

xaTaxXi/cr/tcoi;   h(f.<p^apyi<rear-  of  the  beginning,  procedure,  and  con-

^a*.  J     xcXci/Ta*     alv    ha,  elusion  of  all  things ;  and  to  bury  it

ypafAfAdruy,    vdyruv  oLp^xficq  in  the  city  of  the  Sun  at  Sippara ;  and

xai  fxea-a  KOI  reXevraq  optj-  to  build  a  vessel,  and  take  witli  him

layra  §    ^cryat     iv    ito>^i  into  it  his  friends  and  relations ;  and

^Xwu  ^tintdpoKij  III  xai  vav-  to  convey  on  board  every  thing  neces-

irviyria-diAeyoy  <ryf.dq)oq  ii^^vat  sary  to  sustain  life,  together  with  all

(AfTu  Tuv  ayyyevuv  xom  dva-  the  different  animals,  both  birds  and

7K«/«y  (piKuv'    iy^4<r^ai  he  quadrupeds,   and  trust  himself  fear-

^pufAMxa  Y.ai  isoixara,  ifA-  lessly  to   the  deep.      Having  asked

^aXcry  §€   Koci   ^ua  'rrrrjva  the  Deity,  whither  he  was  to  sail  ?  he

xa<  TCT/wiro8a,  x«i  iidyra  was  answered,^    "  To  the  Gods :"

€vrpc7rt<rdy.€voy  vXeTy,**  ipco-  upon  which  he  oflTered  up  a  prayer

Tw/xeyoy  8e  itov  irXe? ;  (pdyatj  for  the  good  of  mankind.     He  then

vpU  Tou^    ^€ovi'   €v^d{X€voy  obeyed  the  divine  admonition:   and

dvBpuitoiq  dya&a,  yeviaBai.  built  a  vessel  five  Stadia  in  length,  and

Toy  8*  ot)  itapaMva-arra  mv-  two   in  breadth.      Into  this   he  put

r.fiyfia-ayra   (nidcjjoi  to  ^cy  every  thing  which  he  had  prepared ;

fc^xoj  a-Tobiav  wcWc,  to  86  and  last  of  all  conveyed  into  it  his

•jrXaTo^  (TTaSiwy  SJo*  rd  8c  wife,  his  children,  ^ud  his  friends.

<rvyr»xd€yra  vdyra  <rw6ec--
^aif  Kol  ywaTyca   kcc)  Tcxya
Kai  Tovq   dvayx.amq  (piXovq
iu^t^d<TQc,u
rcyo/xcyou   8c   tou   xaTa-         After  the  flood  had  been  upon  the


f   ^cuala  Go. — A«ai'ou  m.
§  TtXtTOLS  o^e|a>Ta  Go.


*  avayfdt^eo-Sa/  Go.
X  <p^eig^a»cr^ai  Go.

II  Sc. — 2terirdpois  Dind. — Siparis  Eu.  Ar.
%  Roganti  autem  quo  navigandum  ?       Responsum ;    ad   Deos,     orandi
causa,  ut  bona  hominibus  eveniant.     Eu.  Ar.
♦•  Sc.—kX^*'  Vulg.


/


it  1 .
Pi


I  i.


I


iv


>i


!     (


It


i:


iif!


m


¥    <


J28

t5v*    OppfUV    TlVa  TOV  E*O"0l'-

Sf^ov  acjyiivai,  to.  Be  o^  t^o-
(p^v  ivpoyta  ouTf  Toirov  owou
yca^io'at  irdXiv  iX,^€7v  ei(  to

itaKiv    fJLerd     riva^    rj>A€pa^
Supievai    ra     opvea'     ravra
§€  mdXiv  et^  tt^v  vavv  iX^etv
Tol^      "jToSa^      ntiityjkuf/.iyov^
exovra.     to   Se  rphov    a(p€'
^evra  cv%  ex*  ^XS^crv   €U  to
-TrXoiov.     TOV     Se     Utuov^poy
iifw/j\['^vai  "y^v  &^aT:€<prt\vivatj
h€Kovra  T€    twv   tou   irXotbu
pa(j)Zv   fxepo^   Ti  xa<    iSo'vTee
'jrpoo'oxelXay    t^    wXcibv    ope*
T*y»  iyi^vat  fxera  t^^  -ywai-
xo^    xai    Tijf    Sriryctrpo^    xa*
toU  nv^epy^Tov  TrpooTcvvi^cray-
Ta  T>jv   "y^y  xa*   ^ufMV  i^pv-
(rdixevov     xa*      ^v<rida-avra
roi^  \f€o7<;  yevea-^at  fjcera  rm
cxjSayTftjy  tou  itXcim  o^ay^.

Ty  vXot^  jtMj  ("KPiropevoiAtyuy
ruv  vepi  TOV  H/crov^poy  cvc-
^dvra^'f  ^rireTv  avrov  iit)
cyofMirot;  jSo&JyTa^.J  Toy  8e
Bii<rov^pov  avTQv  [/.ev  avroiq
owe  €T*  0<f)^ijvai,  (pcov^v  Se  ^x
Tou  oepo^  y€V€<r^at  xtXevov-
<rav    u^     heoy     avrovq     uvat


BEROSSUS.

earth,  and  was  in  time  abated,  Xisu-
thrus  sent  out  birds  from  the  ves-
sel ;  which,  not  finding  any  food,  nor
any  place  whereupon  they  might  rest
their   feet,   returned  to    him    again.
After  an  interval  of  some  days,  he
sent  them  forth  a  second  time ;  and
they  now  returned    with   their  feet
tinged  with  mud.     He  made  a  trial  a
third  time  with  these  birds ;  but  they
returned  to  him  no  more :  from  whence
he  judged   that  the  surface  of  the
earth  had  appeared  above  the  waters.
He  therefore  made  an  opening  in  the
vessel,  and  upon  looking  out  found
that  it  was  stranded  upon  the  side  of
some  mountain ;  upon  which  he  im-
mediately quitted  it  with  his  wife,  his
daughter,  and  the  pilot.     Xisuthrus
then  paid  his  adoration  to  the  earth  :
and  having  constructed  an  altar,  of-
fered sacrifices  to  the  gods,  and,  with
those  who  had  come  out  of  the  vessel
with  him,  disappeared.

They,  who  remained  within,  find-
ing that  their  companions  did  not  re-
turn, quitted  the  vessel  with  many
lamentations,  and  called  continually
on  the  name  of  Xisuthrus.  Him  they
saw  no  more ;  but  they  could  distin-
guish his  voice  in  the  air,  and  could
hear  him  admonish  them  to  pay  due
regard  to  religion ;  and  likewise  in-


*  T0»  oguwv  root  Sc.
X  jSo(S>TOf  Go.


t  txBa>ra;  .  .  .    "Eiaau^pav  Sc.  om  in  Ch.  Eu.


B£ROSSUS.


29


&€(/(r(jScr<  xal  ncaf  aith  *  formed  them  that  it  was  upon  account

ha.  T^y  €V(r€^€iQ>v  i[opGJ€<r^ou  of  his  piety  that  he  was  translated  to

fiera  tuv  ^€uy  oJxij<royTa.  live  with  the  gods ;   that  his  wife  and

T^f  li  airrfiq  ti/jl^^  xai  T^y  daughter,  and  the  pilot,  had  obtained

yvvaTyia,  avrov  xa«  T^y  ^v  the  same  honour.     To  this  he  added,

yaT€pa  xai  Toy  xtjSepyiJTijy  that  they  should  return  to  Babylonia ;

fA€r€<rx^Y.€yai.  etiti  re  avroTq  and,  as  it  was  ordained,  search  for  the

oTi  ^Xet/VoyTa*  itdXiv  elq  Ba-  writings  at  Sippara,  which  they  were

^vXZva,  xai  u^  u/Aaprai  av'  to  make  known  to  all  mankind :  more-

Torif  ^x  ^iinrdpuv  aveKofAcvoK;  over  that  the  place,  wherein  they  then

Ta  ypd[AiM,ra  hiahZvat  roT^  were,  was  the  land  of  Armenia.     The

av^p6Troi(;f  xa*  or*  ovov  ciVly  rest  having  heard  these  words,  offered

i}  xupa  *Ap[Ainaq  ecrrt,  toI^  sacrifices  to   the    gods ;    and   taking

II  aycoda-avra^  ravraj-  ^vtrai  a  circuit,  journeyed  towards  Baby-

T€  Tor?  ^€ot^  xaJ  «ep*^J  ito'  Ionia.
p€v^viv(xt  €ti  BajSyXSya.

Toy  Sf  irXowy  tovtov  xaTa-  The  vessel  being  thus  stranded  in

xX«^€yTo?§  6y  Tj  'ApfA€u^  Armenia,  some  part  of  it  yet  remains

erifAcpoi  Ti\\  iv  roTq  KopKv  in  the  Corcyraean  %  mountains  of  Ar-

pctiuv    o/j6(7«    tyjq  ^ApfMvlaq  menia;  and  the  people  scrape  off  the

liafxUiv,  'Kat  rivaq  <iwo  tou  bitumen,  with  which  it  had  been  out-

'nXoiov    Mfxi'^etv    ^iroluWa^  wardly  coated,  and  make  use  of  it  by

a(r^XToy,x/)S(r^at  8^  a^^v  way  of  an  alexipharmic  and  amulet.

'npci   Tohi    dit(np<mia<rfM^q,  And  when  they  returned  to  Babylon,

^X^oWa^  olv  roikova  ^k  Ba-  and  had  found  the  writings  at  Sippara^

^uXolya  rd  re  c'x  ^^.cirdpa^y  **  they  built  cities,  and  erected  temples :

ypdfAfAara-ff  S^vopi^ai    xai  and  Babylon  was  thus  inhabited  again.

^oXe.,  ^  ^oXXa.,  KT^^oWa,  ++  —SynceL  Chron,  28.—Euseb.  Ckron.

xaJ  Upa  dyi^pva-aixevovq  ntdktv  5,  8.
inDcria-ai  rijv  Ba^vXuva.

*  """'"'  ^«-  t  -Vi  Go.
Eu.Ar"^'^^    Go.-pedibus  Eu.   Ar—Qy.  ^.r?,  ^*?oi,,  or  ^.J^.^Jf.     Ed-"  of

§  Sc—xaraxKn^iuToe  Go.—xaraxhaaBivTos  Go.  m.

II  T/oiToU  h  Go.— Ti Iv  Sc— T/  Iv  A.

IF^or  Cordyean  Fab.— Corduarum  montibus   Eu.  An

*♦  2,a^ipu,y  Din.           ft  Volumen  Eu.  Ar.           JJ  Sc.  ^xor.?ovr«f  Go.


^.  '


0


?!


¥i


H


m


Is   i


BEROSSUS:


FROM  APOLLODORUS.


OF  THE  CHALDiEAN     KINGS.


TATTA  fMv  9  B^puaao^
fcTo/wjo'e,  irpuTov  yewfff^at
/3acr*Xea  *  AXupov  in.  BajSy-
XSvo^  XaX^a7ov"j  ^uaiXev-
aai  §€  cdpovq  SeKce^  kou  xa-
Sfe^?  'AXairapoj/lJ  xaJ  *Afcij-
Xft'ya§  Tov  ex  naia-*;S/jSXa)v*||
€na    'AfA.fji(>uya    tov  XaX-

Toy  f/.vo'apov  ^Cldvy/jVf  tov
'Aw^hcoroVf  iiK.  TiJ^  ipv^paq'
(oirep  'AXi^ai'^poq  itpoKa^uv
npi^K€  <l}a>vjvai  r^  Trpafxy
cTfi*  ovroq  Sc  jCAera  trdpovq
rea-a-apaMrra'  6  8e  *A/3wS>j-
yo5^  Tov**  Z€rjr€pov  *Ay>ij-
8«T0v  />c€Ta  (Tapwq  €iyLO<Tiv  cj*)
€*Ta  Mc-yaXapov  jy  ex  Hav-
Ti|3/j3X&)v  woXew^,  ^a<n,\€V(rai
8*  a^Tov  aupovq  oxr&nta/Sexa*


This  is  the  history  which  Berossus
has  transmitted  to  us.     He  tells  us
that  the  first  king  was  Alorus  of  Ba-
bylon, a  Chaldaean:  he  reigned   ten
sari ;  and  afterwards   Alaparus,  and
Amelon  who  came  from  Pantibiblon  :
then    Ammenon    the    Glialdaean,   in
whose   time   appeared   the   Musarus
Cannes  the  Annedotus  from  the  Ery-
thraean sea.     (But  Alexander  Poly-
histor  anticipating  the  event,  has  said
that  he  appeared  in  the   first  year ;
but  Apollodorus     says     that    it   was
after  forty  sari ;  Abydenus,  however,
makes  the  second  Annedotus  appear
after  twenty-six    sari.)     Then   suc-
ceeded Megalarus  from   the  city  of
Pantibiblon ;  and  he  reigned  eighteen
sari :  and  after  him  Daonus  the  shep-
herd  from   Pantibiblon  reigned   ten


*  ^eifftXiwv  Go.
§  Almelon.  Eu.  Ar.
•*  TO  Go.


t  XaX5a/tt>»  Go.  J  'AXAffwa^ot  Go.

II  navTimXwt  A.  ^  'A/9u8ivbf  Vulg.

ft  Amegalarus.


BEROSSUS.


31


xa<  fMTu  rovTov  ^duvov  not-'
fA,€va  ex  naKnjS/jSXwv  ^acri-
K€v<rai  (rdpovq  Sexa.  xaroi
toStov  tidKiv  <fy/i<Tl  <f)janjvcn  ex
T^q  ipv^paq' Avv^^uTQv  rctap-
rov  TTjV  avrv]y  rolq  avco  ep^ovra

dv^fpufcov^  {Ji-iiiy,  €na  ap^ai*
EyeSw^axovy     ex    XlavTi^S/jS-
X&^V)  xa)  ^a(nX€V(7ai  trdpovq
oxT&^xaiSexa.   eiri  tovtov  ^-
ah    aXXov   <pa)^vai    ex    r^^
ipv^pa^     ^aXd(r<TV}q      ofMtov
xarb.  T^v  Ix^voq  itpoq  dv^pu-
itw  lAi^iv,  ^  ovofAa  'n§ax«v.  J
rovTovq  8c  <pv}<ri  izdytaq  rot
into  *Cldwov  x€(f)aKaiii}bSq  prj-
&evTa  xara  />ce^o^   c^fiy^a'a-
<r^ai,    nrepl   tovtov  ^A^v^vjvof
oiSSev  eiTrev.  ena  dp^ai  *AfA€[A-
yj/ivoy  XaXtaToy    ex    Aapdy-
%wv'    ^a<nXevcrai     8e    a^Tov
oyhooy    a-dpovi     Sexa.     eiTa
dp^ai     'ClTtdpTvjy    XaX^aTov
ex    Aapdyxuv,     ^a<rikivTQi.i
8e  a-dpovi"^,  *ClTidpTov  8e  re-
XeuTTjo-avro^  tov   vlov    avTov
B,t(rov^pov  ^a<rih€V(Tai  <rdpovq
oxTwxa^Sexa.   e'wi  tol'toi;  tov
l^yav  xaTaxXvcr/Aoy  <pvia-i  ye-
yGnja-^ai,  &<;  yiyea-^cu  ofMv
itdvT(f,q^a<Tiy^7q  8exa,  adpovq
8e  exarcv  ei%o<ri.


♦  ^?|«/  Go.  f  Edoranchus  Eu.  Ar.— EieSci^.trxo*  Go.

J  lUxun  Go.— i  Afxywr  Fab.   Go.  m.


sari ;  in  his  time  (he  says)  appeared
again  from  the  Erythraean  sea  a  fourth
Annedotus,  having  the  same  form
with  those  above,  the  shape  of  a  fish
blended  with  that  of  a  man.  Then
reigned  Euedorachus  from  Pantibi-
blon, for  the  term  of  eighteen  sari ;
in  his  days  there  appeared  another
personage  from  the  Erythraean  sea
like  the  former,  having  the  same  com-
plicated form  between  a  fish  and  a
man,  whose  name  was  Odacon.  (All
these,  says  Apollodorus,  related  par-
ticularly and  circumstantially  what-
ever Cannes  had  informed  them  of :
concerning  these  Abydenus  has  made
no  mention.)  Then  reigned  Amemp-
sinus,  a  Chaldaean  from  Laranchae;
and  he  being  the  eighth  in  order
reigned  ten  sari.  Then  reigned
Ctiartes,  a  Chaldaean,  from  Laranchae ;
and  he  reigned  eight  sari.  And  upon
the  death  of  Ctiartes,  his  son  Xisu-
thrus  reigned  eighteen  sari:  in  his
time  happened  the  great  deluge.  So
that  the  sum  of  all  the  kings  is  ten;
and  the  term  which  they  collectively
reigned  an  hundred  and  twenty  sari.
— SynceL  Chron,  39. — Euseh,  Chron,
5,


itf


K'  ^  li


i


i


BEROSSUS :


FROM    ABYDENUS.


iill-li


OF  THE  CHALDiEAN  KINGS  AND  THE  DELUGE.


.  XAAAAION  fjL€y  t^^  o-o^Aj^
vtpi  Toaravra,

Ba<nX€v<rai  Se  r^q  X^'/'a?
irpuToy  Keyerai*  AXwpov,  rov
Se  vitep  ioovTQv  Xoyov  ^loibovi/ai
0T<  fAiv  Tov  XeSy  Troi^ueva  o
Kf€o^  airo^ei^at,  BaariXeva-ai
8e  a-dpov^  8exa.  (rdpo^  8c
eTTiy  i^czMo-ia  xou  rpia")(^l\ia
erea,  y/jpoq  he  efaxoV^a,
cruxTO'Oi  8e  ef^xovra.

McTa  §€  toStov  *AXa7ra/>ov
a/jfai  a-dpovf  rpeiq,  juce^*  ovj
AfxiXkapoq  f  X  -TToXew^  IlayTi-
^idXio^^  i^aa-iXevas  trdpovq
ly  •  i(f>*  ov  SevTfpov  'AwijSaj-
tov||t^v  ^dXa<r<Tav  dvdhvyat
irapairXrja-iov  'flavvij^  r^y
JBeav   viiAilaiiMva.     fxt^     ov


So  much  concerning  the  wisdom   of
the  Chaldaeans.

It  is  said  that  the  first  king  of  the
country  was  Alorus,  and  that  he  gave
out  a  report  that  God  had  appointed
him  to  be  the  Shepherd  of  the  people :
he  reigned  ten  sari :  now  a  sarus  is
esteemed  to  be  three  thousand  six
hundred  years  ;  a  neros  six  hundred ;
and  a  sossus  sixty.

After  him  Alaparus  reigned  three
sari :  to  him  succeeded  Amillarus
from  the  city  of  Pantibiblon,  who
reigned  thirteen  sari ;  in  his  time
came  up  from  the  sea  a  second  An-
nedotus,  a  semi-daemon  very  similar
in  his  form  to  Oannes :  after  Amilla-
rus reigned  Ammenon  twelve   sari,


•  Sc.  Kfytuif  A.^Ki^ii  Go.— x/y«  Go.  m.

f  Sc.  ftiiv  ToS  Xiwf  Go.

§   n«vT</e//3Xoy  Sc— nawT</S//SX/Of    A.

^  'aivvn'  Go.


J  Jtv  Go.
II  'Avvi|Sotov  Sc.


1'


BEROSSUS.


S3


*AfA>[Mmv    ex      fTavTij^/SAwv
?o|e*    adpovq   ijS*.    f^^    ov
MeydXapo^  -f     ex     Uavri^i'
fiXuv  rip^e    adpovq   oxTwxa/-
dexa'    elra  Aacyj   itoifA^v  ex
YloaiTi^i^Auv  ej3ao-/Xeu<re  <rd-
pov^  Sexa,  e^*  ov  h    hupvet^X
•yijv  €x  ^aXda-a-v)^  dve^va-avt
&f  T<z  ovo/AaTa  rayra,  Eue-
8«xof,  'Evtt/ya/AO?,  *Ev€v^ov-
Xo^,§  'Aviy/AevTo;.   €7rJ  Se   toS
jLAera    ravra    Ei5e5&j/3ccr%oi'  1 1
'AvulMf>oi.  1[  /xc^  ov**  aX-
Xoi  Te"!*"!"  ij^lav  xai   'Slaov-
^poq  eV*  TOt/Toi^,  a>^  roi/?  irav-
Tflt^  etvai   j3aa«Xer^  Sexa,   wv
0  xpovo^  t5J^  ^aa-iAeidi  cvv^le
adpovt;     exccTov     etxocr*.     xa«
wep*  ToU  xaTaxXu(7/>coi/  itapo-
[Misc  (Jt-iVf  owe   ai[ccpdXXay.Ta,
Xeye*   o0t&>^*   jotera  E^eSwpe-
<r;^oy   aXXoi    Tive^  ripqav   xa*
^lai^po^y  CO  S>j  Kpovoq  irpoo'r}-
fA.at>€i    fjuv  €crf(r^cn    'nXrj\(oq
OfA^puv  Aea-iov  j^j^  '^' §§     '*^"
Xei^ci  8e  Trav  o  t<  ypafA-i^dTuv
^y  ixfifMvov  iv  'HXiovmXei  \\\\
ry    iv  ^nrirdpoKj-tv  ^^    airo-
yipvyj/oti,      ^i(Ti%!poq  Se  Tauxa
eTTixeXea***  woi^o-a^  ev^euq


who  was  of  the  city  of  Pantibiblon :
then    Megalarus  of   the  same  place
reigned  eighteen  sari :  then  Daos,  the
shepherd,  governed  for  'the  space  of
ten  sari ;  he  was  of  Pantibiblon  ;  in
his  time  four  double-shaped  person-
ages came  up  out  of  the  sea  to  land,
whose  names  were  Euedocus,  Eneu-
gamus,  Eneuboulus,  and  Anementus  :
afterwards  in  the  time  of  Euedores-
chus   appeared    another  Anodaphus.
After  these  reigned  other  kings,  and
last  of  all  Sisithrus  :  so  that  in    the
whole,  the  number  amounted  to  ten
kings,  and  the  term  of  their  reigns  to
an  hundred  and  twenty  sari.     (And
among  other  things  not  irrelative  to
the   subject,  he  continues  thus  con-
cerning the  deluge  :)  After  Euedores-
chus  some  others  reigned,  and  then
Sisithrus.     To  him  the  deity  Cronus
foretold  that  on  the  fifteenth  day  of
the  month  Desius  there  would  be  a
deluge  of  rain  :  and  he  commanded
him  to  deposit  all  the  writings  what-
ever which  were  in  his  possession,  in
the  city  of  the  Sun  in  Sippara.    Sisi-
thrus, when    he   had  complied  with
these  commands,  sailed  immediately
to   Armenia,   and   was  presently  in-


;\\


I  ;


.  1 1

'I


*  /xty  cJv,  with  ace i?f|a<  Go.  throughout.

f  MeyaXflvof  A.  J  hpls  Go.  §  'EvajSouXof  Sc.

II  'Atlw^iayw  Sc.  ^  'AwS  A«^o;  Go.  *♦  e5i»  Go. — ou;  Go.  m.

f  f  ctXXoi  to)  Tt  A. — dtXXo*  8yo  re   Anon.  Dind.

XX  ^ouaiou  Dind.  §§  viftirrri  iir)  S/xa  Go.

nil  'HX/ou  v6Xu  Go.         %^  ltcr7r6§otfftv  Dind.  ♦**  eT»>  TiXia  Go.


m


Mil'


!   I


34t

'KapavrUa  juev*  xareXa/xjSaye
Ta  ex  T6y  faeof.  Tpnri  6e
rjfjitpeyj  eTic*  0&7vy  iMiraa-e,
fAcriei   ruv  opvt^avf  'Jtiipfjv  ^

TOW  tSaroij  cxSiJcrav*  at  Se
cxSfxo/xcvoy  (Tipiaq  irfXayco?
aiMpi^ccv^Q^  atropiova-cci  §  oxi^
Tid^opuiarovrai  1 1  ira^a  tov
2ia"t3rpoy,  onia-u  xo/x/^ovrai,
xai    671*    ai5Ty|v^    erepai.**

«&^S^T^Tiff     Tp/T^<r,V    ^Tt;-

X«>>+t  a7r/xaT0§§  'yap  g^
•TnjXoiJ  xaTairXfOi  rot^  rap-
o-ol^,  Sreo//A<v||||  €^  av^pawwy
cc(pa)>tCflv<riy  TO  St  wXcrov  ev
'ApfA€Hr}  itepiaitTo,  ^vKuv  aXe-
ii^dpiAa^a,  xai  Tero-iv  eir/;^w-


BEROSSUS.

spired  by  God.  Upon  the  third  day
after  the  cessation  of  the  rain  Sisi-
thrus  sent  out  birds,  by  way  of
experiment,  that  he  might  judge
whether  the  flood  had  subsided.  But
the  birds  passing  over  an  unbounded
sea,  without  finding  any  place  of  rest,
returned  again  to  Sisithrus.  This  he
repeated  with  other  birds.  And  when
upon  the  third  trial  he  succeeded,  for
the  birds  then  returned  with  their
feet  stained  with  mud,  the  gods
translated  him  from  among  men.
With  respect  to  the  vessel,  which  yet
remains  in  Armenia,  it  is  a  custom  of
the  inhabitants  to  form  bracelets  and
amulets  of  its  wood. — Syncel.  Chron,
SS.—Euseh.  Prcep,  Evan,  lib.  9.—
Euseh,  Chron,  5,  S,


OF  THE  TOWER  OF  BABEL.


^y


TOi/^  ttpuTdvq  ***  ava<TX^^Tci(;
pufAri  T€  xal  fA€y€^€i  xotAjva"
^6VTa^  xa*  l\  ^f5v-f-j-+
yiara(ppovr,<rai^Ta^  dfj^i'vovui
€«-«<    rv'pa-ip    Yi>jparcv    au-


They  say  that  the  first  inhabitants
of  the  earth,  glorying  in  their  own
strength  and  size,  and  despising  the
gods,  undertook  to  raise  a  tower  whose
top  should  reach  the  sky,  in  the  place
in  which  Babylon  now  stands :  but
when  it  approached  the  heaven,  the


•  /uV  A.  J.  .  ,^  ,       .       V  „     ^

T   «TiT<uwy  A. — ejrtiTa,  uwv  Go.

X   vnpifjv  A.  JJ    »  y  *

,  §  a7ro§^eo6a-at  A.

II  ox...«  &o^^<VovT«/  A.-Sxnxa  ^opf,f,o,Ta,  Go.  ^  aJr^cr/  Go

♦•  ':-f'  A.  ft   r.a)  A.  n  ^'rvx.  A.  §§  i^./^^o   A.

i  /"-  A.  f  f  Sc.-'Ev  rS  B),  Go.  ♦•♦  Sc.  inserts  ix  yH,.

T"^"^  ^'^  ^*^-  III  <i./r/«'v  Go.


BEROSSUS.


35


TtVf  ^^V  '^^  do'O'ov  aval  rov
ovpatvov,  xai  rovq  ave/xot'^
^eoia-i  jSoj^eovTa^*  avaTpei/'ai
irep)  avTo7(Ti  to  /tc>j%av7j^ua,
TOW  Oij  ra  epniriajAeyejfQai
Ba/9uX£va.  reuq  8e  ovTa^
6[/.oyKu(T<T0vq  ex  ^eSv  itoXv-
Klpoovj^  (puvyjv  ev6'yxao"Sraj'§
fMTo,  Se  Kpovo)  xai  TtT^v*  ||
<TV(rT^vai  TioKifMv.  6  8e  totto^
ev  y  Tcvpyov  ^y.olo[AV}(Tav,  vvv
Ba^vXccv  xaXeiTai,  Sia  t^v
(Tvyxvcriv  tow  wep*  t»jv  8<a-
XexTov  'apurov  ivaypov^*  *Ej3-
palot  -yap  t^v  cw-y^wcriv  Ba/SeX
xaXowo-i.


winds  assisted  the  gods,  and  over-
threw the  work  upon  its  contrivers:
and  its  ruins  are  said  to  be  still  at
Babylon  :  and  the  gods  introduced  a
diversity  of  tongues  among  men,  who
till  that  time  had  all  spoken  the  same
language  :  and  a  war  arose  between
Cronus  and  Titan.  The  place  in
which  they  built  the  tower  is  now
called  Babylon,  on  account  of  the
confusion  of  the  tongues ;  for  con-
fusion is  by  the  Hebrews  called  Babel.
— Euseh.  Prcep.  Evan.  lib.  9. — Syncel.
Chron,  44. — Euseh,  Chron,  13.


•  %to\  tl$o^(oyrag  MSS.

J  Go.  m. — iroKC^gojQv  Go. — 7To\6^po\jv  Sc.

§  A.-^iy^yxaaou  Go. — ivtfxoiff^ou  Sc.


f  Sc. — tf/wia  Go.
II  Sc. — t/  t«vi  A. — TirSv*  Go.


!'


I


M


I


f


A


BEROSSUS.


37


fffy,  oitv^  air'  avrov  rj  nara-


might  commence  with  him.-^—SynceL
Chron.  207.


OF  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  JEWISH  TEMPLE.


1
!      <

flt^t


'  f  t


11


BEROSSUS :


FROM  JOSEPHUS,  &c*


OF  ABRAHAM.


META  Tov  yiaraKkva-iMv  Se-  After  the  deluge,  in  the  tenth  ge-
xaxTj  7€V€^,  irapa.  XaXhaioiq  neration,  was  a  certain  man  among  the
Ti^  ?>/  hUaioi  avTjp,  xai  /xe-  Chahlaeans  renowned  for  his  justice
ya.^,  'A.cfX  ra  ovpdvKx.  e/xirci-  and  great  exploits,  and  for  his  skill  in
pof,  the  celestial  sciences. — Euseh.  Prcep.

Evan.  lib.  9.


OF  NABONASAR.


*Airo  8f  'Na^ovao'dpov  rovq
%/>oyot'^  ryji;  rSv  d<rr€puv  xoij-
0'e£i>$  XaXhatoi  rjiipi^acraVf
y.ai  aito  XaK^ot!uv    ol   Trap'

Tf{*  eirciS^  TSicc^ovaa-apoi
(Tvvayayc^v  Taq  trpa^eiq  ruy
ispo  avrov  ^aaiXeuVy  rjcpdvi-


From  the  reign  of  Nabonasar  only
are  the  Chaldaeans  (from  whom  the
Greek  mathematicians  copy)  accu-
rately acquainted  with  the  heavenly
motions  :  for  Nabonasar  collected  all
the  mementos  of  the  kings  prior  to
himself,  and  destroyed  them,  that  the
enumeration  of  the  Chaldaean  kings


•  The  various  readings  to  some  of  the  following  extracts  would,  if  they
were  all  given,  exceed  the  text  in  size.  I  have  selected  those  which  appear
to  be  most  material.


T^v  AtyinrTov  xai  ift)  rr]V
i}fAfT(paif  y^v  TOP  vlov  toy
iavTOv  'Sa^ovxc^ovoa-opov  fM~
rot  itoXKrj^  ^vydfxfoc^f  e7rei6»j-
irep  ouf)s<rrurai  airov^  iit^-
^€ro  •ndvrosv  iytpdri^cref  %ai
TOV  vaov  iv€7[pr](r€  tov  cv  *l€po-
(TokvfMi^,  oX&>?  re  icdvra  rw
nrap*  rjfASv  }ux,ov  avao-Ti^ffa^,
€*5  Ba^vXSva,  fjt.iruv.i(T€v,
awe^rj  8e  xa*  rrjv  woXiv  e^-
fAu^rjvai  y^povov  eruv  i^^OfA-^-
-Kovra,  iKiyjpi  Krjpov  rov  Uep-
CUV  ^aa-iXeoi^,  viparijo-ai  te
{<p^<r))  rov  Ba^vXuviQv  Pdyiuit-
rov,  Xvpia^f  ^QtvUf]^,  *Apa-
^/a?,  ntdvraq  8e  vircp^aAko'
[Mvov*  ra7i  itpd^io-i  rclq  irph
avrov    XaXSatW   xal  BajSv-


He  (NabopoUasar)  sent  his  son
Nabuchodonosor  with  a  great  army
against  Egypt,  and  against  Judea,
upon  his  being  informed  that  they  had
revolted  from  him ;  and  by  that  means
he  subdued  them  all,  and  set  fire  to
the  temple  that  was  at  Jerusalem  ;  and
removed  our  people  entirely  out  of
their  own  country,  and  transferred
them  to  Babylon,  and  our  city  re-
mained in  a  state  of  desolation  during
the  interval  of  seventy  years,  until  the
days  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia.  (He
then  says,  that)  this  Babylonian  king
conquered  Egypt,  and  Syria,  and
Phoenicia,  and  Arabia,  and  exceeded
in  his  exploits  all  that  had  reigned
before  him  in  Babylon  and  Chaldsea.
— Joseph,  contr.  Appion,  lib.  1.  c.  19.


OP  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.


"kviova-a^  8e  o  ttarvip  air-  When  NabopoUasar  his  (Nabucho-
rov  Na^oitoXXda-apoctj-  oxi  6  donosor's)  father,  heard  that  the  go-
rerayixevoq  (rarpditriq  evT€  J    vemor,  whom  he  had  set  over  Egypt,


♦  v7ripfiaX6fjLt>ov  MSS.

t  Hud.  m.—tia^oKdiaffoipos  Hud.  from  MSS.


J  «v  T?  Go.


1 1

!  ft:-


\m


Im


\]


ill


38

Alyvitrrf)  MO.)  roT^  itepi  tiji/
"Evpiai/  Tvjv    KoiKyjv   yai  ttjv

•ycyovev,  oy  ZwafXivoq  avroq
€T*  xaxoira9rf?v,  o-yo-TTjcra^
tZ  vlq)  'Na^ov^obovo<Top(j}*  ovti
€T<  iv  YjAiy.igi.X  fXipti  Tiva  t^^

Tov.||  crvfji.[Jt.i^ai;  8e  fia(5ovxo-
hovocopoq  Ty  aTTOO-Tax'Tj,  xa*
Ttdt.pa.raia.fAtvoqy  avrov  re
ix.vpievo'eyf  xa»  t^v  xupav  «!

y.€iav  ^7ro/>j<r€v.  ry  Sc  irarpl
avrov  avve^fj  Naj5o'7roXXa-
adp^,  Mara,  rovrav  tov  xaipov
a^pw^aavriy  iv  rji  Ba^v-
Xoiiftoov  woXe*  ixerdXkd^ai  rov
jS/ov,  eT>j  Be^aa-iXevMTt  e<xo-

TV}V  rov  irarpoq  reXewT^v  Na-
Povxo^ovoaopo^,  xara<Trri<Taq
roc  Kara  t^v  Aiyvicrov  it  pay-
[xara  xal  t»jv  AoiTcrjv  xupav,

xai  Tol^  ai'x/*^^'^'''''^?  *Iov'
haKay  re  koI  ^oivtyiuv  xai
^vpuv  yea)  ruv  y.ara  rrjv  A^-
yvTtrov  i^yuv  avvrd^aq  ntri
ruv  (fnXuVf  fMra  ^apvrd"
T^j^jy  hvvdfJLfuq  xai  rrj^  Xoi-


BEROSSUS.

and  the  provinces  of  Coclesyria  and
Phoenicia,  had  revolted,  he  was  de-
termined to  punish  his  deh'nquencies,
and  for  that  purpose  entrusted  part
of  his  army  to  his  son  Nabucliodono-
sor,  wlio  was  then  of  mature  age,  f
and  sent  him  forth  against  the  rebel :
and  Nabuchodonosor  engaged  and
overcame  him,  and  reduced  the  coun-
try again  under  his  dominion.  And
it  came  to  pass  that  his  father,  Nabo-
pollasar,  was  seised  with  a  disorder
which  proved  fatal,  and  he  died  in  the
city  of  Babylon,  after  he  had  reigned
nine  and  twenty  years.


Nabuchodonosor,  as  soon  as  he  had
received  intelligence  of  his  father's
death,  set  in  order  the  affairs  of
Egypt  and  the  other  countries,  and
committed  to  some  of  his  faithful
officers  the  captives  he  had  taken
from  the  Jews,  and  Phoenicians,  and
Syrians,  and  the  nations  belonging  to
Egypt,  that  they  might  conduct  them
with  that  part  of  the  forces  which
had  heavy  armour,  together  with  the


•  lia^o\jxoip(T6pu>  Dind.— NajSou^o5ovoad/3w    Go. — Nabucodrossorus  Eu.  Ar.
-lia$»xo^goa6pw  A. — B.

f  Lat. — Fab. — but  a  youth — Qy.

X  Sync,  omits  this  passage.  ||  aurun  Go.

%  l|aC3if  Eu.  ♦*  U  Jos.  in  Orig.  f  f  rrjg  Jos.  in  Orig.


BEROSSUS.


39


ry}v  BajSyAwv/av,  avroq  opfA"^'
ca^*  oXiyo<rroq  irapeyei/ero
iia  rvji  ip-qf/.ov  elq  Ba^uXSva.
xaraXajSfiJv  Se  ra  itpdyf/.ara
Zioitcovf^eva  vito  XaX^a^wv,
xa*  Ziarr]pov[/.€v^v  t^v  ^a<ri-
"Kelav  v-no  rov  jSeXrArTOu  av-
ray  J  v.vpiev<Taq  i^  oKo^X-^pov^
rijq  Ttarpiyirji  dpXfi<;'  ^oTt;  /xev
alxi^aXuroiq  Trapacyeyofji^voq
trvyera^cy  dvroi^  aTroix/a^  iv
roTq  titir-^Zetordroiq  ryj^  Ba-
^vXuviai  ro'TOii;  dnoheT^aif
avroq  Of  awo  ruiv  ex  rov  tto-
Xei^ov  Xoipvpuyj  to  re  B-^Xov
lepov  xai  ra  Xofrta  Kj<rfji.rj<rai
^iXoriixu^.  T^y  T€  vadpyfiv-
<rav  (^  apx^ii  iioXiVf  ycai  ire-
pav  e^a^ev  Trpoa-xapiadfJieyo^
Mti  dyavcaiy^a-aii  irflo^  to
fAijKeri  Zwd(r\fai  rovt;  itoXiop^
xovvraq  rov  Trorauiov  dva-
<rrp€(povraq  inl  rrjv  itoXiv
y.araa-%evdt,€ivy  virepe^dXero
rpeZi  fA^v  ryii  cvSov  itoXeuq
vepi^oXovq,  rpeTq  8e  r^jq  ^^a>
toiTtwv,  Toi,^  f^i,  g'l  g'^T~^
itXiVKfov  xa*  dcTipdXrov,  rovq
le  €*£  aiirri^  rrjq  itXiv^ov,  Ka*
T€«x/(xa;  dlioXoyuq  tt^v  wo'Xiv,
xcw  rovq  icvXuvaq  v.o<rfji.ri<raq
if/JOTT/Jcww?,     'Kpoa-yLareaYjEva-


rest  of  his  baggage,  to  Babylonia :  in
the  mean  time  with  a  few  attendants
he  hastily  crossed  the  desert  to  Baby-
lon. When  he  arrived  there  he  found
that  his  affairs  had  been  faithfully
conducted  by  the  Chaldaeans,  and  that
the  principal  person  among  them  had
preserved  the  kingdom  for  him  ;  and
he  accordingly  obtained  possession  of
all  his  father's  dominions.  And  he
distributed  the  captives  in  colonies  in
the  most  proper  places  of  Babylonia:
and  adorned  the  temple  of  Belus,
and  the  other  temples,  in  a  sumptuous
and  pious  manner,  out  of  the  spoils
which  he  had  taken  in  this  war.  He
also  rebuilt  the  old  city,  and  added
another  to  it  on  the  outside,  and  so
far  completed  Babylon,  that  none,  who
might  besiege  it  afterwards,  should
have  it  in  their  power  to  divert  the
river,  so  as  to  facilitate  an  entrance
into  it :  and  he  effected  this  by  build-
ing three  walls  about  the  inner  city,
and  three  about  the  outer.  Some  of
these  walls  he  built  of  burnt  brick
and  bitumen,  and  some  of  brick  only.
When  he  had  thus  admirably  fortified
the  city,  and  had  magnificently  adorn-
ed the  gates,  he  added  also  a  new
palace  to  those  in  which  his  forefathers
had  dwelt,  adjoining  them,  but  ex-
ceeding them  in  height  and  splendor.


•  ogfitaoLs  A.

X  atttyxiffas  Vulg.~«vax«/wVoef  Dind.


f  oXoxX'^^ojg  Go.


ii


i^''=i


40

xev  To7(f  irarpiMtq  ^a(riXe*0K
h€pa.  ^acrlKeta  ixof^evcc
tiuivuvt  vitepaipovra  dva<rryi'
ua  nal  ry}v  iroXX^v  ifoKvre-
\eiav.  Maxpov*  8*  t<rft?«
€<rTat  idv  rit;  i^fiytjrah  '^X»jv
ovra  76  ^t^f  iitepBoKriv  u<;
(4.€yd\a  xaJ  VTt€pri(f>ava,
avvertXiff^vi  yifxepaii  Bcxa-
«cvTC.   ^v    Se    TO??  ^aa-iKiioit;

inj/^Xa  avyxoSo/xvjo-a?,  xa*  tijv

o/?€<n,  yiarcKpvT€v<ra<;  U»^pf<n
iravToBairor^  i^eipyda-aroy  xai
xaracrxefacra^    tov     xaXou-
aevov    xpc/xao'Toy  irapdh€ia-ov,
^ta    TO    T^v    yvvatxa   auTou

ccft)?,    Te^pa.iJi.fA€V7}V    iv    roTq


BEROSSUS.

Any  attempt  to  describe  it  would  be
tedious  :  yet  notwithstanding  its  pro-
digious size  and  magnificence  it  was
finished  within  fifteen  days.  In  tliis
palace  he  erected  very  high  walks,
supported  by  stone  pillars  ;  and  by
planting  what  was  called  a  pensile
paradise,  and  replenishing  it  with  all
sorts  of  trees,  he  rendered  the  pros-
pect an  exact  resemblance  of  a  moun-
tainous country.  This  he  did  to
gratify  his  queen,  because  she  had
been  brought  up  in  Media,  and  was
fond  of  a  mountainous  situation. —
Joseph,  iotitr.  Appion.Vih.  1.  c.  19. —
SynceL  Chron,  220,— Etiseb.  Prap.
^van.lib.  9.


OF  THE  CHALD.EAN  KINGS  AFTER  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.


tia^ovxc^ovocropo^  (/.ev  ovv
fxera  to  dp^da-^ai  rov  upoii-
prjfAeyQv  xe/xot^,  ifATtta-uv  eU
d^poooTiayy  fAC'njXX^^aTo  tov
j3/by,  jS€/3a<r<X€Uxc^(;  €t>j  tco-
(rapaxovrarpia,  rrj^  he  ^a.-
VkhjiloLq  nvpioq  iyenro  0  vloq


Nabuchodonosor,  whilst  he  was  en-
gaged in  building  the  above-mentioned
wall,  fell  sick,  and  died  after  he  had
reigned  forty-three  years ;  whereupon
his  son  Evilmerodachus  succeeded
him  in  his  kingdom.  His  govern-
ment however  was  conducted  in  an


•  B.  Dind. — fxaxga.  Hud. — juixglv  Go.
f  Dind.  and  others  omit  yt  iif.
§  M^hiat  Dind.


;|;  avaXi^yuaTa  Vulg.


BEROSSUS.


41


avrov  Ev€iX[/wpdh<ivx9i*    ol-
roi     trpoaraq    rZv    irpci7/*a-
ruv  dvofjuoq  xai  da-cXyuq  liti-
^ovXfVKfeU  vvo  TOV  T^v  aBeX-
<frf}v  iXovTOi  avTOv  "SripiyXur-
a-oopovf  dvTipi^vit  ^ao-iXct/Va?

€Tyj  Wo.

Mem  8e  TO  avaipe^'ljyai
Toyroy,  8»aSefa/*€W5  t^v  dp-
X^v  0  iin^ov\€V(Taq  avT^
^rjpiy'hffcroopoi,  €^<xai'Kev<Tiv
tTf)  Tewapa*

TovTOV  vloq  Aa^opofTodp'
X0805J  ivLvpUva-i  fxh  t^^
^aa-iXeiaq  iraTq  uv  f^^vaq
iyyea'  ii[i^ovA€v^t)q  8e,  hd
roTtokkd  ifMf>aiv€iv  xaxo^d^i},
vtco  Twv    ifnXuv    dzervfMta'

'AffoXo/xcvov  SeTol/Tow,  <rw-
ih^ovT€q  oi  iiri^ovXeva-avTeq
avr^f  xoi>^  T^v  fSa<ri}.€iav
'Kepie^tlYav  Na^oy»oj§9J§  t<v*
Tuv  ex  Bv-^vXuuoqi  ovrt  ex
Trjq  avT^q  iirta-va^dareuq.  \\
ittl  TO}JTQv  rd  inpl  tov  irora-
ftov  Tc/xij  t^^  Ba^vXuviuv
ntoXeaqy  ig  oirnjq  wX/v^oy  xat
da-<l>akTov  xarexoo'/bi^d'i}.

avtoZ  iv  Ty  iirrayunhytdr^
eTe«;  'jrpoe^fXrjhj^uq^  Kvpoq


illegal  and  improper  manner,  and  he

fell  a  victim  to   a  conspiracy  which

was  formed  against  his  life  by  Nerig-

lissoorus,  his  sister's  husband,  after  he

had  reigned  about  two  years.


Upon  his  death  Neriglissoorus,  the
chief  of  the  conspirators,  obtained
possession  of  the  kingdom,  and  reigned
four  years.

He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  La-
borosoarchodus  who  was  but  a  child,
and  reigned  nine  months ;  for  his
misconduct  he  was  seized  by  conspi-
rators, and  put  to  death  by  torture.


After  his  death,  the  conspirators
assembled,  and  by  common  consent
placed  the  crown  upon  the  head  o£
Nabonnedus,  a  man  of  Babylon,  and
one  of  the  leaders  of  the  insurrection.
It  was  in  his  reign  that  the  walls  of
the  city  of  Babylon  which  defend  the
banks  of  the  river  were  curiously  built
with  burnt  brick  and  bitumen.

In  the  seventeenth  year  of  the  reign
of  Nabonnedus,  Cyrus  came  out  of
Persia  with  a  great  army,  and  having


f  Vri^tyKtffoipou  Eu.


*  Euik/JL(i\o6povHOs  Eu.

J  AoSopoff<ipaee)(Os  Al. — X(x$a.tffaca^a.yrQ;  Eu.

§  Nowov/B<j*  MS.  EL— Na/3o»/5y  Eu.  ||  Eu.  Hud.— J»-/crTa<r«tt.f  Vulg.

^  TTgoffiXriKudws  Eu. — t^i\riKv^u)s  Syn.

G


III


i


t''


it


I '


42

ji*€&>^  iroXX^?,  xai  xaTao"T/}€-
\pdfA€VOi;  T^v  XoiwV  'Acr/av

/SyAwv/a?.  alv^ofxevo^  he  Na-
jSoyy^jSo^  T^y  etpoZov  adrovy
ditavrricraq  (Mra  t^;  Suva-
jtAco;^  xa»  itapaTcx^diAXVoq,
^Tnj&ci^  t55  jtAax^  xa*  (pvyuv
cikiyoaTOif  crwiyiKiurKfvi  dq
T^v  Bopciinnjvwv  woXiv.  KiJ^o^
Se-  Ba^vXuva  xaraXajSojUevof ,
xai  crwrd^ai  t^  cfw  t^^
-jroXcwj  T€i%>7  xaraa-Kdxl/ai,
hia  rl  X/av  a^y  vpayfJMTi'
arjv  xai  SvcraXcirroy  (pai^vai
rrjv  voXiv*  *Ai/€^€V^€V  iitl
Bopo"*7nrov,  ^xroXio/Jxijcr&w  tov

8ow  oy%  iirOjtAf/yavToj  r^y  tto-
Xiopx/ay,  aX>,*  iy^eip-^a-avro^
avTov,  irpoTcpov  )(^<rdfA€VQi
Kvpoq  <l)iXacvKfpu7tUi,  xat  Sot^
OiX»jTi7ptoy  auT^  Kapyuxviay,
i^eaefJiAl/ev  €x  r^^Ba/SvX&jy/a^.
Naj9oyyij8o^  fxcy  o'y,  to  Xoiiroy
TOtJ  j^ovou  hiaytvofnevoq  iv
ixeivTi  r^  X&pq-,  xaTeVrpo/zc
T^y  ^/oy.


BEROSSUS.

conquered  all  the  rest  of  Asia,  ad-
vanced hastily  into  the  country  of
Babylonia.  As  soon  as  Nabonnedus
perceived  he  was  advancing  to  attack
him,  he  assembled  his  forces  and  op-
posed him,  but  was  defeated,  and  fled
with  a  few  of  his  adherents,  and  was
shut  up  in  the  city  of  Borsippus.  Upon
this  Cyrus  took  Babylon,  and  gave
orders  that  the  outer  walls  should  be
demolished,  because  the  city  appeared
of  such  strength  as  to  render  a  siege
almost  impracticable.  From  thence
he  marched  to  Borsippus,  to  besiege
Nabonnedus :  but  Nabonnedus  de-
livered himself  into  his  hands  without
holding  out  the  place  :  he  was  there-
fore kindly  treated  by  Cyrus,  who
provided  him  with  an  establishment
in  Carmania,  but  sent  him  out  of  Ba-
bylonia. Nabonnedus  accordingly
spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  that
country,  where  he  died. — Joseph,
contr,  App.  lib.  1.  c.  20. — Exueh,
Prcep.  Evan,  lib.  9.


if:


BEROSSUS.


4S


OF  THE  FEAST  OF  SACEA.

Bij/)fi>(rcro^  Se  iv  irpwro)  Ba-        Berossus,  in  the  first  book  of  his
^vXuyia-Kuy,  ry  A«yf,  </w)(r<,     Babylonian  history,  says  ;  That  in  the

*  BaaiXi/arv  ixacav  Eu.


fAijvi  ^xaiSexaTTj  ayer^ai
ioprrjy  ^axeaq  'jrpoo'ayopem-
lAevvjv  iv  Ba^vXSvi  ii:)  ^ixepa^
wevrf,  cy  at^  ifjo^  etvai  ap-

rSv  olycercoVf  difr/jyeTc^ai  re
T(\^  oixia^  eva  avruv  evOeov-
xora  ^oXviv  ofMiav  t^  Bao't-
Xix^,   ov  ycaKeTcr^ai  Zaryav^v,


eleventh  month,  called  Loos,  is  cele-
brated in  Babylon  the  feast  of  Sacea
for  five  days,  in  which  it  is  the  custom
that  the  masters  should  obey  their
domestics,  one  of  whom  is  led  round
the  house,  clothed  in  a  royal  garment,
and  him  they  call  Zoganes. — Athenceus,
lib.  14.


m

I


1-1


:!    1-


MEOASTHENE8.


45


1         '

1         i

II

h

i

)

!  •♦

1    I    '

1

t£

r

1

■

1  •

i

.u


MEGASTHENES:


FROM  ABYDENUS.


OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.


ABTAHNOS  iv  rr,  'Aacvpioov
ypcuf)^^  M€yaa-0€yv}(;  Sc  c/wjo"*.
Na^ovMoZpoffopov  'HpaxXeo^  *
aXxijUfl^Tcpov  yeyovora  itti  re
Aij3i/T)V  xal  *I/3i7/)»'>jv  a-Tpot-
Ttyaaj*  ratjra^  Be  %e»^!ycra-
/bcevov  aTroSaajtAOv  aure&'y  eiV
Ta  SfCta  Toi;  wovrou  xaroix/-
o-a«.  MfTa  8f  XeyeTat  ttpl^
Xa>.8a/a)v,  a''^  dva^a^  eiri  xa

oTty  817.  y  <l)^€yia,[X€Voq  §€
cTirev  oCra??.  "  'Eyw  Na-
/3oyxo8^oa"opo^,  w  BajSuXwvio*,
T^Vjt>t«XXoy<rav  liMVKpoayyc'K-
Xw  avf/xboprjVf  ty/V  01/ re  B^Xo^
c/x;^  Tipoyovo^f  outc  jSaeriXciCt
Bt/Xti;      diroTpexj/xi      f^cipa;

<n];  ^jut/ovof  Torciv  iixfjepoKTi

•  'HfaxAiwf  Eu.

I  Sc.-^0'^(voi'^'>'  Eu.


Abydenus,  in  his  history  of  the
Assyrians,  has  preserved  the  follow-
ing fragment  of  Megasthenes,  who
says  :  That  Nabucodrosorus,  having
become  more  powerful  than  Hercules,
invaded  Libya  and  Iberia,  and  when
he  had  rendered  them  tributary,  he
extended  his  conquests  over  the  in-
habitants of  the  shores  upon  the  right
of  the  sea.  It  is  moreover  related
by  the  Chaldaeans,  that  as  he  went  up
into  his  palace  he  was  possessed  by
some  god  ;  and  he  cried  out  and  said :
"  Oh  !  Babylonians,  I,  Nabucodroso-
rus, foretel  unto  you  a  calamity  which
must  shortly  come  to  pass,  which
neither  Belus  my  ancestor,  nor  his
queen  Beltis,  have  power  to  persuade
the  Fates  to  turn  away.  A  Persian
mule  shall  come,  and  by  the  assist-
ance of  your  gods  shall  impose  upon

f   Sc — Slf.  OTI  diiri,  Eu.


Iri  awamo^  ttrcai  MijSij?  to
^Aa-cnjpiop  a\iy^\M..  u^  €t^€
aiy  icpoa'^€y,  Vi  Zovvai  tov?
iroXiijTa^,  yfiipv^tv  riva  ^
^dkaa-a-av  oorSc^a/xcvi^v  dia-'
rua-on  ntplppiCflVt  17  jtt/y  oKKct^
ohovq  (TTpa^ivra  ipipttr^ai
ha  ttJc  ip-^iMv,  Iva  ovre  off'
T€af  ouTC  ntaTOf  dv^pSiteov,
^fiptf  0€  vofMy  €Xov<rif  km
opvi^ff  Ttk^Cfivraiy  €V  r€  wc-
T^fl-*  xa«  xap^f^a-i  fAovvov
dXufXfvov'  (!*.€  r€  'Kp\v  i^*  vlov
^akia^ai  TatJra,  reXfo?
df/Amvoq  ycu^trai.*

*0  />cfy  K!ta-'ai<raq  irapa-
y(jff{[Mt.  ^dvia-TQ,  0  l€  ol  vaTi
EviXfAaKovpovxQ^  i^aa-^Mve.
Tov  Je  0  xtj^ea'Trji  aTroxre/va^
fJiipiy\i(reiprji,  Xcnre  italZa
Aa^a<r<Todpa<r'Kov,  toiStov  8e
dito^avovTO^  ^laitp  [Aopu,  Na-
^awihoxov  dtrc^eUwo't  ^a<n--
Xea,  wpoo-ijxoyTa  ol  ovbev,  r^
Be  Kvpof  tXuvBa^vXuva  Kap-
fjuiyfrii  i^ifMytviv  ^oapUrai.

(Kai  irep*  tou  Kria-ai  Se
Toy  Na/3ov%oSoyoVo/)  xr/y  Ba-
fiv}Juya,  0  avTOi  tcCCto.  ypd-
^»')  'Ktyixai  8e  wayra  jt>tey
^C  o-py^i  vtup  fivaif  ^dXaa--
<Tay  }iaA€0[Myrjv.  BijXoy  Se
<r(p€a  trav(Taif  %«pijy  exarxy
a'Kov€^|Mlvraf  xat   Ba^vXuva


you  the  yoke  of  slavery :  the  author
of  which  shall  be  a  Mede,  the  vain
glory  of  Assyria.  Before  he  should
thus  betray  my  subjects,  Oh !  that
some  sea  or  whirlpool  might  receive
him,  and  his  memory  be  blotted  out
for  ever  ;  or  that  he  might  be  cast  out
to  wander  through  some  desert,  where
there  are  neither  cities  nor  the  trace
of  men,  a  solitary  exile  among  rocks
and  caverns  where  beasts  and  birds
alone  abide.  But  for  me,  before  he
shall  have  conceived  these  mischiefs
in  his  mind,  a  happier  end  will  be
provided."

When  he  had  thus  prophesied,  he
expired :  and  was  succeeded  by  his
son  Evilmaluruchus,  who  was  slain
by  his  kinsman  Neriglisares :  and
Neriglisares  left  Labassoarascus  his
son :  and  when  he  also  had  suffered
death  by  violence,  they  crowned  Na-
bannidochus,  who  had  no  connexion
with  the  royal  family ;  and  in  his  reign
Cyrus  took  Babylon,  and  granted  him
a  principality  in  Carmania.

And  concerning  the  rebuilding  of
Babylon  by  Nabuchodonosor,  he  writes
thus  :  It  is  said  that  from  the  begin-
ning all  things  were  water,  called  the
sea :  that  Belus  caused  this  state  of
things  to  cease,  and  appointed  to  each
its  proper  place  :  and  he  surrounded
Babylon  with  a  wall :  but  in  process

♦  tit  Eu.


fM


t'i


Wpf


M


1  ,,


M  t'l


46

Ty    tKvei/fAevy    oUpayia-^rivai.

lovoa-opov  tI  /*«X/'*  "^^  Max€-
^viW  apx^ii  ^lafAtTvav  ioy
^aXwrtvXov,  Kai  fxe^  ere  pa
*itiKey€i,  Nctj8ou%o5ovocropo?  Sc
^lahe^diAevoq  tv\v  dpx^Vf  Ba-
^vKSva  fMv  €reixi<Te  rpinX^
irc/»j3oXy,  ^y  •jrcvrcxa/Sexa
vilA.epri<rtf  rov  re  * ApfxayiaAviv
itorafMy  e^'^yayev,  ilvra  k€-
fa^  Ev<ffp'^eu,  lov  re  *A>ipd-
ycavw*  vitep  W  t^?  Si'Tnra-
p^v^y  '7roX<0^|  Xaxxoy  opv^a-
fMvoi,  vepifAerpov  [xiv  retrtra-
pdycovra  itapaffayyeuvj  ^d-
^0(  8*  opyvtSv  eiMcrtf  inrt^Xaf
(itiarv^crey,  ra^  dvctymneq
a^a"My  to  'jtetiov*   y(.aXeov<Ti

iveretxtcre  he  xa*  t^?  'Epu-
S^/j^?  S^aXao-enj^  T^y  cir/xXu-
ctVf  xa*  Te/MjSo'ya  woX<y  €  xt*-
ae»,  xar^  ra^  'Apd^uy  elcr-
^oKdq'  rd  re  ^acriX'^ta  Scy-
8^015  TjoTcijo-e,  ycpfjfAaaxol^  va-
paheicov^  ovofAdtra^.


MEOASTHENES.

of  time  this  wall  disappeared:  and
Nabuchodonosor  walled  it  in  again,
and  it  remained  so  with  its  brazen
gates  until  the  time  of  the  Macedo-
nian conquest.  And  after  other  things
he  says :  Nabuchodonosor  having
succeeded  to  the  kingdom,  built  the
walls  of  Babylon  in  a  triple  circuit  in
fifteen  days ;  and  he  turned  the  river
Armacale,  a  branch  of  the  Euphrates,
and  the  Acracanus :  and  above  the
city  of  Sippara  he  dug  a  receptacle
for  the  waters,  whose  perimeter  was
forty  parasangs,  and  whose  depth  was
twenty  cubits;  and  he  placed  gates
at  the  entrance  thereof,  by  opening
which  they  irrigated  the  plains,  and
these  they  call  Echetognomones
(sluices):  and  he  constructed  dykes
against  the  irruptions  of  the  Erythraean
sea,  and  built  the  city  of  Teredon
to  check  the  incursions  of  the  Arabs ;
and  he  adorned  the  palaces  with  trees,
calling  them  hanging  gardens. —
Euseh,  Prcep,  Evan,  lib.  10. — Euseb.
Chron.  49.


*  Eu.  Ar.  translates   'Axpdxavov,  puteum,  joining  it  with   the   succeeding
paragraph.

t  Eu.  Ar.  adds— quasi  quandam  voluntatem   et  affectum  ex  semetipsis
habuissent. — Self-acting  sluices.


I!  ^'


i    '


SUPPLEMENTAL


FRAGMENTS  AND  EXTRACTS


ILLUSTRATIVE    OF  THE


CHALDEAN  HISTORY.


CHALDiEAN  FRAGMENTS.


OF  THE  ARK :


FROM  NICOLAUS  DAMASCENUS.*


fl


E2TIN  vnep  t>jv  MivuaSa
fxiya  opo^  Kara  rrjv  *Ap[A€-
viavt  Bdpi^  f  Xeyojixcvoy*  €ic  o

ptcrw^^va*,  x,ai  Tiva  eir*  Xap-
va%05  oyfiviMvov  iiii  rvjv  av.pa>-
p€iav  ox€?Xa«,J  xat  ra  Xe/-
ipava  Tuv  ^v\uv  iiti  ttoXi/
(Tw^r^vau  yevoiTO  8'  av  outo<j,
ov  Tiva  xat  M«t{r>j^§  ave-
ypa\p€v   «    'louSctiwv    vofM^€'


There  is  above  Minyas  in  the  land
of  Armenia  a  very  great  mountain
which  is  called  Baris ;  to  which,  it  is
said,  that  many  persons  retreated  at
the  time  of  the  deluge,  and  were
saved ;  and  that  one  in  particular  was
carried  thither  in  an  ark,  and  was
landed  on  its  summit,  and  that  the
remains  of  the  vessel  were  long  pre-
served upon  the  mountain.  Perhaps
this  was  the  same  individual  of  whom
Moses  the  legislator  of  the  Jews  has
made  mention. — Jos.  Ant,  Jud,  I.  3.
— Euseh.  Prcep.  Evan,  9.


•  Nicolaus  Damascenus,  a  writer  of  Damascus  about  the  age  of  Augustus.
His  fragraenta  have  been  republished  by  OrelUus.     Leipzig.

t  Baris  signifies  a  ship.  Walknaer's  dissertation  upon  the  word  Baris  may
be  found  in  the  Preface  to  Valpy's  edition  of  Stephans  Thesaurus,  p.  322.
Epiphanius  styles  the  mountain  Lubar  one  of  the  mountains  of  Ararat;  the
Zendavesta  calls  it  Albordi.

X  oJxiTXai  Eu.  §  MwoTjff  Eu.


H


I


50


SUPPLEMENTAL


CHALDEAN  FRAGMENTS.


51


w^

1

^*

if

'

ir=

rS


m

">*  if'

s


OF  THE  DISPERSION


FROM  HESTIiEUS.


TON  8e  ieptav  rovq  hiaa-u-
^€>Ta^  TO.  Tov  'Evi/aX/ot;
Aio?  UpuudTO,  Xa^ovraq  elq
^€vaap  r-ijf  Ba^vKuviaq  eX-
^eiv.  2x/6vayTai  ^rj  to
XoiTTSv   cvTcD^ev  ^TTO  ryjt;  aX-

yrjv     eKatTTii    xareXa/x^avoy


The  priests  who  escaped  took  with
them  the  implements  of  the  worship
of  the  Enyalian  Jove,  and  came  to
Senaar  in  Babylonia.  But  they  were
again  driven  from  thence  by  the  in-
troduction of  a  diversity  of  tongues  :
upon  which  they  founded  colonies  in
various  parts,  each  settling  in  such
situations  as  chance  or  the  direction
of  God  led  them  to  occupy. — Jos.
Ant.  Jud.  I.  c.  4. — Euseb.  Prcep.
Evan.  9.


OF  THE   TOWER  OF  BABEL:
FROM  ALEXANDER  POLYHISTOR.

i;iBTAAA8€^(7<v,oMo<^&;v«y  The  Sibyl  says:  That  when  all  men

omuj^  TtdvTuu av^pt^Tiuy^riv^^  formerly  spoke  the  same  language;

Toiiruv    idpyav     ^Trep^f-ye'^^  some  among  them  undertook  to  erect

o/xoSo^^(ra*,  ?7r(yj  c/^  tov  o^-  a  large   and  lofty  tower,    that  they


•  ifioy\w<Ta{af  tk;  <ruvoix/«f  Eu.  which  is  preferred  by  Bryant,  who  tran-
slates it,  «  And  mankind  being  as  yet  all  of  one  language  made  their  settlements
m  various  parts,  &c."— Bochart  proposes  ;roXuyAa,<ra/«f.  I  see  no  necessity  for
rejectmg  the  original.


pom  ava^utrim  rw  8e  ^eoiJ
av€[MVi  €[Juf)V(rfj<ravro^  dva-
rp€\pai      avrovq,     nai     l^iav

BajSvXSva  t*/v  tcoaiv  KXrj^r}-
yai'  iMxa  8e  tov  viaTaxXva--
jMif    Tnavok    xai    UpofA-^^^ex


might  climb  up  into  heaven.  But  God*
sending  forth  a  whirlwind,  confounded
their  design,  and  gave  to  each  tribe  a
particular  language  of  its  own :  which
is  the  reason  that  the  name  of  that
city  is  Babylon.  After  the  deluge
lived  Titan  and  Prometheus ;  when
Titan  undertook  a  war  against  Cro-
nus.-|" — Sync.  44. — Jos.  A^it,  Jud.  I.
c.  4. — Eus.  Prcep.  Evan.  9.


OF  THE  TOWER  AND  TITANIAN  WAR

FROM  THE  SIBYLLINE  ORACLES.:

AAA*  oTtorav  [xeydXoio  ^eov  TeXeuyTai  dTceiXat,
Aq  TCOT   cTrTjireiATjcrc  ^poroiq  ol  itvpyov  erev^ayj
Xw/)rj  iv*A.<ravpl^  ofjioijiccvoi  8*  ijo-ctv  aitayre^f

But  when  the  judgments  of  the  Almighty  God
Were  ripe  for  execution ;  when  the  Tower
Rose  to  the  skies  upon  Assyria's  plain,


•  In  the  Armenian  "  Deus  autem  omnipotens,"  which  agrees  with  the  text
of  the  Sibylline  verses  in  the  following  page.  Josephus  and  Eusebius  have
the  plural  ^eo),  Gods.

f  The  last  paragraph  is  not  in  the  Greek  copies,  but  the  Armenian  is  as
follows  : — "  Post  diluvium  autem  Titan  et  Prometheus  exstiterunt ;  ubi  quidem
Titan  adversus  Cronum  (soil.  Satumum)  bellum  movebat."

X  The  translation  is  from  the  fourth  volume  of  Bryant's  Mythology,  who  has
the  following  remarks  upon  the  fragment. — "  It  has  been  borrowed  by  some  Hel-
lenistic Jew,  or  Gnostic,  and  inserted  amid  a  deal  of  trash  of  his  own  composing.
The  superior  antiquity  of  that  part  which  I  have  laid  before  the  reader,  is  plain
from  its  being  mentioned  by  Josephus.  Some  lines  are  likewise  quoted  by
Athenagoras,  and  Theophilus  Antiochenus.  But  there  are  passages  afterwards
which  relate  to  circumstances  of  late  date  ;  such  as  were  in  time  much  inferior  to
the  age  of  Athenagoras  ;  and  still  farther  removed  from  the  sera  of  Josephus."


■    V"


52


SUPPLEMENTAL


CHALDSAN  FRAGMENTS.


59


I


AvtUo.  a^dyaroi  {fjLcyaXfjv  cireS^ijxcv  &vayyii^ii)*
Ilvev fjuto" IV,  avTup  fiteir  avifMi  fAtryav  i'^ii^t  itvfyw
'PA//ay,  xa*  ^vr^TOiffiv  in  aXX^Ao*^  tpiv  upa-avf
Touvexa  to*  Ba^vXuya  ^porvoi  ToXe*  ovvof/J  c^evro.
Airap  iitel  itvpyoi  r  eir€0"€,  yXuara-ai  r   av^pamwv
Ylayrotaicouq  <pav<3ua-i  ZUa-rptcpov,  avrap  ana<ra
Taia  ^porSv  nXripovro  iJi.€pCCfiyt4vuv  jScwiX^wv.

'     And  all  mankind  one  language  only  knew :
A  dread  commission  from  on  high  was  given
To  the  fell  whirlwinds,  which  with  dire  alarms
Beat  on  the  Tower,  and  to  its  lowest  base
Shook  it  convulsed.     And  now  all  intercourse,
By  some  occult  and  overruling  power.
Ceased  among  men :  by  utterance  they  strove
Perplexed  and  anxious  to  disclose  their  mind  ;
But  their  lip  failed  them  ;  and  in  lieu  of  words
Produced  a  painful  babbling  sound :  the  place
Was  thence  called  Babel ;  by  th'  apostate  crew
Named  from  the  event.     Then  severed  far  away
They  sped  uncertain  into  realms  unknown  :
Thus  kingdoms  rose ;  and  the  glad  world  was  filled.

She  then  mentions  Cronus,  Titan,  and  Japetus,  as  the  three  sons
of  the  patriarch  governing  the  world  in  the  tenth  generation
after  the  deluge,  thus,

Kai  TOT€  8^  ^yuirv^  ytviy)  fjtepoTtuv  ay^puTtuUf

*Ef  ovTi€p  yiarayikva-fjioi  ^''T*  itpotipovq  yivir   av^pa^y

Kai  ^Qici'KfViTi  Kpovo^,  xai  TiTov,  'laiteroq  re,

The  triple  division  of  the  earth  is  afterwards  mentioned,  over
which  each  of  the  patriarchs  ruled  in  peace.

Tpiaraai  Zij  fX€p^€i  ycurj^  xara  xAijpoy  €Ka<rrov,

•  Omitted  in  Gallseus ;  Bryant  inserts  k.


Kai  ^cn<rikiv<T€V  enao'TOq  ep^wv  juiepdc,  owSe  /Aa%oyTO*

Then  the  death  of  Noah,  and  lastly  the  war  between  Cronus  and
Titan.

Kal  /*a%€(ravTO  Kpovoq  TirStv  re  itpoq  avrovi.


OF  SCYTHISM  AND  HELLENISM.


FROM  EPIPHANIUS.*


nPOTON  juev  at  tSv  aipe-
<riuv  'na<7uv  fxrjTtpeq  re  xaJ
nrponorvTtot  xa*  wofAaa-iaif
i^  av  fAYjrepeq  wevre  al  aXXat
i<pvr)<TaVf  y.ai  eia-iv  avrai  irpZ-
rai  re<TTapeq,

Upurvif  Bap^apia-fM^f  ^  rif
xa^  eavrviv  icri,  hapx€<ra-
ca  cup  rjiAepuy  rov  Abaf/.  em
Scxa  yeveaq,  euq  rvj  Nwf.
Bap^apKTfMq  §6  xexX)jTai}  dito
rov  fi^  rohq  dv^punovq  dpxi^-
yoy  nvcf.  e^Civ,  19  /x/av  crvfjupw
yiaVf  aXX*  ot*  Ttaq  riq  lavrS
ia-rotxeif  xa«  vofJLo;  eavrS
ycara  r\y  mp(n;i\kt\<nv  rov  Itm
^ovX-fiiAaroq  eyivero.


The  parents  of  all  the  heresies,  and
the  prototypes  from  which  they  de-
rive their  names,  and  from  which  all
other  heresies  originate,  are  these
four  primary  ones.

The  first  is  Barbarism,-}"  which  pre-
vailed without  a  rival  from  the  days  of
Adam  through  ten  generations  to  the
time  of  Noah.  It  is  called  Barbarism,
because  men  had  no  rulers,  nor  sub-
mitted to  any  particular  discipline
of  life ;  but  as  each  thought  proper
to  prescribe  to  himself,  so  he  was
at  liberty  to  follow  the  dictates  of
his  own  inclination.


The  following  extract  from  Epiphanius  is  given  also  in  the  Paschal
Chronicle  in  disjointed  fragments.  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  the  spirit  of  it
as  it  may  be  gathered  from  a  comparison  of  Epiphanius,  Cedrenus  and  the  Paschal
Chronicle.

t  Qy.  Patriarchism  ?


54


SUPPLEMENTAL


#


Aevre  pa.  Sxu^to'/Ao^  dfro
Tuv  ijiAepSv  roZ  Nwe,  (/tA€-
ra  Toy  xaTaxXu<r/xoy,  nai  /u€-
TtTTCiTa)  a%^<  T^^  ToiJ  irvpyov
o/xoSojM^^  xat  Ba^v)^vo^.  xoit
fjLera  tov  toS  iivpyov  yjpLvav
Itci  oXiyotf  €T€(TiVf  rovT€<m
^a>.fyi  xai  'Fayav.  Ot  tiv€(;
iitt  TO  T^5  EvpeoTTTji  xXrjUa  V€-
yf wtoTe^  T9J  rv}^  'Ekv^iu^  t'-^peij
nat  ToT^  avTuv  e^ean  irpoce-
y-pi^fjo-aVf  diro  t^^  toiJ  &^pa
r}'Kiyua^,  xai  eirexf^ya*  el  oSire/)
Oi  Opaxc^  yeyovacrt,

TpiTr]/EXX.€vi(r[AOi  diro  tuv
yjplvuv  ToU  lepolx   ^vaploi(jt.€-
yo^t  htd  TOi  t5j^  elhuXoXaTpla^f
xai   d}<;   itrroixovyro*  T>jyixau-
Ta  exacTTo^  xaTa  nva  Sfio-*-
haifAonavy  itzl  to  fxdWov  -tto-
AiTixwTe/joy  xai  cVi  ci^'^?,   xai
Ktea-fAOV^  eihuXuv  TaTTecr^at  Ta
ToJy  dv^puituv  yevyi,    OT^  totc
OTw;^iJo'ayTe?     ^wo/ouy  f     8<a
X/J&j/xaTOjy  ypd(povT€<:  rvjv  dp-
XfjVf    xa«   a7r€ixa^oyT€jJ    tov^
vaXai  -Tra^'   a^ToIV  rcTifxi^fAi-
vovq,  r,  Tvpdvvov<;  ^  ^717/xoya?,  ^
T/ya^  Ti  S/jacravTa?  c'y  t^/S/oj,
/xyi7^>7^  Tx  SoxoiJy  a|/oy  §/  ^^X-
xij^  Te,  ^  <rfij/*aTfii>y  (vputnta^.


The  second  is  Scythism  which
prevailed  from  the  days  of  Noah  and
thence  downwards  to  the  building  of
the  tower  and  Babylon,  and  for  a  few
years  subsequently  to  that  time,  that
is  to  the  days  of  Phalec  and  Ragau.
But  the  nations  which  incline  upon  the
borders  of  Europe  continued  addicted
to  the  Scythic  heresy,  and  the  cus-
toms of  the  Scythians  to  the  age  of
Thera,  and  afterwards ;  of  this  sect
also  were  the  Thracians.


The    third    is    Hellenism,    which
originated   in   the   days    of    Seruch
with  the  introduction  of  idolatry:  and
as  men  had  hitherto  followed  each
some  demonolatrous  superstition  of
his   own,    they  were    now    reduced
to  a  more  estabhshed  form  of  polity,
and   to  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of
idols.    And  the  followers  of  this  be-
gan with  the  use  of  painting,  making
likenesses  of  those  whom  they  had
formerly  honoured,   either  kings  or
chiefs,  or  men  who  in  their  lives  had
performed  actions  which  they  deemed
worthy  of  record,  by  strength  or  ex-
cellence of  body.


•  Epiphanius  divides  the  word  thus,  Jo-ro^xoDy  r^,  and  in  the  following
passage  places  the  full  stop  after  S.a^oif,  and  a  comma  after  y.'y„,  introducing
after  ..'So^Xo..  the  words  ^b  to/  y,  iva^fdl/xoa.  I  have  in  the  whole  passage
followed  the  Paschal  Chronicle.

t    iS.O^-o/'oUI.  Ep.  J    «T.IXOW^>Tlf  Ep.


CHALDiEAN  FRAGMENTS.


55


Alyvimoi  he  ofjicv  xa*  Ba-
^vXuvioif  xa*  ^p^ye^  xa*  ^oi-
nvitq  ravTVjtT)  rrjq  ^pi^a-yceioL^
irrpuToi  (KTi^yi^rai  ytyoyao'iv
dyaXfxarovQiiaq  re  yea)  fAva-

TT/pluy,  df^     UV     TO.     TtXe^tTTO,

t\^  'EXXTjya^  fjt.€Tvjvex^i^  dtto
T^j  Kex^OTTOj  ^Am/a^.  xa»  xa-
^e^f.  MereTceira  8e  xai
ixTTtpcf}  woXt;,  rcv<;  irep]  Kpovov
xa*  'Pfay,  Ata,  re  xa*  'Airo'A-
Xuvay  xa*  xaS'fl^^  ^eovq  dva-
yop€v<ravreq.


The  Egyptians,  and  Babylonians,
and  Phrygians,  and  Phoenicians  were
the  first  propagators  of  this  supersti-
tion of  making  images,  and  of  the
mysteries  :  from  whom  it  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Greeks  from  the  time
of  Cecrops  downwards.  But  it  was
not  till  afterwards  and  at  a  consi-
derable interval  that  Cronus  and
Rhea,  Zeus  and  Apollo,  and  the  rest
were  esteemed  and  honoured  as
gods.


The  following  extract  is  given  in  Epiphanius  preceding  the
above.


EIIEITA  oe  ano  ruv  y^povuv
Toy  ®dypa  rov  irarpo^  *A^pa-
ufA,  xa*  hi  ayaXfjidruv  rvv
vXavrjv  ryjq  elhuXoXarpiag  el-
jcrrjyyjo'dfA^voif  rovq  eavruv  irpo-
irocropaq  hi*  a7i:eiycoyi<r[Auv  reri~
fMjxoTtf,  xa*  Tot*^  irpo*  avrZv
rer€Xevrv}y.ora^  rext^vjo-cifAeyoi,
ix.  y.epaf/.eiY.^t;  €irta^[ji.v](;  to
w^wToy,  eireira  eycda-rvj^  T€%y>j^
l^ifAVja-afAeyv}/;,  ol-KohofAOi  [A,ey  XL
^ov  ^ea-ayre^f  apyvpo%moi  he,
xa*  X^coxoQif  hih  rvi(;  Ihiaq
tXvjq  TcxTrjya^yo*,  ovru  yea)
TexToyff,  xa*  ol  X6t^c|ij^.


And  from  the  times  of  Tharra  the
father  of  Abraham,  they  introduced
images  and  all  the  errors  of  idola-
try ;  honouring  their  forefathers,  and
their  departed  predecessors  with
effigies  which  they  fashioned  after
their  likeness.  They  first  made
these  effigies  of  earthern  ware,  but
afterwards  according  to  their  dif-
ferent arts  they  sculptured  them  in
stone,  and  cast  them  in  silver  and
gold,  and  wrought  them  in  wood,
and  all  kinds  of  diflTerent  materials.


I  I


56


SUPPLEMENTAL


CHALD.IEAN  FRAOMENTS.


.07


1  I


■  ^n


OF   HELLENISM


FROM  CEDRENUS.


EK   r^i  [(pvXy^i    rov     *ld(p€^

rov  ^oy[/,arof  ttj^  ctSwXoXa-
Tpciaq.  AvTOi  yap,  xaJ  o/
o-yv  a^T^  rov^  itdXai  yevofAe-
j/ovq  f)  iroAefJua-ra^f  17  viy€[Ao-
va^y  yuil  Ti  'npd^avTa^  av^plaq
^  ap€Tvii  a^iOv  €u  tod  piO)  to:/
[AyrifMV€V€<r^ai,  via)  ax;  ovraq
axrruv  itpoTtdropaq  avhpid<ri
<rrv}XZv  iTifJt-vjO'ocVt  ycai  &»^  \f€ov^
vpoafviwovv  avTQXj^  %(n  i^v-
(rla^ov.  Oi  §€  /xcm  rat/ra
av^puTtoi  ayvoovvre^  rvjif  rSy
vpoyovuv  yvuf/.'^v,  on  uq  ttpo-
wuTopaq  xa«  aya^uv  €vp€-
ta^  erifAtjo-ay  ixv^fjuzii  fJiovaiq,
&i  ^€OVi  ittovpavtov^  erifAov,
%ai    i^vtrtaCfiv   axrtot^,       Hv

8e   TO   T^5  aTt0^€Ua€Ui    C-^^fAO,

ToioZrov.  *Ey  roT^  UpacriyiaTq
airuv  jS/j3Xo<^  iTucrTovro  tu
ivifxara  avruv  tx€Ta  tcXcut^v,
x«<  xaT*  iKfTvov  TOV  xaiph
iopT^v  avrS  eircTcXoty,  Xeyov-
T€{  T^f  auTwy  ^f^a?  c/c  Ta^
TftJv  fA.ayidpo)V  iz-^a-ovf  tevatyKot
jMtjxeTt  xpiyfT^ai  ri  KuUc^ai
wpL


Of  the  tribe  of  Japhet  was  born
Seruch,  who  first  introduced  Hel-
lenism and  the  worship  of  idols.  For
he  and  those  who  concurred  with
him  in  opinion  honoured  their  pre-
decessors whether  warriors  or  leaders,
or  characters  renowned  during  their
lives  for  valour  or  virtue  with  co-
lumnar statues,  as  if  they  had  been
their  progenitors,  and  tendered  to
them  a  species  of  religious  veneration
as  a  kind  of  gods  and  sacrificed.  But
after  this  their  successors,  overstep-
ping the  intention  of  their  ancestors
that  they  should  honour  them  as  their
progenitors  and  the  inventors  of
good  things  with  monuments  alone,
honoured  them  as  heavenly  gods
and  sacrificed  to  them  as  such.  And
the  following  was  the  form  of  their
canonization :  they  inscribed  their
names  after  their  decease  in  their
sacred  books  and  established  a  festi-
val to  each  at  certain  seasons,  saying
that  their  souls  had  departed  to  the
islands  of  the  blessed  and  were  never
condemned  or  burnt  with  fire.


OF  THE  TOWER  OF  BABEL  AND  ABRAHAM


FROM  EUPOLEMUS.


nOAIN  Bac^vKwva  trpurov
[xh  yiTia^rjvai  vno  ruv  hia-
<ru^€VTuv  ex  rov  xaTaxXvo--
jtxot/,  flvai  Se  avToi'^  yiyayra^y
otxoSo^uierv  8e  tov  l<TTopovf/^yoy
•Bvpyov.  TteaovTO^  he  rovrov
V7[Q  triq  TOV  ^€0v  ivfpyiiaq,
Tovq  yiyavraq  hia(r'jrap'ijva,i
xa^*  oXijv  TTjV  yyjy.

AexaTTj    8e    yeve^  {^^tiv)
iv  iro'Xe*  Trj^  Ba^vXuvla^  Ka-
/xap/viji  ^v  rivaq  "kiyeiv  wo'Xiv
OvplfjVt  uvai  8e  /xe^epfArivevo-
lA.€yr))f,   XaXSa*W    Tro'Xtv,     ev
rpiayiauheyidTr}    yfvear^tai  'A-
^paa[A    yevig^f  evyeyeigt,    xai
ao(f)i^  irdvrai  virfp^e^i^Kora,
fly  8^  xai  T^y  aa-rpoXoyiav  xat
XaXSaikr/v  evpeiVf  eir/  re  rrjv
evue^eiocv  opy.'^a-acyTa  evetpea--
rijvai  rS  ^t$.  Tovrov  he  hta
ra   i:po(rrdyiJt.a,ra    rov    ^eov
el(;  'boivU-^v  iX^oyra   xaTOtx^-
a-aif    xai    rpOTsaq    ^\iov   ku)
(njXiyy>jf  xai  ra,  aWa  itdyra
hhdlavra  rolq  ^omxa^,  eva-
pea-r^mi  rS  ^aa-iXet  avrZv.


The  city  of  Babylon  owes  its  founda-
tion to  those  who  were  saved  from
the  catastrophe  of  the  deluge  :  they
were  the  Giants,  and  they  built  the
tower  which  is  noticed  in  history.
But  the  tower  being  overthrown  by
the  interposition  of  God,  the  Giants
were  scattered  over  all  the  earth.

He  says  moreover  that  in  the  tenth
generation  in  the  city  Camarina   of
Babylonia,  which  some  call  the  city
Urie,  and  which  signifies  a  city  of  the
Chaldaeans,  the  thirteenth  in  descent
lived  Abraham,  of  a  noble  race,  and
superior  to  all  others  in  wisdom ;  of
whom  they  relate  that  he  was  the  in-
ventor of  astrology  and  the  Chaldaean
magic,   and  that   on  account  of  his
eminent  piety  he   was  esteemed  by
God.     It  is  further  said,  that  under
the  directions  of  God  he  removed  and
lived  in  Phoenicia,  and  there  taught
the   Phoenicians  the  motions   of  the
sun  and  moon  and  all  other  things  ;
for  which  reason  he  was  held  in  great
reverence    by    their    ¥Atig,—Euseh,
Prcep,  Evan.  9.


W


5S


SUrPLEMENTAL


OF  ABRAHAM  :


FROM  NICOLAUS  DAMASCENUS.


ABPAMHS*  i^0Lal>.€v<T€  Aa-
fAaa-MVf  eni^Xvq  crvv  ct^o.-
rS  a(/)ty,a€yo?  ex  tij^  yrjq  t^j
iivep  Ba/3f X5v6^  f  XaXBat/wv
Xeyofxev-^i,  fAtr*  cv  roXty  ^po~
jiw  iia^avTccq  ko.)  ano  rav-
triq  Tiji  xupaq  <rvy  tS  <t^-
fepf  Xay  ei^  t^v  tot€  (acv
\avavaiav  MyoLniy^Vf  vvv  Se
*Uvhaiav  [A€T(fyir)(T€f  xai  o*
Siic'  imiuov  wXij^iyvavTt^,  irccJ
ft«'  iu  hip^  Xoya?  ti€^€i[xi  ra
ia-TopoviAiva.     'iov  re  'A^pd-

[MV    €Tl  xai   Vl!y  €V  T^   AcJCfAM-

axrjVTj  TO  oVo/xa  Bo^a^cra*,
xcii  x«/tA7y  air*  ayroiJ  St/xvi;-
tatf  *A^pdfAov   cUri<Ti;  Xeyo-


Abram  was  king  of  Damascus,  and
he  came  thither  as  a  stranger  with  an
army  from  that  part  of  the  country
which  is  situated  above  Babylon  of
the  Chaldacans  :  but  after  a  short  time
he  again  emigrated  from  this  region
with  his  people  and  transferred  his
habitation  to  the  land,  which  was  then
called  Cananaea,  but  now  Judaea,
together  with  all  the  multitude  which
had  increased  with  him ;  of  whose
history  I  shall  give  an  account  in
another  book.  The  name  of  Abram
is  well-known  even  to  this  day  in
Damascus :  and  a  village  is  pointed
out  which  is  still  called  the  House  of
Abram. — Euseb.  Prcep.  Evan.  9. —
Jos.  Ant.  Jud.  1.  7.


•   'AS^cti^rif  Eu— -A/8^«yuof  Vat.  f    B«/SuXaJ»«  Eu.

X  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  concluding  sentence  is  that  of  Nicolaus  Damas,
or  of  Josephua :   It  is  given  in  Eusebius.


CHALP.F.AN  FBAGMENTS.


58-


1    ',


II


OF  BELUS


FROM  EUPOLEMUS.


BABTAnNIOT2  yap  Xeyeiv
vpZrov  y^via^ai  B^Xov,  ov  nvai
Kflovov.  'Ex  rovTov  Se  'yevcaSat
B^Xov,  xai  Xavaav  tstStov  Se
Tov  Xavaav  yfVVfitTon  tov  Tta-
ilpa  rZv  ^oivtxa'v.  Tovtqv  he
Xovf/.  vlov  yei^eadaif  ov  Ctto  twv
*EXX'^vajv  Xeyea-Qai  Aer^oKov
Tiaiipa  Ze  AldiOTr&'i'  a5€A<|)oy
Sc  TwJ  Mfcxpati^,  Trarepoc
AiyuiTTtajv.  EXXijva^  te  Xeyeiv
TOV  ArXavTa  e^p'jjxevcn  ao"-
rpoKoylav.


For  the  Babylonians  say  that  the
first  was  Bel  us,  who  is  the  same  as
Cronus.  And  from  him  descended
Belus  and  Chanaan;  and  this  Cha-
naan  was  the  father  of  the  Phoeni-
cians. Another  of  his  sons  was  Chum,
who  is  called  by  the  Greeks  Asbolus,
the  father  of  the  Ethiopians,  and  the
brother  of  Mestraim,  the  father  of  the
Egyptians.  The  Greeks  say,  more-
over, that  Atlas  was  the  discoverer  of
astrology. — Eus.  Pr.  Ev.  lib,  IX.


1*!


In


I  k


r  I


FROM  THALLUS.


KAI  yap  BijXou  tuv  *A<r<n;-
picov  jSao-jXei/fl-avTo^,  xai  Kpo-
voy  TUV  Tiravoq  QaKKoq  H-^j^"
viyra*,  (paa-nuv  tov  B^Xov  -ttctto-
XejMvjxevai  avy  Toiq  Ttrao"*
irpoq  TOV  A/a,  xa<  Tolq  <tv>
avTco  Bfovq  KeyofAevov^j  iiSa
(pTjo-iVf  xai  0  Tvyoq  iTTTrjdeU
€(f)vy(v  dq  TapTr}<r<roy,

Kara  yap  t^v  SaAkov  i(r-
Topiav,  0  B'^Xo?  tipoyeveo'Tepog

€Vpl(Ty.€Tai  TOV     lAiaKOV  TToXe-
[/.OV  €T60-<  TxS'.*


Thallus  makes  mention  of  Belus,
the  king  of  the  Assyrians,  and  Cro-
nus the  Titan ;  and  says  that  Belus,
with  the  Titans,  made  war  against
Zeus  and  his  compeers,  who  are  called
Gods.  He  says,  moreover,  that  Gy-
gus  was  smitten,  and  fled  to  Tar-
tessus.

According  to  the  history  of  Thal-
lus, Belus  preceded  the  Trojan  war
322  years. —  Theoph.  ad  Aut.  281,
282.


*     jj'  xa)  X    Al.


M


SO-


SUPPLEMENTAL


OF  THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE:


FROM  CTESIAS.


nAPAnAHsini:  8e  to^t^

irapa.  marpo^  5iaSe%onx€vo^  tviv
otpXTjVf   iici  yevea^  rptuMj/Ta
i^acriXevaaVf    fJ^fXP^    2ap8a-
vaTtdKov,      'Ewi  rovrov  yap  rj
ruv  'A<r<Tjpiuv  rjyffAOi^ict,  /x€T€-

fjL€iva<Ta  TrXc/w  t5v  p^jX/iwv  xax
Tpiaxo(r/«v,  eTi  8  clujxovra,*
Ka^rd-rrcp  (pv}<r)  Krijc/a^  o  Kv/-
8w^  €v  T^  Scvre^^t  j8/)9Xy,


In  like  manner  all  the  other  kings
succeeded,  the  son  receiving  the
empire  from  his  father,  being  alto-
gether thirty  in  their  generations  to
Sardanapalus.  In  his  time  the  em-
pire passed  to  the  Medes  from  the
Assyrians,  having  remained  with  them
upwards  of  1360*  years,  according  to
the  account  of  Ctesias  the  Cnidian,  in
his  second  book — Diod,  Sic,  lib.  II.
p.  77.


FROM  DIODORUS  SICULUS.


*H  fAfv  ovv  tiyifAdvla,  tuv
*A<r(rvp(ooy  otito  N/vou  hiafMi'
vava  /Acv  TpiUMyra  ycvea^,
CTij  8c  itXiiu  ruv  "xpJuv  xai
nrpaxoa-iuVf  vito  Mri^uv  yiarf"
Xv^r)  Tov  itpoeipyifAivoy  rpoitov.


In  the  manner  above  related,  the
empire  of  the  Assyrians,  after  having
continued  from  Ninus  thirty  descents,
and  more  than  1400  years,  was  finally
dissolved  by  the  Medes. — Diod,  Sic,
lib.  II.  p.  81.


FROM  HERODOTUS.

ASSTPinN  apxoyruv  tSj^  The  Medes  were  the  first  who  began
avu  'Ao-nj?  ctt'  exca  cIkoo-*  xaJ  the  revolt  from  the  Assyrians  after
wevraxo  a,  irpSroi  Snt*  avruv  they  had  maintained  the  dominion
M^8o*  Yip^avro  aitlcraa^ai,        over  Upper  Asia  for  a  period  of  520

years. — Lib.  I.  c.  95.

♦  The  Armenian  omits  the  sixty  years.


CHALDiEAN  FRAGMENTS.


59


OF  NABOPOLASAR


FROM  ALEXANDER  POLYHISTOR.*


TOTTON  (NajSairoXauapov)
0  Hokvia-TCfop  ^Wi^civlpoq  ^ap-
SavaTraXov  xaXc?  iriiMpavra
irpoq  ^Aarvdyrjv  laTpdirriv
Mr^86/af,  xat  rrjv  ^vyarcpoc
avTCv  'A/IXWT1JV  Xa^ovra  vv/X"
dwjy  €K  TOV  vlov  avrov  Na-
j5oy%o8ovoVo/).  ovToq  a-rpaivfyl^
iito  ^dpoKoq  ToC  XaX8a/ft>v
jSacTiXew^  (TTaXc*^,  v.ara.  rov
avTOv  IdpoLM^  €U  N/vov  €ir«-
(rrpare^eit  ov  t^v  e^oSov
'KTOv}\fe)q  0  Idpcc-Koq  eavTov
erlv  ro7^  QaatAeioi^  iv€npi^<r€v,
xa»  T^v  otp^yjv  XaK^aiCiiv  Trejt-
peXa^ev  o  avTo^  Sat^onoXd-
<rapji  0  ToD  Naj3ouxo8ovc<<rcpoy

lldl.T'^p,


Nabopolasar,  whom  Alexander  Po-
lyhistor  calls  Sardanapallus,  sent  to
Astyages  the  Satrap  of  Media,  and
demanded  his  daughter  Amuites  in
marriage  for  his  son  Nabuchodono-
sor.  He  was  the  commander  of  the
army  of  Saracus  King  of  the  Chal-
daeans,  and,  having  been  sent  upon
some  expedition,  turned  his  arms
against  Saracus  and  marched  against
the  city  of  Ninus  (Nineveh).  But
Saracus  confounded  by  his  advance
set  fire  to  his  palace  and  burnt  him-
self in  it.  And  Nabopolasar  obtained
the  empire  of  the  Chaldaeans:  he
was  the  father  of  Nabuchodonosor. —
Euseb.  Chron.  46.


OF  THE  CHALDEAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  KINGS :

FROM  ALEXANDER  POLYHISTOR.

Verum  haec  quoque  Polyhistor  In  addition  to  the  above  Poly-

iis    adjiciens,     scribit :     quod  histor   continues    thus:     After

nempe  post  diluvium  Chaldaeo-  the  deluge  Evexius  held  pos-

rum  ret^ionem  Evexius  tenebat  session  of  the  country   of  the

o

•  This  and  the  following  fragments  of  Alexander  Polyhistor  are  most  pro-
bably extracts  from  the  history  of  Berossus.


^


t;1


60


SUPPLEMENTAL


chaldj:an  fragments.


61


neris  quatuor.  Ac  post  eum
filius  ejus  Comosbelus  impe-
rium  suscepit  per  neros  qua-
tuor, et  sossos  quinque.  A
Xisuthro  vero,  et  a  diluvii  tem-
pore usque  ad  illud,  quo  Medi
Babylonem  ceperunt,  reges  om-
nino  Lxxxvi.  Polyhistor  re-
censet,  atque  unumquemque  ex
Berossi  volumine  nominatim
memorat :  tempus  vero  om-
nium eorum  numero  annorum
trium  myriadum  et  tribus  mil-
libus  uno  et  nonaginta  com-
prehendit.  Deinde  vero  post
eos,  cum  ita  firmiter  stabiliti
erant,  repente  Medi  copias  ad-
versus  Babylonem  compara-
bant,  ut  caperent  eam,  atque
ex  se  ipsis  Tyrannos  ibi  con-
stituerent.


Deinde  nomina  quoque  Me-
dorum  tyrannorum  ponit,  viii.
numero  :  quorum  anni  ccxxiv
et  rursum  reges  undecim,  an-
nosquc. . .  Postea  Cbaldaeorum
reges  xlix,  et  annos  cccclviii.
Deinde  Arabum  ix  reges,  et
annos  ccxlv.  Post  quos  annos
etiam  ipsam  Semiramidem  in
Assyrios  dominatam  esse  tra-
dit.  Atque  iterum  minute
enumerat  nomina  regum  xlv,
adsignans    illis    annos   dxxvi.


Chaldaeans  during  a  period  of
four  neri.  And  he  was  suc-
ceeded by  his  son  Comosbelus,
who  held  the  empire  four  neri
and  five  sossi.  But  from  the
time  of  Xisuthrus  and  the  de-
luge, to  that  at  which  the
Medes  took  possession  of  Ba-
bylon, there  were  altogether
eighty-six  kings.  Polyhistor
enumerates  and  mentions  each
of  tliem  by  name  from  the  vo-
lume of  Berossus  :  the  duration
of  the  reigns  of  all  which  kings
comprehends  a  period  of  thirty-
three  thousand  and  ninety-one
years.  But  when  their  power
was  thus  firmly  established,
the  Medes  suddenly  levied
forces  against  Babylon  to  sur-
prise it,  and  to  place  upon  the
throne  kings  chosen  from
among  themselves.

He  then  gives  the  names  of
the  Median  Kings,  8  in  num-
ber, who  reigned  during  the
period  of  224  years  :  and  again
1 1  Kings  during  ....  years.
Then  49  Kings  of  the  Chal-
daeans 458  years.  Then  9  Kings
of  the  Arabians  245  years.
After  all  these  successive
periods  of  years  he  states  that
Semiramis  reigned  over  the
Assyrians.  And  again  minutely
enumerates   the  names  of  45


Post  quos,  inquit,  rex  Cbal-
daeorum fuit,  cui  nomen  Phu-
lus  ;  de  quo  item  Hebraeorum
quoque  historia  meminit,  Phu-
lum  denominans,  quem  in  ter-
ram  Judaeorum  venisse  aiunt.


Kings,  assigning  to  them  a  term
of  526  years.  After  whom,  he
says  there  was  a  King  of  the
Chaldaeans,  whose  name  was
Phulus :  Of  whom  also  the
historical  writings  of  the  He-
brews make  mention  under  the
name  of  Phulus  (Pul)  who  they
say  invaded  the  country  of  the
Jews. — Eu.  Ar.  Chron.  39.


OF  SENECHERIB:


FROM  ALEXANDER  POLYHISTOR.


PosTQUAM    regnasset     frater
Senacharibi,  et  deinde   post-
quam  Acises  in    Babylonios
dominatus  esset,  et  nee  dum
triginta  quidem   diebus  reg-
num'tenuisset,  a  Marodach  Ba-
ladano  occisus  est ;  et  Maro-
dach Baladanus  per  vim  (reg-
num)  tenuit   sex    mensibus:
eum  vero  interficiens  regna-
bat  quidam  cui  nomen  Elibus.
Verum  tertio  regni  ejus  anno
Sennecheribus    rex   Assyrio-
rum  exercitum  conflabat  ad-
versus  Babylonios,  proelioque
cum    iis    commisso    vicit,  et
captum   una   cum  amicis,   in
terram    Assyriorum    perduci
jussit.     In    Babylonios    ergo


After  the  reign  of  the  brother
of   Senecherib,   Acises    reigned
over  the  Babylonians,  and  when
he  had  governed  for  the  space  of
thirty  days, he  was  slain  by  Maro-
dach Baladanus,  who  held  the
empire    by    force    during     six
months  :  and  he  was  slain  and
succeeded  by   a  person  named
Elibus.     But  in  the  third  year
of  his  reign  Senecherib  king  of
the  Assyrians   levied  an    army
against  the  Babylonians  ;   and  in
a  battle,  in  which  they  were  en-
gaged, routed,  and  took  him  pri-
soner with  his  adherents,    and
commanded  them  to  be  carried
into  the  land  of  the  Assyrians.
Having  taken  upon  himself  the


62


SUPPLEMENTAL


«


dominatus,  regem  eis  filium
suum  Asordanium  constituit;
ipse  vero  recedens  terrain  As-
syriorum  petiit.

Quum  autem  illefama  acce-
pissetGraecos  in  Ciliciam  belli
movendi  causa  pervenisse,  ad
eos  contendit;  aciem  contra
aciem  instruit,ac  plurimis  qui-
dem  de  suo  exercitii  coesis
hostes  (tamen)  debellat  atque
in  victoriae  monumentum  ima-
ffinem  suam  eo  in  loco  erectam
reliquit,  Chaldaicisque  litteris
fortitudinem  suam  ad  futuri
temporis  memoriam  incidi
jussit.  Et  Tarsum  urbem,
inquit,  ipse  ad  similitudinem
Babylonis  condidit,  quam  ap-
pellavit  Tharsin.  Et  post
omnia  facta  Sinnecherimi  il-
lud  quoque  addens,  ait  eum
XVIII  annis  vixisse  (in  im-
perio)  ;  et  per  insidias  quas
illi  paravit  filius  Ardumusa-
nus,  e  vita  excessisse.


government  of  the  Babylonians,
he  appointed  his  son  Asordanius
their  king,  and  he  himself  retired
again  into  Assyria.

When    he   received  a    report
that  the  Greeks  had  made  a  hos-
tile   descent    upon    Cilicia,     he
marched  against  them  and  fought
with  them  a  pitched   battle,  in
which,  though  he  suffered  great
loss   in  his  own  army,  he  over-
threw them,  and  upon  the  spot
he  erected  the  statue  of  himself
as  a  monument   of  his  victory  ;
and  ordered  his  prowess  to  be
inscribed  upon  it  in  theChaldaean
characters,  to  hand  down  the  re-
membrance of  it  to  posterity.  He
built  also  the  city  of  Tarsus  after
the  likeness  of  Babylon,  which
he  called   Tharsis.      And  after
enumerating  the  various  exploits
of  Sinnecherim,  he  adds  that  he
reigned  1 8  years,  and  was  cut  off
by  a  conspiracy  which  had  been
formed  against  his  life  by  his  son
Ardumusanus. — Eu.  Ar.  Chron.
42.


CHALDEAN  FRAGMENTS.


62.


OF  SENECHERIB  AND  HIS  SUCESSORS:


FROM  ALEXANDER  POLYHISTOR.


Ac  post  eum  Senecheribum
Polyhistor  fuisse  regem  ait.
p.  41.

(Tamen  Sinecherib  ipsum,
et  filium  ejus  Asordanum,  ac
Marodach  Baladanum,  Chal-
daeus  quoque  historicus  com-
memorat,  cum  illis  etiam  Na-
buchodonosorum.)  p.  42.

Regnavit  Sinecherim,  ut
Polyhistor  exponit,  annis  xviii.
et  post  eum  ejusdem  fiHus  annis
viii.  Postea  vero  Sammuges
annis  xxi.  et  frater  ejus  annis
XXI.  Ac  deinde  Nabupalsar
annis  xx.  et  post  eum  Nabu-
codrossorus  annis  xliii.  (A
Sinecherimo  usque  ad  Nabu-
codrossorum  comprehendun-
tur  anni  omnino  lxxxviii.)
p.  44.

Post  Samugen  vero  Sar-
danapallus  Chaldaeus  regnavit
annis  xxi.  Hie  exercitum  As-
tyagi  Medo,  familiae  Principi
ac  Satrapae,  auxilio  misit,  ut
Amuhean  Astyagis  filiam  Na-
bucodrossoro  filio  suo  uxorem
daret.  Ac  deinde  regnavit  Na-
bucodrossorus  annis  xliii,  et


And  after  him  (Pul)  according
to  Polyhistor,  Senecherib  was
king.

(The  Chaldaean  historian  also
makes  mention  of  Senecherib
himself,  and  Asordanus  his  son,
and  Marodach  Baladanus,  as  well
as  Nabuchodonosorus.)

And  Sinecherim  reigned  eigh-
teen years ;  and  after  him  his  son
eight  years.  Then  reigned  Sam-
muges twenty-one  years,  and
likewise  his  brother  twenty-one
years.  Then  reigned  Nabu-
palsar  twenty  years,  and  after'
him  Nabucodrossorus  forty-three
years.  (Therefore,  from  Sineche-
rim to  Nabucodrossorus  is  com-
prehended a  period  altogether  of
eighty-eight  years.)

After  Samuges,  Sardanapallus
the  Chaldaean,  reigned  twenty-
one  years.  He  sent  an  army  to
the  assistance  of  Astyages  the
Mede,  Prince  and  Satrap  of  the
family,  that  he  might  give  the
Amuhean  daughter  of  Astyages
to  his  son  Nabucodrossorus.
Then  reigned  Nabucodrossorus


'A  *i


\


63-


SUPPLEMENTAL


III


contractis  copiis  veniens  cap-
tives duxit  Judaeos  et  Phoo-
nices  ac  Syros.

Et   post  Nabucodrossorum
regnavit  filius  ejus  Amilmaru-

dochus,  annis  xii Postque

ilium    in    Chaldaeos    regnavit
Neglisarus  annis  iv.  et  postea
Nabodenus  annis  xvii.     Sub
quo  Cyrus   Cambysis   (filius)
exercitum  duxit  in  terram  Ba-
byloniorum.     Cui  obviam  ivit
Nabodenus,  atque  victus  fugae
se  dedit :  et  regnavit  Babylone
Cyrus   annis  ix.      Deinde  in
campo  Daas  altero  certamine
inito  mortuus  est.    Post  quem
Cambyscs   regnat   annis  viii.
ac  deinde  Darius  annis  xxxvi.
post  quem  Xerxes  caeteri  quo-
que  Persarum  reges.  p.  44.


forty-three  years;  and  he  came
with  a  mighty  army,  and  led  the
Jews,  and  Pha?nicians,  and  Sy-
rians into  captivity.

And    after    Nabucodrorossus
reigned    his    son    Amilmarudo-

chus,  twelve  years And  after

him  Neglisarus  reigned  over  the
Chaldaeans  four  years  ;  and  then
Nabodenus  seventeen  years.     In
his  reign  Cyrus,  the  son  of  Cam-
byses,  invaded  the  country  of  the
Babylonians.     Nabodenus  went
out  to  give  him  battle,  but  was
defeated,  and  betook  himself  to
flight :  and  Cyrus  reigned  at  Ba-
bylon nine  years.    He  was  killed,
however,  in  another  battle,  which
took  place  in  the  plain  of  Daas.
After    him    reigned    Cambyses
eight  years ;  then  Darius  thirty-
six  years ;  after  him  Xerxes  and
the  other  kings  of  the  Persian
line. — Eu.  Ar.    Chron.  pp.  41,
42.  44,  45.


CHALD.EAN  FRAGMENTS.


63


OF  SENECHERIB  AND  HIS  SUCCESSORS  :


FROM  ABYDENUS.


EoDEM  tempore  vicessimus
quintus  utique  Sinecherib
ipse  ex  regibus  vix  demum
inventus  est,  qui  Babylonem
sub  ditionem  redigens  sube-
git,  et  ad  litus  maris  Ciliciae
Graecorum  classem  profliga-
tam  depressit ;  condiditque
templum  Athenarum,  statuas
aereas  erexit,  litterisque  sane,
inquit,  suam  fortitudem  exa-
ravit ;  et  Tarsum  ad  figuram
et  similitudinem  Babylonis
aedificavit;  ut  Tarsum  Cyd-
nus  flumen  interflueret,  Eu-
phratis  nimirum  more  Baby-
lonem interfluentis.

Ex  ordine  autem  post  eum
Nergillus  regnavit,  qui  a  filio
Adramelo  est  interemptus :
et  ipsum  quoque  frater  ejus
Axerdis  ex  eodem  patre,
non  autem  ex  eadem  matre,
occidit;  et  exercitum  perse-
quutus  in  Byzantinorum  ur-
bem  includit.  Qui  primus
mercenaries  milites  sibi  col-
legit  ;  quorum  unus  Pytha-
goras fuit,  Chaldaeorum  sa-
pientiae  discipulus.  Axerdis
autem    ^gyptum    partesque


At  the  same  time  the  twenty-
fifth  who  was  Senecherib  can
hardly  be  recognized  among  the
kings.  It  was  he  who  subjected
the  city  of  Babylon  to  his  power,
and  defeated  and  sunk  a  Grecian
fleet  upon  the  coast  of  Cilicia.
He  built  also  a  temple  at  Athens
and  erected  brazen  statues,  upon
which  he  engraved  his  own  ex-
ploits. And  he  built  the  city  of
Tarsus  after  the  plan  and  like-
ness of  Babylon,  that  the  river
Cydnus  should  flow  through  Tar-
sus, in  the  same  manner  as  the
Euphrates  intersected  Babylon.

Next  in  order  after  him
reigned  Nergillus  who  was  as-
sassinated by  his  son  Adrame-
lus:  and  he  also  was  slain  by
Axerdis  (his  brother  by  the
same  father,  but  of  a  different
mother,)  and  his  army  pursued
and  blockaded  in  the  city  of
Byzantium.  Axerdis  was  the
first  that  levied  mercenary  sol-
diers, one  of  whom  was  Pytha-
goras a  follower  of  the  wisdom
of  the  Chaldaeans  :  he  also  re-
duced under  his  dominion  Egypt


'M


G4


CHALDiBAN  FRAGMENTS.


Syriae  inferioris  in  suam  po-
testatem    redegit;     ex     qua
Sardanapallus  quoque  extitit.
Post  quern  Saracus  in  As-
syrios    regnavit :     et     quum
compertum  habuisset,  multi-
tudinem    barbarorum    maxi-
mam  e    mari  exisse,    ut  im-
petum  faceret,  Busalossoruni
ducem  confestim   Babylonem
misit.     Ille  autem  consilio  re-
bellionis  inito,  Amuhean  As-
tyagis   Medi   familise  Princi-
pis    filiam    Nabuchodrossoro
suo    filio  uxorera   despondit.
Ac  deinde  protinus  discedens
accelerat  aggredi  Ninum,  id
est,    urbem    Ninive.       Cum
autem   de   his   omnibus  cer-
tior  est  factus  Saracus  Rex,
concremavit      regiam     aulam
Evoriti.-j"     Nabuchodrossorus
vero  accipiens  regni  imperi-
um,  valido  muro   Babylonem
cinxit.


and  the  country  of  Caelo-Syria
from  whence  came  Sardanapal-
lus.*

After   him    Saracus    reigned
over  the  Assyrians,  and  when  he
was  informed  that  a  very  great
multitude     of    barbarians    had
come  up  from  the  sea  to  attack
him,  he  sent  Busalossorus  as  his
general    in    haste    to   Babylon.
But  he,  having  with  a  treason-
able design  obtained  Amuhean,
the   daughter  of    Astyages    the
prince    of    the   Medes,    to    be
affianced  to  his   son   Nabucho-
drossorus, marched  straightways
to  surprise    the  city   of  Ninus,
that    is    Nineveh.      But    when
Saracus  the  king  was   apprized
of  all  these  proceedings  he  burnt
the  royal  palace.  And  Nabucho-
drossorus succeeded  to  the  em-
pire   and    surrounded    Babylon
with    a   strong  wall. — Eu,   Ar.
Chron.  52.


'  .1  !
11^


*  The  name  Sardanapallus  is  indiscriminately  applied  to  various  persons.
Here  perhaps  Saracus  may  be  intended ;  but  from  the  fragment  p.  59,  most
probably  Busalossorus,  i.  e.  Nabopolassar.  The  passage  then  in  the  text  may
refer  to  the  dominion  (potestatem)  of  Axerdis,  "  from  which  Sardanapallus
revolted."

t  The  Armenian  Editor  in  a  note  complains  of  the  obscurity  of  this  passage
in  the  original,  and  thinks  it  may  be  translated  "  Condonavit  regiam  aulam
Evoriti,"  entrusted  the  palace  to  some  officer  named  Evorites.  In  some  authors
the  daughter  of  Astyages  is  named  Aroites :  and  it  might  possibly  refer  to  her,
if  the  word  were  read  in  conjunction  with  the  subsequent  sentence.  See  Frag.
p.  59.


.fl!


chaldjEAN  fragments.


65


OF  BELUS  AND  THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE


FROM  CASTOR.


Ill


Belus,  inquit,  rex  erat  As-
syriorum  :  et  sub  eo  Cyclopes
Jovi  decertanti  adversus  Ti-
tanos,  per  fulgura  fulminaque
ignea  opem  in  praelio  tulerunt.
Eo  autem  tempore  Titanorum
reges  agnoscebantur ;  quorum
unuseratOgygusrex.  Paucis
vero  interjectis,  prosequitur,
dicens :  Gigantes  in  Deos  irru-
entes,  perempti  sunt,  auxilium
Diis  ferentibus  Hercule  et
Dionyso,  qui  ex  Titanis  erant.

Belus  de  quo  antea  diximus,
vitam  finivit,  quin  et  Deus  ha-
bitus est.  Post  quern  Ninus
imperavit  Assyriis  annis  lii.
Hie  uxorem  duxit  Semirami-
dem.  Post  eumque  Semiramis
ipsa  in  Assyrios  regnavit  annis
xLii.  Deinde  vero  Zames,  qui
etiam  Ninyas.  (Et  continuo
singulos  Assyriorum  reges,  qui
post  eos  fuerunt,  in  ordinem
redigens,  ad  Sardanapallum
usque  recenset,  cunctos  nomi-
natim  commemorando :  quo-
rum etiam  nos  utique  nomina,


Belus  (says  Castor)  was  king  of
the  x\ssyrians;  and  under  him
the  Cyclops  assisted  Jupiter  with
thunder-bolts  and  lightnings  in
his  contest  with  the  Titans.  At
that  time  there  were  kings  of  the
Titans,  one  of  whom  wasOgygus.
(After  a  short  digression  he  pro-
ceeds to  say,  that)  the  Giants,  in
their  attempted  inroad  upon  the
Gods,  were  slain  by  the  assistance
of  Hercules  and  Dionysus,  who
were  themselves  of  the  Titan
race.

Belus,  whom  we  have  men-
tioned above,  after  his  death  was
esteemed  a  God.  After  him,  Ni-
nus reigned  over  the  Assyrians
fifty-two  years.  He  married  Se-
miramis, who,  after  his  decease,
reigned  over  the  Assyrians  forty-
two  years.  Then  reigned  Zames,
who  is  Ninyas.  (Then  he  enu-
merates each  of  the  successive
Assyrian  kings  in  order,  and
mentions  them  all,  down  to  Sar-
danapallus, by  their  respective
names  :  whose  names,  and  the
length  of  their  reigns,  we  shall


till


i


65-


SUPPLEMENTAL


regnique  tempora  paulo  post
adponemus.  Siquidem  et  ille
in  Canone  suo  his  verbis  de
ipsis  scribit).

Primo  Assyriorum  reges  di-
gessimus,  initium  a  Dels  fa-
cientes :  quum  vero  ipsius  reg-
ni  annos  vix  certo  traditos  ha-
beainiis,  nomen  solummodo
commemoravimus :  sed  tamen
chronologiae  principiumaNino
duximus  et  in  alterum  Ninum,
qui  regnum  a  Sardanapallo
accepit,  desinimus :  utpote  hoc
pacto  perspicuum  esset  tarn
universi  temporis,  quam  sin-
gulorum  regum  (temporis)  spa-
tium ;  hoc  itaque  modo  reperi-
tur  tempus  annorum  m,  du-
centorum  et  octoginta.


also  give  presently.  Castor  men-
tions them  in  his  canon  in  the
following  words.*)

We  have  first  digested  into  a
canon  the  kings  of  the  Assyrians,
commencing  with  Belus :  but
since  we  have  no  certain  tra-
dition respecting  the  length  of
his  reign,  we  have  merely  set
down  his  name,  and  commenced
the  chronological  series  from  Ni-
nus  ;  and  have  concluded  it  with
another  Ninus,  who  obtained  the
empire  after  Sardanapallus ;  that
in  this  manner  the  whole  length  of
the  time,  as  well  as  of  the  reigns
of  each  king,  might  be  plainly  set
forth.  Thus  it  will  be  found,
that  the  complete  sum  of  the
years  amounts  to  1280. — Eus.
Ar,  p.  8 1 .


•  The  passage  above  is  thus  cited  by  Syiicellus,  p.  206.

,  .  .  .  w;  TTOV  xa)  KiffTwp  iv  Tu  xav6in  avTOU  <pr}ffiv  tv^t.

rigdnoui  yuiv  ou>  tous  'Aaavg/ovs  BaatXtls  xartTay^oLfjit)),  t^v  yut»  OL^Xn*  otTrh  B^Xou
TriTroirjfxiyovf.  tZ  8i,  rot  Trj(  BaatKtlai  «JtoS  Jtjj,  firi  ira^a.^tl6a^M  att(pws  toC  fitv
otOfAOLTOi  fivrifjLOvtCo/mtv,  T^»  S«  °'PX^*  "^^^  ')(^povoygaiptai  airo  N<voi;  vsTTOi'^/j.i^a,  xa)
xonoLKftyofxtv  \n\  N7>ov  tov  ZtaZt^itxtyov  t^»  $xai\ttixv  jra^a.  lap^atairiKou. ...

The  conclusion  also  is  thus  given  by  Syncellus,  p.  1G8.

T*  KoKTTOft  yuSXAov  a.xoKou^^0-a(  (Eu^ijjSiOs)  o5  xou  //a^TU^/a>  ira^^yocyi  aair'  "tjj
^iffxovaav  lovs  'Affav^iwt  fia.atKtls  ap^ai. . . .


IV


CHALDEAN  FRAGMENTS.


66


OF  THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE:
FROM  VELLEIUS  PATERCULUS  AND  AEMILIUS  SURA.


Insequenti  tempore  imperium
Asiaticum  ab  Assyriis,  qui  id
obtinuerant  annis  mlxx,  trans-
latum  est  ad  Medos  ab  hinc
annis  ferme  dccclxx.  Quippe
Sardanapalum  eorum  regem
mollitiis  fluentem,  et  nimium
felicem  malo  suo,  tertio  et  tri-
cessimo  loco  ab  Nino  et  Se-
miramide,  qui  Babylona  con-
diderant,  natum,  ita  ut  semper
successor  regni  paterni  foret
filius,  Arbaces  Medus  imperio

vitaque    privavit ^milius

Sura  de  annis  populi  Romani :
*'  Assyrii  principes  omnium
gentium  rerum  potiti  sunt,
deinde  Medi,  postea  Persae,
deinde  Macedones.  Exinde
duobus  regibus,  Philippo  et
Antiocho,  qui  a  Macedonibus
oriundi  erant,  baud  multo  post
Carthaginem  subactam  devic-
tis  summa  imperii  ad  populum
Romanum  pervenit.  Inter  hoc
tempus,  et  initium  Nini  regis
Assyriorum,  qui  princeps  re-
rum    potitus,    intersunt    anni


MDCCCCXCV.


>»


The  Asiatic  empire  was  subse-
quently transferred  from  the  As-
syrians, who  had  held  it  1070
years,  to  the  Medes,  from  this
time,  for  a  period  of  870  years.
For  Sardanapalus,  the  king  of
the  Assyrians,  a  man  wallowing
in  luxury,  being  the  thirty-third
from  Ninus  and  Semiramis,  the
founders  of  Babylon,  from  whom
the  kingdom  had  passed  in  a
regular  descent  from  father  to
son,  was  deprived  of  his  empire,
and  put  to  death  by  Arbaces  the

Mede ^milius  Sura  also,  in

his  annals  of  the  Roman  people
says,  "  That  the  Assyrian  princes
extended  their  empire  over  all
nations.  They  were  succeeded
by  the  Medes,  then  by  the  Per-
sians, then  by  the  Macedonians
and  shortly  afterwards  by  two
kings  Philip  and  Antiochus,  of
Macedonian  origin,  who,  not  long
after  the  destruction  of  Carthage,
were  conquered  by  the  Romans,
who  then  obtained  the  empire  of
the  world.  To  this  time,  from  the
beginning  of  the  reign  of  Ninus,
king  of  the  Assyrians,  who  first
obtained  the  empire,  there  has
elapsed  a  period  of  1995  years."
— Hist.  I.  c.  6.


J*


)'


66'


CHALD.f.AN   FRAGMENTS.


nisse  quendam  nomine  Menona
tradit  xv  annis  ante  Phoro-
neum  antiquissimum  Graeciae
regem :  idque  monumentis  ap-


rosus  et  Critodemus  cccclxxx*
annorum.  Ex  quo  apparetf
aeternus  literarum  usiis.


OF  THE  CHALD^EAN  OBSERVATIONS:

FROM  PLINIUS.
Anticlides  in  iEgypto  inve-  Anticlides  relates  that  they  (let-
ters) were  invented  in  Egypt  by
a  person  whose  name  was  Menon,
fifteen  years  before  Phoroneus
the  most  ancient  king  of  Greece:
probare  conatur.  E  diverso  and  he  endeavours  to  prove  it  by
Epigenes  apud  Babylonios  the  m6numents.  On  the  con-
Dccxx  annorum  observationes  trary,  Epigenes,  a  writer  of  first-
sideriim  coctilibus  laterculis  rate  authority,  informs  us,  that
inscriptas  docet,  gravis  auctor  among  the  Babylonians  were  pre-
in  primis  :   qui  minimum  Be-     served  observations  of  the  stars,

inscribed  upon  baked  tiles,  ex-
tending to  a  period  of  720  years.
Berosus  and  Critodemus,  who  are
the  most  moderate  in  their  cal-
culations, nevertheless  extend
the  period  of  the  observations  to
480*  years.  Whence  may  be  in-
ferred the  eternal  use  of  letters
among  them. — Lib.  VII.  c.  56.

FROM  CICERO.

Contemnamus  etiam  Baby-  We  must  also  contemn  the  Ba-

lonios,  et  eos,  qui  e  Caucaso  bylonians,  and  those  who,  in  the

cccli  signa  servantes,  numeris  reigion  of  Caucasus,   pretend  to

et   motibus   stellarum   cursus  have  observed  the  heavens  and

persequuntur :  condemnemus,  courses  of  the  stars:   we  must

inquam,  hos  aut  stultitiae,  aut  condemn  them,  I  say,  of  folly,  or

vanitatis,  aut  impudentiae,  qui  of  vanity,  or  of  impudence,  who

ccccLxx    millia   annorum,    ut  assert  that  they  have  preserved

ipsi  dicunt,  monumentis  com-  upon  monuments  observations  ex-

prehensa  continent.  tending  back  during  an  interval

of  470,000  years. — De  Divin.

*  Nonaginta  M.  and  Ch.         f  Appareret,  aeternum  literarum  usum,  Ch.


I  I


THE


DYNASTIES  OF  THE  KINGS


OF


CHALDiEA,  ASSYRIA,  MEDIA,  PERSIA,
THEBES,  AND  EGYPT.


I         {

'4i


\


DYNASTY  OF  CHALDEAN  KINGS.


4.  Nechubes..


5.


Nabiiis


01  XaXla7oi  irpuTOi  iy^yopev-     The   Chaldaeans  were  the  first  that
(Tdv  Uvroin;  patnXeT^,  uv  irpu-     assumed  the  title  of  Kings.
To«E^i?V^,*oira/^/xryN€-         Of  these   the   first  was  Evechius
iSp^8,t  i^aatUvci  Bac^vXupo^     who  is  known  to  us  by  the  name  of

Nebrod  (Nimrod)  he  reigned  at  Ba-
bylon 6  years  and  one-third.

2.  Chomasbelus     . .  7  J  years.
From  the  foundation  13  years.

3.  Porus        . .      . .  35  years.

48  years.

. .  43  years.

91  years.
. .  48  years.

139  years.
, ,  40  years.

179  years.
, .  46  years.

225  years.
Syncell.  169.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  some  of  these  names  occur  again  as
the  immediate  successors  of  Nabonasar.

♦  Eujj^^oiof,  A.  B.— Eu)5;^oof,  Go.  Sc.  Eu.  f  N«/*%a)8.  Go.

I  yo'.  (^)  A.  B. — Sc.  and  Go.  omit  it.

§  Xo(rfiia$oKo{  Vulg.— Xoff■^aa/3IJ^of  B.«— Xo/xficr^oXof  Sc.  Eu.

II  NfxtijSijf  Sc.  Eu.  f  A^iof  Go.     Sc.  Eu.
*•  Z/v?/fOf  Go.     Sc.  Eu.  ft  /«*•'.  Go.     Sc.  Eu.


Xcj/xao-jSijXo^  §  cTij^  ^^.
TlSpoq  (T*j  X*'.
N€%ot;9ij?||  hri  fxy,

XfltXSatftJV   r'«  e/Saa/Xcyo'ev
XaX8a/&>v    ^  .   ejSactXfytrc


6.  Oniballus  . .

7.  Zinzerus  . ,


it  ll


i/;


i

(   .


i


It!


11    (  Jl


It


DYNASTY  OF  THE  ARABIAN  KINGS

OF  CHALDiEA.


APABftN   jSacTiAcwv  twv  jW€-
*nv  a.    MapSoK€VT>j^  i^a'

c/XCVO-CV  €T>J  jtAC  .

*Apd^uv     jS*.    ifiaa-lXevare
Maphaao^  €77}  f/f.

ci/xopSaxo^  *   erij  x>j*.

*Apdi^asv     8 .      i^a<riX€V(T€

'Apd^ocu     €  .     €^a.<rtke.v<T€
VLdpavvoq  ct>j  ju'.

Naj8oyvaj9o^ ;][   crij  xc'.


After  the  six  first  Chaldaean  kings
reigned,  reigned  the  following  Ara-
bian kings  of  Chaldaea,

1.  Mardocentes     ..  45  years.
From  the  foundation  45  years.

2.  Mardacus   . .     . .  40  years.

85  years.
. .  28  years.

113  years.
. ,  37  years.

150  years.
. .  40  years.

190  years.
. .  25  years.

215  years.


3.  Sisimordacus

4.  Nabius

5.  Paramus    . .

6.  Nabonnabus


*  ^tffi/jia^^axos  Sc.  Eu. — 2tffi/nsg^a.xog  Go.
^  Na/3ouvy«i9o;  Dind.


t  rdt/S<of  Sc.  Eu.


OF  THE  ASSYRIAN  KINGS :


FROM  ABYDENUS.*


"  FuiT,    inquit,     Ninus,  Ninus  (says  Abydenus)  was  the  son

Arbeli  (filius) ;   qui  Cha-  of  Arbelus ;    who  was   the   son   of

ali ;  qui  Arbeli ;  qui  Ane-  Chaalus,  the  son  of  Anebus,  the  son

bi ;  qui  Babii ;  qui  Beli  of  Babius,  the  son  of  Belus  king  of

regis  Assyriorum."  the  Assyrians.


*  The  passage  above  cited  from  Abydenus  in  the  Armenian  edition  of
Eusebius's  Chronicle  places  Ninus  the  sixth  in  descent  from  Belus,  introducing
the  same  names  in  an  inverted  order,  that  occur  in  the  following  Assyrian
dynasties  of  Syncellus  and  Africanus  (see  p.  70)  betwreen  Teutaeus  the  twenty-
eighth  and  Dercyllus  the  thirty-fourth.  The  Editor  in  a  note  produces  some
passages  from  Moses  Choronensis  and  others  to  shew  that  such  was  the  general
opinion  among  the  Armenians.


1    ."


ma


fm  !

A

If


DYNASTY  OF  ASSYRIAN  KINGS:


FROM  AFRICANUS.


SYNCELLUS.
ASSTPIflN    a.    i^a<riX€v<r€

■n~^        ''  *

DfjAOq  €Trj  V€  .

c  .    ApeiQ^   (Tvj  A  .

?j'.   ^ApixafAi^pvjit.   cTvj  Xij'.
^'.  B?JX£y%05  tTtj  Xe  .
/.  BaXaio^  €t>j  v,8'.
ta,   SeS^oj^  eT>j  v'.  §
ij3'.  Ma/xt^o^   €Tij  X  .
<</.   ' Ao-p^aXiO^  1 1  €T>j  x>j\^
*8'.    ^{paipo^  eT»j  xjS'.**
«e'.   Ma/xfXoj  ctij  X'.


*  N/vu«;  i'T»)  Xrj'    Go.

J  ^A^fiafxfi^ris  B.  §

f  x/S*  Go.  m.

ft  2>r«f&a/wf  Go. — ffna^^ios  B.


Of  the  Assyrian  kings  the  1st  was
Belus  who  reigned  55  years.

2.  Ninus 52  years.

3.  Semiramis  . .    . .     42.

4.  Ninuas  who  is  called  Zamis
the  son  of  Ninus  and  Semira-
mis :  hereigned  38  years.


5.  Arius     . .    . .

. .     30  years.

6.  Aralius

.     40.

7.  Xerxes. .    .>    .

.     30.

8.  Armamithres    .

.     38.

9.  Beloclms     . .

t  •       uO t

10.  Balaeus

.     52.

11.  Sethos

.     50.

12.  Mamuthos  . .    .

.     30.

13.  Aschahus    . .    .

.     28.

14.  Sphaerus

>  •     <4/v.

15.  Hamulus  -. .    ,

.     30.

16.  Spartheos  . .

..     42.

t  Zifxrii

•  Go.

'.    Go.                        II    B«ff^d

X«of.

••    xri.

Go.  m.

DYNASTY  OF  ASSYRIAN  KINGS:


FROM  EUSEBIUS.


.    t


SCALIGER.
ADSTPION  e  Bao-ZXcyo-ev  a.

BjJXo^    6T7J   Vt  .

y.   2€fjupa[xiq  eTYj  /xjS'.
h  .   Nivt^a^  0  xai  Za/x);^  vto^

N/vov  xai  liffAipdueui;

ervj  A7j .
6  .    Apeto^  cTij  X  .
r'.   *ApaKioq  err]  fA.

5  .     tS,€pZ7ji    (TV)   X  .

ij'.   *ApfAaiAl^pvjq  €T»2  Xij'.
St'.    BijX4i%o?  c'ti^  X«',
/.   BaXaro^  ctvj  v/S',
»«'.   'AXraSa?*  €T»j  XjS'.
ijS'.   Ma/xv^o^  €T»j  X',
ly  .   May)(fic.Xioqj  tTij  xij'.
(8'.   ^S<pa7po^  eTTj  x^'.
ic'.   MaafXo^  €ti/j  X'.
<5-  .   2'jrapS'€«^  j^  '  TTj  X'.


ARMENIAN.

I.  NiNus,  quern  primura  universae
Asiae,  exceptis  Indis,  imperasse
dicunt  annis  lii.
II.  Semiramis  . .    . .     ann.  xlii
III.  Zames,  qui  Ninyas     . .   xxxviii


IV.  Arius XXX

V.  Aralius  qui  Amyrus   . .   xl

VI.  Xerxes  qui  et  Ba-

IdBUS        ..       ..      ..      ..     XXX

VII.  Amramithes xxxvm

vni.  Belochus xxxv

IX.  Balaeas     xii

X.  Aladas      xxxii

XI.  Mamithus      ,   xxx

XII.  Machchalaleus     . .    . ,  xxx

XIII.  Sphaerus  . .    , .    , .    . ,  xxii

XIV.  Mamilus xxx

XV.  Sparethus       xl


•rl


I!


:N'


•  Sf^wj  Afr.

J  ^iroLp^ks  hri  ftff.  Afr.


f  *Ar)(AKiog  Afr.


!^>*«ilC3pGw


72


DYNASTY  OF   ASSYRIAN  KINOS.


SYNCELLUS.

i^.  *Ao-xaTaSij5  errj  Xij'.

«1j'.     'AatVTTJ?     €T17  /*€'.

lb".    BijXoxo?  fTIJ  X€  .

x.   BaXaTop>j^*  ctij  X'.
xa'.    AafJi.'Kpt^'^q  erf}  X  .
xjS'.   lua-dpvji;  €t>j  x/
yy  .    AafAicpavjq  erij  A  .
x8'.    navua?  erij  ^'.
xc'.    ^uTapufiq  €T>j  Xjy .
xr  •   Mi^rparo^  eTTj  x^'.
x^'.   Tc^Ta/xo^,   0  xat  Taw-
Tav>j^  Trapa  T«cr*    Xe-

ylfAiVOq,  €TV)  Xp  .

xSr'.  'Apa^Xo^f  €Tij  /*j5'.
a'.   XaXao;  trij  //.e  .

Xa  .  "AvejSo^  €Tij  Xtj',

XS*.   BaiSiO?  €T>j  X^'.

X7 4!eTij  X.

X8'.   AcpxtXo?  erij  /a'.

Xe.   EwTraxjixi)?  §  6x19  Xij'.

X/ .   Aao<T^€vr,(:  hf}  /*€.

X^.   IlepTJaSi]^  €T>j  X'.

X»j'.  'OcpparaTo^  €Tij  xa  .

X^.  'E4)€j(;€p^<  €T>j  r  •  11
f/!,  'Axpayavvj?  txij  /*^.

fxa  Suvo;  0  \eyofMvoi  Kov-
xoXcpo?,  'EXXTfiviflTTt  2«ip5aya-
iraXXo^**   €T7j  it'.ff

2ap5ava7roiXXo?Tap(rov  ex-


17.  Ascatades

18.  Amantes

19.  Belochus

20.  Balatores

21.  Lampridea

22.  Sosares  , .

23.  Lampraes

24.  Pannas  . .

25.  Sosarmus

26.  Mithraeus


he  reigned  32


27.  Teutamus — who  is  called  by
some  Tautanes
years.

28.  Teutaeus

29.  Arabelus


30.  Chalaus

31.  Anebus

32.  Babius..

iiijm  •    •  •    •        .    •

34.  Dercylus

35.  Eupacmes

36.  Laosthenes

37.  Pertiades  .

38.  Ophrataeus

39.  Ephecheres

40.  Acraganes


38  years.

45.

25.

30.

30.

20.

30.

45.

22.

27.


44.
42.
45.
38.
37.
30.
40.
38.
45.
30.
21.

6.11
42.


41.  Thonus  surnamed  Concolerus,
by  the  Greeks  Sardanapalus :  he
reigned  20  years.

Sardanapalus    built   the    cities   of


♦   Baktr6gr)s  Go.
§   Evndx/iris   Go.

H  52.
■\-\  It'.  Go.


f  'A^afi/XoffB.


QivMS  Sc.


••


y/S*  Go.  m. — Sc.
lapZoufiiTroiKQi,  Vulg.


DYNASTY


SCALIGER.

^1       .  .  /rk         t


iC,'.   * Aa-ycaToivjq  errj  Xij'.
iij'.  'A/xt/Knj^  cTij  jtce'.
i&'.   BijXo^oj  errj  xe*.
x'.   Bakdropoq*  ervi  X'.
xa'.  AafAirpib/j^  erij  X'.
xjS'.   ^ucrdpi/jq  €rrj  x  .
xy'.  Aayt-Tcpa^i  erij  X'.
xB'.   Ilavi^a?  "j"  cTij  jtx*.  J
xe'.   'Eua-apfMq  tryj  xjS'.§
xr'.  M/Srparo^  erij  x^,
x^.  TevTay-oq  0  xat  Tcy-

TaVIJ^    €T1J  Xj3  .
X1J  .      1  €VTatOq     €T1J  fA.0  .

xiy.  ©ivaro^  II  €T>j  x'.
X'.   AipycvXoq  €rvj  f/,
Xa.  *Ewa.y.i/.viq  erij  Knj ,
Xj9*.   Aaoa-^eyrji  errj  ftc'.

Xy.    IlvpTiaSlJ^^    €TVJ  X'.

X8  .  'OipparaToq**  €Tij  xa'.

Xe'.  *E(/)aX€p^?f  f  erij  v^'.

X^*'.  *A-Kpaydyv)q  err]  fA^.

X^'«  ©Svo^  0  XeyofAevoq  Koy-
xoXepo^  'EXX^jvio-xi  lap^awd'
vaiKoq  CX17  x'.

'"1/  %

Ouxo^,  €cr%axo?  yeyovaq
*k(T(rvpluv  ^cx.tTikivqy  virepi^pev
aiiQyraq     rovq     itpo     avrov


OF  ASSYRIAN  KINGS.  73

ARMENIAN.

XVI.  Ascatades    . .   ann.  xl

XVII.  Amintas xlv

XVIII.  Belochus        . .    . .  xlv

XIX.  Balatores        ....   xxx

XX.  Lamprides      . .    . .   xxxii

XXI.  Sosmares       . .    . .  viii

xxii.  Lampares       . .    . .   xxx

xxiii.  Pannias xlii

XXIV.  Sosarmus xix

XXV.  Mithreus        . .    . .   xxvii
xxvi.  Teutamus       . .    . .   xxxii

xxvii.  Teutaeus xl

xxviii.  Thinaeus xxx

XXIX.  Derusus xl

xxx.  Eupalmes xxxviii

XXXI.  Laosthenes     . .    . .  xlv
XXXII.  Peritiades       . .    . .   xxx
xxxiii.  Ophrataeus     . .    . .   xxi
XXXIV.  Ophatanes l

XXXV.  Acrazanes xlii

XXXVI.  Sardanapalles    ....  xx


Simul  universa  Assyriorum  Dynas-
tia  juxta  certos  Scrip  tores  (perdu-
ravit)  annos  mccxl.  juxta  alios  autem


'.  i


1 ;


•  Ba\aT6pris  Afr. — BeWsffTri^yjs  Sc.  m.  f  UavvCas  Afr.

X  /**'.  Afr.  §  fx$'.  Afr.

II  In  Scaliger's  list  of  Africanus,  he  also  introduces  between  Teutaeus  and
Thinseus —  x^.  'A^a^ijAof    jjl^.

X'.  XaAaof         /<•'.
X«'.  "AvaSof         Ajj',
A/S*.  EdBios         A?'.— See  p.  69.
^  nu/jiT<a8T)s    Afr.  •*  Oip^exTivrig  Sc.  m.

tt  'Ax/3«xdtpT)f  Afr. — 'Oxpa^aTTT^;  Sc.  m.


\


74


DYNASTY  OF  ASSYRIAN  KINGS.


I  i  f
1.1?

('ft'

If


SYNCELLUS.

Tio-c*    xa«    *A7XiaXijv   Ta$  Tarsus  and  Anchiale  in  one  day.

•H  ruv*Aa-(Tvpiuv  ^aaiKeta         The  Assyrian  empire  founded  a.m.

tU  TO  xo^oXixov  xoo-/Aixov  ,8x«€  ^2 1 6.  flourlshcd  1 460  years  and  was

€To<  €X*j^€,  hapyL€(Ta<ra  tr-q  overthrown  A.M.  4675.


CTOV?.


I


•  MHtifftv  Vulg. — a?Xiffl>    Sc.


DYNASTY  OF  ASSYRIAN  KINGS.


75


SCALIGER.
rpwjy^i   xa«  pa^up^.      ^A^-
X»aXoy  xai   Tapo-ov  ev  ij/xf/jjt

'ApjSaxoy  tou  MijSow  v^xijSreK
fwyakr^v  ntvpav  iroi-^aa^  tov  t€
p^ucrov,  xal  tov  apyvpov  wnav-
Tfit,  -Jrpo?  Se  rcvTOii  ttjv  ^aa-i-
XiK^y  eVSf^ra  ava<Tav  iiti
Tavrrjv    iaupeva-e.      nai   laq

(TvyvXtiaa^  e«?  tov  h  i*.i<rr^  ti}
vvp^  KaTea-Mvaa-fAevov  otxov,
ay-a  toi^to^  arcot/riv  kavrw  re
xat  Ta  ^a<ri\€ia  xaTexava-ev,
EiTct  ^  T«y  *A<r(rvpiuy  ^acri-

^^v}. — Eus,  Chron.  Sc,


ARMENIAN.

annos  mccc.  Thonnus  Concolerus,  qui
Graece  Sardanapallus  vocatur  ab
Arbace  et  Belesio  devictus,  seipsum
igni  tradidit:  a  quo  ad  primani
Olympiad  em  (sunt)  anni  xl. — Eus.
Chron,  Ar.  p.  98.


I'll


M


II


J  i


DYNASTY  OF  ASSYRIAN  KINGS.*


U


AssYRiORUM  primum  regem
scribunt  Bilum,  quern  et  ab  As-
syriis  et  Phoenices  et  Persi
Deum  vocaverunt.  Hunc  Dium
Graeco  nomine  interpretave-
runt.

I.  Bilus  vero  primus  in  As-
syrios  regnavit  annos  lxii,  et
partem  Asiae.

II.  Post  haec  regnavit  Ninus
annos  lii.  Iste  condidit  Nine-
vem  civitatem  Assyriorum,  et
veniens  in  Asia  vocatus  est
Picas.

III.  Post  quern  Semiramis,
uxor  ejus  annos  xlii.  Hanc
Ream  vocaverunt  propter  ejus
multam  atrocitatem.

IV.  Post   hunc    Zinas,    reg-
navit annos  xxxviii.

v.    Arius  XXX.


They  write  that  the  first  king
of  the  Assyrians  was  Bilus,
whom  the  Assyrians,  Phoeni-
cians, and  Persians,  call  God.
In  tlie  Greek  language  they
call  him  Dius.

1.  Bilus,  who  was  the  first
king,  reigned  over  the  Assyrians
and  part  of  Asia  62  years.

2.  Afterwards  reigned  Ninus
52  years.  He  founded  Nine-
veh, a  city  of  the  Assyrians,
and  coming  into  Asia  was  called
Picus.

3.  After  him  Semiramis,  his
wife,  42  years.  She  was  called
Rea  on  account  of  her  manifold
atrocities.

4.  After  her   Zinas   reigned
38  years.

5,  Arius  reigned  30  years.


•  This  Catalogue  is  given  by  Scaliger  from  a  Chronological  compilation  "  ab
homine  barbaro,  incpto,  Hellenismi  et  Latinitatis  iniperitissimo."  It  is  possibly  a
mutilated  copy  of  Castor's  Canon,  as  it  ends  with  the  second  Ninus.     See  p.  65-.


'  t


DYNASTY  OF  THE  ASSYRIAN  KINGS.


77


VI.  Aranus  annos     . .   xl.
VII.  Xerxes,  qui  et  Balleus

XXX.

VIII.  Mamithrus  . .  xxxvii.

IX.  Bilochus      . .      xxxv.

X.  Balleus  , .  . .  lii.
XI.  Altallus  . ,  . .  XXXV.
xii.  Mamithus      , .     xxx.

XIII.  Itafferus     . .    . .     xx.

XIV.  Mamythus     . .    xxxv.

XV.  Spareus      . .    . .     xl.
XVI.  Ascatagus        . .     xl.

XVII.  Amintus  ....  l.
xviii.  Actosai  et   Semiramis

femina      xxiii.

XIX.  Bilochus  . .    . .      XXV.

XX.  Belleroparus      xxxiv.

XXI.  Lampridus  . .     xxxii.

XXII.  Posarus     . .    . .      xx.

XXIII.  Lamparus      ..     xxx.

XXIV.  Paunius  et  Zeus    xlv.

XXV.  Sosarmus  . .    . .      xx.
^X\i.  Mithreus     ..     xxxv.

XXVII.  Tautelus      . .      xxxii.
Anno  isto  tricessimo  se-
cundo    confixus    est    Sol
(Ilion?)  ab  Acheis.


. .


XI.
XXIX.

XL.

XXXVI.

XLV.

XXX.

XX.

•  •      x«»

.        XL.


XXVIII.  Euteus  annos
XXIX.  Thineus
XXX.  Cercillus
XXXI.  Eupalus      . .

XXXII.  Lausthenus

XXXIII.  Peritiadus     .

XXXIV.  Ophrateus
xxxv.  Ophratanus

XXXVI.  Acrapazus

XXXVII.  Tonos  Conceleros  qui
vocatur  Graece  Sardanapalus
annos     xxx.

XXXVIII.  Ninus  . .  . .  xix.
Simul   reges    xxxix   antiqui

Assyriorum  perseverantes  an-
nos mille  quadringentos  tri-
ginta.  Ab  istis  autem  in
prima  Olympiada,  annos  lxvii
Assyriorum  regnum.

Altogether  these  thirty-nine
ancient  kings  of  the  Assyrians
reigned  1430  years.  And  from
them  to  the  first  Olympiad  the
kingdom  of  the  Assyrians  con-
tinued sixty-seven  years.


■  I


!,     »'


_««*t>%*«S3j2


78


CHALDiEAN  DYNASTY  OF


If     ,


NABONASAR.


THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  CANON.

TA  uTto  laK(Mivaaap,  ?TOi  Na-  TiiE  ecclesiastical  computation  of

jSovcco-aiJou,  €T>j  y.aTa  t>jv  eVxXvj-  the  years  from  Salmanasar  who  is

a-iaa-Tiyyiv  Troix^icoa-iv  euq  Ki//jou,  the  same  as  Nabonasar  to  Alexan-

xai  t-nena  'AXcJavB/wv  rav  Ma-  der  of  Macedon.

a.  'Sa^ovd(Tapo<io%tM"^ak'  1.  Nabonasar  who  is  called  in

fxavaa-ap*  iv  rri  ypouj/fi  Scripture  Salmanasar,  reigned

"KtylfAivoi  ?Tij  xf'.  25  years.                         25.

^.   ^d^ioq  ervi  vj'.  2.   Nabius  8     33.

y.  Xiv^T,po(;yia'inupo^€Tfj€\  3.  Chinzerus  and  Po-

rus5       38.

8'.  'iXouXarof  f  €T>j  «'.  4.  Ilulaeus  5      43.

€*.  Map8oxejut'jra8o«{€T>jt/9'.  5.  Mardocempadus  12       55.

r .  *Apx6avo<  eT»j  e'.  6.  Arceanus  5         ....    60.

^*.  'AjSatr/Xct/To^  ctij  jS'.  7.  Interregnum  2    . .    . .   62.

vf,  BrjXiMi^  €TYi  y.  8.  Belilus  3       65.

^\  ^Aicapava^KTOi  ^t»j  ^'.  9.  Aparanadisus  6 . .     . .   71.

/.  *H/»7€i3aXo«||  €To?  a'.  10.  Erigebalus  1       ..    ..    72.

«a'.  Mfo-ijo-ijuiopSaxo?^  eri]  8'.  11.  Mesesimordacus  4  ..    76,

*   laK/ULOvaaap  Go.  f    'IKKovKaTog  Vulg. — »\oXa<os  B.

J  MapSoxi/xTotSoxof  Vulg.  §  B^XjjXof  Go.

II  *I^Tiy*/S«AXos  Go.  ^  MiffnTix6p^axog  A. — M«fl'ff'<o-</*^f8«xoj  Go.


CHALDEAN  DYNASTY  OF
NABONASAR.


THE  ASTRONOMICAL  CANON.

TA  dtro  ^a^ovacdpw  trriy  rov  The  Astronomical  Canon  of  the

xat    ^aAfxavaa-^p,*    ^aa-iXecaq  years  from  Nabonasar  who  is  the

XaKZaiuVf  €u^  'AXcfavS/jov  rov  same  as  Salmanasar  King  of  the

xT/<rroy  reXevrrjq  yiara,  tov  d<r-  Chaldaeans  to  the  death  of  Alex-

rpoyofAiTM)'  naviva.  ander   the  founder  of  the  Greek

dynasty.

a,  'Na^Qvaa-dpov €Tvi        «8'.         1.  Nabonasarus    ..    ♦.     14.

/3'.  NajS/ot;  ^T>j  iS'.  <r.         2.  Nabios2    16.

y.  Xipl^-^pov  xcii  Uupov^  3.  Chinzerus  and  Porus

€T)j  €'.  %a\  5 21.

h\  'IXouXawu  cTTj  c'.        xr'.         4.  Ilulaeus  5   ..    ..  -..     26.

€'.  Map^oMfA.'Kdhv      trvf  5.  Mardocempadus  12       38.

$■'.  *Apx€avov  errj  e'.        fjvy,  6.   Arceanus  5 43.

^.  *A^i'A€VT9i  ^rr)  ff,  /*€'.  7.  Interregnum  2  . .    . .  45.

v}'.  Bv}Ki^ov  J  (Tvj  y\      jbm|''         8.  Belibus  3 48.

^'.  'AirapavaS/croy  §  eT>y  9.  Aparanadisus  6      . .  54.

r.  »^'.

«'.  *H/ji'y€^aXoy||(To«a'.  vf'.  10.  Erigebalus  1     ....  55.

id.  M€a-via-ifMphd)(av  ervi  11.  Mesesimordacus  4 , .  59.

8'.  ^.

•    2aX^ovaj-af   Go.  f  Udtgov  B.  m. — TlC^ov   A. — HlJ/J^ow  Go.

+  B>j\i'/Sou  B.— BijX/^ou  Go.— B/X</;ios  Supra  in  Dind.

§   'Airagavvah'aon   B. — 'Airogaval/cou  Go.  fj  *Ipiy»iSaXou  Go.


1''

if'

if  ill


i.»Cl^<iltfS»«J»l»pii».<-;''#Wjpii||SI


80


CHALDEAN  DYNASTY


THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  CANON.


<jS'.  'Aj9a<r/X6VTo^   aXXo; €tij         12.  Interregnums        ..      84.


«5^.   Na^(nta>A<rapoi  §      cttj
1^'.   Naj3oi;%o8ovoVwf)||  uw;  ctij
n/.   Ev€iXa8  ^   MapoSax  exij

iK^.  "SipiyX'^a-apo^**  o  yea)
BaKrdaap  eri^  y.

x'.  ficc^ovdho^  0  xa»  ATrvd-
•yij?  Aapcro^  '|"'|'  'Ao-ffowj-
pouJJ  xa)  *JipraUpi7}<;
try]  iC/.


13.  Isarindinus  13        ..     97.

14.  Saosduchinus    9    ..    106.

15.  Cineladanus  14       ..120.

16.  Nabopalasarus  21  ..    141.

17.  Nabuchodonosor  his

son  43 184.

18.  Euilad  Marodach  5      189.

19.  Niriglesarus  who    is
Baltasar3 192.

20.  Nabonadius  who  is
Astyges  Darius  As-
suerus  and  Artax-
erxesl7     219.


PERSIAN  DYNASTY.


•  ii


xa'.  Kvpo^     Tlepa-uv     vpurtK;
xjS'.   Ka|ixjSyV>]5     vio^     Kvpov


€T»j  yf.


xy.   Mdyoi  dZeXcpoi  ^  ^fAep-
hioq  §§     )(^^     Ilavt^ovrrji

x5'.   ^apeioi  vtoi  'Ta-rdj-itov


21.  Cyrus  the  first  king
of  Persia  31.

22.  Cambyses  the  son  of
Cyrus  8     39.

23.  The  Magi  two  bro-
thers Smerdius  and
Pausoutes  7  months.

24.  Darius  the  son  of
Hystaspes  36   . .    . .     75.


♦  'IffeKxpi^Yivl;  Vulg.  f  2a^f  AoC^'Oi  Go.

X  KivriKa^avas   Go.  §  "SaBoiraKaaa-agog  B.

II  N«j8o^o8ov^{rwf    B.  f  eJVSSv  jSa^ o^aS  A.— 'Ej8i8a»  MifoSa^  Go.

♦*  Nif uyX^  a«f Of   Go. — Nr)f<yX^o-afOf  A.  B.

ff  A^fff*os  A.  B. — Adtf o-iiof  Go.  JJ  'Aaoui7fou  A.  B.

§§  'E/i/f?«oj  B.  nil  'TcTTinou  A.  B.


•J


OF  NABONASAR.


81


THE  ASTRONOMICAL  CANON.

1/3'.  *A^a(riX€vroi   aXXo^  12.  Interregnum  8 . .    ..      67.


€TVJ  Vl  .


K-.


ly.   'la-apivbmv*  err]  iy\   ir'.         13.   Isarindinus  13  .  .     ..       80.
iS'.  Sooo-Sovx/vou  "f    6T1J  14.  Saosduchinus  9      . .     89.

ic*.  KiVTjXaSaXovJ  €T>j  iS*. py'.       15.  Cineladalus  14. .    ..   103.

16.  Nabopalasarus  the
father  of  Nabuchodo-
nosor 21     124.

17.  Nabopalasarus  who  is
Nabuchodonosor  43    167.


ij-'.   Na^oiraKaa-dpov  §
varpoi;  NajSowp^oSo-
yoa-up    T1J  xa  .  px6  .

1^'.  Naj3oiraXao'apc«i/||ToD
xai  NajSovp^oSovoV&>/>
eriy  ^y'.      .  .  />{^.

ii/,  'ITOioapox^dfAOV^  err}
7.  •  •  fo.

«y.   ^ipiya<roXa<rdpov**

etti  e  .      . .  poi ,

y.\   NajSovaSww  toi/    xa*
'AcTTtayov^  tTTjXS'.   er^'.


18.  Illoarudamus  3 . .   ..    170.

19.  Nirigasolasarus  5  ..    175.

20.  Nabonadius    who  is
Astyages  34     ....   209.


r .  ' '


PERSIAN  DYNASTY.

xa'.  Kvpov  ervi  ^.         crivl.  21.  Cyrus  9      218.

XjS'.  Ka[x^v<rov  irri  •/{.  ax(r.  22.  Cambyses  8      ....  226.

xy'.  ^apeUv  ervj  Xr'.    o-fjS'.  23.  Darius  36 262.

xS*.  SJp^ov  erv)  xa.      <rwy'.  24.  Xerxes  21 283.

•  'laafiijS/vow  A. — 'lo"a^<»}8^vou   B.

f  ZaoffSoy^/ou  Vulg. — 2ao8ou5^iVou  B.  ■

%  KiwXaSiXou  Go. — Dind.  proposes  KivriKabotoov.

§  No^SouxoXaaca^ou   B. — N«/SovjrotXao-o"cifou  Go.

II  'Soi$ov)((iZov6ffop  Go.  ^  'IXXou«^ou8«/«ou  Go.

*♦  VtoriyaaoXoiffdgov  B. — N»jf»jyao-oXa»-a^ow  Go.

M


1  P
!  I


I


¥'}:


;  I


:  i


82  CHALD-EAN  DYNASTY

THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  CANON.

xff.  He/)|*j^  vloi  ^pdov  fx5J-  25.  Xerxes  the    son    of

ya(;  %'.*  Darius  20  months  . .     77.

%^,   'Apra^ep^rit;     BJp^ov     o  26.  Artaxerxes   the   son

lxayipox€tp  trv}  i^yi,  f  of  Xerxes,  Longima-

nus  43 120.

x^'.  Bfphi  viU  *ApTaUp^ov  27.  Xerxes  the  son  of  Ar-

fMlvaq  j3'.  taxerxes  2  months.

xTj'.  ^oyhiavof  [A.^mi  t/.  28.  Sogdianus  7  months    121.

x^'.  AapfToi  0  No^ro^t   ertj  29.  Darius  Nothus  19  ..    140.

«^.

yj,  'ApTaUplfii  0  Mvij>ijv  €T>j  30.  Artaxerxes  Mnemon

fjj,  40 180.

W. 'flxo?  'kpraUplw    vVoi  31.  Ochus  the  son  of  Ar-

eT>j  £'.  taxerxes  5 185.

X/3'.  "Apo-ow    a§€X(/)oi;  "Oxov  32.  Arses  the  brother  of

?T*j8'.  Ochus  4      189.

xy.  Lapiiov  y  *Ap<rdiJi.Qv  Ur)  33.  Darius  III.  the  son  of

5-'.  Arsamus  6        ..    ..    195.

X8'.  'AXe^avBpoy     MaxcSovo?  34.  Alexander  of  Mace-

;[T>jr'.  don  6 201.

♦  6Trj  Go.  m.  t  /"«'•  Go.  m.

X  NoSoa/w/to;  Vulg. — No^o<r>jvo/xos  B. — fi^og  ri  v6fJL05  Ubrarius.


fn


ir


OF  NABONASAR.  83
THE  ASTRONOMICAL  CANON.

xe'.  *ApTa^€piov  a  €Tr}  25.  Artaxerxes  I.  41.  .,   324.

fAU'.  TxS',

xr'.  Aapc/oi/  jS*.  TotJ  xa«  26.  Darius  II.  who  is  No-

No'S^oy*  cTij  iS^'.  '^1*7'  thus  19        343.

x?'.  "Apra^iplov  letnepov  27.  Artaxerxes  II]  46  . .    389.

xij'.  "Oxoy  erij  xa.  w'.        28.  Ochus  21 410.

x^'.  ^dpov  CT7J  iS'.  wjS'.       29.  Sarus  2       412.

X'.  Aaptiov  rptTov  rov  30.  Darius  III.   who  is

y.at*Apa-diA.ov€rrjg''.         virf,  Arsamus  6 418.

Xa'.  ^AXfidvdpov  Tov  (AeydKov  erij  31.  Alexander  theGreat  6.  424.

•  N(f»ot/B.  f  (r?8'Qy.


#«


It  1/


i  A


lI


83-


PTOLEM^US'  CANON :


FROM  THEON.


I


ASSTPiriN  KAl  MHAQN.

a'.    Na/Sovacro-apof  erij       *8  .

y.   X<v^//Joy  xa)  nwpou  e' .  xa'.


8'.  'lovyct/oy  e'.

X5-.

c  .   MapSoxfjMTraSou  ijS  .

Xfj'.

;- .     Apx*«vou  €  .

n-

X^,  'AjSao-iXfVTOu  Ttpairov

/3'.

1

ij'.   BijX/jSou  7'.

^,'.

y.   * Aitpwvaliov   J- .

kS*.

/.    ¥iyr]^-^\ov   a  .

w'.

ui.   Mea-efforifAoplaMV

S'.

v^'.

ijS'.   'AjSacr/XeuTou  ij'.

«'.

«y.  *Aa-<rapalmv  ly.

ir'.

iS'.   Saoo-Bouxijow  x'*

/.

ie'.   XuviXaBavoy  x^.

pxiS'.

if'.  NajSoxoXaco'apoy

/
xa .

puy

KINGS  OF  THE  ASSYRIANS
AND  MEDES.

1.  Nabonassarus  . .    . .  14.

2.  Nadius  2 16.

3.  Chinzirus  and  Porus

5 21.

4.  lugaeus  5 26.

5.  Mardocempadus  12  iiS.

6.  Arcianus  5        ....  43.

7.  Interregnum  2        . .  45.

8.  Belibus  3 48.

9.  Apronadius  6  . .    . .  54.

10.  Rigebelus  1      ....  55,

11.  Mesessimordacus  4  59.

12.  Interregnums..    ..  67.
15.  Assaradinus  13      ..  80.

14.  Saosducheus  20      ..  100.

15.  Chuniladanus  22    ..  122.

16.  Nabocolassarus21 . .  143.


\k\


m


FROM  NABONASAR  TO  ANTONINUS.


84


«^'.   'Sa^oY.o'kaa-a'dpov        exij

ill*   *IXovapohdiAov  ^' .  ffflra'.y
«S^.    Nipiyia<T<rokaa'<roi-

pov  8'.  P^^-X


17.  Nabocolassarus  43  186.

18.  Iluarodamus  2        ..  188.

19.  Niricassolassarus  4  192.

20.  Nabonadius  17       ..  209.


u:.


nEPZriN   BA2IAEnN.

xa  .   Kt/Jou  k7     ervj.  <rivj .

xjS'.   KaiA^vaov  x'.  §  cxg-  .

x'y'.    ^apilav  a  .  X5- .  cgjS  .

x8'.   p,€p^ov  xa'.  <'"/*7''||
xe'.   *ApTa^€p^ov  a.

[/.a .  Tx8  .

x^'.   'Apra^ep^QV  Zemipov

xij'.  "Op^oi;  xa  .  u/.

xSf'.   *Apu(rTOv  ^.  wjS*.

X'.   Lapitov  rpirov  y  .    W5- .


KINGS  OF  THE  PERSIANS.

21.  Cyrus  9      218.

22.  Cambyses  8      ....   226.

23.  Darius  I.  36     ....    262.

24.  Xerxes  21 283.

25.  Artaxerxes  I.  41    . .   324.

26.  Darius  II.  19         ..   343.

27.  Artaxerxes  II.  46  . .   389.

28.  Ochus  21 410.

29.  Arostes2 412.

30.  Darius  III.  4  ..    ..416.


EAAHNnN   BASIAEnN.

'AXf^aj/S/Jou  jtAotx.  x'.    ^  wtS'.
4fiXiTr'Kov  *Api^aiov  X^.  ^  .


KINGS  OF  THE  GREEKS.

Alexander  the  Great  8.  424.
Philippus  Aridaeus  7.  7.  431.
Alexander  ^gus  12.   19.  443.


EAAHNUN    BA21A.  EN

Airrnxn.


GREEK  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


IlT&'Xe/Aa/oy  Aayou   x'.    xSr'.       PtolemaeusLagus20.  39.  463.
Ht.  ^iXexZihpov    Xij'.      0^'.       Pt.  Philadelphus  38.  77.  501.


f


*  pirr  Qy.
§  V  Qy.


t  pirn  Qy-
II  <^*7'  Qy-


J  P^/S-  Qy.

f  '»'  Qy.


84-


PTOLEM^US    CANON.


4


i«


rir.  Eixpyhov  xe'.

ITt.  ^iKcTtaTopo^  <^ .

FIt.  *ETiKf)civovq  xB  .

IIt.  ^iXo/A^Topo?  }\€  .

ITt.  Evepyerov^  ,y.^»

IIt.  Sorr^po^  Xr  •


pi^  .
povf.


IIt.    Awv^ctov  x^  .  <tq^  .

KAcoVaT^a^  xjS'.  o"^^  .*


Pt.  Euergetes  25.  102.  526.

Pt.  Philopatorl7.  119.  543.

Pt.  Epiphanes  24.  143.  567.

Pt.  Philometor  35.  178.  602.

Pt.  Euergetes II.  29.  207.  631.

Pt.  Soter  36.      . .  243.  667.

Pt.  Dionysus  29.  272.  696.

Cleopatra  22.     ..  294.  718.


PnMAinN   BA2IA2I2.


KINGS  OF  THE  ROMANS.


m


m


M»l


Avyova-rov  fA.y.  . .

. .    tX^.

Ti^epiov  xjQ  .

.  ,      TV^'.

Taiov  S'

. .  T^y*

KkavlUv  i^.

.  .      TO^'.

J^cpuvoq  1^.      . .     .

.    Tja'.t

Oveo'itaa-iavov  i .

. .     va.

TiTov  7'. .  .

v8'.

Ao/AeTiovot;  it  .     .  .

.  .     Vl^  .

Nepova  a

.  .         VK.

Tpaiavov  t^.

.  «    yX^'.

*A^piavov  xa'.     .  .

v^' .

'Avruvlpov  Ky,    . .

. .    vvy.

Augustus  43.
Tiberius  22.
Gaius  4.   . .
Claudius  14.
Nero  14.  . .
VespasianuslO
Titus  3. . .
Dometianus  15
Nerva  1 .  . .    .
Trajanus  19.  .
Adrianus  21.
Antoninus  23.


..  337.

..  359.

..  363.

..  377.

..  391.

..  401.

..  404.

..  419.

..  420.

..  439.

..  460.

..  483.


761.
783.
787.
801.
815.
825.
828.
843.
844.
863.
884.
907.


CalvisiuSy  p.  79.


ff^y  Qy.


f  T$a  Qy.


i  I


if


•  >  I  t


r
[1


u


85-


DYNASTIES  OF  THE  MEDIAN

KINGS.


FROM  SYNCELLUS.


MHAftN  a'  4^a<riK€v<r€v  *Ap-
jSaxTj^,  0  xaraXtcra?  t^v  tuv
* AaavpiuiM  apx'l^y  ^"^  ^""l  •

p.  Mav8at/xvj?  ervi  %,

y.   XaxrapiAoq  eryj  X'.

S*.     ApTvuaf  cTTj  X .

€'.    ATjioXTJ^*  €T>J  vS'.

tKTKTev  'ExjSarava  "j"   rvjv  iroXiV
fMydXriy  xa<  Bia^SoiyTov.

5".   'A^paa^TTj^ J  €T^  va.

^.    Kva^dpy}(;  tTrj  XjS'.


Of  the  Median  kings  the  first  was
Arbaces  who  overthrew  the  empire
of  the  Assyrians    ..    ..   28  years.

2.  Mandauces    . .    . .   20.

3.  Sosarmus      . .    . .   30.

4.  Artycas 30.

5.  Deioces 54.

Deioces  the  king  of  the  Medes

founded  the  great  and  celebrated
city  of  Ecbatana.

6.  Aphraartes  ..    ..   51  years.

7.  Cyaxares      . .    . .   32.

8.  A  sty  ages  Darius       38.


FROM  EUSEBIUS.

FROM  THE  CANON.  ARMENIAN.

a .  'A/)jSax>j^  cT>j  x*j'.  I.  Arbaces         xxviii,

^.  I,u(rapfji.oi  €Tvj  x'.  II.  Mandauces xx.

7'.  MeS/00^  €tij  fA.  III.  Sosarmus       xxx.

S'.    KapSixea?  €t>j  ly.  IV.    Articas .    XXX.

«'.  AvjioxTj;  ertf}  vh'.  v.  Dejoces Liv.

*   A/o/x>js  Vulg.  f  'Exi8«x7«ft  A.  B.                 X  'A(Pf  aSapijf  Sc.


Wl


.::'jiLv.   .'^ft^;agg':^r|';»"*Y'-:''»v'^


86'


DYNASTIES  OF  THE  MEDIAN  KINOS.


VI.  Phraortes      xxiv.

VII.  Ciaxares       xxxii.

VIII.  Astyages       xxxviii.


DYNASTIES  OF  THE  MEDIAN  KINGS.


87-


FROM  CASTOR.*


f     r


^■i


i  II


^


Wi


FROM  HERODOTUS.

a'.  A7jiox>j^  €T>j  vy'.  1.  Deioces 53  years.

p,  ^paopTfjq  err}  xjS'.        2.  Phraortes     22.

y'.  Kva^dpyii  €rri  /*'.         3.  Cyaxares       40.

8 .   ^Aa-rvdyi^i  trti  Xe'.        4.   Astyages        35.


FROM  CTESIAS.*

a'.  *Ap^dyiri<;ir'/}%yi,  1.  Arbaces        28  years.

iS'.  MaSawKij^f  €Tij  V .  2.  Maduces      50.

y\  lua-apfAoq  ervj  x'.  3.  Sosarmus      30.

8'.  'ApTi'a^  J  €Ti7  /.  4.  Artias     50.

€'.  *ApPid)rfjq  cTi)  xjS*.  5,  Arbianes       22.

r.  'Apcraro{§  €T>i  f*'.  6.  Arsaeus 40.

f .  *ApTijvr^<i  €Trj  Y.^ ,  7.  Artynes 22.

V«  *ApTi^dpvai  try]  u,  8.  Artibamas 40.

*Ao-Tij9a/3aS€  ToU  j3a<ri-  After  the  death  of  Astibaras  king

Xeuq  rSy  M-^huv  y^p^  of  the  Medes  of  old  age,  reign-

•TcXet/njcavTo^,  ed

^.  'Ao-iraSa^ll  o  wft^,  o  two  9.  Aspadas    his    son,    whom    the
T«v  'EXK-^vuv  ^Aa-Tvdyvji  Greeks  call  Astyages.

KaXoi;/x«vo^  Diod,  Sic.  Lib.  II.  p.  84.

♦  Jackson  gives  a  catalogue  of  the  Median  kings  composed  of  the  four  first
from  the  list  of  Syncellus,  and  the  five  last  from  this  of  Ctesias.

f  M«»8aux))$  m.  J  'ApTvxas  m.

§  Diodorus,  in  subsequently  relating  the  revolt  of  Parsodes  and  the  war  of
the  Caducei  or  Carducei  with  the  Medes,  changes  the  name  to  'Apza^os.

II  'ATd(»$(xs  m.


•  •


QuoD  vero  cclxix  annorum
Midorum  obtinuerunt  tempora,
sic :  a  principio  Abbaci,  qui
primus  regnavit  in  Midia,  usque
Alyatum  quem  Cyrus  exter-
minans  in  Persida  regnum  mi-
gravit.

I.  Abracus      ann.  xxviii.

II.  Sosarmus

III.  Mamythus

IV.  Cardiceus

V.  Diycus

VI.  Fraortus
VII.  Cyaxarus

VIII.  Astyacus

Haec  Midorum  regna  per-
manserunt  per  annos  cclxix  a
quintodecimo  anno  Ozias  regis
Judae,  hoc  est,  liii  annorum
primae  Olympiadae.  Finiit  au-
tem  quinquagesima  quarta
Olympiada  anno  trecentessimo
octavo  regnante  Astyago,  quem
exterminavit  Cyrus  Persus  in
quinquagesima  quarta  Olym-
piada.


IV.

XL.

XXIII.

LIV.

XXIV.

XXXII.

XXXVIII.


The  times  of  the  kingdom  of
the  Medes  continued  269  years,
thus  :  From  the  beginning  of
the  reign  of  Abbacus,  the  first
king  of  Media  to  Alyatus,  whom
Cyrus  dethroned  when  he  trans-
ferred the  empire  to  Persia.

1.  Abracus

2.  Sosarmus

3.  Mamythus

4.  Cardiceus

5.  Diycus

6.  Fraortus

7.  Cyaxarus

8.  Astyacus


. .    . .


28  years.

4.
40.
23.
54.
24.
32.
38.


The  kingdom  of  the  Medes,
therefore,  continued  269  years,
from  the  15th  year  of  Ozias,
king  of  Judah,  that  is  53  years
before  the  first  Olympiad,  and
it  ended  in  the  54th  Olympiad,
in  the  308th  year,  in  the  reign
of  Astyagus,  whom  Cyrus  the
Persian  dethroned  in  the  54th
Olympiad.— A^c.  J^M.  Chron.  7S.


•  This  is  from  the  barbarous  Latin  chronology  loeationed,  p.  76.


I


.    A..!.!    *'V


84


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  THEBES :


FROM  ERATOSTHENES.


&rj^aiuy    herr^tpoi;    i^aat-

iTVl    v^,        avToq    ipfA.rjV€V€Tat

*EpuQy€Vfjq»

Qyj^aiuv  AlyvTrriuv  rphoi;

Qfj^aicov     i^aa-lXeva-f     8'.

»&  .      ovroq  €p[JLriv€V€Tat  4fiA€-

raipoq.^


The  first  who  reigned  was  Menes  the
Thebinite,  the  Thebaean  ;  which  is  by
interpretation  Dionius.  He  reigned
sixty -two  years.

The  2nd  of  the  Theban  kings
reigned  Athothes  the  son  of  Menes,
59  years.  He  is  called  by  interpre-
tation Hermogenes.

The  3rd  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  was  Athothes,  of  the  same
name,  32  years.

The  4th  of  the  Theban  kings  was
Diabies  the  son  of  Athothes,  1 9  years.
By  interpretation  he  is  called  Phile-
taerus.

The  5th  of  the  Theban  kings  was
Pemphos,  the  son  of  Athothes,  who


•  M«'»jj  Go. — Mjjws-  B.
f  enviTJjf  Vulg. — e>j>/Tijs  B. — Thyuites  Eu.
X  atwvtos  Din.  from  Jabl.  §  Mmws  Go.

^  Sc.  Din. — iptXirtpos  A.  B. — *<XiffT«pos  Go.


II  'A&(u<r«u;j  Go.
*•   2iyU(^a;(  Jabl.


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  THEBES.


85


Xevce      r  •      ToiyapdiAayjiq  *

QVTO^  ipur]v€vtTUi  T^^  avS/JO^'l'
itepttro'OfA.eK'^^,

(hi^aiuv  AlyvTtriuv  i^atri-
X€VT€  5'.  ^ToT^oq  vioq  aVTOV,
0  ia-riv  Apvjq  "^  ava/o-S'ijTo^,
err)  5-.

Srj^aicoif  AlyvTCTiuv  i^atri-
Xffcre  oyhooq  Yo<TopfA.liiqy  %  cV-
Tiv  ^ETTjo-nravTcq  eri/]  a'.

@vi^a(uy  Alyvmiuv  i^atrt-
Xeva-e  ^  .  Mdprjq  vtoq  avrov,
0  iariv  'HKuihupoq  €tv}  x^'.

Qvi^aiuv  AtyvTtriuv  i.  e^a-
alXtva-ev  * Avuvcfn^y  §  0  ia-riv
vw;  evixotyoi  jj  6tij  x.

S^pauov  AlyvTTTicov  ta.
€^aa-l\€V(T€v  ^ipioq^  ^  0  €<mv
vVoi  Koppyj^y**  &(;  l\  ^T€poi
'A^acrxavTO?  eTyj  i-^ ,

&vj^aiuv  AlyvTCTiuv  i^,
i^acaiXeva-eXvov^ot;  Vvevpoq,  ff
0  €(my  Xpiia-fji  Xpvaov  vllq
€TVI  xjS'.

Orj^aiuy  A)yvnrtcov  tX',
i^a>Tl\€v<r€  *Pavu(ri^y  0  cVxiv
apxiY-pd-Tup  XX  %Tt\  ly,

Srj^aiuv     AlyvTtriuv      *S',


The  6th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  was  Toegaramachus  Momchiri,
the  Memphite,  who  is  called  a  man
redundant  in  his  members,  79  years.

The  7th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings,  Stoechus  his  son,  who  is  Ares
the  senseless,  reigned  6  years.

The  8th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  Gosormies,  who  is  called  Etesi-
pantus,  reigned  30  years.

The  9th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  Mares,  his  son,  who  is  called
Heliodorus,  26  years.

The  10th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  Anoyphis,  which  signifies  a
common  son,  reigned  20  years.

The  11th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  Sirius,  which  signifies  the  son
of  the  cheek,  but  according  to  others
Abascantus  reigned  18  years.

The  12th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  reigned  Chnubus  Gneurus,
which  is  Chryses  the  son  of  Chryses,
22  years.

The  13th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  reigned  Rauosis,  which  is  Ar-
chicrator,  13  years.

The  14th  of  the  Theban  Egyptian
kings  reigned  Biyris,  10  years.


*  To7yarf  A^«;,.oj   Go.— Toiydtfayuof  Sc.

X  a'f'f  JabJ.

II  inlxwfxog  B.  Din.— 8»r<xo//of  A.

**  xof)jj  B.  Din.  f f  xnufos  Sc.

§§    B/df/f  Go.— A;i;^>;f  Sc.


t  T/o-ovS^ofSc.
§   ^AvuiC(prt(  Go.

%  Algols  Sc.
XX  cgX^xpdtTwp  B.


86


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  THEBES.


J^aZ(pi(;'\.  /3'.  err}  x^'.


Xa  .


Mova-^i^  \\  err}  Ky.

Xe'.  **

Sy}^aiaiif  x'.  i^aa-iXivcrev
'AiraTr-Trof?  '["j'  [/.iyicrrc^y  ovroi;
u(;  (pacri  ruapa  upav  y.lcn.v  ej3a-

0ijj9a/(yy  xa'.  i^aa-iXeva-fv
*'E%€<Ty(.oa-QY.dpaq  ^^  €to?  a'.

07]^aia)v  x/3'.  ^jSaer/Xcvtrf
NiTwapi^  §§  "yw^  avT*  toS
av8po?,  0  eVxiv   AS^vjva   N<x>j-

Qyj^aiuv  xy.  €^a<TtA€V<r€
MvpraToi  *A,a^£yvo§OTO^  er*;
xi9'.

Sfj^aiuv  xB'.  f^a<TiX€vcr€
QvoaifAapyii  \\\\     xparaio^,    0


The  15  th  of  the  Theban  kings
Saophis  Comastes,  or,  according  to
some,  Chrematistes,  reigned  29  years.

The  16th  of  the  Theban  kings
Saophis  the  second,  reigned  27  years.

The  17th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Moscheres  Heliodotus,  reigned  31
years.

The  18th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Musthis,  reigned  33  years.

The  19th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Pammes  Archondes,  reigned  35
years.

The  20th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Apappus  Maximus,  is  said  to  have
reigned  100  years  with  the  exception
of  one  hour.

The  21st  of  the  Theban  kings,
Echescosocaras,  reigned  one  year.

The22nd  of  the  Theban  sovereigns
was  a  queen,  who  reigned  instead  of
her  husband ;  she  was  named  Nitocris
that  is  Athena  the  victorious,  and
reigned  6  years.

The  23rd  of  the  Theban  kings,
Myrtaeus  Ammonodotus,  reigned  22
years.

The  2  kh  of  the  Theban  kings,
Thyosimares  the  robust,  who  is  called
the  Sun,  reigned  12  years.


w


*  Din.  inserts  AlyrjirTtuiv — Sc.  inserts  it  throughout. — Go.  inserts  BaaiXiw*.
f  Kofxaa-T^f  .  Go.  +  2(vaaf<pis  Sc. — Itnaouu^ts  Go.

§  Moffxspn   Go.  II   Moff^rji   Din.  B.

^   Ud/uLfAo;  Go. — n«,ttvof  Sc.  *♦   ty.   Sc.  ft  "ArrairTros  Sc.

XX  '£x*'**^?  ^  Hoipoif  A. — 'A5^<<7-;^of  'Oxoipas  Go. — ^'E^^icxoj  6  Kapas.    Sc.
§§  HiTpoxh    B.  nil  oCooifxd^rii  Din.  Jabl.


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  THEBES.


87


Svj^aiuy  Xf .  c/Sao-ZXevcre
f^/viXXo?,*  0  icTTiv  av^-^a-aq  to
vaTpiov  yipdroq  eri^  rjf,

Qrj^aiciw  x$- .  i^atriXivae
lefMppovY.pdrrjqy  0  tVrty  'H/ja-
xX^^  ^ApiroyipccTVj^  errj  ivf,

Xov^Yfp  Tavpoq  y  Tvpavvot;  cttj

«'.

©jj/Sa/oJV    x>j .    i^aa-i\€v<T€
Mevpij^  ^iXoVxopo^iJ;  €TV)  i^' .
Qvj^aio)]/   x^ .    i^aa-iKeva-e

tpaia-roq  \\  cttj  icx,'.

&v)^(xiuv  X'.  i^aa-iXevare
2oixovi>i6a-oxo<;  ^  rvpccvvo^  err]

f.

Syj^aiuv  Xa'.  i(3aiTiX€vff€
Tlerea^vp^q**  €t>j  ^r'-'f't'

Grj^aicov  Xj9'.  i^aa-iXeva-e
STaujtxevfa^^  J  J  jS'.  erij  xy.

§§  0>JiSa/wv  Xy.  i^a<ri-
X€v<T€  lia-rQa-ixepfxy};  \\\\  'H/ja-
xX^?  xparaio?  ^^f   cttj  ve'.

Bi^^aicov  XS'.  i^a,<riX€v<T€
eTi7  jt^y ,


Mapi^***  '-


The  25th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Thinillus,  which  is  the  augmenter  of
country's  strength,  reigned  8  years.

The  26th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Semphrucrates,  who  is  Hercules  Har-
pocrates,  reigned  18  years.

The  27th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Chuther  Taurus  the  tyrant,  7  years.

The  28th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Meures  Philoscorus,  reigned  12  years.

The  29th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Chomaephtha  Cosmus  Philephaestus,
reigned  11  years.

The  30th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Soccuniosochus  the  tyrant,  reigned  60
years.

The  31st  of  the  Theban  kings,  Pen-
teathyres,  reigned  16  years.

The  32nd  of  the  Theban  kings,
Stamenemes  the  second,  reigned  23
years.

The  33rd  of  the  Theban  kings,
Sistosichermes,  Hercules  the  strong,
reigned  55  years.

The  34th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Maris,  reigned  43  years.


♦  96pfXXos    Sc— e/f/XXoj    A.— Se^AiXos    B.

t  Xova^ipraOpos    Jabl.  j  Me/jijs  (p<Xoo-o^os    Sc.

§  Xo/xa«(^a    Go.  II   Salm. — i>t\E<paii7T0i  Go.—  pKe<pterTOS  A.

^  Dind. — 2yxo(;v<os  6-)(UTv§avvos    A. — 2o<xouv<os  6-)(yT6pavvos    B. — 2xouv/(^o-oyoi
rigavvos  Sc. — Ayxo(5i»/os  'O^^uTu^avi/os    Go.

••  nsvTsa^u^\s  Go.  tt  y«/^-  Go.  m.  ++  2Tayuiv6>>}s  Go.

§§  Din.  leaves  the  33d  vacant,  and  continues  the  rest  as  the  34th,  &c.
nil  *E§TOfff)(^ipfjirii  Jabl.
%^  A.  B.  Din. — 'UpdnKtOi   xpiros  Go.  **•   Mdprig    B.


I


mttm^-^mv.fi'tirrinimr^.att


88


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  THEBES.


'H(f)ai(rrov,  ctij  e  .

Qr]^aluv  Xr .   i^aat\(V<T€

€  T>J  l6  .

Gij/3a/a»v   A^'.    i^acri'A€v<T€
^povpuvy  firoi  NerXo^,  cttj  e  .

G>j/3a/wv     Xij*.     i^aa-Uva-e


The   35th    of  the  Thehan  kings,

Siphoas,  which  is  Hermes  the  son  of
Hephaestus,  reigned  5  years.

The  36th  of  the  Theban  kings,
reigned  14  years.

The  37th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Phruron,  which  is  Nilus,  reigned  5

years.

The  38th  of  the  Theban  kings,
Amuthantaeus,  reigned  G3  years. —
Sync.  Chron.  91.  DC.  101.  104.  109.
123.  147.


•  ^KpwaffOi  Sc— 5«ptu«s  Go.


f  'AfAOvp^xloi    Sc.


89


THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  CHRONICLE.


«I»EPETAI  yap  vap  A\yvn-
rioiq  ttakaiQV  ri  y(jp<ivvypou\)€iovy
7[€pi€xov  X  hvvaareiuv  iv  ye-
inaiiq  TcexKiv  piy  ;^ovov  oltzh-
pov,  iv  (/.vpidcri  rpia-i  koi
,$T/)xe  ,  irpuToy  [xh  tuv  Avpi-
Twv,  Se^'xfpov  §€  ruv  Mecr-
rpaiwyy  rpnov  he  AiyvTrr/wv,
ovru  Ttuq  tTii  M^eu^^  ep^ov.

OEflN  BA2IAEIA
Kam  TO  TtaXaiov  xpovi^cov.

*H(f)aiaTov  xpovoq  ovx  ea-Ti
ha,  TO  vi/xTO?  xai  ^f^paq  av~
Toy§  (paiycuf.

HXio;  'Hipaia-Tov  i^aa-i-
Xcfo-fv  €Twv  fjivptd^aq  TpeTq.

Eiteira  Kpoyo;^  (ffrja-i,  xa*
o<  Xoticoi  wavTt^  ^eoi  hutena
i^aa-ikevaav  cty}  .y  "J^  irS'.


Among  the  Egyptians  there  is  a  cer-
tain tablet  called  the  Old  Chronicle,
containing  thirty  dynasties  in  113
descents,  during  the  long  period  of
36525  f  years.  The  first  series  of
princes  was  that  of  the  Auritse ;  the
second  was  that  of  the  Mestraeans ;
the  third  of  Egyptians.  It  runs  as
follows :

THE  REIGN  OF  THE  GODS
According  to  the  Old  Chronicle.

To  Hephaestus  is  assigned  no  time
as  he  is  apparent  both  by  night  and
day.

Helius  the  son  of  Hephaestus
reigned  three  myriads  of  years.

Then  Cronus  and  the  other  twelve
divinities  reigned  3984.


•  X^ivtuv  air$fgw9  Go.

t  This  number  is  also  mentioned  by  Jamblichus,  in  connexion  with  Egyptian
history,  as  the  number  of  the  Hermaic  books,  perhaps  allowing  a  book  to  each  year.
Tks^hoZvEKas  'Epfxrjs  Iv  Ta7f  AH  which  Hermes  wrote  in  20,000  books,

according  to  the  account  of  Seleucus ;  but
Manetho,  in  his  history,  relates  that  they  were
completed  in  36,!i25.~De  Myst.  §  8.  c.  1.


airiygir^aro'   rj  Ta7s   rpt^fjiupfous
T«  xa)  i^axiff^iKtaii    xa)  irtvTa-
MOffiaus  xa)  e'ixoa-i  ?r«vT»,  wi  Ka-
vi^wg  iffTogtl  reX/wj  oj./5«/|«.
J   Ke^swv  A.


\lti


ll


't


§  a^iTuiv  6.


90


THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  CHRONICLE.


"Eitena   iifA^^eoi   ^aaiKeT^

OKT&>  €T>J  <ri^  .

Ka)  fA€T*  ayTol^  yevea)  *e
KwiMv  x^kKov  aveypoufytia-ay
iv  €r€<rt  vfjty .

Elra  TawTwv  *$-'  Zwaa--
xe/a,  yeveuv  ij ,  eTwy  /sf^ .

IIpo?  oT^  i^  Stivao-reta
M€[Juf}trm,y€V€Sv  S',  erwv  ^  .

McSr'  ot^  i*]'  hvvaa-rtia  M([a-
durZvy  y€>tSv  »8  ,  irZv  t^ij  .

"EirciTa  i^'  8wa<rr€/a  A<o<r-
TToXiTwv,  7€V€wy  €  ,  iruv  p^S  .

Elra  x'  8i/va<rT€ta  A«o<r-
iroXtrSv,  y€V€uv  ifj',  €t£v  o-kij'.

*'E'7r€<Ta  not  hvvamia  Ta-
ifiTUVt  y€V€uv  r  ,  ^tSv  pKa  .

EiTot  xjS'  hwota-reia.  Tavi-
rwy,  yeviuv  y  ,  €t&»v  fAij .

"Eiteira*  x-y  twacrrttok
Ato<rvoXiruVf  yeveuv  ^ ,  iTuv

Eira  xS'  hwaa-Ttia  2ai-
T«y,  yevfuv  y  t  irSv  /xS  .

TLfioi  el?  xe'  Buvatrreia  A^*
^lO'JTUVt  y€V€Uif  y ,  erSv  j/A  .

Mc^*    ot^    X?-'    hvvaa-reia

Kal  (/.era  ra,^  x^  hvifoo"-
Tiia^  n.€p<Tuv  €f  iTuv  pxS'.'l"


Next  in  order  are  the  demigods,
in  number  eight,  who  reigned  217
years.

After  these  are  enumerated  1 5  ge-
nerations of  the  Cynic  cycle,  which
extend  to  443  years.

The  16  th  Dynasty  is  of  the  Tanites,
eight  descents,  which  lasted  190  years.

17th  Meraphites,  4  in  descent,
103  years.

18th  Memphites,  14  in  descent,
348  years.

19th  Diospolites,
194  years.

20th  Diospolites.
228  years.

21st  Tanites,
121  years.

22nd  Tanites,
48  years.

23rd  Diospolites,
19  years.


24th  Saites,
44  years.

25th  Ethiopians,
44  years.

26th  Memphites,
177  years.

27th  Persians,
124  years.
28th


5  in  descent,
8  in  descent,

6  in  descent,
3  in  descent,

2  in  descent,

3  in  descent,
3  in  descent,

7  in  descent.


5  in  descent,


*  Go.  omits  this.

f  auTobs    x^  Suv«ff^T«/«  TlififfiHv  yivtwv  Sc. — TOt^TOus    xf  SuvaaTiiot  Go.— Taj
x?*  B. — xf.  A.  X  Dind.  leaves  no  space.


THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  CHRONICLE.


91


"Eiftna  K^'  SyvaoTc/a  Ta-
vnuv,  yeviZv ....  irSy  X^  .

Kai  iiti  Ttda^atq  X   Zvvaa-
T€ta  1  avnov  evo^,  ctij  itj .

ia  Tiayra  ofA,ov  zuv  X   ov-
vacTetSv  irti  My  xai  ,s-(^xe'.

1  ai/Ta  a,vak\jliA.e)^af  €*-
TOW  (jLcpii^ofAcva  Ttapa  ia
uv^a  €T>j  €ixocr*  ircyrax*?,
T^v  wap  Aiyvirr/oi^  xai  "EX-
Xij(r*v  aTroxaTacTTaffJV  rev  Zw-
S*axoi/  fAv^oXoyovfAey/jv  SijXo?,
toSt  ecTTi  Ty/V  aTro  tsS  avTOv
jflfAfiov  iiii  to  avxQ  a-rjfA^iQV,

0  CtTTi  TipU'lOV  'ACTtroV  T^^  'JTOW-

T>j5  ao/jpa^  la-r][A€piyov  ^oohiov,

KpiQv  K€yQ[ji€vov  iiap    avroT^y

utTitip  xa*  iv  To7q  T€ViY.(nq  rov

'EpfJLOv  xat  €V  rar^  Kvpayyi<ri'f


in  descent,
1  in  descent.


29th  Tanites,
39  years.

30th  a  Tanite,      . .
18  years.

In  all,    30  Dynasties,   and  36525
years.

Which  number  of  years,  resolved
and  divided  into  its  constituent  parts,
that  is  to  say,  25  times  1461  years,
shows  that  it  relates  to  the  fabled
periodical  revolution  of  the  Zodiac
among  the  Egyptians  and  Greeks ;
that  is,  its  revolution  from  a  par-
ticular point  to  the  same  again,  which
point  is  the  first  minute  of  the  first
degree  of  that  equinoctial  sign  which
they  call  the  Ram,  as  it  is  explained  in
the  Genesis  of  Hermes  and  in  the
Cyrannian  books. — Syncel.  Chron.  5 1 .
— Euseb.  Chron,  6,


FROM  CASTOR.


iEoYPTioRUM  regnum  inveni-
mus  vetustissimum  omnium  reg-
norum  :  cujus  initium  sub  Ma-
nethono  dicitur  memoramus
scribere.

Primum  Deorum,  qui  ab  ipsis
scribuntur  faciam  regna  sic :


Of  all  kingdoms  we  find  that
of  the  Egyptians  to  be  the  most
ancient.  Of  whose  beginning
we  purpose  to  write  according
to  the  relation  of  Manetho.

The  first  dynasty  was  that  of
the  Gods,  who  are  classed  by
themselves ;  and  I  reckon  their
reigns  thus  :


♦    vytvn  Vulg. — ^TOi  Sc.


f  Kvgavvijci  B.


91


THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  CHRONICLE.


#


i


m


!


Ifestumdicunt  quidam  Deum
regnare  in  ^gypto  annos  sex-
centos  LXXX.

Post  hunc  Solem  Ifesti  an-
nos LXXVII.

Post  istum  Osinosirim  annos
ccccxx.

Post  hunc  Oron  Stoliarchum
annos  xxviii.

Post  hunc   Typhona   annos

XLV.

CoUiguntur  Deorum  regna
anni  mille  dl.

Deinceps  Mitheorum  regna
sic  :

Prota  Anubes  Amusim,  qui


Some  say  the  God  Ifestus
reigned  in  Egypt  680  years.

After  him  the  Sun,  the  son
of  Ifestus,  77  years.

After  him  Osinosiris,  420
years.

After  him  Oros  Stoharchus,
28  years.

After  him  Typhon,  4-5  years.

The  sum  of  the  reigns  of  the
Gods  amounts  to  1550  years.

Then  succeeds  the  kinjjdom
of  the  Demi-gods,  thus :

First  reigned  Anubes  Amu-


etiam   iEgyptiorum   scripturas     sim,  who  composed  the  writings


composuit  annos  lxxxiii.

Post  hunc  Apion  Grammati-
cus,  qui  secundum  Inachum  in-
terpretabatur ....  annos  lxxvii
quem  sub  Argios  initio  re-
gnaverunt.*

Post  haec  Ecyniorumf  reges
interpretavit  Imitheus  vocans
et  ipsos,  annos  duo  millia  c,
fortissimos  vocans.

Haec   finis   de  primo  Tonio


of  the  Egyptians,  83  years.

After  him  Apion  Gramma-
ticus,  who  reigned  77  years.
In  his  reign  commenced  the
kingdom  of  Argos,  under  Ina-
chus.*

Afterwards  the  kings  of  the
Ecynii,f  by  whom  must  be  un-
derstood the  Demi  gods.  They
reigned  2100  years.

This  is  the  end  of  the  first


•  This  and  the  next  passage  are  so  barbarous  and  obscure  that  the  transla-
tion I  have  given  is  merely  conjectural.  I  suspect  this  passage  has  some  con-
nexion with  the  following  from  Tatianus.  'Airi'wv  i  ypx/i/i(XTtx6i  <prjffi  8*  Srt  xa-
T(i(ffxot\Pe  T^v  huvQiv  " kfivan  x«t«  tJiv  'Apy«7o».  ytv6fxtv<ii  "Ivo^^ov. — Eus.  Pr.  X.

f  These  Ecynii  are  manifestly  the  same  with  vixuat  of  the  Dynasties  of
Manetho  and  the  Manes  of  the  preceding,  all  which  appear  to  be  no  other  than  a
corruption  of  the  fifteen  generations  of  the  Cynic  Cycle  n'  xuv<xoS  in  the  original
of  the  old  Chronicle,  p.  90.


THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  CHRONICLE.


92


Manethoni  habens  tempora  an-  volume    of    Manetho,    which

norum  duo  millia  c.  contains  a  period  of  2 1 00  years.
Mineus  et  pronepotes  ipsius         Mineus  and  seven  of  his  de-

septem      regnaverunt      annos  scendants  reigned  25S  years.

CCLIII.

Then  reigned  eight  others
302  years.

Necherocheus,  and  eight
others,  reigned  214  years.

Likewise  seventeen  others,
214  years.

Likewise  twenty-one  others,
258  years.

Othoi  and  seven  others,  203
years.

Likewise  fourteen  others,
140  years.

Likewise  twenty  others,  409
years.

Likewise  seven  others,  204
years.

Dynasty  of  Diospolites  9
years.

Dynasty  of  Bubastites  153
years.

Dynasty  of  Tanites  184
years.

Dynasty  of  Sebennites  224
years.

Dynasty  of  Memphites  318
years.

Dynasty  of  IliopoHtes  221
years.

Dynasty  of  Ermupolites  260


Regnaverunt  et  aliorum  octo
annos  cccii.

Necherocheus,     et     aliorum
octo  annos  ccxiv.

Similiter   aliorum   septende-
cim  annos  ccxiv.

Similiter      aliorum      viginti
unus  annos  cclviii.

Othoi    et     aliorum    septem
annos  cciii.

Similiter  et  aliorum  quatuor-
decim  annos  cxl.

Simihter   et   aliorum  viginti
annos  ccccxx.

Similiter  et  aliorum  septem
annos  cciv.

Potestas  Diopolitanorum  ann.

IX.

Potestas  Bubastanorum  ann.
cliii.

Potestas     Tanitorum     ann.

CLXXXIV.

Potestas  Sebennitorum  ann.
ccxxiv.

Potestas  Memphitorum  ann.
cccxviii.

Potestas  Iliopolitorum  ann.
ccxxi.

Potestas  Ermupolitorum  ann.

CCLX.

Usque   ad    septimam    deci-


if!


II


,•


years.

The  second  volume  enume-


92'


THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  CHRONICLE.


m


mam  potestatem  secundum  scri-  rates  to  the  17th  dynasty  and

bitur  totum,  ul  docet,  numerum  contains  a  period  of  1520  years,
liabentem    annos    mille    quin-
gentos  XX.*

Haec  sunt  potestates  iEgypti-         These  are  the  Dynasties  of

orum.  Egypt.


FROM  EUSEBIUS.


Primus  homo  apud  iEgyptios
Hephestus  qui  ignis  inventor
ipsis  fuit*

A  quo  Sol.

(Post  quem  Agathodaemon.

Post)*  quem  Cronus.

Post  hunc  Osiris.

Ac  deinde  Typhon  frater
Osiridis.

Post  quem  Orus  Osiridis  et
Isidis  filius.

^gyptii  primi  hi  dominati
sunt.

Post  quos  per  successionem
protractum  est  regnum  usque
ad  Bitem,  in  spatio  annorum
myriadis  triumque  milHum  et
nonagentorum,  juxta  annos  lu-
nares,  triginta  inquam  dierum
numerum  enim  mensem  unum,
illi  annum  vocabant.


The  first  man  according  to  the
Egyptians  was  Hephestus,  who
was  the  inventor  of  fire.

From  him  descended  the  Sun.

(After  whom  Agathodaemon.

After)  whom  Cronus.

Then  Osiris.

And  then  Typhon,  the  bro-
ther of  Osiris.

After  wliom  was  Orus,  the
son  of  Osiris  and  Isis.

These  were  the  first  Egyp-
tian kings.

After  them  the  empire  de-
scended by  a  long  succession
to  Bitesj  through  a  lapse  of
13,900  years,  reckoned,  I  say,
in  lunar  years  of  thirty  days
to  each  :  for  even  now  they  call
the  month  a  year.


*  This  passage  in  the  Armenian  is  between  parentheses,  and  in  what  we
might  call  italics.  Has  it  been  interpolated  or  omitted?  I  have  replaced  the  true
names  from  the  Armenian  :  Aucher  has  given  them  Vulcanus,  Saturnus,  &c.


THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  CHRONICLE.


93


Post  Deos  regnavit  gens
Semi-deorum  annis  mcclv.

Atque  item  alii  reges  domi-
nati sunt  annis  mdcccxvii.

Post  quos  alii  xxx  reges
Memphites  annis  mdccxc.

Post  eos  alii  Thynites  x  reges
annis  cccl.

Ac  deinde  Manium  et  Semi-
deorum  regnum  annis  mmmmm

DCCCXIII.

Simul  omnes  anni  recensen-


After   the   Gods,  a  race  of
Demi-gods  reigned  1255  years.

Then    reigned    other   kings
1817  years.

After  them  thirty  Memphite
kings,  1790.

Then  ten  Thynite  kings,  350
years.

Then  came  the  kingdom  of
the  Manes  and  Demi-gods,
5813.

The  number  of  years  alto-


tur,     myrias     (et)   mille:    qui  gether     amounts    to     11,000;

etiam     lunares     sunt,    scilicet  which  also  are  lunar  years,  that

menstrui.  Jg  to  say,  months.

Computantur    simul    omnes  All  the  lunar   years,  which

anni  lunares  quos  .Egyptii  re-  the    Egyptians    allow    to    the

ferunt  fuisse  Deorum  et  Semi-  reigns  of  the  Gods,  the  Demi-

deorum   atque   Manium,    duae  gods,    and     the    Manes,    are

myriades,    quatuor    millia    et  24,900.— ^m.  An.  200.

DCCCC.


<i


I


i


IJ   i


94


EGYPTIAN  DYNASTIES  OF
MANETHO.


DYNASTY  OF  THE  DEMIGODS.


I


Ylpuryj  Syvao-Tf/a.*
A\yvirriuv  a .  €^aa-lK€va-€v

Alyvittluv  0 ,  €/Sacr/Aeucr€v

AiyvTtriuv  y .  i^a<riK€V(r€v
'AyQ^o^aifxuv  err}  vj* .  xa*
^/A«rv  xal  Sexa  r}fA.€pat,q.  §

Alywrr/iwv  8 .  i^a(nXev(T€v
Kpiifoq  €rrj  fx .  xa)  ijfJLiav,  ||

Alyvjrrtwv  € .  i^a<rt\ivcrtv
Oaiptq  xa«   lex?  erij  Xe  .

AJyvTrr/wv  j* .  €j3ao-/X€t»o"6v

•     •     .    CTTJ   •     •     .

A\yvwTiuv  5 .  i^aatXcva-o

l'v(f>UV  CT>J  x^'.


First  dynasty.

The  1st  of  the  Egyptian  kings  was
Hephaestus,  who  reigned  724  years
and  a  half  and  4  days.

The  2nd  was  HeHus,  the  son  of
Hephaestus,  86  years.

3rd,  Agathdaemon,  who  reigned
56  years  and  a  half  and  10  days.

4th,  Cronus,  40  years  and  a  half.

5th,  Osiris  and  Isis,  35  years.


6th,


years.


7th,  Typhon,  29  years.


8th,  Orus,  the  demigod,  25  years.


•■I  I


•  A.  places  these  words  after  Hephsstus.

t  Go.— >^k8'^  y.  i.  e.  724,  3-4.  Din.         J  Go.— ^

§  Go — vrO'S'-  >•  e.  56  7-12.  Din.

§  .«*'w  l^in-  A.  ^  Ofoj  Go.


r' Din.  i.  e.  80,  1-6.


EGYPTIAN  KINGS.


93


AiyvKTiuv  ^.  i^a<riKtv<r€v
"Apiii  yifAi^eQi  €TV}  X7 .

AlyvTtriuv  *'.   i^oKriKtvo'ev

A/yvrriW  loJ,  €^curl>^ev<r&t
*H/)axX^5  yilM^€Oi   €tij  «e.'

AiyvKriuv  ijS*.  i^aalXcwrev
'AiroXXSv  *  ijyu^€o^  erri  xe  .

Alyvitriav  ty'»  i^oLtri'kewTiv

'Af*/A«V  VJlXl^eOi  €T1J  X  .

Alyvmiuv  *§'.  (^(jta-i^wrev
Ti^orji  vjfAi^eoq  erij  x^.
Alyintriuv  k\  e^aa-iXeva-ev

At^t^TWV  *?■'  lj3ao-/X€vo-ev
Zey^  vifjJ^reQi  cnj  x'.


9th,  Ares,  the  demigod,  23  years.

10th,  Anubis,  the  demigod,  17
years.

11th,  Heracles,  the  demigod,  15
years.

12tb,  Apollo,  the  demigod,  25
years.

13th,  Ammon,  the    demigod,    30

years.
14th,  Tithoes,    the    demigod,   27

years.
15th,  Sosus,  the  demigod,  32  years.

16th,  Zeus,  the  demigod,  20  years.
— Syncel.  Chron.  19. — Euseb,  Chron,
7.


\i


•  onroXa  A. — 'AjtoXXo;  Go.


'I


THE  EGYPTIAN  DYNASTIES  OF

MANETHO.


THE  FIRST  DYNASTY.


AFRIC.  SCAL.

META     vexva^      tov^     ^jw<-


After  the  dead  demigods  the  first
dynasty  consisted  of  eight  kings.


a'.     Ov  irpuroq  Mijvij^  0€<-
o<  WTO  t-jnroiroTajtAoi;  y   ^lapita-


1.  The  first  was  Menes  the  Thi-
nite;  he  reigned  62  years,  and
perished  by  a  wound  received  firom
an  hippopotamus.


^,  "A^u^ii  vtoq  erri  v^.  o         2.  Athothis,  his  son,   reigned  57


•  Sc— ef».»/T)jff  Go.  f  imrorAfiov  Go.

N.  B. — The  first  column  contains  the  dynasties  of  Manetho  according  to
Africanus,  from  the  text  of  Dindorf:  the  names  and  paragraphs  included  between
the  parentheses  are  the  variations  which  occur  in  the  list  of  Scaliger.  The
third  column  contains  the  dynasties  according  to  Eusebius,  from  the  text  of  the
Editor  of  the  Armenian,  who  for  the  most  part  has  followed  Goar:  the  varia-
tions are  those  of  Scaliger.  The  fourth  column  is  the  Latin  translation  of  the
Armenian,  with  the  variations  from  the  fragments  of  the  old  Latin  version  of
Hieronymus.


THE  EGYPTIAN  DYNASTIES  OF

MANETHO.


THE  FIRST  DYNASTY.


!     i


EUSEB.  SCAL.

META  vcxua^  xa*  rov^  rj[At-
^eov^f  Hpuryjv  ^vvatrrciav  xa-
rapi\ffAov<ri  ^atriKeccv  oktu,
ftw  'KpSro^  yiyove  Mijjoj?,  oj
hia<rrji/.a}q  avrZy  viyqa-aro.  Sub*
ov  roiv^  i^  endoTov  y^vovq  jSa-
(riXeva-avTai      avaypd^i/za/xcv,

rpoToy,

a'.  Mt}joj5  0€iWT)jf,  'I'  xa»
Oi  ToijTov  anoyovoi  (i^',  ev  aX-
X(p  8e)  ^',  ov  *HpoboTOi  Mvjva
cJvo^bcao'fv,  €^a<riX€v<r€y  ereo'iv
i  .  cvToq  vnepopiQv  <rrpar€iav
iTroiyia-arOj  xat  evho^Q^  ixpi^rj,
into  J   8e  *IirKQTrordfMV  §    ^p-


ARMEN.  HIERON.

Post  Manes  et  Semideos,  Primam
Dynastiam  viii.  regum  percensent.
Quorum  primus  fuitMemes,  qui  nem-
pe  praefulgens  inter  eos,  dominatio-
nem  obtinuit :  a  quo  quasHbet  regum
generationes  singillatim  describemus;
quorum  successio  ita  prorsus  est.


I.  Memes  Thynites,  et  hujus  vii.
fihi,  quem  Herodotus  Mina  nuncu-
pavit,  regnavit  annis  xxx.  Hie  vel
ultra  regionis  limites  cum  exercitu
progreditur,  et  illustris  famosusque
habetur ;  atque  ab  hippopotamo  rap-
tus  est.

II.  Athotis    hujus    filius   obtinuit


•  avay§oo^cifiivwi>  Go.— Sc.  f  eij/nif  Go.

t  Go.   inserts    lirirov. — A.  Tcriroy. — B.   iVirou, — and   Din.    [iVow]  between
iirh  .  .  .  .  8(.

§  iVoTciyuou  B.  II  "A^ai^ts   Din.


96


MANETHOS  DYNASTIES


OF  THE  KINGS  OF   EGYPT.


97


*


I


AFRIC.  SCAL.

ra  iv  Mffupii  ^acrlXtia  oho-  years  ;  he  built  the  palaces  at  Mem-

houvja'ai'  oZ  (f)4povTat  jS/jSXoi  phis,  and  left  the  anatomical  books,

&varo[xiKa),*  larpoi;  yap  ?v.  for  he  was  a  physician.


l/iO^  tXT}   Aa .

8',  Ov€V€(pvii  ('Eve^^)  vlo^
€Tri  xy.  iip*  oZ  XifMq  xarcVxe
T^v  Atywrroy  fxeyaq-  ovro^  raq

€*.   Ov(raul>a7^oq    (^afpaT-

hoi)   vioi  6T1J  x'.

r  •   Mie^thoq  vlof  €rr}  xj^.


3.  Cencenus,  his  son,  reigned  31
years.

4.  Venephes,  his  son,  reigned  23
years.  In  his  time  a  great  plague
raged  through  Egypt.  He  raised  the
pyramids  near  Cochome.

5.  Usaphaedus,  his  son,  reigned  20
years.

6.  Miebidus,  his  son,  26  years.


^.  2€/x6/x\^?J  (2€/*fjtAi//*^)  7.  Scmempses,  his  son,  reigned  18
vio^erri  it},  ^</)'  oZ <p^opa  /xc-  years.  In  his  reign  a  terrible  pesti-
yiarrv}  %ari<rxfi  t^v  AJyvsTov.       lence  afflicted  Egypt.

r{.  Biijycx^^  §  W05  It)j  xr'.         8.  Bienaches,  his  son,  reigned  26

years.

*OjtAou  enj  017'.  The  whole  number  of  years  amount-

ed to  253.


EUSEB.  SCAL.

I'ioc  ^^C^y  eT€<rt  x^ .  xat  ra
^y  McfMpi  "f  ^atriXiia  c^m^o-
^ijo-cy,  larptyi'^v  re  e|)j(rx»j(r€y,

xai  jS/jSXof^  avaTOfAiYMq  avv-
eypa^^iv.

y .    Keyxeyij^  0  tovtou  1/W5

S*.  Ov€V€<fy^^  (Ov€V€(pprj^^
fTrj  fA^o  i(f>  oZ  KifAoq  xaT€(r%6
rrjv  x^paVf  oj  xa»  ra^  icvpa-
y.il(X.q  raq  irepl  Kojj^aJyijyJ
^yeipev.

«'.   Ov<ra(f)ariq  ervi  x'.  (c'.)


ARMEN.  HIERON.

[regnum]*  annis  xxvii.  et  in  Memphi
urbe  regiam  aedificavit ;  qui  et  me-
dicinam  exercuit,  atque  de  modo  cor-
pora dissecandi  libros  conscripsit.

III.  Cencenis   istius    filius,     annis

XXXIX.

IV.  Vavenephis,  annis  xlii.  cujus
tempore  fames  regionem  occupavit,
qui  et  pyramidas  ad  Chovonem  [vel,
juxta  Choe  villam]  erexit.

V.  Usaphais,  annis  xx.


5-'.  NicjSc?  §  (Nie^vji)  errj         VI.  Niebais,  annis  xxvi.


xr.

€T)j  ivjK  €(p*  ov  iioXam  vapu'
(TtifAot  eycyero,  xai  (/.eyiaTYj
dt^opoi,

T>j?,  trifi  xr.   *

Ol  Se  Trayre?  i^aaiKeva-av
eryj  tryjS'.  (<ri^,)


VII.  Mempses,  annis  xviii.  Sub
quo  plurima  facinora  facta  sunt,
maximaeque  corruptiones.

viii.  Vibethis,  annis  xxvi.

Omnes  simul    regnaverunt  annos

CCLII.


)


PH


THE  SECOND  DYNASTY.

A€OT€/)a  ^vya<rr€ia  0cm-         Of  nine  Thinite  kings.
T«y  ^acikiuv  hv€a'


THE  SECOND  DYNASTY.


*  B.  in  m.  has  tayi^ou  BaaiKiwi .
f  irafot  Go.  omitting  T«f.
§  Btfivor)(^s   Go.


J  2i/nlff4ft!  Go.


/\€vr€pa  Iwao-Tfix  ^a<ri-         Secunda  dynastia  regum  ix.

MUV  ^,

*  The  words  contained  between  crotchets  [  ]  are  so  placed  in  the  original
translation :  the  variations  of  Hieron.  are  between  parentheses  (  ).

f  M(/JL(fet  Go.  m. — Sc.

J  Kw)(Ojfiriv  Din.  B. — Koj^wvjjs  Sc. — Cho  oppidum  Lat.  Qy.  Xa;  xa>/*>j»
or  X'*'S^*  Ed"  Arm.

§  Nii/SiTjf  Din.— viijSaJf  B.— Niebaes  Lat.  ||  A.  B.  Din.

%  oJjS/ev^if  B.  **  Jackson  allows  only  16.


i  1


^B


«


AFRIC.


a


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


SCAL.


OF   THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


99


''fly  -KpSro^  Borj^li*  1.  Boethus  the  first  reigned  38
err}  Xrj'.  €(p*  ov  xda-fAa  f  xara  years.  During  his  reign  a  chasm  of
Bov^aa-Tov  iyfvfroj  xa*  aisu-  the  earth  opened  near  Bubastus,  and
XovTo  itoXKoL  many  persons  perished.

jS*.  Kaje^w^  J  erij  X%r'.  2.  Caeechos  reigned  39  years.  Un-
i^*  ov  01  jSoe?  'A7r<?  cv  Mefjt.-  der  him  the  bulls  Apis  in  Memphis,
(/)€i§  xai  Mv€w^||  ^v 'HXioy-  and  Mnevis  in  Heliopolis,  and  the
woXci^  xa*  0  M€vSi7<r<05  Tpd-     Mendesian  goat,  were  appointed  to

be  gods.

3.  Binothris  reigned  47  years.  In
his  time  it  was  determined  that  women
might  hold  the  imperial  government.

4.  Tlas  reigned  17  years.

5.  Sethenes  reigned  41  years.

6.  Chaeres  17  years.

7.  Nephercheres  25  years.  In  his
^<^*  ov  fAv^etjeTai  rov  Ne^Xov  time  it  is  said  the  Nile  flowed  with
fA.€>ari  xexpafAevov  rii*.4pa.q  Iv-     honey  during  eleven  days.

Sexa  pvS^vai.

8.  Sesochris  48  years.  His  height
was  5  cubits  and  breadth  S,j[f


yo^  ivo[xi<T^rj<rav  etvai  S'eo/.

y,   Bivu^pi^  erv}  fjtX,',  i(f}
ov  iyipi^v}  ru^  yvvtzi-na,;  ^acri'
Xc/a^  yepa^  ^yjav.

f  ,    Xaip-^i  €T>J    lC,\

^'.  l^€(f>€pxfpv}<;    €TV}    xe'.


\\


*0[Jt.OV  (T1J   T^'.)


9.  Cheneres  30  years.
Altogether  302  years.


EUSEB.  SCAL.

a.  B5%o?,*  €<^*  ov  xao--
ua  'Kara  Bov^aa-rov  "f  iye-
vcTO  xa*  TToKkoi  airwXXovTo.


ARMEN.  HIERON.

I.  Bochus.  Sub  quo  ingens  ter-
ras hiatus  in  Bubastone  factus  est,
multique  perierunt.


^.  Me^  ov  xa*  (SeW/jo?)         ii.  Post   quem   Cechous  ;    qui  et

XoQf,  +  oT€   xai  'Attk,  xa*  o  Apis,  et  Mnevis,  nee  non  Mendesius

MvevK;  §  aX\a  xa)  6  McvStj-  caper,  tamquam  Dii  habiti  sunt.

aio^  rpdyo^  ^eo)  €V0fA.:a-^v](rav.


y'.  BtO(f>r}^i  (Bio<piq)  i(ft*  ov
eKpi^v]  xa«  ra^  yvvatKaq  jSa-
ariXeicci  ytpuq  t%f  *y.

8'.  t .  s^.  KaijtxeTa  Tot/Tot^

pourvifAoy  iyevero,

^ .  'Eiri  Toy  i^^ofAov  fjw-
^€V€ra.t  Nf rXov  /xeXiTi  xcx^aju-
jLicvov  vilMpaq  cvSexa  px^vat.

r{.   Mf^'   ov   ^€a-axpii  €Tr}
f^yj  •     Of     XeycTa*     yeyoyevat
txpo^  irvjx^v  i.  icaKaiaruv  y.
TO  fJiiyiKio^.

*J .  Ewi  §6  Tovf  ivvia  oySfv
aziO[*yifj[XQV€VTov  VTnjp^ev,

Oi  xa*   i^atrlXivcran  er€(ri


III.  Postea  Biophis,  sub  quo  lex
sancita,  qua  fceminis  quoque  regni
honor  delatus  fuit.

IV.  V.  VI.  Post  istos  alii  adhuc
tres;  quorum  aetate  nullum  insigne
opus  factum  est.

VII.  Sub  septimo,  commentores
fabularum  Nilum  fluvium  diebus  xi.
melle  aqua  permixto  fluxisse  ajunt.

VIII.  Post  quem  Sesochris,  annis
XLviii.   cujus  proceritas  cubitis  v.  et

latitude  palmis  in.  fuisse  dicitur.

IX.  Sub  nono  autem  nihil  memoria
dignum  fuit  gestum.

Regnaruntque        [simul]
ccxcvii.


annis


i         5:


*  ^^^f  Go.  m.  f  i^'  o5  ^ifffioc  Go.

J  xa)  ix^t  A.— Ka<ax<Sf  Go.  §  Ms'a(pi  Go.— yt/f/*^*  B.

II   Sc. — Mrjv.Of  Go.  ^  \Kiouir6Ku   Go.

•*  Syncellus  gives  the  two  following  as  from  Eusebius,  but  there  is  much
reason  to  suppose  that  they  properly  belong  to  the  list  of  Africanus.

tt  Three  palms.  Eu.  Ar.— 5  cubits  and  3  hand  breadths  high.  Jack.


*  n^ (Stou  Bw^oC  Go. — Sc.
f  xaTa^ov^dffTwv  Go. — Bo60xffTn>  Sc.

X  Xaios  Din.  B.  §  fittCus   B.

II  Sc.  at  the  end  of  this  dynasty  places  2eVo^<f  and  Xtve^ra  from  the  list  of
Africanus  as  in  the  opposite  page.


I  ft


^i'l.WIMiiWJMi'nUWiiWi*  ««m,L<mm<m


100


MANETHOS  DYNASTIES


THE  THIRD  DYNASTY.


m


AFRIC.  SCAL.

TpiTV}  hvvaTTela  MtfMpnuv
^acrtAeuv  ivvea,

a  .    Ov  N€%f/)o^(;*  (*Ex€-

a'Ki<TT^cra,v  Alywrr/iyv  y.ou  ttj^
<r«X>jy>j5   Tiapcc  Xoyov  avirj^ei-

(ray,

^.  To<rop^po^  €T»)  x^'.
01/T05  'AcxXijTrto^  At-yuirr/o^
xara  tijv  larpiM'/jv  v^vofAia-rai,
xa*  T^v  8ia  ^€(rruv  X/^wv  oi-
xohoixiav    €vpaTOf     aKka    xat

7'.    Tlf/XJ  f  €T1J  ^'.

8'.    Mecr&jj^/x?       (Mccroxpi^)

V  y/


*r


X'.


Of  nine  Memphite  kings.

1.  Necherophes  reigned  28  years.
In  his  time  the  Libyans  revolted  from
the  Egyptians,  but  on  account  of  an
unexpected  increase  of  the  moon
they  submitted  through  fear.

2.  Tosorthrus  reigned  29  years.
He  is  called  Asclepius  by  the  Egyp-
tians, for  his  medical  knowledge.  He
built  a  house  of  hewn  stones,  and
greatly  patronized  literature.

3.  Tyris  reigned  7  years.

4.  Mesochris  17  years.

5.  Soyphis  16  years.

6.  Tosertasis  19  years.

7.  Aches  42  years.

8.  Sephuris  30  years.

9.  Cerpheres  26  years.
Altogether  214  years.


J  2tt>V^<f  Go.


II  lf(pov(is  Go.


f  TtJfllJ    B.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


101


THE  THIRD  DYNASTY.


EUSEB.  SCAL.

TpiTi^  hvyaa-T€ia  Mefjupiruv
^aariXeuv  v^ .

a.  Nexcp^x*^,  *  ^<^*  ol
Al^ve^  an€<Trrjaav  AtyvKTiuv,
Y,at  T^^  o-fXijvTj^  irapa  Xoyov
avirj^eir/ji  htoc  deo^  iavroli^
itape^oa'av.


ARMEN.  r  HIERON.

Tertia  dynastia  Memphitarum  re-
gum  VIII.

I.  Necherochis,  sub  quo  Libyes
adversum  Aegyptios  rebellarunt :
quumque  Luna  importune  aucta  fue-
rit,  metu  ducti,  seipsos  rursum  in
servitutem  dedidere.


1


feii


AffxXi^'Jrio^  "Trap'  AiyimTioi^
ixk-^^rvi  ha  rrjy  larpiK'^v.  ovro^
xai  T^v  8<a  ^eirrSy  Xi^uv  oixo-
doptijv  fvpaTOf  aXKa   xcii  ypa-

Ot  he   Xoivoi  €^  oCSev  d^iO'
IMfifAwtmov  t-npa^av.


II.  Post  quem  Sesorthus,  qui  ob
medicam  artem  Aesculapius  ab  Ae-
gyptiis  vocatus  est.  Hie  etiam  sectis
lapidibus  aedificandi  modum  invenit,
atque  literis  exarandis  curam  impen-
dit.

Sex  caeteri  autem  nihil  memo-
ratu  dignum  gesserunt.


Oi  xaJ  ipaa-iKtva-ev  trea-i        Quique  regnarunt  annis  cxcvii.


phyj.


*  Nax^f<«OC'f  Go.


.J


k


i


102


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


THE  FOUHTH  DYNASTY.


AFRIC.  SCAL.

TfTaprvj   hwaa-xfiat  ^eiJi.'

j3.  Icvipi;  err)  ^y,  oq  Trjv
[Aiyicrrnjv  yjy€ip€  irvpafxihaf  ^v
(fyifja-iv  'HpoboToq  vtto  Xeovoq*
yeyonevatm  ovto^  Se  xai  vire-
poTtrrjij  €lq  Klfovq  iy€i>€TO  xai
Trjy  Upav  a-vv€ypa.yp€  j3/,9Xoy,
fiv  uq  fJt-eya  Xf>7/xa  iv  AiyvnT^

y  •  2oS^*5  *trri  f f',

e'.   'PaToia-^i  ervi  xc',
r'.  B/x€pi<§    err}  x^'.
^.   le^epxeprii    (Ze^fpxe-
prii)  errj  ^'.

>j'.   Sa[X(p^]^  errj  Kf'.


Of  eight  Memphite  kings  of  a
different  race.

1.  Soris  reigned  29  years.

2.  Suphis  reigned  63  years.  He
built  the  largest  pyramid  which  He-
rodotus says  was  constructed  by
Cheops.  He  was  arrogant  towards
the  gods,  and  wrote  the  sacred  book ;
which  is  regarded  by  the  Egyptians
as  a  work  of  great  importance.

3.  Suphis  reigned  66  years.

4.  Mencheres  63  years.

5.  Rhatceses  25  years.

6.  Bicheris  22  years.

7.  Sebercheres  7  years.

8.  Thampthis  9  years.
Altogether  284  years.


THE  FIFTH  DYNASTY.

nefAirrri  hvvsKrreia  ^acri-         Of  nine  Elephantine  kings.
Xewv  rf\\  i^  'EXe^vr/vij^.


fl


a,  Ovaepxepfii^erriyir}.         1.   Usercheres  reigned  28  years.


*  u^i  x**»"<'s  A.  B.— Cjto^^/ottov  Go.
J  txTterajuLYiv  B.

II  Qy.  ^'.


t  B. — i  TlfgiiTTiii  Go.
§  Btx'g*i  B.  Din.  Go.
^  Ou  ffipxtgn  Go.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


103


THE  FOURTH  DYNASTY.


EUSEB.  SCAL.

Terdpri^  ^vvaa-reia   ^a(ri-
Xiuv  i^  .      MefMpirSy  (rvyye-

^Clv  rpiroq  ^ovcpt^f    05   r^v

ixeyia-rrjv  TtvpaiAihcc  iyeipa^,
rjv  (pr/jo-iv^Hpu^orof  viro  Xcoiroj
yeyoyevat.  oq  xai  vir^poim^^
eU  \ftQv^  yeyoveVf  uq  [Aeravo"^-
(Tavra  avrov  r^v  Upav  arvy-
ypdxpai  jS/jSXov,  tjv  uq  fxeya
XP^l^d''  AlyvTcrioi  itepiertova-i,
ruv  Se  XoiTsuv  cvhev  aQiofAy/j-
[MVivrov  dveypd^j  ol  xai
i^cKTiy^v(rav  errj  v[j(.r).


ARMEN.  HIERON.

Quarta  dynastia  Memphitarum
regum  xvii.  ex  alia  stirpe  regni.

Quorum  tertius  Suphis,  qui  mag-
nam  illam  pyramidem  erexit,  quam
a  Cheope  factam  Herodotus  dicit :
qui  et  superbus  in  Deos  inventus  est,
usquedum  eum  [hujusce  rei]  poeni-
tuit,  et  libros  Sacrarii  conscripsit ;
quos  velut  magnas  opes  habebant
Aegyptii.  De  caeteris  vero  nihil  me-
moria  dignum  scriptum  est.  Quique
regnarunt  annos  ccccxlviii.


(■


THE  FIFTH  DYNASTY.

UifA'arri  Swaerre/a  ^aa-i-         Quinta  dynastia  regum  XXXI.  Ele-
Xeuv  rpiuKoyra  evoq  c|  'EXc-      phantiniorum.
(payriwjq.


i


!l


11


104


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


AFRIC.  SCAL.

y.   N€(p€px€pyii  {N€px€(p€-
pnq)  €TVl  k'.


2.  Sephres  13  years.

3.  Nephercheres  20  years.


8'.  :^i<rtpr}q*  (Sw-^x'^  ^'^n         4.  Sisires  7  years.


c'.   Xe/>ij^  (E%€/wj;)  ervj  x  .
5-'.   'Pa2roi;/)>j?f     (Pa^ou-
pii)  €T/}  /*8'.  (jt*a'.)


5.  Cheres  20  years.

6.  Rhathures  44  years.

7.  Mencheres  9  years.

8.  Tancheres  44  years.

9.  Obnus  33  years.
Altogether  248  years.


THE  SIXTH  DYNASTY.


tf  MefMpirZv,

X',  0$  iwo   Twv  hpwpopuv  avrj-
pf^ri.

y.   MfSrovcrou^i^  €T>j  ^.
rra^v  p.


€,  M€v3r€<roi5(^*?  **       €to^


Of  six  Memphite  kings.

1.  Othoes,  who  was  killed  by  his
guards  ;    reigned  30  years.

2.  Phius  reigned  53  years.

3.  Methusuphis  7  years.

4.  Phiops  who  began  to  reign  at
six  years  of  age,  and  reigned  till  he
had  completed  his  hundredth  year.

5.  Menthesuphis  reigned  one  year.


♦  llai^is  Go.

^  'O^e&jjs  A.— OSw»)j    Go.


•f-  Poe^owf)f  Go.


X  Mipx'§^:  Go.
ovvos    B.
••  MivTfffovipts  Go.


i|


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


EUSEB.


SCAL.


ARMEN.


105

HIERON.


'^Ov  irpuro^  *03roij^.  (0«)j^)
ovroq  vito  Tuv   hopiHpopuv  aifTj-


Quorum  primus  Othius.
suis  satellitibus  occisus  est.


Hie  a


*0  8e  y.  */6n//  (A<^/&n//)         Quartus  Phiops,  sexennis  regnare
If a€T^;  ap^dfuvoi  i^aa-tXivarc    ccepit ;  tenuitque  usque  ad  annum.


f^XP^i  iruv  p\


THE  SIXTH  DYNASTY.


'EXT»J  8wao"T€i«.


Sexta  dynastia.


106


MANETHOS  DYNASTIES


OF  THE  KINGS  EGYPT.


107


II


AFRIC.  SCAL.

^,  N»T«xp/?     yofyiKond'         6.  Nitocris,    who   was    the    most

r^*  yiocl  cvfju>p(poTdr'r}  ruu  nar*  handsome  woman  of  her  time,  of  a

avTvjv   yevofMvyiy    ^ay^rj  ry^v  florid  complexion ;  she  built  the  third

XpoiaVf   %  T^v  Tphifjv    i^yeipe  pyramid,  and  reigned  12  years.


UfMv  erij  <ry .


Altogether  203  years.


THE  SEVENTH  DYNASTY.

*EjS8oji«?  ^vvaa-nU  M^iMpi-         Of  seventy  Memphite  kings,  who
ruv  jSacTiXewv  o',  ol  i^a<riK€v-     reigned  70  days.
<rav  yjixepai  o .


EUSEB.  SCAL.

Twv  xaT*  avrriv  yewiy-iardrr}
xai  €V(AOp(pOTdTrjf  ^av^-^re  Trjv
yj)oav  litdp^aa-ay  ^i  xai  Xeyc-
tai  T^v  Tp/xijv  TtvpaiMda  y'xo-
8o/x>jx€yai.

01  xa*  (^ao'iKfva-av  €t>j  o-y .


ARMEN.  HIERON.

Mulier  quaedam  Nitocris  nomine
regnavit :  quae  omnium  sui  temporis
virorum  fortissima  erat,  atque  om-
nium foeminarum  pulcherrima,  flavo
colore,  et  rubris  genis :  ipsamque
ajunt,  tertiam  pyramidem  aedificasse ;
quae  est  moles  erecta  coUis  instar.
Qui  regnaverunt  annis  cciii.


THE  SEVENTH  DYNASTY.


tSv  jSacTiXewv  wcvTf ,  of  i^a-
aiKevcav  rji^pa^  oc  .


Septima    dynastia     Memphitarum
regum    v.    qui    regnaverunt    annis

LXXV.


\


THE  EIGHTH  DYNASTY.


Of  twenty-seven  Memphite  kings,
who  reigned  146  years.


THE  EIGHTH  DYNASTY.

*Oy8o>j8uva(rT€taM€jtx<^<T5v         Octava  dynastia  Memphitarum  v.
Poc<rt\€a>v  ffevTc,  ot  c/Saff/Xeu-     regum,  qui  regnarunt  annis  c.
ffa>  €Tij  p.


THE  NINTH  DYNASTY.


THE  NINTH  DYNASTY.


^Efarv}    hwaa-rtia   *Hpax-
Xf OTToXiTWj/ y  ^aa-iXiuv  i^,  dt

Civ  0  TcpuTOq  *Ax^or}i  8f  tvo-
Taro^  ruv  irpo  avrov  ytvofAtvo^
To^f  iv  wao-ij  Aly^Ttf  xaxa
flpydararOf  vcrrepov  he  fxavltf.
'7r€pi€ir€a'€y  xcci  Ctro  x^oxoSc/Xou
Zi€(l)^dpvi»

*  ytnriTtx^nArti  ti  xo)  B.


Of  nineteen  Heracleopolite  kings,
who  reigned  409  years.

1.  The  first  was  Achthoes,  who
was  worse  than  all  his  predecessors.
He  did  much  injury  to  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  Egypt,  and  being  seized  with
madness,  was  killed  by  a  crocodile.


*EvyaTij  hvya<rr€ia  *Hpa-
xXc&nroXtTSv  ^affikeuv  retTTa-
puv,  ot  (^aai\€v<ra,y  tT»j  p  .

''Civ  irpuroq" Ax^o;  *  heivo-
TaT05  tSv  irpo  avTov  yevoiMvoif
ToTf  iv  itda-ri  AlyvTcru  xaxa
€\pyd<raroj  ttntpov  fjiavl^  ite-
pieitea-ef  xa)  two  xpoxoBc/Xov
heip^dptj*


Nona  dynastia  quatuor  regum  He-
racleopolitarum,  qui  regnaverunt  an-
nis c.

Quorum  primus  Ochthovis,  om-
nium, qui  ante  eum  reges  fuerunt,
crudelissimus  fuit ;  itaque  tot,  tanta-
que  in  universa  Aegypto  scelera  ac
flagitia  patravit,  ut  demum  dementia
laborans,  a  crocodilo  bestia  devoratus
fuerit.


f  Hgax\nMiTix<!jv  Go.


♦  ix^djvis  B. — Ochitois  Lat.


„yiifc.<j<^»«eiJ


108


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


»


it


THE  TENTH  DYNASTY.


AFRIC.  SCAL.

Afxdrv}   hvaa-Teia   'Hpa~         Of  19  Heracleopolite  kings,  who
xXeoTroXiTwv     jSao-iXeW    t^,     reigned  185  years.
0*  €^aa'iK€v<rav  exij  pit€.


THE  ELEVENTH  DYNASTY.


iroXiruv  ^aciKeuv  ig-\  at  i^a-
atkivcratv   ^rvi    fAy ,    fx€^    ot^

Mc;^^<    Toi/$t    Tov    trpurov
rofMv     xaray^ox'^*    Mayes's.


Of  sixteen  Diospolite  kings,  who
reigned  43  years.  Among  whom
Ammenemes  reigned  16  years.

The  whole  number  of  the  above-
mentioned  kings  is  192,  who  reigned
during  a  space  of  2300  years  and  70
days. — SynceL  Chron.  54  to  59. —
Euseh.  Chron.  14,  15.


*   xetrayfiwy^i  B. — xardyti  6  Xt/ui/jLotvt^ai  Go. — xaray^o^^fv  6  Motvi^ui  Go.  m.
t  ,^'»"'  n/i^f «'    B. — ^Btti'  fxigou  A. — ^/Stjj'  fifiigas    Go.


"""iiiirifciiiii'iiiiiiini


I  V


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


109


THE  TENTH  DYNASTY.

j;USEB.  SCAL.  ARMEN.  HIERON.

AfKaTij  Swoo-Te/a  *Hpa-  Decima  dynastia  Heracleopolita-
xXcwwoXiTSv  ^aaiXeav  i^'.  oi  rum  regum  XIX.  qui  regnarunt  annos
i^aciXfvcay  e-n?  pite.  CLXXXV.


t,  4  ■

I


THE  ELEVENTH  DYNASTY.


'EySfxarij  tvvaffreia  Aioo--

(TiXevaav  ervj  fxy,      Mfj^  ov^
'A/A/A£y€/xij^  erij  <r  •

Mex^f  ToDSe  tov  trpurov  to-
^ov  xaraye*  (^X^J')  o  Mcivc-
&«?.      '0/xoy  ^aviKuq    ph^  .


Undecima  dynastia  Diopolitarum
regum  xvi.  annis  xliii.  regnantium.
Post   quos   Ammenemes  annis    xvi.

Hue  usque  primum  tomum  producit
Manethus.     Simul  reges  cxcii.  anni

MMCCC.


m


(


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  MANETHO.


Ill


THE  TWELFTH  DYNASTY.


m


AFRIC.  SCAL.

AnAEKATH  Swao-Tc/a  Aioa-

a.   ^€<Toyyfi)a-iq *     (Tiaruv
rutrrjqf)  'AjLCjwave/woi;  vloq  fTt}

jS'.   *A/Ajuave//ij^  c-nj  Xij',  oq

y.    J,€<ruarpiq'^    erij  jowy',
Of  aitourav    ix€ipua-aro    r\v

r^i  Evpeoiti^i  ra  [/-f^i  Qptf.y.'fiq
ttayra'Xfiai  fxy/jfAoawa  iyeipaq
T^?  ruv  i^yuv  <TX€<T€Uff  iitl
[A€v  TOK  yevvaioiq  avhpuVf  iiil
8c  Toiq  oty€VV€<ri  ywQiixuy  fAo-
pia  Ta7q  (rt'fi'Kai^  ^yxapoi(T<T(i>Vf
cq  xnsh  AlyiMTiuv  fA€Toc  Oa-iptv
itpurov  vofAia-Kfrivai.


Of  seven  Diospolite  kings.

1.  Geson  Goses  the  son  of  Amma-
nemes.     He  reigned  46  years.

2.  Ammanemes  reigned  38  years.
He  was  slain  by  his  eunuchs.

3.  Sesostris  48  years.  He  con-
quered all  Asia  in  nine  years,  and
Europe  as  far  as  Thrace,  every  where
erecting  monuments  of  his  conquest
of  those  nations :  among  the  people
which  had  acted  bravely  he  set  up
cippi  of  a  phallic  nature,  but  among
the  degenerate  female  emblems  of  a
similar  description  engraved  upon
pillars.  By  the  Egyptians  he  is  sup-
posed to  be  the  first  after  Osiris.


•  2»ff6YXivffis  Din. — Itaiyywpii  Go.  m.

X    ffKTOffTgH    B.


t  yi  ffovy6ffis  B.


THE  SECOND  BOOK   OF  MANETHO.


THE  TWELFTH  DYNASTY.


EUSEB.  SCAL.

AOAEKATH  tvva<n(ia^iQ<r-
p<5  *  *Afji,iA€)/e[AOv  vioi  eT>2  [a^.

^.    *AfA[A€y€fAyii^    CTIJ  h/f,

pe\tv},

y .  2  fjwtrrpiq  ^  erij  jtxij .
oi  Xeyerai  yeyovevai  'Kt\yjav  S'.
'naKa.icrruv  y ,  Saxri/X&iv  jS'.
o{  <Ka<rav  ix€ipcoa'aTo  r^y  *A(Tiav
cv  iyiavroT^  ivvea,  not  t^j
Evpu-mji  ra  [Jt.€xpi  ©/Jjtxij^,  §
'Kayraxoo-e  fAvv}[ji,Q(rvifa  iydpaq
T/iq  ruv  i^vuv  iiara(rx€creu(;f
iiit  fA€v  ro7q  y€vvaioi(;f  avbpuv,
xa*  cr*  To^f  ay€W€<ri  yxjvai-
xwv  fMpia  Taiq  TTYiKai^  iyxoi-'
paaaruy,  uq  xaJ  itTto  tuv  iCiyv-
vrtuv  [A€ra  "Oa-ipiv  ||   vofAia-


ARMEN.  HIERON.

Duodecima  dynastia  Diopolitarum
regum  vii.

I.  Quorum    primus    Sesonchosis
Ammenemis  filius,  annis  xlyi.

II.  Ammenemes,  annis  xxxviii,
qui  a  suis  eunuchis  occisus  est.

III.  Sesostris,  annis  xlviii.  quern
quatuor  cubitorum,  et  palmorum
trium,  duorumque  digitorum  [proce-
rum]  fuisse  dicunt.  Hie  totam  Asiam
annis  novem  subegit,  Europaeasque
partes  usque  ad  Thraciam:  atque
ubique  monumenta,  quarumcumque
gentium  potitus  est,  erexit ;  fortium
quidem  virorum  formas  virili  specie,
ignavorum  vero  muliebribus  membris
in  cippis  insculpsit :  adeo  ut  ab
Aegyptiis  post  Osirim  habitus  sit.


•  ff'ir^yxotris  B. — Itffiy^ojgtg  Go. — ltff6yx<*>(rn  Din.


4 1

i


J     i


t  ' AfifxcaifjLHi  Din. — B.
§  ^^Xf'  ^oXao-o-jjs    Sc.


J  ffiffoar^is   B.
Go.  adds  tt^cDtov  in  m.


112


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


l|j


11


II


AFRIC.  SCAL.

8'.  Aaxapy]<;  ervi  vj\  o<  rh
€v  *Ap<riyoiTri  Xa^vptv^ov  eccvrS
Toupov  ycarea-xevacTf.

€.    AfAfAeprjq^  ervj  yf,

$-'.   'AfJt.fji.€V€fAy}^'f  tTij  -rf.

^.   ^KefJLwppi^  aSfXt^  €Tifj

8'.


4.  Lachares  8  years ;  he  built  the
Labyrinth  in  the  Arsenoite  nome  as
a  tomb  for  himself.

5.  Ammeres  8  years.

6.  Ammenemes  8  years.

7.  Scemiophris,  his  sister,  4  years.

Altogether  160  years.


THE  THIRTEENTH  DYNASTY.


TpiOTtaiBcxaTvj    Zwaartia        Of  60  Diospolite  kings,  who  reigned
AiooTroXiTwv  jSao-iXewv  I*,   ot     453  years.


THE  FOURTEENTH  DYNASTY.  §

Tco-o-apcoTtaiScxarij  Svvacr-        Of  76  Xoite  kings,  who  reigned

Ttia  Hoi'Twv  ^aaiKiwv  o$-'>  o*     184  years.


THE  FIFTEENTH  DYNASTY.


nevreKaidexaTi}   8yya<rrc/a  Of  the  Shepherds.

'Ho-av    86    *omxei    ^cW        These  were  six  foreign  Phoenician
^a<ri\€7q  ^t  oi  xal   MifA(f)iv     kings  ;  who  took  Memphis.


CiXoy.


I


t  'AfijULivifjitrts  A.— «yuii»/yui|;  B.


*  kftt^ra    B.

t  B.— firs'  A.  Go.  Jack.

§  Inserted  by  Dind.  from  B. — Omitted  altogether  by  Goar.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


113


SCAL.


EUSEB.

M€^'  tv  Ad^apiq*  Uf}
rl.  U  Tov  iv  'Ap(T€voir7i  Xa-
^vpiv^oy  kccvrZ  rd(pov  xaTe<x-
yt.€vaa-€v.

oi  St    Tovrov   SiaSo^o*   ervj

Oi  iravre^  ipaa-tKeva-QU'  ervj


ARMEN.  HIERON.

Post  quem  Lambares,  annis  viii.
qui  in  Arsenoite  labyrinthum  sibi  se-
pulchrum  construxit.

Hujus  successores  regnaverunt
annis  xlii.

Simul  vero  omnes  regnarunt  annis

CCXLV.


THE  THIRTEENTH  DYNASTY.

Tp«rxa*5exaTyj  ^vvdn-reia  Decimatertia  dynastia  Diopolita-
^lOT^toXnuy  j3a(r*Xc«v  f.  ol  rum  regum  LX.  qui  regnaverunt  annis
(^aa-lXivaav  ervj  vvy.  CCCCLIII.


THE  FOURTEENTH  DYNASTY.


Tccro-ap€<rxat8f  xaTTj  ^wa(T-
(pith'.)


Decimaquarta  dynastia  Xoitarum
regum   lxxvi.    qui  regnarunt   annis

CCCCLXXXIV.


THE  FIFTEENTH  DYNASTY.


AjoTTToXtTwv  ^acrtXiwVi  ol  i^ac-


Decimaquinta  dynastia  Diopolita-
rum   regum ;  qui  regnaverunt  annis

CCL.


•  Ai/jiagis  B.  Din. — Lampares  Lat.


114


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


AFRIC.  SCAL.

a'.  ^Clv  itpuTOi   latrrjq  i'

^ci(Tt\€v<T€v    err]    i^ ,    a^*  ov

eKTta-aVf      Ouft*       1J^      op[AU[A.€K>l

^,   BvZv  ^  ( Avwv)  trfi  [xh'.
eT)j   5a  .


*Ojuiow   cTij  (TirS


i^/


1 .  The  first  was  Saites  who  reigned
19  years.  The  Saite  nome  is  so
called  after  him.  The  shepherds
founded  a  city  in  the  Sethroi'te  nome,
from  whence  they  invaded  and  con-
quered all  Egypt.

2.  Beon  reigned  44  years.

3.  Pachnan  61  years.

4.  Staan  50  years.

5.  Archies  49  years.

6.  Aphobis  61  years.

Altogether  284  years.


THE  SIXTEENTH  DYNASTY.


'ElxaiScxaTTj       Suvacrxf/a         Of  32  Hellenic    Shepherd  kings,
Ttoiixevfi  *'EXXijv6?  If   ^a.(Tiki7q     who  reigned  518  years.

X/3  .  i^a(TiK€v<Tfxv   erri  (pivf'


THE  SEVENTEENTH  DYNASTY.

'EirTaxa<8«xaT>j  ^vvatrrfia         Consisted   of  43  Shepherd   kings
itoiy.€v€(i  aXkoi  ^aa-iXtit;  fx.y     and  43  Theban  Diospolites.
(xy)  xai   0v)^a7oi  Aio<nroX7-
rai  fAy  •

'OfMv  oi  votfA€jf€i   xa«   01         The     Shepherds     and     Thebans
Srj^aioi     €^aa-iK€v<rav     erv}     reigned  altogether  151  years.
pvat\


■I

4'  h


*  This  paragraph  cJv  tt^wtos   ....  voyui^f  is  inserted  by  Goar  and  others
after  iy^it^wa-xnTo.

f  trai^gcfTT]  B.  J  By&Jv  Go. — Br}wv  Go.  m.

§  A7r«^»a$    Go.  nti,  ||  A<pw(p<s    m.  •[[  a'AXo*  Din.  Sc.


EUSEB.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF   EGYPT.


SCAL.  ARMEN.


115
HIERON.


THE  SIXTEENTH  DYNASTY.

'E|xai8€xaT>j      SvvacTTc/a         Decimascxta   dynastia   Thebarum
Qri^aioi  ^aa-iUTi  e.  oi  y.ai     regum  V.  qui  regnarunt  annis  cxc.
i^a^iXeva-av  ervj  p*f  .


THE  SEVENTEENTH  DYNASTY.


'EirraxatSexaTTj  Zvvaa-reioe,
vixf?   Icvoi  ^aa-ihii^t    oi    xat

a.  '^ftv  t:pZro(;  2atT»j^
i^ao-iKeva-ev  erij  <Sr'.  a^'  01;
xai  0  2atTi7<  yojM.05  exXij3r>j.
01  xai  ev  rS  DeS'/JOt ttj  vo/a«
TrJXiv  exTicrav,   a^*    »J^   o/)p5-

/3'.   Bvwv  (AvSv)  €T>j  [Ay,
y,   "Aipwpiq  €T7J  *8^.

8'.  Me^  ov  "Apx^^'J?  (Av-
X^Yli)  irfi  X'.

Ojixoi;  €T»j  py  .    Kara  tou-

CiXc^)  *I«07|^  heUwrai,


Decimaseptima  dynastia  Pastorum ;
qui  erant  fratres  Phoenices,  peregrini
reges ;  qui  Memphim  etiam  ceperunt.

I.  Quorum  primus  Saites  regnavit
annis  xix.  a  quo  et  Saitarum  Nomus
nomen  habuit.  Qui  in  Sethroite  quo-
que  Nomo  condiderunt  urbem  ;  ex
qua  irruptione  facta  Aegyptios  ipsos
subegere.

II.  Secundus  Bnon,  annis  xl.

III.  Post  quem  Archies,  annis  xxx.

IV.  Apophis,  annis  xiv.

Summa,  anni  cm.  Horum  tem-
pore, ut  imperaret  Aegyptiis,  Joseph
apparuit.


lis.


*  Sc.  omits.


116


AFllIU.


MANETHOS  DYNASTIES


SCAL.


THE  EIGHTEENTH  DYNASTY.
*OxT«xa*5exaT>7  hvvxa-reia,         Of  sixteen  Diospolite  kings.


m


i»


if!


1)1


a .    Qv  TtpuTo;  Wfxut;,  i(\>  1 .  Amos,  in   wliose    time  Moses

(Z  Muv(rfi<;  e^X^ev  i^  Atyuvr-  went  out  of  Egypt  as  we  shall  de-

Toy,  uq  yj[/.€7q  aito^eix.vvofjt.ev.  monstrate.

^'.  X€,8puq  eT)j  ly.  2.  Chebros  1 3  years.

y.  'Afxevucp^U  ctvj  v2'.  *  3.  Amenophthis  24  years.


€*.  M^aacfypiq  (Ml<r(f)pii)
CTTJ  ly  .

5^.  Mi<T(fipccyfjiov^ci}a-iq  eTifj
X5- ,  €<^'  QV  6  ini  AeuxaX/oJVo^
xaTaxXucTjUo^.

?7 .   \\[/.(vcl)(pi(;  kr'/}   Xa'.  o2-

y.i^oiA.€voq     y.ai      (p^fyyof^cyoq

^  .   'Clpoq  e  tt;  X^',


4.  Amersis  22  years.

5.  Misaphris  13  years.

6.  Misphragmathosis  26  years,  in
whose  time  happened  the  deluge  of
Deucalion.

7.  Tuthmosis  9  years.

8.  Amenophis  31  years.  He  is
supposed  to  be  Memnon,  to  whom
the  musical  statue  is  erected.

9.  Horus  37  years.
10.  Acherrhes  32  years.


la  .  'Pd^uq   f  T7J  (^,  11.   Rathos  6  years.


•  w-i  fi


xd  Go.  ni.


f  ei/xivff)s    B.


EUSEB.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


SCAL.  ARMEN.


117
HIERON.


THE  EIGHTEENTH  DYNASTY.

'OtcTftjxaiBcxarij  hwccamia  Decimaoctava  dynastia  regum  xiv.

Awo-woXiTwv     jSao-iXewv     i^^  Diopolitarum.
Or.)

a,'. ''CluvpuTOi"  Auua-ii  €TV}  I.  Quorum  primus  Amoses,(Amo-

«'•  sis)  annis  xxv.


ty


^.  Xe^puu  (hivrepoq)  trvj         ii.  Chebron,  annis  xiii.

y\  AfxiA€vu(f>iq  (AfA.iyov(po<;)         ill.  Amophis,   annis  (Amenophis)


T7J  xa.


XXI.


S'.    MicPpU  *  erri   i^'.


IV.   Memphres,   (Mephres)    annis


XII.


«'.  Mia-(f)payiMij^u<ri(;'f  €Tr]  v.  Myspharmuthosis,  (Misphrag-

♦'r .  muthosis)  annis  xxvi.


5-'.    Tov^fXiXTiq  €  TV)   6^.

^'.   ^AfAtvaxpiq  J    €Tij    Xa'.

voq  xa*  (f)^€yyofj>.€VO(;  X/^oj.


VI.  Tuthmosis,  annis  ix.

vii.  Amenophis,  annis  xxxi.  Hie
est,  qui  Memnon  existimatus  fuit,
lapis  loquax.


V.    fipo?§   err)   x^,    [iy         viii.  Orus,  annis  xxviii.(xxxviii.)

aXXo)  Xi^.J

.^'.  'Ax€yx€p<ry}<;  errj  i^,  ix.  Achencheres,  (Anchencherres)

annis  xvi.  (xii.)
/.  "A^upiq  trvi  X^'.  (x.  Achoris  vn.)


•  M/^fJjs  B.  Din.  f  fx,a(f§ayjULQ6^wi  B.  +  Amnophis  Lat.

§  See  Syucellus*  list  infra  where  this  and  the  three  foUowing  are  given  as
a  dynasty  of  Etliiopian  kings  from  the  river  Indus.


*    .        !


I


!


118

AFRIC.


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


SCAL.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


ly,    Axfpf^i  €77)  ij3.

iS.    'Apuea-ijq*   QAfxepavji;)


1 2.  Chebres  1 2  years.

13.  Acherrhes  12  years.

14.  Armeses  5  years.


»€*.  'Pajuco-tr^?  ■(•  eroi  a,         15.  Ramesses  1  year.

If'.  'A|Uf vwr/xx^  J      CA/a-       IC.  Amenophath  19  years.

*0/*oiJ  6T7J  o-^y.  Altogether  2G'i  years.


EUSEB.


SCAL.


ARMEN.


119
HIERON.


rovrov  MwOotj^  t^^  ^^  Ai7t;ir-
Tov  'Tcopeiaq  ruv  *Iou8a/wv  hlTl'

(TCtTO.

T^5  AlyvvTW  iycTiea-wv  na*
fpeiryuv  rov  ahe'kcploy  A'lyvnrov
el;  T^v  'EXXaSa  a^ixvcrrai,
xpari^o-a;  re  tou  'Apyov^  /3a-
ciXct^e*  *Apytluy.

»«'.    'A/x/xecT^;,  §  0  xat  At-

'yVTTTO;,   €T>J   {1j'.

if'.    Mcvox^K  II  ^Tij  jt*'.


(xi.  Chencherres  ann.  xviii.)  Hu-
jus  aetate  Moyses  Judaeorum  ex
Aegypto  egressus  Dux  fuit.*

X.  (xii.)  Acherres,  annis  viii.

XI.  (xiii).  Cherres,  annis  xv.

XII.  (xiv).  Armais,  qui  et  Davonus
[lege  Danaus],  annis  v  :  quibus  annis
exactis,  Aegypto  pulsus,  fugitivus  ten-
dit  ad  fratrem  suum  Aegyptum ;  [lege,
fugitivus  tendit  a  fratre  suo  Aegypto]
adiens  Helladam,  Argo  capta,  regnat
in  Argivos.

xiii.  Ramesses,  (xv.  Remesses
Lxviii.)  qui  et  Aegyptus,  annis  lxviii.

XIV.  Amenophis,  (xvi.  Meno-
pbes)  annis  xl.

Summa,  anni  cccxlviii.


THE  NINETEENTH  DYNASTY.


THE  NINETEENTH  DYNASTY.


'EvveaxaiScxaTij   Buvaare/a

a  ,   2.€iJu^  ervj  va  ,

y  .   * Ay.f/.iveip^'fji  §   erv]  x  .


Of  seven  Diospolite  kings.

1 .  Setlios  reigned  5 1  years.

2.  Rapsaces  61  years.

3.  Ammenephthes  20  years.


l'.  *PafA(a-(T^i  II     (Pa/xe-         4.  Rameses  60  years.


♦  a/JLtff)is  A. — a^juLiffii   B.

f  ^afjLfitarii  A.  B. — VafjL/utffciis  Go.

§  afAtvttp^ris  B.


J  kfitv&^  Go.

PotyUIOj;    Go.


j9ao-iXewv  e.    AiOCTroXtrSv.

a'.    2€^Uq  €T>J  V€\

y.    'A/Xa€J/€<^>J«**  CAjlA€-


Decimanona  dynastia.     Diopolita-
rum  regum  v.

I.  Setbos,  annis  lv.
II.  Rampses,  annis  lxvi.
III.  Amenephthis,  annis  viii.


•  In  the  Armenian  this  paragraph  immediately  follows  Achencheres  the
9th ;  Achoris  and  Chencherres  being  altogether  omitted.

f  Ancheres  Lat.  X  A|^y"<f  Go.

§  afxiffffhs  B.-^'Pufjtffarii   Dind.  |1  Mi>w^<s  Go. — 'Afiivoxpn   Din.

f  Pa/i>|/i)f  Din.  B.  **  'Afjifitvi^)g  Din.


H    ll


!  n


120


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


11


AFRIC.  SCAL.

$-'.    ®ovupiq,  6  irap*  'OfA-qpu
y(.aXov}Ji.€voi  HoAv^o^t    'AXxav-

Opaq        OtyflPy    €(p      OV    TO      lAiOV
*OjU0D  CT7J   (T^  .

Ltti  tov  avrov  Oevrepov  to-


5.  Ammenemnes  5  years.

6.  Thuoris,  who  is  called  by
Homer  Polybus,  the  husband  of  Al-
candra,  under  whose  reign  Ilion  was
taken,  7  years.

Altogether  209  years.

In  this  second  book  of  Manetho
are  contained  96  kings  and  2121
years. — SynceL  Chron.  59  to  75. —
Euseh.  Chron,  15  to  17.


^.  "AXxavipof  av>)f  \<p*  Sic.  is  thus  given  by  several  editors.


m


:


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


121


EUSEB.  SCAL.  ARMEN.  HIERON.

8'.  *AfjL[MV€fAfMi<:*  erviyir.         IV.  Ammenemes,  annis  XXVI.


c'.   Sovupiff  0  -Trap*  'O/xij^y
"AXxavS/Jo^    avvipy     i<l>*    ov   to

*E««    TO    (tcXo^)  avTO   ^'.
trti  ,apv.d.  [lege  /^/Jxa.]


V.  Thuoris,  qui  ab  Homero  Poly-
bus vocatur,vir  immanis  roboris  [lege,
vir,  sive  maritus  Alcandrae,]  cujus
tempore  Ilium  captum  fuit,  annis  vii.

Summa,  anni  cxciv.

Insimul  ex  secundo  Manethi  tomo,
xcii.  regum,  anni  mmcxxi.


I


tl


•  *AyM/u«v»yu>js    Din.  B.


f  n^XujSos   Din.


Il


I

m.


■i


THE  THIRD  BOOK  OF  MANETHO.


THE  TWENTIETH  DYNASTY.


AFRIC.  SCAL.

EIK02TH   Iwatrnla  jSaat-

<TiK€v<rav  €rv)  pXc'.


Of  1 2  Diospolite  kings,  who  reigned
135  years.


THE  TWENTY-FIRST  DYNASTY.


a'.    ^jUCvS^^  "j"      (l[A€p^i;)

tTTJ     XJ-'.

y\   N€(f)€AX€pvii  trrj  8'.

8'.     ' AfJt.€VUHp^)q  §   €T1J     ^.

f',  *0<roxap\\      QOtTQxuv)
tryj  r.


Of  seven  Tanite  kings.


1.  Smendes  reigned  26  years.

2.  Psusenes  46  years.

3.  Nephelcheres  4  years.

4.  Amenophthis  9  years.

5.  Osochor  6  years.

6.  Psinaches  9  years.


•  »r.  Go.

t  "^ovffivrii   A.— .*ouj/»i|f  ^  >i'ow/o')js   Go.
II  'O<ro;^of  A.  Go,


f  2/x«8^$  Go.

§  AyU«viV(t»^<s  Go.

IT  nivocx^ie  Go.


THE  THIRD  BOOK  OF  MANETHO.


THE  TWENTIETH  DYNASTY.*


EUSEB.  SCAL.

EIK02TH  hvvaa-reia   jScKXi-


ARMEN.

Vicesima    dynastia    Diopolitarum
XII.   regum,    qui   regnaverunt   aunis

CLXXII.


THE  TWENTY-FIRST  DYNASTY.f


HpuTi}  xat  fixooTrj  Ivvatr-
rda  ^aa-iXeav  Tavnav  eirxcc.

X5-.

8'.   'A/>tfvax^*^,  J  €Tij  d'.
e'.  *0<roxupf  \\  ct>j  r»

5"'.   *ivax>j?,  c-nj  d'.


Vicesima  prima  dynastia  Tanita-
rum  regum  vii.

I.  Smendis,  annis  xxvi.

II.  Psusennus,  annis  xli.

III.  Nephercheres,  annis  iv.

IV.  Amenophthis,  annis  ix.
V.  Osochor,  annis  vi.

VI.  Psinnaches,  annis  ix.


•  The  rest  of  the  variations  of  Hieronymous  are  given  page  141.

f  Scaliger  omits  this  dynasty  and  places  its  kings  under  the  20th  dynasty.

X  a/ifjiii>w(p^)s  B.  II  6<ro5^<wf  A.


I  p


ll

m

if


it

i


w


124


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


i<t


m


M


AFRIC.  SCAL.

5'.  "♦"ovo-evvij^*  (2ot(r€vj^?)         7.  Psusennes  14  years.


*O/X0S  €T1J  /JA'.


Altogether  130  years.


THE  TWENTY-SECOND  DYNASTY.

Eixoo-T*!  ZevTcpex,  ^vvartfia  Of  nine  Bubastite  kings.

a ,  5l€<ro7%if  J  crtj  xa'.  1  •  Sesonchis  2 1  years.

0.  '0<rop^wv^  {Ova-op^uv)  2.  Osorthon  15  years.

"       I

y'.  S'.  ^.  "AKKoi  Tp€t(;  "rrj  3,  4,  5.  Three  others  reigned  25

xe*.  years.

^.  Tax€XajSf<5||(Tax€XAfii>-  6.  Tacelothis  13  years.

^.  V*  ^''  "AaXo*  TpeT^  trvj  7,  8,  9.  Three  others  42  years.

Mis'-

'OjtAoD  cT>j  pxV  (pxr'O  Altogether  reigned  120  years.


II


THE  TWENTY-THIRD  DYNASTY.

Tplry}  xa*  €ixo<rr^  8i;>ao-         Of  four  Tanite  kings.

a'.  IleToy^aTij^    (II^tou-         1.  Petoubates  reigned  40  years ;  in
^ao-Tvj?)  €T)j  /x',  ^<^*  o5  oXt/X'     his  time  the  Olympiads  began.

^'.  *0<ropxu      {'Oaopxuif)        2.  Osorcho   8    years,    whom   the
tryj  t\\  ov  'H/jaxXea  AtyvTcrioi     Egyptians  call  Hercules.


xaAovo"!.


•  Souatvvjjs    Go.

J  oiaoiYxji  B. — liff^YKwo-is  Din.

§  '0«-a>f&ft/K  A. — 'Offwf^  Go.


f  X«'.  Din. — X'.  Go.  m.


Tax/XX«/;^if   Go.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.
£USEB.  SCAL.  ARMEN.

5'.  •^ov<T€wri(;y  UriU',  VII.  Psosennes,  annis  xxxv.


U5


~  "      «^'


'OfMV    €TVI  pA


Summa,  anni  cxxx.


THE   TWENTY-SECOND  DYNASTY.

Eixoo-TTj  ScJrepa  Suvao-re/a  Vicesima  secunda  dynastia  trium

Bov^aa-rnuy  ^aatXeuv  rpiSSv.  regum  Bubastitarum.

a.  2€o-€7X«(r*« *  €T>j  x» .  i.  Sesonchusis,  annis  xxi.

jS'.  *0<ra>/j^«v  ('Oo-o>Sr«y|-)  ii.  Osorthos,  annis  xv.

t       /

€T1J  <€  .


I


y.  Tax«XX«^i«  X  hri  ly,         m.  Tacellothis,  annis  xiii.


*0[MV  trri  IA.B.


Summa,  anni  xliv.  •


THE  TWENTY-THIRD  DYNASTY.

E/xotTT^   t/3/t>j    Syyao-Tc/a         Vicesima  tertia  dynastia  Tanitarum

TavjTwv  ^aa-iXeuv  rpiSy.  trium  regum.

a'.  n€Toi;i3a(rT>j^§eT>jx€'.  I.  Petubastis,  annis  XXV.

(x«'.)


CO(ro'/»Sr«v)  I't»j  d'.   ov   *Hpa-
xXea  A»7t?rr»ot  ^xaXeo-av.


II.  Post  quem  Osorthon,  annis
IX.  quem  Herculem  appellarunt
Aegyptii.


•    ctaiyy^ojffts  Din. — csodrfyuiats  B.
{  loLxi\w^n  Din.  B.


t  Din.  B.
§  Il«Tou/3d{«^T<$    Din.


it


sit  '


i  ll


126


AFRIC.


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


SCAL.


y  .   "^ufAfjUMq  erij  i'.
8'.    Zr^TeTij  Xa'.  *


3.  Psammus  10  years.

4.  Zeet  31  years.
Altogether  28  years.


ii


THE  TWENTY-FOURTH  DYNASTY.


TerdpTrj    xa*    UMO-Trj    hv-


yaa-reia.


Boxx«pi«f  (BoKX«/Ji5)  lot'


Bochchoris    the   Saite    reigned  6
years,  in  whose  reign  a  sheep  spoke.


Ii


THE  TWENTY-FIFTH  DYNASTY.


■■i:


UefxiTTyj  Mai  eJxoo-Tr/  Suvao--
Tc/a  Al^fioTcuv  ^aa-iKeuv  rpiSv.

a'.  Xa^dxuvy  J  0^  alxf*d-
Aurov  Boxxupiv  §  eXwv  exatcrc
^wvTa,    xsti    i^aa-iXcva-fu  errj


Of  three  Ethiop  kings.

1 .  Sabacon,  who  having  taken  Boch-
choris captive,  burnt  him  ahve,  and
reigned  8  years.

2.  Sebichus,    his  son,  reigned   14
years.

3.  Tarcus  18  years.
Altogether  40  years.


w


THE  TWENTY-SIXTH  DYNASTY.


Of  nine  Saite  kings.


Ka.


I

\'4


•  a8'.  B.
§  fi6YX,o^iv  B.


t   ^o;^of'0"a/T)js    B.

11  B. — 2tCriy^0i    Go.


X  lafiBdxtuv  Go.
^  AaaiTw*  Go.


THE  TWENTY-SIXTH  DYNASTY.


\


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


m


EUSEB.  SCAL.  ARMEN.

y.  "irafjitMiiq  €T7j  1'.  III.  Psammus,  annis  x.


*0/xoi5  cTij  /*8'.


Summa,  anni  xliv.


THE  TWENTY-FOURTH  DYNASTY.


Eixoo-T^    rerdpTV)    Si/vacr-         Vicesima  quarta  dynastia.


Tc/a.


Bo'xw/)!?*  (Box^w/ji?)  2ai'         Bocchoris  Saites,  annis  xliv.
T1J5  €T»j  ftS'.    i(p*  ov   apvlov     quo  agnus  locutus  est.


Sub


THE  TWENTY-FIFTH  DYNASTY.


Ai^iOTTw  ^atriKiuv  rpiuv.
a,  2aj9jSaxft?v, y  0^  Bo%a)-

^wvTa,    xai    i^atrlKfvarey   erij

^.  2€i^>j;^o^  ;||  vio^  ex'j^  i^.

7  .    lapaxo^  ctij  x  .


Vicesima  quinta   dynastia  regum
Aethiopum  trium.

I.  Sabbacon,  qui  captivum  duxit
Bocchorem,  et  vivum  combussit ;  reg-
navitque  annis  xii.

II.  Sebichos  ejus  filius,  annis  xii.

III.  Taracus,  annis  xx.
Summa,  anni  xliv.


ExTij  xai  eUoa-rvi  hvvaa-         Vicesima  sexta    d3mastia    regum
Tc/a  2aiT«v  ^a<riX€ccv  ^ ,  Saitarum  IX.


*  B^XX^'f'S    I^in-  t  2«i8d(xwy  Din.

J  2«/3<x<J^f  Din.  B.


i:i^t'


128

AFRIC.


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


SCAL.


II  I


if


a  .   ImpivaTfiq  irrj  ^  .
^,   Nexei/zw^  *  €T»j  5-'.

XwTov  II  €\q  Aiyxmrov  aif^yaye.


1 .  Stephinates  reigned  7  years.

2.  Nechepsos  6  years.

3.  Nechao  8  years.

4.  Psammeticus  54  years.

5.  Nechao  the  second  6  years.  He
took  Jerusalem,  and  carried  Joachaz,
the  king,  captive  to  Egypt.


5-'.  "^dfAfAov^K;  €r(po<;  €t>j  6.   Psammutliis  0  years.


ptuv  *lepov<rxM}fA  ol   twv  'Iou-
haiuv  bir^Xoiiroi.


7.  Vaphris  19  years,  to  whom  the
remainder  of  the  Jews  fled  when
Jerusalem   was   taken   by  the  Assy-


nans.


yf.  "kfj-ucriq  €Tvi  /xS'.  8.  Amosis  44  years.

^.  '*"a/Li/>t€xeprnj«**  /x^va^         9.  Psammecherites  6  months.


'OfAov  trvi  pv ,  xai  iMJvai  ^' ,         Altogether    150    years    and    six

months.


THE  TWENTY-SEVENTH  DYNASTY.


»


II


n  .


*Ej98o/xi7  xai  eixoo-T^  hvyaa--         Of  eight  Persian  kings.


•  A.  B.— Nifr^^f  Go.

J  ^aftfifrtxoe  Go.  A. — >|/ai/UyujJTv^of  B.

II  Go.  m.

••  '^OLftfior)(tp(rr{(  Go.


f  yot^ora/  B.
§  Ituo^Sc  Go.
f   «)r^B.

ff  Bat9iX«/ff  G«.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT,


129


EUSEB.  SCAL.

a.  "AfAfAeptq      QAfAiMpvji)
AlSr/oi//  €Tfj  <j9',

jS'.     '2T€(f}avd^li  *   €T)J  5'.

5^.  Nc^aw  hevrepoi  k  Tti  ^,
oJto?  cTXe  T^v  'lepovo-aX^jEA,  xa)

/xaXsirrov  €*<  AiyyTrrov  ainj^a-

xa»  ^ajtAjUiTtp^o?  'j*  CTi;  i^'.

»j'.  Ova(f)pii  (pvaupp-/}^)  eTTj
x€'.  y  irpoa-i<pvyov  dXot/cnj?
viro  *A(ravpiuv  tijj  *l€poyflra-
X^jt*   ot  tSv  *Iou8a/«v   icjroXot-


TTOi.


^.  "AfAMaii  enj  /xp  .


ARMEN.

I.  Ammeres  Aethiops,  annis  xviii.

II.  Stephinathis,  annis  vii.

III.  Nechepsus,  annis  vi.

IV.  Nechao,  annis  vi.

V.  Psammetichus,  annis  xliv.

VI.  Nechao  secundus,  annis  vi.
Hie  cepit  Hierusalem,  et  Joachaz
regem  in  Aegyptum  duxit  captiviim.

VII.  Psammuthes  alter  qui  et  Psam-
metichus, annis  xvii.

VIII.  Vaphres,  annis  xxv.  ad  quem
confugerunt  ab  Assyriis  Judaeorum
reliqui  ex  Jerusalem.


IX.  Amosis,  annis  xlii.


*0/Aoy  €T»j  p^y.


Summa,  anni  clxyii.


THE  TWENTY-SEVENTH  DYNASTY.

Eixotrrr)  €^8o/>mj  twacrreta        Vicesima  septima  dynastia  Persa-
ll€p<ruy  ^a<ri)Joiy  ij'.  rum  regum  viii.


•  ZTiipouroaij?  Go.— STf^ivdt^ts  Din.  B.

J  'Iwa^^af  Din.


f  irafifi^Tixog  Din.  B.


f


ISO


UANETHO  S  DYNASTIEg


AFRIC.  SCAL.


1.  Cambyses  reigned  over  Pei^ia,
his  own  kingdom,  5  years,  and  over
Egypt  6  years.


m


in


!tj


p,  Aapeioq  'TorraoTroy  cnj         2.  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,

X/.  36  years.
y.  Bep^yji  0  fxiyai;  iTVi  )ia ,         3,  Xerxes  the  Great  21  years.

tf.  'Aprd^ou/oi  QApra^d'         4.  Artabanus  7  months.
€*  * kpraliplfii  trvj  fAoJ .  5.  Artaxerxes  41  years.


f'.  H^^jj?  fA^va^  Sy'o.


6.  Xerxes  2  months.


5'.  2o75iavS<  /ix^m?  f .  7.  Sogdianus  7  months.

V.  Aa/jtro<  Bc/J^ow  €Ti7  <y .         8.  Darius  the  son  of  Xerxes,  19

years.
'OfAovervi  pyih'f  fMivai^.  Altogether    124    years    and    four

months.


Jin


THE  TWENTY-EIGHTH  DYNASTY.
'AfAijpreQ^'*      QAiAvpraToi)         Amyrteus,  the  Saite,  6  years.


■

■  •


THE  TWENTY-NINTH  DYNASTY.


Of  four  Mendesian  kings.


•    AfidgTiwi  Go.


f  Mt>i^ffi9t  fiaatkils  Din.


OP  THE  KINGS  OP  EGYPT.


131


EUSEB.                                 SCAL.  ARMEN.

a.  Ka[x^ii(ni<;  eru  ire/Aw-  I.  Cambyses  anno  regni  sui  xv.

fff)  T^?  avrav  ^atriKuat^  i^a-  [lege  V.]  regnavit  in  Aegyptios  annis

o'/Xei'O'Cv  AlyvTrrov  ervj  y.  III.

p,  Mdyoi,  fA^vat;  ^'.  II.  Magi,  mensibus  vii.

y.  Acspclb?,  c-nj  Xr'.  HI.  Darius,  annis  xxxvi.

8*.  Ueph;  0  Aapeiov,  ertj  IV.  Xerxes  Darii  [filius]  annis  xxi.


xa


€ .  ^ApraUpirii  [p  Maxpo-  V.  Artaxerxes,  annis  xl.

r'.  Eep^iy?  0  ScvTepo^j/A^va^        VI.  Xerxes  secundus,  mensibus  ii.

^.  ^oyhavky  fx^vaq  ?.  vu.  Sogdianus,  mensibus  vii.

ij'.  A«/jero^  0  H^/)^v,  €T»j  viii.  Darius .  Xerxis    [filius]    annis

l^*.  XIX.

'OfMv  eryi  p%.  f^rim  ^^  Summa,  anni  cxx,  et  menses  iv.


THE  TWENTY-EIGHTH  DYNASTY.


E/»eooT7i  iytlvi  hwamia*


Vicesima  octava  dynastia.
Amyrtaeus  Saites,  annis  vi.


THE  TWENTY-NINTH  DYNASTY.

E/xoo-rij  ivvdrvi  Uma-rfia        Vicesima  nona  dynastia  regum  iv,
M€v^<T^ol  jSacnXer^  8'.  Mendesiorum.


*  Afiv^rAtog  Go.


1/


132


MANETHO  S  DYNASTIES


AFRIC.  SCAL.

rvif)  err}  r .

^  .    Axupii  erv}  vy  ,

y .  '^dfXfAQv^i^  f  eTO<  a'.


1.  Nepherites  reigned  6  years.

2.  Achoris  13  years.

3.  Psammuthis  1  year.

4.  Nephorites  4  months.


Altogether    20    years    and     four
months.


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.
EUSEB.  sCAL.  ARMEN.

a'.  N€<p€pirriiy  « tij  /.  i.  Nepherites,  annis  vi.


^,  *Ax&>pi^,  err)  ty',
y.    "^dfAfMv^iqf  trot;  a,
8*.   ^€(f)€pirr}if  *  fMivaq  8'.
€,   MoSS"*^,  fTO^  a'.


133


II.  Achoris,  annis  xiii.

III.  Psammuthes,  anno  i.

IV.  Muthes,  anno  i.

V.  Nepherites,  mensibus  iv.
Summa,  anni  xxi,  et  menses  iv.


THE  THIRTIETH  DYNASTY.


THE  THIRTIETH  DYNASTY.


Tpiatiotrrri   ^wasrreia   2f-
^evwruv  ^ao-iXea-v  rptuv,
a .   NcxToycjSiy^  err}  irf,

y.   NfXTav€j8o?  §  ervi  trf.
'OfMv  erri  Xr/,


Of  three  Sebennyte  kings.

1.  Nectanebes  18  years.

2.  Teos  2  years.

3.  Nectanebes  18  years.

Altogether  38  years.


Tpiaxoa'rrj    8wao"T€/a  2f-
^eifVvrZv  ^aa-iXeuv  rpiuv,
oi,   NexTave^ij^,    (Nocra-

^  .  Te«^,  €T>j  jS'.

7'.   NfXTave^^,    (Ncxra-

'O/HOU  (Tiy  x'.


Tricesima   d3niastia   regum   trium
Sebennitarum.

I.  Nectanebes,  annis  x.

II.  Teos,  annis  11.
III.  Nectanebus,  annis  viii.

Summa,  anni  xx.


%\%


I'


'


HM^

'W^'-


THE  THIRTY-FIRST  DYNASTY.

np«T^  xa*  T/jxaxoo-T^  8y-         Of  three  Persian  kings.
vourrtla     YlepaSy     pa<riX€uv
rpiuv,

«•  ''^o^ll   c/xoo-T^    ?T«         1.  Ochus    ruled     Persia     twenty
rrji  iavrov  ^a-iXeia^  JJepaSy     years,  and  Egypt  2  years.

i^aa-iXeva-ey  Alyiiirrov  errj  ^,


•  N«(p«f«rTi}f  Go.

X  V tropins  A. — Ni^of^T>js    Go.
§  N»HT«»/i8i|j  Go.


t  -^d/jiov^ts  B.


THE  THIRTY-FIRST  DYNASTY.

T/jiaxoo-T^  7r/jwT»j  SwaoTe/a         Trigesima  prima  dynastia  Persa-

Hfpa-Sy  i^Paa-iXeuy  rpiuy,^  rum.

a.    Oxo?  (  nxo?§)  e/xocT-  i.  Ochus,  qui  vicesimo  regni  sui

Ty  ere*  t^^  ayroS  nf/jo-Sv  ^a-  Persarum  anno,  obtinuit  Aegyptum

(TiXeia^  xparet    rrjq  Myrrnrov  annis  VI.

fT»2  r.


*  AvKpt^lrrti  Go.

§  Din.


t  A.  J  Din.

II  «f o"'f  ft^COM  A. — o^ffyttriyiiM  B.


IH


N ANSTHO  S  PYNASTIE8


AFRIC.  SCAL.

jS'.  *Ap<r^i  ("A^?  "^X'^y)        2.  Arses  reigned  3  years.

€T»j  y .

y,  AapeTo^  ctij  ^,  S,  Darius  4  years.

'OfjLQv  €Tri  Y  xofMv  pJ,  And  the  whole  number  of  the  years

in  the  third  book  1050years.-<->i5'^nr.
Chron,  73  to  78.


,1


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


135


EUSEB.                                 SCAL.  ARMEN.

^.  Me^  ov'AptrriiW  *Clxov  II.  Post  quem  Arses  Ochi  [filius]

fTV]  8^4  annis  iv.

y,  McSr*  w  AapeTo^  err]  e^.  iii.  Post  quem  Darius,  annis  vi.

*0y  'AXcfavS/jo^    MavteStfv  Quem  Alexander  Macedo  occidit.

Tavra   tou   rpirov    rofMv  Omnia    haBG    ex   tertio    Manetht

Mccvcd'w.  tomo.


1/


1    I


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT  :


FROM  JOSEPHUS.


1M


SEVENTEENTH  DYNASTY.*

a'.  HaXari^  eT>j  iV.  1.  Salatis  19  years.

jS'.  Brjuv  errj  ftS'.  2.  Beon  44  years,

y.  ^Airaxvaq  ervj  Xj-',  xa*  3.  Apachnas    36     years     and    7

/w^va?  ^'.  months.

8*.  "Atcuffn^  €T>j  l^a .  4.  Apophis  61  years.

€.  'Iciy/aj    €Tij     y',    xa*  5.  Jamas  50  years  and  1  month.


fM}V(x.  a ,


r'.  "Aa-a-ii   €T»j   /xd',  xai         6.  Assis  49  years  and  2  months.

EIGHTEENTH  DYNASTY.

a.  Ti^fMxrn;  €t»j  xe ,  xai  1 .  Tethmosis    25    years     and    4

/lA^vaj  S'.  months.

^.  Xt^puv  err)  ly.  2.  Chebron  13  years.

y\  *AiMvu<pii  cTTj  x',  xai  3.  Amenophis    20    years    and    7

W«?  ^'  months.

8'.  *A^<r<rvjq  eryj  xa',  tmu  4.  Amesses  21  years  and  9  months.

€'.  Mij<^/)i2^  €Ti;  ijS*,    xa<    '     5.  Mephres     12     years     and     9
fMJvai  y.  months.


f  '-'


•  The  various  readings  to  this  catalogue  are  given  infra.    See  Manetho  on
the  Shepherd  Kings.


JOSEPHUS  ON  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


137


5^.    Mri(f)pa[Mv^Ci}(Tii       erij


%e',  xai  f^ijva^  i .

^',  QfAUcriq  «Tij  ^,  xai
fMjvaq  1} .

ij .  * AfJiivucpi^  ervj  X',  xat
y.rjva^   i .

^.   'O/)05  ?nj  X5-  )  ycau  ft^-

*'.    'A-neyxp^q  €TVj    ijS  ,  xa*

fa  .   Pd^ariq  erij  ^  .

ijS*.  'Axeyxfipfii  erij  i,S',
xa»   fJi.vjvaq  €'.

17'.  'Axeyx^/J*??  P'*  e^vj  <^',
xai  fi^vaq  y .

<S'.  Apuai't;  €rvj  8 ,  x<jti
jt*ijva  a'.

i€ .   VaiA-ea-a-^q   croq  a   xa*

if'.  'ApfAeara-i^i  Mia[A[Aw
erv}  Is"',  xai  fA^va^  jS'.

*^'.  *A[A.€vo^tq  err}  i^,  xa<

<»j .   Sc^wo"*?    xai    Fa[M<7-

Te^fAuaiq  yap  ^y  ^a<n-
"Kixjq  0T€  6|rjeTay(oi  icoiueveq).
'Atto  8e  TOUTwy  (/.era^v  rwv
jSa^iXfwy    xar'     ayroy    CfTT*


6.  Mephramuthosis  25  years  and
10  months.

7.  Thmosis  9  years  and  8  months.

8.  Amenophis   30   years   and   10
months.

9.  Orus  36  years  and  5  months.

10.  Acenchres    12     years   and  1
month.

11.  Rathotis  9  years.

12.  Acencheres    12    years  and   5
months.

13.  Acencheres  II.  12  years  and
3  months.

14.  Armais  4  years  and  1  month.

1 5 .  Ramesses  1  year  and  4  months.

16.  Armesses  the  son  of  Miam-
mus  66  years  and  2  months.

17.  Amenophis    19    years  and   6
months.

18.  Sethosis  and  Ramesses.

Jos.  contr,  Ap.  I.  15.
Tethmosis  was  king  when  the  shep-
herds went  out  of  Egypt.  From  these
(the  shepherd)  kings  there  intervenes
a  period  of  393f  years  to  the  two  bro-


}!


•  Qy.  siccus  ^  noti  Vttfxefftrrt;,  who  is  Ramesses.

t  The  sum  of  the  17  kings  of  the  18th  dynasty  amounts  only  to  333
years.  The  reading  393  is  however  confirmed  by  the  extracts  in  the  following
page.  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Cullimore  for  the  observation  that  the  deficiency
of  60  years  occurs  in  the  7th  and  11th  reigns  which  ought  to  have  been  each  39
years.  This  correction,  which  may  be  found  in  some  of  the  other  lists,  makes
the  Canon  completely  harmonize  with  the  Hieroglyphic  dates.

T


,/


H"


H  ■


fit  I  f  5


-*1
i


I
I


138


JOSEPHUS  ON  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


Tpt<xM(Ticc  €V€vvjyiovraTpia  erv;,  thers  Sethos  and  Hermaeus  of  whom

f^expi  ruv  Ivo  al^'K^Zv  le^u  he  says  Sethos  was  called  Aegyptus,

yca,VEp[Aaiov,£vTov  fA€vI,€^uv  and  Hermaeus  Danaus.     Sethos  after

Aityvzro>  tov  Sf  "Epy-aiov  Ad-  he  had  expelled  Hermaeus  reigned  59

vaov  fA€ropQiJ.a<r^r}mi    <^>jo-iv.  years.  After  him  his  eldest  son  Ramp-

Ov  €%^aXvv  6  l€^u<;  i^avl-  ses  reigned  QQ    years. — Jos,  contr,

X€V(r€V  €Tvi  v^.    Kai  jIact'  au-  Ap.  I.  26.

Tov    0   itp€(r^vr€po^  ruv    vtSv

In  the  16th  chapter  Josephus  has  the  foUowing —

A^Xov  §€  ia-Tiv  U  ruv  elpr,-  It  is  manifest  from  a  computation

M€Kyy  iruv  tov  yipivw  (rvKKn-  of  the  above-mentioned  years,  that

yta-devTOi    on  ot  x.ciXoij[/.€m  the  Shepherds  (our  ancestors)  were

itoifxeve^,  riixhepoi,  Se  irpoyovoi,  driven  out  from  Egypt,  and  left  that

Tpia-l  V.CU  evev^Mvra.  noct  rpia-  country   three  hundred  and  ninety-

ycoa-ioK;  itpo<rB€v  erea-ivj  ix.  rrj^  three  years  previous  to  the  departure

AlywtTQv    a-naAXayevTc^t  '^vjv  of  Danaus  to  Argos.
Xftj/joi/    ravrjrv  airaJxijo-av,    17
Aavaov  e'lq  "Apyo^  ^(pUea-dai,

And  in  the  2d  chapter  of  the  second  book : —

Maneuf  fMv  ykp  xara  t^  Manetho  says  that  the  Jews  (i.  e.

'T€BfA^<TiQ;pa(Ti\€tavaTtcf,XKa.-  the    Shepherds)   left    Egypt   in   the

O^va/  </)>jo-tv  6*1  Alyj^Ttrov  tou?  reign  of  Tethmosis   three    hundred

UvlaiQvqy   Tcpl  iruv   rptocxo'  and  ninety-three  years    before    the

(Tiuv   ivtvyi^ovrarpiuv  t^q  dq  flight   of  Danaus  to  Argos.     Lysi-

"Apyoq  Aavctov  tpvy^q.    Ava-!-  machus  that  it   was  in  the  reign  of

l^xo^  8e  Kar^  Boxx^piv  tI>  Bocchoris,  i.  e.  one  thousand  seven

^aeriXeaty  Tovrea-Ti  -jrpo  irZv  hundred   years    before.       Molo   and

Xikiuv    ^TTTaKoo-iW.      ulXuv  some  others  place  it  as  seems  good

§€  KaJ  &XKoi  nvU  &<;  aCroTq  to  them.     But  Apion  the  most  cor-

eSolev.  'OSe'  ye  TtdvTuv  'mtrzi  rect  (ironically)  of  all,  fixes  it  de-

Taro;  *A7r/av  i/j/o-aro  t^v  ?fo-  cidedly  at  the  first  year  of  the  seventh

Sov  ixpi^S^  ^aik  i\y  6'/SSo>,p.  Olympiad  in  which  he  says  the  Phoe-

•OXv^awiaSa,  xai  -ca^y^q  Xraq  nicians  founded  Carthage.
itvai  TtpuToVf  iv  5J  (f)yj(n  Kap-
X^l^ova  ^omx€t;  eynirav.


HI*


liiiiiiiii''''' "'""'  II  "i


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT :


FROM  SYNCELLUS.


AirrnTOT  t^^  -rraXai  Me-

palaq  ^a<riX€uv  err}.

a.'  MearpaifA  *  0  xai  M^-
yrjc;  "j"   eri^  Xe,

p.   Kovpuhvjq'i^  erv}  |y.

y .   'Apia-rapxoq  ervj  XS'.

€'.     r  .      * A\f€THypci(l)UV     €T>J

S  •   *0  ^epaiCK;  §  xy'.

•nJ  .      A,tC6Vf/X1J5  CTIJ  XfJ  .

i'.  "AfAa<riq  \\   erij  jS*.
<a'.    *AK€(r€(f)^priq  erij  iy',
i^'.   'A7xo/>fi/c  ^  exTj  ^.
<</.   'Ap/Aiva^q**  6T»7  8'.
«8'.  Xa[^oi(;  cTf}  ij3'.   "j-j'


Canon  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  for-
merly called  Mestraea.

1 .  Mestraim  who  is  Menes :  he
reigned  35  years.

2.  Curodes  63  years.

3.  Aristarchus  34  years.

4.  Spanius  36  years.

5.  6,  Anonymous  72  years.

7.  Serapis  23  years.

8.  Sesonchosis  49  years.

9.  Amenemes  29  years.

10.  Amasis  2  years.

11.  Acesephthres  13  years.

12.  Anchoreus  9  years.

13.  Armiyses  4  years.

14.  Chamois  12  years.

15.  Miamous  14  years.

16.  Amesesis  65  years.


♦  MTiargixijuL  Sc.  f  M/v)}s  Go.  Sc.

J  KoupouS»}j  Go. — KotJSfous  Sc.  §  d}ffi§07r)i   B.

II  Afxwffti    Go.  m.  Sc.  ^  A^°f '"5  Go. — A')(u)§e^i  Sc.

•*  AfuCffJje  Sc.  tf  xr'.  Sc.

XX  Afiea-icrii  trij  ^>)'  is  substituted  by  Go.  Sc.  and  A.  for  the  15th,  while  the
16th  is  left  vacant,  14  years  being  assigned  for  the  period  of  the  reign.


,/


uo


SYNCELLUS    CANON


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


141


hi


■I


!€'


1^'.   Oyffij?  *  erifj  v'.


17.  Uses  50  years.

18.  Rhameses  29  years.

19.  Rhamessomenes  15  years.

20.  Usimares  31  years.

21.  Rhamesseseos  23  years.


xy


x.^*.  *PajtA€<ro-ajOccvw  II    €T)j         22.  Rhamessameno  19  years.


«3'.

*  <r^  6T1J  X^.

xS'.   *PajtA€CJo^    OvcUppov*

if        (\>
€Tr]  x-J  .

xc  .    Koyx^pi^  ft  €T^  €  .  J  J

xf    ^a(TiX€V(xavroi   Koy^dpeuq

r^q  AtyvTiTov   ii:]  t^j  15-'    Sy-

va.<n€ta,q  tov  Kwimv  Xeyof/^vov

xJxXoi'  Trapa  talJ  Mavf^a?,  auo

TOV  izpurov  ^a<n.\€aq    xai  Oi-

xio-Tov   MetTT^aijtA  §§   t^^  Ai-

yvJtroVf    TTA'^povvrai    iry]     ;//,

^aariXiuv  xe'.

'     T?  •.  /       ''       a.'         ~

X5-  .     i<AiT>J^   <T17  i^7  .    "TT/JW-

ntapa  MaveS^oj.

x^  .   Baiuv  '(STY}  juS',
xV»   *ATa%va?  €tij  X§-'.

xS^  .      A(pUKpiq  €T1J  £a'.
X'.     'S,€^uq  fTYl  V  ,


23.  Rhamesse  Jubasse  39  years.

24.  Rhamesse  the  son  of  Vaphris
29  years.

2b.  Concharis  5  years.

In  the  5  th  year  of  Concharis,  the
25th  king  of  Egypt  of  the  IGth  dy-
nasty, which  is  called  by  Manetho
the  Cynic  Cycle,  was  completed  in
25  reigns  a  period  of  700  years  from
Mestraim  the  first  native  king  of
Egypt.


2G.  SiHtes  19  years,  the  first  of  the
6  kings  of  the  1 7th  dynasty  accord-
ing to  Manetho.

27.  Baeon  44  years.

28.  Apachnas  ^Qt  years.

29.  Apliophis  61  years.

30.  Sethos  50  years.


f  fiafifffOjUiviii  B.

§  FajuLsa^fftws   Sc.


•  Ovari  Go.  Sc.

}  oCffi/xa§ri  B. — Qvffi/ULipris  Go.

II   Fa/ujutffffajmiviu(  Sc. — Pajutaffi/iivw  Go.

^  pafxfxtaar^*  ovBotci^  B. — Vetfitaari  toD  B«>jt^  Go.

tt  "^yX^ff  B* — K^y^a^Of  Sc.
§§   MiffTpi/u  Go.


•*   Ptx/tta-ffr)o6a^^os   Sc.
XX  r .  Go.  m.


Xa.  Kvipruq*  trrj  xSr'.
y.aTa  'laxT'^TT'itoy,  xara  8e  rov
MaveSrS  exTj  /xS  .

XjS'.   'A<rrj^  f  €Tvi  x'.

aurSv  raq  e'  e7rayo/*eva^,  xa*

Ticev  T^t'  :^jt>t6p£v,  0  Alyv%ria-
xo?  €V*auTO?  t|'  /xoW  rjfAepav
vpo  rovTov  fj!,€rpov[A.€yoq»  'Eir*
atJroi/  0  fMO'Xoq  ^€cmoti^^€iq
'Airtq  exXij^ij.


31.  Certos  29  years  according  to
Josephus,  but  according  to  Manetho
44.

32.  Aseth  20  years.

He  added  the  5  intercalary  days  to
the  year :  and  under  him  the  Egyp-
tian year  which  had  previously  been
reckoned  360  days  only  was  increased
to  365.  Under  him  also  the  calf  was
deified  and  called  Apis.


FROM  SYNCELLUS  AND  EUSEBIUS.


SYNCEL.  EUSEB.

Xy  .  "AfJiutTiq  0  xai  TtS'/xw-
o-k;  €Tr}  xr'.§

'  A/XW0-/5  xj" .
X8'.   Xe^puv  €Tij  ly.

Xe^puv  vy ,
Xe'.   *A/xejw^^||  eT>j  nK

*AlJl.€fA(pr,i  l€,

Xf'.   'Attevcr^?  ct>j  ^a'.

'A/xevcnj^  I  a'.


ARMEN."


HIERON.


I.  Amosis  ann.  xxv.


Amosis  xxv.

II.  Chebron  ann.  xiii.

Chebron  xiii.

III.  Amenophes  xxi.

Amenophis  xxi.

IV.  Memphres  xii.

Mephres  xii.


*   KrjgTOS  Go.  t  oiffffv^   B.

X  In  the  Armenian  Canon  of  Eusebius,  a  Theban  dynasty,  which  he  calls
the  16th,  is  placed  as  the  first,  to  which  is  assigned  a  period  of  190  years.  This
is  followed  by  the  I7th  dynasty  of  the  Shepherds  which  lasts  103  years.  No
names  are  given  in  either.  The  first  part  of  Hieronymus'  old  Latin  version  of
Eusebius  is  lost.  The  lists  therefore  both  of  the  Armenian  Canon  and  of  Hiero-
nymus' version  commence  with  this  the  18th  dynasty  of  Diospolites.  The  names
of  the  32  kings  given  above,  are  merely  those  of  Syncellus  in  the  Greek
opposite.

§  xjS*  Go.  II  A/xiipris  Go.  Sc. — 0L/iJL$fi<p)s  B.


142


SYNCELLLUS     AND  EUSEBIUs'


i  'I


SYNCEL.  EU.  SC.  ARMEN.  HIERON.

A^'.  Mi(r(ppayfA.ov^u(rii  errj  *r'.        V.    Mispharmuthosis    XLVI.

MiT<ppccyfA.ori9u<n^  t^'.  Misphragmuthosis  xxvi.

Xij'.   MKTcpp^q  tTifi  x-y'.

Mt<r<ppr]q  cxij  Ky,
XSr'.   To\j^fM}(Tii;  err;  X^'.  vi.    Tuthmosis  IX.

Tov'Sfxcoa-t^  xd'.  Tuthmosis  ix.

^ .  *AfA.€vZ<p^i,;  €rr)  XS'.  VII.  Amenophthis  xxxi.

'AlA^vZ<\>Bi,;  XS.  Amenophis  xxxi.

02to«  h  'AfA.€vZ<t>^,g*  €o-T*v  Hie    ille    Amenophthis    est,    qui

0  Mefxvay  elvai  vo/a/^o>€vo?  xaJ  Memnon  ipse  creditus  fuit,  lapis  lo-

^eyyofA^voq  Xl^oq.  quax.

Al\li07[€f  a-KQ   *Iv8oiJ  -jrora-

/*y .   ^A^iop)<;  x^.

ASr^^/^  xd'.
fcS .   \€VX€pr,<;  xf'.


/*^'-"Axw?t  f'-'J   V.   i         XII.  Acheresviii.


viii.  Orus  xxxvii.

Orus  xxxviii.

IX.  Achencheres  xii.

Achencherres  xii.

X.  Athoris  ix.

Achoris  vii.
XI.  Chencheres  xvi.

Chencherres  xviii.


xa;  X.


Hm^  -n-


J  »


Acherres  viii.
xiii.  Cheres  xv.  Cherres  xv.

^r'.  'Api^a:^  I  xai  Aa-         xiv.  Armais  qui  et  Danaus  v.

ApfAdi^  ^',


Armais  v.


XV.  Aegyptus  lxviii.


Remesses  lxviii.
xvi.  Menophis         MenophesxL.

♦  «yuyui»0(pls  B.

Lt^'f^^  Go.— The  four  above  are  given  in  both  the  Greek  catalogues  as

\  AlyuiTTKii  Go.


Ethiopians.


CANONS  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


143


SYNCEL.


£U.  SC.


/XTj'.   *A(Ji.eyekHpi^*  trvj  tf.


va,   "^ay^iMv^i^   ly.
v^ S'.


ARMEN.  HIERON.

XIX  DYNASTIA.

I.  Sethosis  Sethos  lv.

II.  Rampses  Ramses  lxvi.

III.  Amenophis  xl.

Amenophtes  xl.

IV.  Amenemes  xxv.

Ammenemes  xxvi.
V.  Thuoris  vii.

Thuoris  vii.
Thuoris  Aegyptiorum  rex  ab  Ho-
mero  Polybus  vocatur  maritus   Al-
candrae.    De  eo  meminit  in  Odyssea.

XX  DYNASTIA-j"  ANNIS  CLXXVIII.

50.  Nechepsos  19  years.

51.  Psammuthis  13.


52.


i€'


Pcifixj/i^  jtAc'.
vt'.  *Au.€V(Tr]t;  o  xa*  'Ajix^txe-
i>€[xri^  §   xr'.

AfAfXfvarjq  xr .

Oxvpevi  *8'.
AjueS^^  x^ .


53.  Certus  16.

54.  Rhampsis  45.

55.  Amenses  who  is  Ammenemes
26.

56.  Ochyras  14.

XXI  DYNASTIA  TANITARUM.

I.  Amendis  xxvi.

Semendis  xxvi.


♦   a/xivtui|>7jf  A. — Afxtvo(p)s  Go.

f  Neither  of  the  Latin  versions  give  the  names  of  the  20th  dynasty.  The
names  substituted  above  are  merely  translations  of  the  Greek  of  Syncellus
opposite.

J  KjjfTtus  Din.  §  Ayu«v«/xi)5  Go. — dtv^ivZ/xij?  A.  ||  A/ni^s  Go.  A.


UL'.'l,U,im_L  JW  '


144


SYNCELLUS'  AND  EUSEBIUS*


CANONS  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT,


145


SYNCEL.  EU.  SC.

Qoriapii  V  .

xara   t^v   Afy^irTov  eyeyovroy

A\[(i}\tiq  0  xai  ^ov(Tupoq  xij .
f  .   Keyxcvij^  XS^.'

K<yxev>jf  XSr .

Ovevvitpriq  XSr .

|j3'.   Soucraxeij^jl    errj  XS  .

SoKcaxctjiA  Ai^vaq  yea]  Ai-

^loTtaq  xa)  TpwyXoSt^ra^  "Tra/)-

cXajSe    Trpo    rr/^    *lipova-(xkfifA..

'EovtraMeifJi'  XS .

J,eyi\l>ov€pDq  xc'.

cf .   N€(p€X€pri;  r'.

^i(p€XW  5"''
^,    'Ajt*/X€vS(^<iJ^  ^'.

A/>c/>tev£(^t^  Sr*.
f  f '.   2ai*r>j?  *€  .


ARMEN.


HIERON.


SYNCEL.


EU.   SC.


♦  §  SotJo/fijs    A.  B.
^    aXxa»8^os  A.  B.
II   2ov0'0'O(Xf)yu   Go.


II.  Pseusenes  xli.

Pseusennes  xli.

hi.  Ammenophis  ix.

Amenophthis  ix.
IV.  Nephercheres  iv.

Neplierchenes  iv.


V.  Osochor  VI.


VI.  Psinaches  ix.


Osochor  VI.


Spinaches  ix.


f  noXujSous  Vulg.
§  o\}i>vt<pis  B.

^    AjULJIA$9W(pHi    Go.


HeTov^da-ri^q  /xS'.
q^'.   *0(rup\lui>  ^  .

Offop^ccif  ^'.
o'.   '^/'oiyi.fAO^   /.

'^dtAiJiij^  i .

oa'.   Koyxv,pK;  xa'.

Ko-y^api^  xa .
ojS'.   *0<J-op\fa}y  Iff,

Qaop'^uv  i€ .
6y\  TaycaXacpiq  *  ly  .

Ta^€\a<piq  vy

Bop^wp^  /*§'.
Box;^&7j5i5§   AlyxMrtoif  ho-
/xo^fTC*,   6<^*  ou   Koyoq  apvlov
(pdiy^aa-dai.

oc'.   2ajS4xwv  A*d/oi^  11  €T)7

.J3'.

OvToq  Tov    Box%ftjpy  ai;QtAaX«-
To»  "ka^uv  tfivra  exaycre»».
05-'.   SejSijxft'*'  ^jS*.

2f/9>jxa?v  «;9  .
0^  .   Ta^axij?  X  ,

1apdxfi<;  X  .


ARMEN.  HIERON.

VII.  Psusennes  xxxv.

Psusennes  xxxv.

XXII  DYNASTIA  BUBASTARUM.

I.  Sesonchusis  xxi.

Sesonchosis  xxi.

II.  Osorthon  xv.

Osorthon  xv.

III.  Tachelotis  xiii.

Tacellothis  xiii.

XXIII  DYNASTIA  TANITARUM.

I.  Petubastis  xxv.

Petubastes  xxv.

II.  Osorthon  ix.

Osorthon  ix.
III.  Psammus  x.

Psammus  x.

XXIV  DYNASTIA.

I.  Bocchoris  xliv.

Bocclioris  Saites  xlvi.


xxv  DYNASTIA  AETHIOPUM.

I.  Sabacon  Aethiops  xii.


Sabacon  xii.


II.  Sebichus  xii.


III.  Tarachus  xx.


Sevichus  xii.


Taracos  xx.


*    T«X€>w^^JJC  Go. T«X«Xtt»^)3f  A.

t  /a'  B.  §  $6K-)(u>^ris  B.


f  ^iny^a^ts  A. — Bixx^g-ni  B.

II   aj^(or^  B.


u


/


/


146


SYNCELLUS'  AND  EUSEBIUS'


CANONS  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


147


SYNCEL.


EU.  SC.


017'.   *Au.arjq  erij  Xij .

ApfAai^  Xtj  •

-Tra'.    Nc^aci  vj'.

iry  .   N€%aw  /S'  ^apau  ^'.
NexaaiS  /9'  .  .  ^.

xai  '^afAf/.riTixct;  §  x^'.

we.   Ovouppiq  K^.

Ovcuppvii  aS'.
•jrr .    AfjLuert^  >/,


Eftj{  roijrov  yj  tZv  A\yvt:-
a-ov    yca^jipe^rj    iiti    rov    tt^


ARMEN.  HIERON.

XXVI  DYNASTIA  SAITARUM.

I.  Ammeres  Aethiops  xii.

Ammerres  Aethiops  xii.

II.  Stephinatis  vii.

Stephinatis  vii.

III.  Nechepsus  vi.

Nechepsos  vi.

IV.  Nechao  viii.

Nechao  viii.
V.  Psammedichus  xliv.

Psammitichus  xliv.
VI.  Nechao  vi.

Nechao  secundus  vi.
VII.  Psammuthes     alter     qui     et
Psammetichus  xvii.

Psammitichus  alter  qui  et
Psammus  xii.
viii.  Vaphres  xxv.

Vaphres  xxx.
IX.   Amosis  xLii.

Amasis  xlii.

xxvii.  Aegyptiorum  dynastia  Per-
sae.  Obtinet  quippe  Aegyptum  sexto
regni  sui  anno  (quinto)  Cambyses  ;
efficiuntur  autem  usque  ad  Darium
Xerxis  filium  ann.  cxxiv.  (cxi.)

The  kingdom  of  Egypt  after  hav-
ing continued  2211  years  through  a
series  of  10  dynasties  and  86  kings,
was  subdued  by  Cambyses  in  the
reign  of  Amosis  the  86th  king  from
Mestraim,  who  is  the  same  as  Menes,


•  Naxf-^/if  Go.

+  ya^/i/T<xof  Go.—^ixttjujut'Tt-)(Oi    A.-^^^ocfjifTtixog   B.


SYNCEL.  EU.  SC.

^TOi  Alyxj-TTTOv  x&pcLq  *A[A,eo-
cea^f  onto  tov  npurov  olvtuv
MearpaifA  rav  xai  Mijvcw^.  .  .

"Efxeivc  8e  vj  At-

yvirroq    viro    Hepa-aq  €T<    taq

AapdoV     TOV      B,€p^OV»       "EcTTiV

Hepa-ai     eKpeiri^a-ay     aico    €

erov^  Kau^v<TOv.

"jr^.    Kafx^va-rji  ernj  y',
nr/f,  Ma-yot     abthcpoi     hvo

jLtvjva?  S  •

w^'.   Aap€io<;      'Ta-Tda-Ttov

V.   Bep^"^!;  eTij  x'.
^a'.  " ApToi^avot;  /[x^va;  ^'.

hy\   B,€p^Y}i  fMJvaq  ^.

he  »   Lapihi   0    No^foi  exij

Ai^yTTTO^    ania-rfi   H(p<ruy


* AfMjpraioq  loitrri^  r  •


6^'.    'S€(p€plT'/i<;  5-'.


ARMEN.  HIERON.

of  that  part  of  Egypt  which  is  called

the  Mestraean  region Egypt

remained  under  the  dominion  of  the
Persians  till  the  time  of  Darius  the
son  of  Xerxes.  The  27th  dynasty
therefore  is  that  during  which  the
Persians  held  Egypt  in  subjection
from  the  5  th  year  of  Cambyses.

87.  Cambyses  3  years.*

88.  The    Magi    two    brothers    7
months.

89.  Darius  the  son  of  Hystaspes
36  years.

90.  Xerxes  20 f  years.

91.  Artebanus  7  months.

92.  Artaxerxes  40  years.

93.  Xerxes  II.  2  months.

94.  Sogdianus  7  months.

95.  Darius  No  thus  21  years.

Egypt  revolted  from  Persia  in  the
second  year  of  Darius  Nothus.

XXVIII   DYNASTIA.  J

I.  Amurtaeus  Saites  vi.

Amurtaeus  Saites  vi.

XXIX  DYNASTIA  MENDESIORUM.

II.  Ephirites  vi.

I.  Nepherites  vi.


*  Eu.  Ar.  allows  only  2  years  to  Cambyses,  reckoning  the  7  months  of  the
Magi  as  one  year.     Hieron.  gives  him  four,  omitting  the  Magi  in  the  Canon.

f  21  Eu.  Ar.  omits.

♦  The  Armenian  reckons  this  and  the  two  following  as  the  28th  dynasty.
Hieronymus  divides  them.


\


14b


\


SYNCELLUS'  AND  EUSEBIUs'  CANONS,  &c.


SYNCEL.  EU.  SC.

AxvpK;  iy\

"^dfAiMv^fiq  ^,
p ft^vaj  *  hf,

pa\    ^€XTav€^y}<;  ly'.

Pis'.   NfXTd£i/fjSo^    jS',    ^T)j


.^.


pe'.   *A/)3tJ^  "fl%oy  aScX^o^


ARMEN.  IIIERON.

III.  Achoris  xii.

II.  Achoris  xii.

IV.  Psammutlies  i.

III.  Psammuthis  i.
V.  Nepherites  menses  iv.

y  IV.  Nepherites  menses  iv.

XXX  MNASTIA  SEBENNITARUM.

v^^ectanebus  xviii.
*  I.  Nectanebis  xviii.

vii.  Teos  II.


II.  Teos  II.
viii.  Nectanebus  xviii.

III.  Nectanebos  xviii.

XXXI  DYNASTIA  PERSARUM.

I.  Ochus  IX,

Ochus  X.
II.  Arses  Ochi  in.


V.


Apar^t;  8  .


pi/,   ^apuoi  </,


III.  Darius  vi.


Arses  Ochi  iv.


Darius  Arsami  vi.


•  Din.— Vulg.  M»)»af — Sc.  in  the  Canon  at  the  end  gives  it  Moi»i$  irof  «.'

t  <>j'.  Sc.  can.


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT :


FROM  DIODORUS  SICULUS.


MreOAOrOTi;!  8'  avruwiyh
TO  /*€y  vpuroy   ap^ai  t^?  AI-
yvitrov  ^€Ovq  t€  xa)  ^puaq  eTfj
^pay^    Xihovra    twv    [Avpluv
xa«   oxTaxiO"xiXwy|  xa)   ^feuv
€(r%aTov  ^acriXiva-ai  rov  lari-
80?  ^Clpov,      'T-jt'  ay^puTtuv  8e
T^y  Xupav  ^€^a<xiktv<T^ai  (poc
(Tiv  airo   fAvpidhq   exij  ^pax^
Xc/irovra   t5v  'jrevraxio^t?^**'"'*
ji*e%/3i  T^5  6xaT0o-T^$  xa*  oy8o>j-
xoo-T^^  'OXv/xTTiaSo^.    xa^  ^jv
^/x€iV  /Afy  Tcape^dKoiMv  fU  At-
•yuirroy,  i^aa-iKexje  8e  IlToXe-
fAaTo^j  0  vfo;  Aiovvcroi  xP'^il^-^^'

Tovruv  8t  Ta  jM,ev  TrXero-Ta
xaracrxf  rv  t^v  dpx'iiv  iyxcopiQvq
jSowiXcr^,  oX/ya  8e  A«^»07ra?
xai  nep<ra^  xa«  MaxeSova^.


Some  of  them  fable  that  the  Gods
and  Heroes  first  reigned  in  Egypt
during  a  period  little  less  than  eighteen
thousand  years  ;  and  that  the  last  of
the  gods  who  reigned  was  Horus
the  son  of  Isis.  They  also  relate
that  the  kingdom  was  governed  by
men  during  a  series  of  nearly  fifteen
thousand  years  to  the  hundred  and
eightieth  Olympiad  in  which  we  have
visited  Egypt  which  was  during  the
reign  of  Ptolemy  who  bears  the  title
of  the  younger  Dionysus.


The  kings  of  Egypt  were  for  the
most  part  natives  of  the  country,  but
the  Ethiopians,  Persians  and  Mace-
donians acquired  the  empire  for  some
short  periods.

There     reigned    altogether     four


150


DIODORUS  SICULUS    CANON


VROM  DIODORUS  SICULUS.


151


rta-a-apaq  ov   xara   to    efij^,

to,  TtdvTX  ^paxv  XetTcoifTa  tZv
€{■  KaJ  rpidmvra.

Hepa-aq      8e      rjy^tracrdai

09rXo«;  xaTacTpei^auevou  to
iBvo^y  TrevT€  'Kpoq  To7q  evtaTov
xax  rpidMvra  €T€<Tif  <rvv  raTq
tuy  AlyvTntuv  aTcoa-rua-ea-iv,
aq  iirot^<ravTOf  (l)€p€iv  ov  hvvd-
fA€VOi  rrjv  Tpaxvrvjra  T^q  iina--
raa-ia^y  xai  t^v  flq  rovq  iy-
%upiwq  Beovq  d<T€^€iay.

*E<TxdTovq  ge  MaxcSo'vaj
apQaiy  xai  Tovq  dit(^  MaxeSo'-
vuv  €^  trr)  irpoq  roiq  hiaaoa-ioiq,

Tofj  8e  AOiiroi/^  XP^vovq
azayraq  licneXiaai  ^octimv-
ovrat;    t^^    Xcipaq    iyxupmq'

rotq  T€r patKoaiOK;,  yvvaiyuzq  Se
TrevTf.

MfTa  T01/5  ^eoiiq  Toivtv
TtpZroVj  (pa(Ti  ^a<riMv(rai  tyjt;
Alyijirrov  Myjvav.

'E|^^  he  dp^ai  Xeyerai  rov
'iipO€tpri[X€vov  ^aaiUuq  rotj
disaylvouq  li^o  ^tplq  ro7q  iteyTrj-
xovra  Toi/^  airavTa?,  ervj  icKuu
Tuv  ;^4X/<yv  xcii  T€rpa'M<riuv.*


lRov<ripiq,


Ethiopians,  not  successively  but  at

intervals,  the  length  of  whose  reigns
collectively  occupied  a  period  of  nearly

thirty-six  years.

The  Persians,  under  the  command
of  Cambyses    their   king,    subdued

the  nation  by  force  of  arms.  They
occupied  the  throne  during  a  hun-
dred and  thirty-five  years,  inclusive
of  the  insurrections,  which  the  Egyp-
tians, unable  to  put  up  with  the  seve-
rity of  their  domination,  and  their
impiety  towards  the  gods  of  the
country,  made  from  time  to  time.

Lastly  reigned  the  Macedonians,
and  their  successors,  two  hundred
and  seventy-six  years.

All  the  rest  of  the  time  was  filled
up  with  native  princes,  that  is  to  say,
four  hundred  and  seventy  kings  and
five  queens.


After  the  gods,  Menas  was  the
first  king  of  the  Egyptians.

After  him  it  is  said  that  two  of  the
descendants  of  the  before-mentioned
king  reigned,  and  they  were  suc-
ceeded by  fifty  who  altogether  reigned
during  a  period  of  more  than  one
thousand  four  hundred  years.

Busiris.


Kai  ruv  toi;tou  ndXiv  ^-
•yoWv  oxTto,  Tov  TeXexjraToy*
ofJuoyOfMy  ovra  tw  ttpuru,
(paa-)  ycrlo'ai  r^v  1)1:0  [*€»  Ai-
yvmiuy  xaXov/xevvyv  Aioq  iroXiv
viro  Se  Tuy  'EXat^vwv  ©ijjSaj.

Tov  Toi/TOf  ToD  ^aTi'Aeooq
dnoyoyeoy  oyhooq  6  dno  tow
vaTfioi   Ttpoa-ayopfvadi  Oy^o-

ptVq     €'KTKr€,       TTOXiy      MffAtplV

itiKpayetrrdTTiy  tuv  xaT*  At-
•yt^Tov.

Afi^Sfxa  yeveai  ^aa-iAeuv,
Mvpiiq'  *Eitd>ei}   he  rrlq  iro-
Xeuq  XifAvriy  upv^e,

'Eirra,  yeyeal  ^aa-iXeuv,
^€<Tou<riyf  (paa^yf  ittupct-
ytrrdraq  kou  fxeytaraq  twv
icpoq  avrov  rd^ciq  imreXe'
<r(G-^ai  yea)  itpd^eiq,  Elq  fxey
ri^y  Epv^av  ^dkaa-cav  direo''
TfiXc  (TToXov  ytSy  rerpa-
xotTiay,  xai  rdq  re  y^a-ovq  raq
iy  roiq  roTCOtq  xaTcxTija-otTO,
xai  Tyjq  rjV€ipov  ra  •napa  ^fd-
XaTTav  l^py]  xaTfo-Tpet^aTo,
y-€xpi  T^<  *Iv§»x^^.  A^To^  Se
jLceTa  ryjq  hwdfJieuq  rrt^^  rrjv
tiopetav  tiOitiadiMvoq,  xaTca-
Tpeyj/aTo  'nct<Tav  T»;y  'ATtav.
xsti  TOV  rdyyvjv  TtoTafMv  hU^i),
xai  ti^y  'IvStxijj'  kir^X^e  'zao'ay


Then  eight  of  his  descendants,  of
whom  the  last,*  who  bore  the  same
name  with  the  first,  founded  the  city
which  by  the  Egyptians  is  called  the
city  of  the  Sun  or  Diospolis,  biit  by
the  Greeks  Thebes.

The  eighth  of  the  descendants  of
this  king,  who  bore  the  sirname  of
his  father  Uchoreus  built  the  city  of
Memphis,  the  most  celebrated  of  all
the  cities  of  Egypt.

Twelve  generations  of  kings.

Myris,  who  dug  the  lake  above
the  city  of  Memphis.

Seven  generations  of  kings.

Sesoosis,  whose  exploits  were  the
most  renowned  of  all  the  kings  be-
fore him.  He  fitted  out  a  fleet  of
four  hundred  ships  upon  the  Red
Sea;  and  subdued  all  the  islands,
and  all  the  parts  of  the  continent
bordering  upon  the  sea  as  far  a§  the
Indies.  And  he  marched  with  a
mighty  army  by  land,  and  reduced
all  Asia.  And  he  passed  over  the
Ganges  and  conquered  all  the  Indies
**  even  to  the  ocean,  and  all  the  na-
tions of  the  Scythians,  and  most  of
the  islands  of  the  Cyclades.  He
then  invaded  Europe  and  overran
all   Thrace :    and  Thrace   he   made


•  TtTToigAxotTa  m.


*  Diodorus  does  not  here  mention  the  narae  of  this  king,  but  describes  the
magnificence  of  Thebes,  and  the  sepulchre  of  Osymandyas.  Scaliger  confounds
him  with  Uchoreus.     Others  suppose  him  to  have  been  a  second  Busiris.


If


152


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


If)


U'


A


^av  €i&M7,   xa<  rZv  KxmKa^oov
y/j(ruv  raf  vXeia-Ta^.    Aia^u^
3*  €1?  T^v  EvpccTrrjv,   xat)  8<f-
Ciuv  aTtaa-av  rrjv  @pdxviVf  xa«
epia  Tt]^  errpariaq  iroiijffdiMvo^
iv  T?j  Sp^'KTj^  trnjXa?  xaretr-
xfvao-€v  €v  iraXXoTf  Tonotq  ruv
avrov   xaraxTij^cvTwy.      T^v
8f  ;^a'/jav  aitaaav  dq  If  xai
rptdKOinroc  fxepyj  gifXcJv,  a  xa-
Xowo-iv  AlyvTtrioi  NofAov^f  iizi'
<rrif}a-€v  attatri  f4o/Adpxa(;.  €Tt
Of   T^ia   -BT/X)^    Tor<    TpiaxovTa
^aa-tX€V(raq    U     irpoaipea-eeci
^ifXtTre  rw  j9/ov.  wroXtTTovruy
avTop  Tu<v  ofxfxdruv.

'"^poitpyifAfyov  vUq.

IIoXao*  ^acriAuq  (A^rcc  tou-


boundary  of  his  military  excursion.
And  he  set  up  pillars  in  Thrace  and
in  many  other  places,  commemorating
his  conquests.  He  also  divided  Egypt
into  thirty  parts,  which  the  Egyptians
call  nomes,  and  appointed  nomarchs
over  each.  And  after  a  reign  of  33
years  he  destroyed  himself  on  account
of  the  failure  of  his  eyesight.


TOV.


Af/.a(riq,   0  KaTaxpaTrj6e)q
aito  'A'<rurdi>ov  AiBioiioq,

*AxTi(Tdyf](;  AlBlc^/.

Mevlri^  A'lyvTimoq^  o  xai
Md^poq.  Td<pov  §€  avT^  xara-
<T\itva<r€  rou  ovofAal^oufvov
Aa^vpivBov,

*Avcipyla.  trevre  yeveSv.

KcTva,*  0  xat  UpajTivq.

'Pe'fA^iq.

'Eirru  ^i€^gayro  rvjy  dp'-
X^jv  ^aa-iXfTq  otpyol.  otJScv  av-
tSv  (pyov  ojJSe  irpa^iq  la-ropiuq


Sesoosis  the  second  ;  the  son  of  the
preceding.

Many  kings  succeeded  him.

Amasis,  who  was  conquered  by
Actisanes  the  Ethiopian.

Actisanes  the  Ethiopian.

Mendes  an  Egyptian,  who  is  the
same  as  Marrhus.  He  constructed
the  building  which  is  called  the  La-
byrinth as  a  tomb  for  himself.

An  interregnum  for  5  generations.

Cetna,*  who  is  Proteus.

Rhemphis.

Seven  insignificant  kings  reigned
of  whom  no  work  or  deed  worthy  of
history  is  handed  down  except  of  one


*  Kirjig  Cetes.  Marg.


FROM  DIODORUS  SICULUS.


153


a^ia  itapale^oraif  itXvjv  hoq
NfiXf<y?*  ouf)*  ov  <rviA^a(i/€i  tov
ttorafMV  uvofxdo'^a.i  NeTKov  to
ntpoTOv  nakovfAiyov  Atywrrov.

"078005  8f  ^acriMvq  yevo-
fieyoq  y.tfJi.Bvii*  0  Mfjn4)iT>j5,
^0^6  fA€v  errj  irevTi^xovTa,  xa-
ra<rMva<r€  8e  ryjv  [/.eyla-TVjv
ruv  rpiZy  Hvpafjuhecv.

TeXevTVj^ravroq  Se  rov^a<ri-
Xfuq  rovTov  SieSclaro  tV  dp-
X'»}V  0  dh€X(l>oq  Kfippi^y,  xa<
vipiey  ervj  cf  itplq  '»'o*«  '^f"-
Tijxovra.  Evioi  8e  (f)a<riy
oCx  aSeX^ov  aXX*  vlov  Ttapa-

/xfvov  Xa^piJtv.

Mvyc€plyoq  (ov  rivcq  [A€V  Xe-

p7voy  oyo[/id'^ov(riy)  vioq  ecv  tou

iiof^a'ayroq  ty{it  nrpoTcpav  Tlv-

pd[x.iba,f  ovroq  8e  €7r<j9aXo/x6vo?

rplrriv  xaraffxcva^fiv,  "npore-

pov  iT(A€vrif}<r€v  fjirfp  ro  ipyov

€'Aa^€  (rvvr€\€tay.

Tv€(paxd<iq,-f

Bo'xxo/JK  0  <ro(f)oqt  Tyetpax'
Kfov  vioq,

rioXXori;  8  va-repoy  xpovoiq
i^a<riK€V(T€  rrjqAlyvnrov,  2  a-
^dycoVf  TO  (Aiv  yeyoq  uy  Al-
^iot//.

Ayapx^oi  eir   er^j  Oi/o.

0»  SwSexa  i^ycfAoyfq  €t»j  le.

"^afAiAirixo^  0  laiTVjq,  eiq
coy  Tuy  ip    "^yefMyuy*


Nileus,  from  whom  the  river  is  called
Nilus,  having  formerly  borne  the
name  of  iEgyptus.

The    eighth  king    was    Chembres

the  Memphite.  He  reigned  50  years

and  built  the  largest  of  the  three
Pyramids.

After  his  death  his  brother  Ceph-
ren  received  the  kingdom  and  reigned
56  years.  Some,  however,  say  it  was
not  the  brother,  but  the  son  of  the
Chembres  that  succeeded  him,  and
that  his  name  was  Chabryis.


Mycerinus,  whom  others  call  Che-
rinus,  the  son  of  the  founder  of  the
former  pyramid.  He  undertook  to
raise  a  third,  but  he  died  before  the
completion  of  the  work.


Tnephachthus.

Bocchoris  the  Wise,  the  son  of
Tnephachthus.

After  a  long  time  Sabacon  reigned
over  Egypt,  being  by  race  an
Ethiopian.

An  interregnum  of  two  years.
Twelve  chiefs  15  years.
Psammitichus,  the  Saite:  who  was
one  of  the  twelve  chiefs.


*  Xi/uLfiti,  Marg.


f  rvi<pttx^(o.  Marg.


154


ijl


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


FROM  HERODOTUS.


155


i


If  •


T9T€pov  r€Trap<rt  yeveai^

€Tr}  iteyre  itpo^  tqk;  irtvryjKOi/Ta,
HaT€<rrpexl/€  tov  ^loy,  xad*  ou
Xpo^ov  Kaf^^v(rv)i  o  tuv  Ilep-
<ruv  ^aa-iXiVf  ia-rpdnva-ev
ivi   rrjv   AiyvmoVf   xara   to

xai  rpirrji  "OXviAviaboi,  yju
ivUa  o-TaSwy  YlapiAiy^rjt;  Ka-
fA.ap^yaioq,


After    four     generations     reigned
Apries  22  years.     He  was  strangled.


Amasis.  He  died  after  a  reign  of
55  years,  at  the  very  time  that  Cam-
byses,  king  of  the  Persians,  invaded
Egypt,  in  the  third  year  of  the  63d
Olympiad,  in  which  Parmenides  the
Camarinaean  was  the  victor Lib,  IL


CANON  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT


FROM  HERODOTUS.


TON  M^va,   TOV  irpSroy  ^w
<rik€V(Tayra  Aiyvitrov,

Mera  h(  rovrov,  xareXeyop
ci  ip€€<;  ^K  ^ij^Aov  ak'Auv  ^a-
<ri\7juy  TptviKoa-tuv  re  xa*  to*ij-
xovra  oivofxaTa.  iv  Toa-avTTja-t
Se  y€V€^<ri  dy^pc^uVf  onruncat-
8exa  /tt€v  Al^unreq  ^<ray,  fjurj
he  yvyr,  iirixupiv^'  ol  Se  aAXo*,
avBpf^  Alyvmioi'   tJ  he   yv-
vaixi  ovvoua   ?v  ^rtf   i^aa-i'
Xeva-e,    roitep  rrj   Ba/3i;Xwv/^,
N/tcmc/j*^.

T«v  8€  cikX      Q      -,*         ,
(t!V  paatMuVf  qv


Menes  was  the  first  king  of  Egypt.

After  him,  the  priests  read  out  of
a  book  the  names  of  330  kings.  And
among  these  were  1 8  Ethiopians  and
one  woman  a  native  Egyptian :  all  the
rest  were  men  and  Egyptians:  and
the  name  of  the  woman,  who  reigned
also  over  the  country  of  Babylonia,
was  Nitocris.


Of  the   other   kings   nothing   re-
markable is  in  any  way  recorded  ex-


Se^iv,  xaT*  ov^eu  eivai  "KafAttpl-
rrfTOf,  vXtiv  iyo^  rov  ecy/irw
avrSu  Moipto^.  'klfji.vypi  opv^ai,

^ea'uo'Tpi^,    TOV    eXeyov   ol
ipeeq  TtpuTQv  (Aiv  itKoioKTi  fA.a-
v.p(n«Ti  opfArj^evTO.  €x  Toy  *Apa-
^lov  KoXvav,    Tolq  itapa  t^v
'Epx^prjv  ^dXaaorav  xaroiyiri-
(Aevov^  v-aracnpeipea-^ai,  *Ev-
rev\Sev  oe    uq   oittau  airiycero
eq  AityvTtToVf  a-TpocTirjv  ttoXXtjv
Kapeov  r{Xa.vve  hia  t^^  i^ttc/oov,
way  ti^voq  To  ifAVohuv  xaTa-
<rp€(f>of/.eyo<;.   'Ex  r^^  *A(r/>j^  iq
T^y  Evpu%i^y  hia^ai;^   rovq  re
^KV^aq     xaT€o-T/>«A//aTo     xa«
rolq  O^jjt'xa^.

^epuv  6  rov  ^ecruxTrpioq.
Anhpa  MefXtpirvjVf  rS  yiaru
T^v   T«v   'E^Atyvwv    y\ui(T<Tav
ovyofAa  Tlpurea  eivai,
*Pa/A,\l'iynoy,

Mera  St  Toi/Toy,  ^aa-i'
Xerja-avrd  a-cpecoy  Xeona,  iq
vouray  xaxoTijTa  e\d<rai'
xaraxh^iarayra  ydp  fjuv  ntdy-
ra  ra  Ipa,  irpura  fAev  a-ipeaq
^va-i€uy  UTtep^ai'  HvpocfAl^a
itatramevda-ai'  xa*  ^a<ri-
Xtvo'ai  veyTfjyiovra  erea.

Toy  aSfX^ov  avrov  Xetp-
pyjya'  UvpafJLiha  icoiyjorai'  xai
^aa-tXevjM  e^  xai  weyT^-
xoyra     erea,       To^rovq    vno


cept  the  last  Maeris.     He  dug  the
lake.

Sesostris.  The  priests  said  that
he  first  sailed  with  a  fleet  of  large
vessels  from  the  Arabian  gulph,  and
conquered  all  the  nations  bordering
upon  the  Red  Sea.  And  that  from
thence  he  returned  to  Egypt,  and
with  a  mighty  army  he  traversed
the  continent  (of  Asia)  subjugating
every  nation  that  opposed  him.  From
Asia  he  passed  over  into  Europe  and
reduced  the  Scythians  and  Thracians.


Pheron,  the  son  of  Sesostris.

A  Memphite,  whose  name,  accord-
ing to  the  Greek  interpretation,  was
Proteus.

Rampsinitus.

After  him  reigned  Cheops,  who
inflicted  upon  them  every  kind  of
evil :  he  overthrew  the  temples,  and
was  the  first  who  put  a  stop  to  the
sacrifices.  He  founded  the  pyramid,
and  reigned  50  years.


Chephren,  the  brother  of  Cheops.

He  built  a  pyramid,  and  reigned  56

years.     The  Egyptians,  out  of  hatred,

decline  to  name  these  two  kings,  but


I' '


15G


OF  THE  KINGS  OF   EGYPT,


I,


i


taq  'Trvpaf/.t^aq  TuaXeovai  itoi-
fA€vcq  ^tXhiQ^f  o{  rovTOv  tov
^ovov  €y€[X€  ycTvjvea  Kara  rav-
ra  ta  yfi:pia,

TIvpafAi^x  8e  xai  oZroq  ontf
XiicerOf  itoXKov  iXdcraru  toiJ
itarpoq,

AW(TIV  TOV  TV(f>X0V,  'Eit)
TOi/Toy  ^acriXetJOVTOf,  iXdcrat
in  AiyvTtTov  %€*/3*  nroXK^  A*-
^toirdq  T€  xat  ^a^ooiSv  ruv
Al^lioicuv  ^aciXea,

*AiSf/oirc6  1,a^a%uv  ^cutTt-
Xefeiv  AiyvTTTov  iir  erea  ttcv-
TijxovTa.

flaX^y  Avwo-^y  tov  ti^Xov.
2e3^5v,  tov  i^ca  tou  *H-
tpaicrrov.  'Er  Ai-yvirTov  iXctv-
v€iv  CTpaTov  fxeyav  ^a^a^d-
pt^Qv  ^aa-iXta  *Apa^iuv  t€
Ka*  *A<r<Tvptuv  ....  *Ev3rat'Ta
aviMfxevovi,  toiV*  ivirriOKn
airoTa-i  iitiXv^ivTaq  vvxtoj
^u?  dpovpotUv^f  Kara  fX€v  (pa-
y€€iv  Toi/5  (paperpeuvaq  av-
T€uv,  xara  8e  Ta  To^a,  -jr/jo?
0€  TftJv  ao^tOtfv  Ta  oyava,
«OTe  T^  Ccrrepairj  (^vyovruv
erff)€uy  yvfjivuy  ovXuv  -jreo-eeiv
woXAoy^.    Airo  toU  irpuTov  ^a'


call  the  pyramids  the  work  of  the
shepherd  Philitis,  who  grazed  his
flocks,  at  this  time,  in  that  coun-
try.


Mycerinus,  the  son  of  Cheops.
He  also  left  a  pyramid  much  less
than  that  of  his  father.

Asychis.

Anysis,  who  was  blind.  In  his
reign  the  Ethiopians  invaded  Egypt
with  a  mighty  army  under  Sabacos
their  king.

Sabacos,  the  Ethiopian,  reigned
50  years.

Anysis  the  blind,  again.

Sethos,  the  priest  of  Hephaestus.
In  his  reign  Sanacharibus,  the  king  of
the  Arabians  and  Assyrians,  marched

against  Egypt  with  a  vast  army

And  when  Sethos  and  his  attendants
arrived  at  Pelusium,  during  the  night
a  multitude  of  rats  attacked  their  ene-
mies, and  gnawed  the  bowstrings  from
off  their  bows,  and  the  thongs  of  their
spears;  so  that  on  the  morrow,  as
they  fled  unarmed,  great  numbers  of
them  were  slain.  From  the  first
king  to  Sethos  the  priest  of  He-
phaestus, are  341  generations  of  men.


ii


FROM  HERODOTUS.


157


a-iXfo^f  if  ToiJ  'H^a/tTTOt;  tov
Ipea  toUtov  tov  reXevraTov
^ao'tXevvavTUf  fAirjv  re  xai
T€<ro"apaxovTa  xa«  rptrjMO-ia^
ay^puTtuv  yfveaq  yevofxeva^ .  • .
OvTCt)  iv  lAvpiotai  re  xai  j^*-
Aioio"/,  xai  wpo^,  rptrjy(,0(riOKrl
re  xoti  Tf crcre^axovTa  *  eXeyov
rJcov  aviSpaitoeioea  ovbeva  ye-
vea^ai.  Ev  to/wv  toSt^  rS
p^'vy  rer paM^  eXeyov  ii  vj^eccy
TOV  TjXiov  avareTAai'  ev^a  re
yvy  ycarabveraif  iv^evrev  tl^
iiravreTXact'  xai  iv^fev  vvv  ava-
reXXei  ik^favra  di$  xaTa-
hvyat,

AuwSfxa  ^oKTiXeT^  el^  8v«-
Scxa  fJi-epv}  ^i-j^pviiAevyj;  rv}^  Ai-
ytjirrov,

'^afA.fA.'^ri'Xfiq  *'?  '^^^  SwScxa
i^aa-iXtvcre  Alyvnrov  reaaepa
xai  "jrevTijxovTa  erea,*  ruv  roc
€vo^  SeovTa  T^t^xovTa,  A^wtov,
T^f  'Zvpirji  fAeydXfjv  itoXiv  ispoa-
Mar^fAevof  cwoAio'^xee*  if  to  ef-
eTXe,   t

"^afjt.fAfirly.ov  Be  Nfx«^  ntal^
iytyerOj  x«*  i^acriXeva-e  At-
yihnrov  i'lOiaihiyca  erea'  0^  r^
S<«pv%t  i'ney^eipv^a-e  nparoq  t5j
€5  Tijv  *Epv^pr}V  ^dXaacrav
(jiepova-i^.     Kai  ^rjpoia-i  ve^  0


And  in  all  these  11,340*  years,  they
say  no  God  has  made  his  appearance
in  the  human  form.  And  during  this
time  they  affirm  that  the  Sun  has
twice  risen  in  parts  different  from
what  is  his  customary  place,  that  is
to  say,  has  twice  risen  where  he  now
sets,  and  has  also  twice  set  where  he


now  rises.


Twelve  kings  reigned  over  Egypt,
divided  into  twelve  parts.

Psammetichus,  one  of  the  twelve,
reigned  54  years.  And  in  the  29th
year  of  his  reign  he  beleagued  Azo-
tus  (Ashdod  ?)  a  large  city  of  Syria,
and  took  it  by  siege.


Necos,  the  son  of  Psammetichus,
reigned  1 1  years.  He  was  the  first  who
undertook  to  cut  the  canal  through  to
the  Red  Sea.  He  also  marched  against
the  Syrians  and  overcame  them  in  an
engagement  at  Magdolus  (Migdol?)


*  Herodotus,  in  the  intermediate  passage,  makes  this  calculation  from  the
341  generations,  allowing  three  generations  to  a  century.


1^8


lif


OF  THE  KINGS  OF  EGYPT,


Nota)s-,  <rz^M<i^v  h  M«y-     And  after  the  battle  he  took  Kadytis,*
Ux<f>   iytxyjo-t'   f/.€Ta   Se  T^y     a  large  city  of  Syria.


\       V  V


(repdnovTa  erea,

"^O^m^itOi        t       'A[Jtd<TlC^


Psammis,  the  son  of  Neco,  6  years.
Apries,   the  son   of  Psammis,   25
years.

Amasis,  44  years.

Psammenitus,  the  son  of  Amasis,
6  months.


M


CANON  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  DYNASTY

OF  MANETHO:

FROM  THEOPHILUS.


a.    Afiaat^  criy

xe  Koc]

ycK

^.

^.  X^PpSv

•y-

y.  'Afjf.€vu<pii  . .

X.

?.

h',   ^AfA.i<T(rfi

xa.

/
9  .

€*.    M^(j^^^

i/S'.

^'.

Sr'.   Mti^pafAiMv

^wrt;

*
X.

1  .

^»    T9v^fAuaT^(;

^\

1?'.

l(.     AafMp€VO(fH(

X'.

t
1.

^'.  ^Clpoi

Xe'.

€'.

1.  Amasi


SIS


Years.
25


Months.
4.


2.  Chebron        ..       15

3.  Amenophis    . .       20  . ,  7,

4.  Amesse         ..      21  _  j^

5.  Mephres        ..       12  ..  9,

6.  Methrammuthosis  20  . .  10.


7.  Tuthmoses  . .         9

8.  Damphenophis       30

9.  Orus     ..      ..       S5


8.

10.

5.


•  This  may  po^ibly  refer  to  Jerusalem,  of  which  the  modem,  and  I  beUeve
the  Arabic  name,  is  El  Kods,  from  Kadesb,  Holy.


ANP  THE  EGYPTIAN  ERA.


159


»'.   TovTuy  he  ^fvyuTfjp    i,    y'.

idt,  *A^up)q*      . .      ij3'.    y,

t^,   X€vx//Jij;  ,  .       X'.    a.

ly  .   2e^«5  MiafAfAoi)      5-'.

iS'.   *ApfJUiToq        .  .        S'.    j9'.

ie'.   2e^«f  , ,      a'.

»$-'•   *Ay.€va><p)q     , .       !&'.     5-'.
i^.   2e^w5  J  xai  *PafX€<Ta"^»


Months.
3.
3.
1.


Years.

10.  Their  daughter    10

11.  Athoris       ..        12     ,

12.  Chencheres  30

13.  Sethos  Miammu    6

14.  Armaeus         ,,      4

15.  Sethos  . ,      1

16.  Amenophis    . .    19

1 7.  Sethus  and  Rhamesses.

p.  246.


2,


6.


OF  THE  EARLY  KINGS  OF  EGYPT  AND  THE

EGYPTIAN  ERA.


FROM  JOSEPHUS.


IIANTES  ot  Tuv  Alyimriuv
^atriXuqaito  M<va/bu  tov  Mf/*-

'KoWoTq  cf/.TcpocrKfey  iyevero  toZ
Ttdinrov  vifAuu  'A^pdfMv  jU€-
Xpt  ^oXofAuvoq  itXeiivoev  iruv
rpiaxoa-iuv  xa)  p^fX/wv  (xcra^
heXfihj^QTatVf  ^apauveq  cxXij-
^i^a-av.


All  the  kings  of  the  Egyptians,  from
Minaeus,  the  founder  of  Memphis,
who  lived  many  years  before  Abra-
ham our  ancestor,  to  Solomon,  ex-
tending through  an  interval  of  more
than  1300  years,  bore  the  title  of
Pharaohs.— /o5.  Ant.  lib.  VII.  c.  6.


f


FROM  MALALA.


AinrnTinN  8^  i^aa-^Xevcre  The  first  king  of  the  Egyptians  was

itpZroq  ^aa-iKil;   rrj^  ^vX^q  Pharao,  of  the  tribe  of  Ham,  the  son

ToS  Xa/A,  vlov  N«€,  ^a,pawf  0  of  Noe :  he  is  called  also  Naracho.—

xai  Na/jax^  y-aXovf/uenq,  /.  Malala,  lib.  III.


*  ^hx^P^i  AI.


t  ©o7(r<7»f  xa)  '^fitfiharn  Ur^  t,  Al.


160


OF  THE  EARLY  KINGS  OF  EGYPT


FROM  SUIDAS.


H*AI2T02)  0  ^(oif  xa<  'jtvp.
*Ep[A,Qv  ^aaikivduytaq  tl^  aX-

TOf    irapaXafA.^dvft    ttjv    jSa-

Bai    tTti   T€<rarapa  f/irivaq   ^.

yifAtpaq   yj .    ovvi    fibetaav   yap

Tore  AlyvitTtoi  iviavrov^  fjt.iT-

prjaai  a\Au  rrjv    ircpiobov  xiyj

yj/xepa^f  iviavrov  eXc^ov.


Heph/Estus,  a  God :  also  Fire.  After
the  death  of  Hermes,  king  of  Egypt,
Hephaestus  obtained  possession  of  the
empire  1680  days,  which  is  4  years,
7  months,  and  8  days;  for  the
Egyptians  in  those  times  were  not  in
the  habit  of  measuring  time  by  the
year,  but  called  the  period  of  the  day
a  year. — Suidas  v  Hephcsstus,


FROM  DIOGENES  LAERTIUS.


AirrnTIOI  [Ah  yh.p  Ne/Xow
y€V€a-9aci  ffccrSa  "H^aio-rov'  ov
apzai    (piKocro^ta^i     yiq    tol^
irpoea-Turai,   Upiaq  (hai  xa*
irpo<p7jTaq.    'Alto  Se  rovrov  el^
'AXefavSpov     rov     Mawhova
eruv  €u>ai  fAvpiocBaq  T€<r<rapaq
not  '  l^x.ra.Y.icryiKia,   OKraycQ<ria
€Tfl  i^vjxoyraTpia,  iy  oiq  ^Xwy
€xXcn//ei^  y€V€(T6ai  rpianoaia^
f^8o/*»jx6VTaT^€r.f,  (reXrjvr}^  he
omruMo-laq  rptaxoyruhvo.


The  Egyptians  say  that  Hephaestus
was  the  son  of  Nilus,  and  that  he  in-
vented philosophy,  of  which  the  fol-
lowers were  called  Priests  and  Pro-
phets. From  him  to  the  time  of
Alexander  the  Macedonian  elapsed
48863  years,  in  which  occurred  373
solar  eclipses  and  832  lunar  eclipses.
— Diog,  Laert,  Procem.  p.  2.


AND  THE  EGYPTIAN  ERA.


161


FROM  DICiEARCHUS.


AIKAIAPXOS  le  iv  a  imt^
toif  Oaripihoq  xai  larihoq  Clpou
/SactXecc  (fnja-i  yeyovevai  Se-
<ra)(TTpiv*  *  u^rre  yivec'^ai  octio
[xey  T^^  2e<ru<rTpiho^  ^UTiketaq
f^ixp^  Tov  NeiAoveTfj  ^^(f) ,  airo
T^^  Ne/Xoy  ^aa-ikeiaq  i^^xpt
T?7^  a  *0>^vuiridhoi  erti  /^^r  »+
&i  eivai  Tos  Travra  6[mv  ctij
/^T^Xr .  Ka}  vofAovq  he  Xeyei
^licaiapxoq  avrov  re^feUevai,
yiflheva  ivcXeheiv  tt/V  nsarpua.v
T€%n;v*  rovro  yap  aero  ap-
Xijv  etvai  trXeove^ia^,  Kai
irpuToy  he  cyp^jxeva*  ticitov^
eici^aiveiv  av^pamov,  "AWoi
he  ravra  eiq  Clpov  avatpe-
pov<ri.


DiCiEARCHus,  in  his  first  book,  says,
that  after  Orus,  the  son  of  Osiris  and
Isis,  reigned  Sesostris :  and  that  from
the  reign  of  Sesostris  to  that  of  Nilus
elapsed  a  period  of  2500  years  ;f  and
from  the  reign  of  Nilus  to  the  first
Olympiad  436  years  ;  J  so  that  alto-
gether the  number  of  years  amounted
to  2936.  Dicaearchus,  moreover,
says,  that  he  established  laws  that  no
one  should  leave  the  profession  of
his  fathers  :  for  he  believed  that  such
a  proceeding  would  be  the  intro-
duction of  avarice.  He  was  the  first
who  discovered  the  art  of  riding  upon
horseback.  Others,  however,  at-
tribute these  things  to  Orus. — SchoL
in  Apoll,  Rhod,  Arg,  Lib.  IV.  v.  272.


li:


\  \i


FROM  ARTAPANUS.


APTAnAN02  he  <pr)<Tty  ev  ttj
irtpt  lovhaiuy,  A^paacfA  re-
KevT'i^<ravTo^  xat  tou  viov  av-
Tow  Mefxypaa-Oeyudf  OfAoiai;  he
xai  ToC  ^atriKeuq  ray  Alyva-


Artapanus,  in  his  work  concerning
the  Jews,  says,  that  after  the  death  of
Abraham  and  his  son,  as  well  as
Mempsasthenoth,  the  king  of  the
Egyptians,  his  son  Palmanothes  as-


*   ^ea^Y^ojffif  Sc.

t  Scaliger  says,  from  the  reign  of  Sesonchosis,  or  Sesostris,  to  the  Olympiads,
X  ufiT  446.  Sc.  §  Inrro)*  Larch,

was  2500.


I


162


OF  THE  EARLY   KINGS  OF  EGYPT,


TiW,    T^v    8i;vacrT€*av    itapa-
Xatfiv  Toy  vlov  avrov  flaX-
fxayuQrjv,  tovtov  8e  Toiif  *Iou-
daicif   (paiiXu^  TtpotTcpepea-dai,
Kat  TtpSrov  fjiXv  t^v  Kccrcrav
olnohoy-vjcrai,  to,  tc  ^tt   auT^
?e^^v  •Ko.Oi^pva-ao'Oaif  flra  rov
it/    'HXiOUTToXft     vaov    xara-
o'xefao'ai.  Towtov  §€  y€v>^<rai
Bvyarepa.  Me^ptv,  ijv  X€i/€(pp^
rm   ytaTeyyvJjo'aiy    tuv  viskp
Mefjufiiv    Toirwv    ^aaikiv'ivrt.
ntaXKov^  yap  Tore  t^^  Al-yuTr-
Toy    jSacTiXctfciv.      Tai^'Tujv   Se
crtipav    t-ndpYfivcrav    viro^a-
X€<r9ai     Tivo^    Tuv    ^lov^aiuv
irathfoVf  TQVTO  Zt  'M^v<roy  oyo-
lA.ao'at*    Itth  5e   twv  'EXX-ijvwy
amcv    avhpuBtvTct    Mw<Ta7ov
irpo(rayop€v6yjvai'  y€ViaBai  Se

TOV     MwlVoV    TOUTOV     *Op(p€Ui

SiSao'xaXov.


sumed  the  crown,  and  he  carried  him-
self with  great  severity  towards  the
Jews.     And  he  compelled  them  first
to  build  Kessa  and  to  construct  the
temple  that  is  therein,  and  also  the
temple    in    Heliopolis.     He    had   a
daughter  whose  name  was   Merris,
who  was  married  to  a  king  named
Chenephres,*  then  reigning  in  Mem-
phis;   for  there   were   at   that  time
several  kings  in  Egypt,  f   And  as  she
was  barren,  she  brought  up  a  child  of
the  Jews,  and  named  it  Moyses  :  but
when  he  arrived  at  manhood  he  was
called,  among  the  Greeks,  Musaeus.
And  this   is  the  Moyses   who  they
say  was  the  instructor  of  Orpheus.


FROM  PLATO.

TH2  §€  iv^d^e  ^laMo-fArj-  The  transactions  of  this  our  city  of

o-corc  wop*  rifMTv  iv  TOi\  Upoi^  Sais   are    recorded    in    our    sacred

ypdiAfAaa-ivUraxiax^XlouViruv  writings   during    a    period   of  8000

upt^lAWi  ytypaitTou.  years. — Timceus,  p.  23.

•  By  Eusebius,  Clemens,  the  Paschal  Chronicle,  and  Cedrenus,  the  name  is
variously  written  Chenophres,  Nechephres,  and  Cheremon.

t  Eusebius,  also,  in  the  Armenian  Chronicle,  expresses  his  opinion,  that
many  of  the  dynasties  were  contemporary,  and  not  successive.


rlJr        ^-j-"-!     ^1'    ^Aftt.


AND  THE   EGYPTIAN   ERA.


FROM  POMPONIUS  MELA.


163


Ipsi  vetustissimi  (ut  praedi-
cant)  hominum,  trecentos  et
triginta  reges  ante  Amasin,  et
supra  tredecim  millium  an-
norum  aetates,  certis  annali-
bus  referunt:  mandatumque
literis  servant,  dum  ^gyptii
sunt,  quater  cursus  suos  ver-
tisse  sidera,  ac  solem  bis  jam
occidisse,  unde  nunc  oritur.


The  Egyptians,  according  to
their  own  accounts,  are  the  most
ancient  of  men,  and  they  reckon
in  their  series  of  annals  330
kings  who  reigned  above  13,000
years ;  and  they  preserve,  in
written  records,  the  memory  of
the  event,  that,  since  the  com-
mencement of  the  Egyptian  race,
the  stars  have  completed  four
revolutions,  and  the  sun  has
twice  set  where  he  now  rises.


i


i  I


p    h


FROM  HERODOTUS.


AAA  A  tk;  a,p%ouii^  i<Tzi  ^€05
AlyujrT/otcTi  'H/JaxXcij?*  u^  Se
auToJ  \kyw(Ti^  trtd  iarri  eic-
Taxi(r%tX*a  xai  fA.rjpia  iq  A.ua-
Civ  jSacTiXevtravTa,  iizei  re  ex
T«y  oxTw  ^eSv  ol  SywBtxa
^€o)   iytyofrOf  tuv  'H^axXecc


There  is  a  very  ancient  God  among
the  Egyptians  who  is  called  Heracles  :
and  they  assert,  that  from  his  reign  to
that  of  Amasis,  17,000  years  have
elapsed :  they  reckoned  Heracles
among  the  Gods  when  the  number
was  augmented  from  8  to  12. — Lib.
II.  c.  43.


FROM  DIODORUS  SICULUS.


EINAI  Be  €T7j  ^ao-Jv  aTTo  *0(7t-
fi8i^  xai"lo-i8o5  €&>^  T^5   AXf-


They  say  that  from  Osiris  and  Isis
to  the  kingdom  of  Alexander,  who
founded   the   city  of  Alexandria  in

Y


■t


1


164


OF  THE  EARLY  KINGS  OF  EGYPT.


To^  ev  Aiytirroj  tV  eV^yvy/xov  Egypt,  there  elapsed  a  period  of  more

avTov  TcoXiv,  ntXeiu  xuv  (xv-  than  10,000  years;  or  as  some  write,

piuv.  uq  8*  cvioi  ypdcjHiva-if^pa-  of  little  less  than  23,000. — Diod.  Sic.

XV  XeUovra  rSu  ticfjivpiuv  Ma)  lib.  I.  p.  14.


FROM  DIODORUS  SICULUS.


OI  he  IfpeTq  Tuv  Alyvnricov
rov  %povov  ano  t^^  'HXiov  jSa-
ariKftaq  <rvKAoyi^ofx€vot,  [Ai-
Xpi  T^^  'AXe^dvhpov  hia^d-
orewj  e'lq  t^v  *A(r/av,  <pa(rh
virdpx€iv  irSif  fxaXia-rd  tcuq
hiiTfAvpiuv  y.a)  Tpiax^Xluv.  Mu-
B<ikoy(!v<Ti  Se  xa*  t5v  BeZv  toi/^
jucv  a/3%aiOTaTOUs  ^a(Tiktv(ra.t
TtXeto}  TUV  ;^iX/a«/  xa*  Siaxo-
<nft)v  ^tSv,  Tol^  Se  [xerayeve-
trrepovq  om  iXdrTu  tuv  rpia-
Kocrtcov.  'AirtWoy  8'  ovto?  toS
trXvjBovq  TUV  iruv,  iirtxfipovo'i
Tiv€q  Xeydv  OTi  rl  itaXaiov
oviru  Tyjq  itep)  rov  "Hkiov  xxmj-
<r€uq  €Tt€yvu<TfA.€vriqf  <rvv€^aiv€
xfltTa  TTjv  T^j  a-eKrjvYjq  icfpiohav
ay€(r6ai  rov  iviavrov.


But  the  priests  of  Egypt,  summing
up  the  time  from  the  reign  of  the
Sun  to  the  descent  of  Alexander  upon
Asia,  calculate  it  to  be  about  23,000
years.  They  pretend,  also,  in  their
fabulous  legends,  that  the  most  an-
cient of  the  Gods  reigned  more  than
1200  years;  and  those  that  came  im-
mediately after  them  in  succession  not
less  than  300,  Some  of  them  attempt
to  abate  the  incredibility  of  such  a
multitude  of  years,  by  asserting,  that
in  former  times,  when  the  revolution
of  the  sun  was  not  accurately  ascer-
tained, the  year  consisted  of  one  re-
volution of  the  moon. — Lib.  I.  p.  15.


FROM  JOSEPHUS.


^AfAcvucpiv     yap    ^aviKed  He  makes  Amenophis  king  when

ntpoiT^elq,  ^pevhfi;  ovofxcz,  xa*  this  event  (the  second  invasion)  oc-

ha  rovTo  xpovov  avrov  t^;  jSa-  curred,  giving  him  a  false  name  ;  and

aiXeiAi  opia-at  fArj  roXixriiraqt  upon  this  account  he  presumes  not


ii


CHALDiEAN  AND  EGYPTIAN  DYNASTIES.


165


%at  toi  y€  ill)  TUV  aXXuv  jSa-

ClXiUV  UKpl^U-q  TO.  €Tiy  'KpO<X''
T«S^«K,      ToStO     TipOtTOtTrtet    Ti-

vaq  ixv^oXoyiet^f  irciXa^ofA-evoq
(T^fSov  OTi  'nevTav.QVioiq  €Tf<ri
xal  ScxaoxTW  irpoTfpov  /<rro-
flijxe  y€V€a-^ai  Trjv  tuv  Iloi-
fxivuv  e^o^Qv  €U  'Ifpoa'oXvfAa,
Tt^/xfO-i^    yap    rjv    ^acriXtvq


ore  i^T^eaav.


to  define  the  length  of  his  reign;
though  in  mentioning  all  the  other
kings,  he  accurately  gives  the  time  of
each.  Here,  however,  he  invents  some
fabulous  relation,  not  remembering
that  he  had  already  stated,  that  the
exodus  of  the  shepherds  to  Jerusa-
lem took  place  518  years  before ;  for
Tethmosis  was  king  when  they  went
out. — Jos,  Contr.  Ap.  I,  26.


!'.    !


I-      ^


CHALDiEAN  AND  EGYPTIAN
DYNASTIES  :*

FROM   BAR-HEBR^US.


EGYPTIAN  KINGS.

1.  Phanuphis    68  years.

2.  Auphiphanus      . .    . .  46

3.  Atanuphus  Kusia  or
the  Cusaean

4.  Pharoun  Brsnusf     ..  35

5.  Pharoun  Karimun    . .  4

6.  Pharoun  Aphintus    . .  32

7.  Pharoun  Aurunkus  ^S


CHALDiEAN  KINGS.

1 .  Nmrud         . .         years.

2.  Qmbirus      . .   %5

3.  Smirus   . .    . .    72

4.  Bsarunus  Phrthia
or  the  Parthian

5.  Arphazd       ..    18

conquered  by
Bilus  the  As-
syrian.


*  I  have  given  these  dynasties  according  to  the  Syriac  orthography,  and
placed  them  beside  each  other,  as  they  are  synchonized  in  the  chronicle.

f  The  Syriac  says  this  king  succeeded  Auphiphanus,  for  which  the  Trans-
lator substitutes  Atanuphus.


-i


!l!J


•    $


m


166


CHALDvEAN  AND  EGYPTIAN  DYNASTIES.


ASSYRIAN  KINGS.


1.

I5ilus

..    bSJ

years.  8.  rharoun  Smuniis

20  years.

Ninus     . .

..    52

9.   Pharoun  Armnis

10.  Pharndus  the  Theban

11.  Pharoun  Phanus

27
43

3.

Smirm    . .

..    46

12.  Pharoun  Aisqus

13.  Pharoun  Susunus

21

44

4.

Zmarus

. .    38

14.   Pharoun  Trqus   . .    . .

44

5.

Aris

..    30

1 .  Satis  the  Shepherd   . .

2.  *     ♦

3.  *     *

19

4.  Aphphus  the  Shepherd  14

Mphrus 12

Tumuthus     18

Amnphathis  *      ....   43
Pharoun  Phsunu.-f-


•  Amnphathis,  in  the  narrative,  is  also  called  Pharoun.  The  chronicle  says
that  his  daughter  Trmuthisa,  called  Daniris  by  the  Hebrews,  the  wife  of  Knaphra,
was  the  person  who  saved  Moses.

f  Drowned  in  the  Red  Sea.


P


EGYPTIAN  FRAGMENTS:


FROM


THE  OBELISKS;


AND  FROM


MANETHO,   CH^REMON,   LYSIMACHUS,


AND  OTHER  WRITERS.


i


*  f


11


if    ^


EGYPTIAN  FRAGMENTS.


THE  OBELISK  OF  HELIOPOLIS


FROM  AMMIANUS  MARCELLINUS.


JT1X02  nPnT02  TAAE.
"HAIO^    iS«(nA€?  '?cc{A.e<rrri.
£i€^upr}u.al    a-oi    dva     iiaa'av
u-MviA.€Vfiv  ixira  %<x.pa^  jSatri-

AttoXX&jv,  KpaTf^o^  ^iXaXij-
6v}q  vlh^  "HpuvQ^f  Seoyevero^t

"HKioq  irpoevcpiveyf  aXyiiiMq
Ape&>?  jSao-jXel?  'Pa/t^eo-TTj^,
*Q  iracra  trroTcraxra*  ^  "y^
/lAcra  aAK^j  xat  Baparav^,  Ba-
o-tXci/?  *?aiA€<mfi;  'HKiov  ntai^

2TIX02  AETTEP02.
'AwoXXwv   Y-paxipoit  9  ^<^'
T«<    €ir*    dXriQeia^    BfOTTOTij^

ao'a^}  x6XT>jfX€yo^,  dyXao-
%oi-q<rai  *HX/ou  iroXiv,  xai  xt/-
ccc^    T^v    Xojir^v     o/xoi;j^€V>jv.


SOUTH  SIDE.

The  interpretation  begins  upon  the
southern  side.

VERSE  THE  FIRST.
The  Sun  to  King  Rhamestes.  I  have
bestowed  upon  you  to  rule  graciously
over  all  the  world.  He  whom  the
Sun  loves  is  Horus  the  Brave,  the
Lover  of  truth,  the  Son  of  Heron,
born  of  God,  the  restorer  of  the  world :
He  whom  the  Sun  has  chosen,  is
the  King  Rhamestes,  valiant  in  battle,
To  whom  all  the  earth  is  subject  by
his  might  and  bravery.  Rhamestes
the  King,  the  immortal  offspring  of
the  Sun.

VERSE  THE  SECOND.
It  is  Horus  the  brave,  who  is  in
truth  appointed  the  Lord  of  the  Dia-
derp;  Who  renders  Egypt  glorious,
and  possesses  it ;  Who  sheds  a  splen-
dour over  Heliopolis,  And  regene-
rates the  rest  of  the  world,  And  ho-


»!       '


«i
.11


I:    it


170


THE  OBELISK  OF  HELIOPOLIS.


xai


;i7roXt»Ti_a^aa^T6t^cv*HX/ou     nours  the  Gods  that  dwell  in  Helio-
nQAei  Oeovi  dfi^pviAepoiit  *0y     polis:  Him  the  Sun  loves.
HXiO(  (/)(Xt'r.

TP1T02  2TIX02.  VERSE  THE  THIRD.

'AiroXXwv  xpaT€po(;y  *Hktov         Horus  the  brave,  the  offspring  of
itaT^f  TtafAcpeyyvjqf  ^Ov  "HKioq     the  Sun,  all-glorious ;  Whom  the  Sun
iipoeKpivtv  nut  "Apvjq  a^KiiAOi     has    chosen,    and    the  valiant   Ares
ilap-f^a-aro.     Ol   ra   dyaBa     has  endowed,  His  goodness  remains

for  ever.  Whom  Ammon  loves,  that
fills  with  good  the  temple  of  the
Phoenix.  To  him  the  Gods  have
granted  life:  Horus  the  brave,  the
o-avTo  'AttoXXwv  )ipar€po;  viq<;  son  of  Heron  Rhamestes,  the  King  of
"HpuvQ^j  Bac/XfK  oWovfAeuY}^  the  world.  He  has  protected  Egypt
*Faui<rrvi<;,  *0^  ic^vKa^v  A?-     and  subdued  her  neighbours :    Him

the  Sun  loves.  The  Gods  have  granted
him  great  length  of  life.  He  is  Rha-
mestes, the  Lord  of  the  world,  the
immortal.


AiA[/.uv  ayotTToiy  ti'Mipaxjaq  tov
V€uv  T6tJ  ^oiV(x0^  ayaiBwv,
Q  01  $€01  ^6%  XP^^'^^  i^up"^-


yimrovf  rovq*  aXXoedve?^  vi-
'Kokvv  y^povQi/  ^»^^  ihup-qa-avTo


'  "AAAOS  2TIX02  AETTEP02.
HXio^  Oeoq  {/.eym,  Seo-Tro-
T1J5  ovpfxvovy  AftuprjiAat  (TOi  ^lov
dvpocT'Aopov.  AiroXXwv  xpa-
T€po(;)  Ki^pw^  8ia8ij/*aT05,  ave/-
naa-To^f     Civ  av^pidvrixq  due-


ANOTHER  SIDE.

VERSE  THE  SECOND.
I,  the  Sun,  the  great  God,  the  sove-
reign of  heaven.  Have  bestowed  upon
you  life  without  satiety.  Horus  the
brave.  Lord  of  the  diadem,  incom-
parable. The  sovereign  of  Egypt,  that
OrjKfy  €'v  T^Sf  T^  ^cL<Ti,\tlq.  li<T-  has  placcd  the  statues  of  (the  gods)
Wt^^  Alyi^Voy  Kai  ^Wcr^)?-  in  this  palace.  And  has  beautified
3-ev  'HX/ou  TTo'Xiv,  '0/*o/a;5  xai  Heliopolis,  In  like  manner  as  he  has
airxlv  "HX/ov,  8f<r7roT>jv  olpa-  honoured  the  Sun  himself,  the  sove-
voS,  2x;v€T6X€t;T7jo-ev  %py<,y  rcigu  of  heaven.  The  offspring  of
dya.^lv  'HX/ou  ^a?^,  ^ao-.-  the  Sun,  the  King  immortal,  Has  per-
X(U  aluyo^iof,  formed  a  goodly  work.


Gron. — ToS  aXXeu  iBvovg  Vulg.


OF  THE  SYRIADIC  COLUMNS.


171


Tprros  mxo2.

pavoVf  *Pay.€(TT7i  ^acrtXfi  6€-
^uprjuai  To  Kparo^  xai  t^v
xara  irdyruv  izova-lap,  Ov
'AttoXXwv,  (f)i\aX'^\[i^q,  S€<r-
'aoTv}q  y^vuvy  xa*  Hj^atcrroj
0  Twv  S'eSy  'iraTrjp,  'Kpoex.ptvev
T^^  Tov'  Ap€a.  Bxa-iXtvq  tray-
Xaprjq,  *HX<oy  wa?!;,  xa*  V'ao
*HX/ou  (ptXovfAevo^,

A4>HAmTH2  nPnT02  2Tlx02.

'O  dip)*    *HX/oU    TtOAfCCq    [A€-

yaq  Kfeoq,  ivovpdviO(;y  AiroX-
Xftjy  ycparepo^  "Hpuvoq  vlo^^  ov
"tiXioq  v)yuyyj(T€v*  ov  ol  ^eol
iTil/.'/}<raVf  0  'ndo'rjq  'y^^  ^a-
aiXeiJuVf  ov  HXiO^  ttpoi'^piviv,
0  ahufJLoq  Sia  tov  A/}6a  jSa-
ciXeiAf.  Ov  *A(A.[/.uv  (piXu,
Kai  0  iraiJulHyyij^  cvyKpivaq
auuviov  pota-iXea,


VERSE  THE  THIRD.
I,  the  Sun,  the  God  and  Lord  of
Heaven,  have  bestowed  strength  and
power  over  all  things,  on  King  Rha-
mestes :  he,  whom  Horus,  the  lover  of
truth,  the  Lord  of  the  seasons,  and
Hephaestus,  the  father  of  the  Gods,
have  chosen  on  account  of  his  valour,
is  the  all-gracious  King,  the  offspring
and  beloved  of  the  Sun.

TOWARDS  THE  EAST,  VERSE  THE
FIRST.

The  great  God  from  Heliopolis,

celestial,  Horus  the  brave,  the  son  of

Heron,  whom  the  Sun   begot,   and

whom  the  gods  have  honoured,  he  is

the  ruler  of  all  the  earth  ;  he  whom

the   Sun   hath   chosen   is  the   king,

valiant  in  battle.    Him  Ammon  loves.

And  him  the  all-glittering  has  chosen

his  eternal  king.


OF  THE  SIRIADIC  COLUMNS :

FROM  JOSEPHUS.

OTTOI  vdvr€<;  dya^o)  (pvvrcq  All  these  (the  sons  of  Seth)  being

y/jy  T€  rrjv  avrrjv  da-taalaa-TOi  naturally  of  a  good  disposition,  lived

xaT5Jx>jcrav€iJ8ai/>iojojo-avT€5"|'  happily  in  the  land  without  aposta-

fAtilivoq  ayro?^,  a.'xjpi  y.ai  re-  tising,  and  free  from  any  evils  what-

XewT^^,  8y(7xoXou  •npoa-it^a-ov  soever :  and  they  studiously  turned

♦  Gron — y)p(uyna-n>  Vulg. — Marshall  has  lyswijo-w.
f  x«T0/X)7J-«vT«p  fOSw/xovTjaav  Vulg.


h  III

i


lij


I


'S


">i


I  r


V


172'


OF  THE  SIRIADIC  COLUMNS.


TO?"  co^lav  re  rrjv  ir€pl  tec
ovpavia  Koi  t^iv  rovray  8<a-
xo(rixria-iv  ittevoi^a'ay,  'Tire/)  It
rov  fMj  hiatpvyeiv*  tov^  av-
^puvovq  ra  cvpT/jfAfvaf  [xv}  8e
vph  (l^  yvuartv  cX^elV  (p^afnj-
vat*  'jrpo€ipvjy(,oTOi  a(pavK7fMV
*AtdfAOv  tuv  tkuv  €(T€<r^atf
TQV  fjLev  xar*  <Vp^V  ''tvpaqy  tov
€T€pQv  Sc  xara  ^lav  yea)  ttXij-
^r^vj"  vharcq'  a-T'^Xaq  tvo  mi-
v)<Tai/.(voij  Tiji/  jUfv  ^x  ttX/vS'ou,
Tijv  8e  €T€pav  €x  Xi^fwVj  aiMpO"
Tepaiq    av€ypa\pav    ra    €y^>j-

vu<ra  Tiapoiaxri  (ao^uv  Tcuq
ai/^p'iitoi^  TO,  tyycy pocfxiAiva^
SijXotflra  xai  TrXivS'/njj/  S'  ^ir*
avTuv  avuTe^rjvai,    Mivei  S*

^ipid^a,"^


their  attention  to  the  knowledge  of
the  heavenly  bodies  and  their  con-
figurations. And  lest  their  science
should  at  any  time  be  lost  among
men,  and  what  they  had  previously
acquired  should  perish  (inasmuch
as  Adam  had  acquainted  them  that
a  universal  aphanism,  or  destruc-
tion of  all  things,  would  take  place
alternately  by  the  force  of  fire  and  the
overwhelming  powers  of  water),  they
erected  two  columns,  the  one  of  brick
and  the  other  of  stone,  and  engraved
upon  each  of  them  their  discoveries ;
so  that  in  case  the  brick  pillar  should
be  dissolved  by  the  waters,  the  stone
one  might  survive  to  teach  men  the
things  engraved  upon  it,  and  at  the
same  time  inform  them  that  a  brick
one  had  formerly  been  also  erected
by  them.  It  remains  even  to  the  pre-
sent day  in  the  land  of  Siriad. — Jos,
Ant.  1.  c.  2.


•  ^uyu*  Al.  f  Samb. — irhri^ot  Al.

•  IvpiiZ*  Vulg.  Al.— 2/^<8a  Malala,  Glycas,  Cedr.   et    Vet.  Int.— ZjjV^iot
Eust.  Ant.^Voss.  proposes  Eirath.


MANETHO.


OF  THE  WRITINGS  OF  MANETHO.


nPOKEITAI    8e    "Ktnitw  xai
•jrefli  T1J5  tSv  Kiyvmiuv  ^vva-
oTita^    [Aiyipac    StaXajServ    ex
tSv  MaveOZ  rov  ^e.Scvvi/Tou,
0^  iiti  riToXcjwct/ou  TOU  ^iXa-
ZfXcpov  apxt€p€Vi  ruv  iv  Ai-
ySicrcp  6i8«Xe/(»v   y(ipiei^ri(rc/.i
iy.  ruv  iv  r^  DijpiaSix^  yji  x€i-
fAcveov  CTijX&jy  Upj!  ^(Ti  Oia-
XexT^j  xa«  UpoypoupiMTi  ypdjA.'

fUKTl    X€%»paXTTjpWfA€Va>V    Vltl

0S5  TOiJ  vpurov  *EpiMv,  xai
ipfJLTiVevGtio'uv  [Aira  rov  y.ara-
yc\v<r[MV  €x  ryji  Upai^  StaXex-
Toy  €ii  ryjv  'EXXijv/Sa   tpuviiv
ypd(A[Mt(riv  Upoy\v(piY.oT^f  xa*
di[or€$€*ruv    iv    j3/j3Xoic   vvo
rw  *Aya6ohixifMVQi    viov   rov
hevrtpov  'Epi/.oVf  'acurpo^  Se  rov
Tar  tv  To?^  d^roiq  ruv  tepuv
Alyijitrov,    '7rpoo"c^c5y^o"6     rS
avr^  ^iXahiKcfxf  ^aariKu  Scu-
rtpcfi  IlToXf/Aa/^  cv  t^  ^i^K^


It  remains,  therefore,  to  make  certain
extracts  concerning  the  dynasties  of
the  Egyptians,  from  the  writings  of
Manetho   the  Sebennyte,   the  high-
priest  of  the  idolatrous  temples  of
Egypt  in  the  time  of  Ptolemaeus  Phi-
ladelphus.     These,  according  to  his
own  account,  he  copied  from  the  in-
scriptions which  were  engraved  in  the
sacred  dialect  and  hierographic  cha-
racters, upon  the  columns  set  up  in
the  Seriadic  land,  by  Thoth,  the  first
Hermes ;  and,  after  the  deluge,  trans-
lated from  the  sacred  dialect  into  the
Greek  tongue,  in  hieroglyphic  cha-
racters ;  and  committed  to  writing  in
books,    and    deposited  by  Agatho-
dsemon,  the  son  of  the  second  Her-
mes, the  father  of  Tat,  in  the  pene-
tralia of  the  temples  of  Egypt.     He
has  addressed  and  explained  them  to
Philadelphus,  the  second   king  that
bore  the  name  of  Ptolemaeus,  in  the


ri


f  li


11 "


■4'
J


169'


OF  THE  WRITINGS  OF  MANETHO.


EnirroAH  MANEon  tot  2E-

BENNTTOT   nP02    HTOAE-
MAION  TON  *JAAAEA<t'^N.

Baa-iAcT    /AeydXaj    OtoXc-

fAUKp     ^iXaSeX^y     a-eSaarS

Mave^u  apy^nptlq  xai  ypau-

[/.ardq  Tuv  xacT*  A'lyvitrov  U~

fZv  ahvxuVf  yivu  2€j9cyvt;T7j{

VTzapXcov     'HXiouiroX/T*j^,     rZ

leaTiOTTj  fA.ov  XlToXe/^a/^  %«/-

'Hixa^  dtT  Xoy/^eo-S'ai,  /xi-
ytrre  ^airtXiVf  T^ep)  Ttdvruv
uy  iocv  jSo^Xoj  Vjua^  i^€Td<rat
itpayfAUTuv*  iTttH^rjTovifri  <TOi
icept  ToJy  [/.eXXovTcov  rS  >tO(T/>c^
yiyv€a'^ai  xavw^  iaeXeva-di;
jMOi  'irapeKpay^(r€Tai  (701  a  e/xa-
^ov  lepa  ^i^Kioi  ypcKpivra  vito
rov  irpoiraTopo^  rpi<Tij(.€yi(Trov

*EpfMlV.     €ppu<TQ     fAOt     S/o-TTOTa

fMV  ^a<riK€v,


book  which  he  has  entitled  Sothis.
They  are  as  follows  :

THE  EPISTLE  OF  MANETHO,  THE
SEBENNYTE,  TO  PTOLEM^EUS  PHI-
LADELPHUS.

To  the  great  and  august  king  Ptole-

maeus   Philadelphus:    Manetho,    the

high  priest  and  scribe  of  the  sacred

adyta  in  Egypt,  being  by  birth  a  Se-

bennyte  and  a  citizen  of  Heliopolis,

to  his  sovereign  Ptolemaeus,  humbly

greeting :

It  is  right  for   us,   most  mighty
king,  to  pay  due  attention  to  all  things
which  it  is  your  pleasure  we  should
take  into  consideration.     In  answer
therefore  to  your  inquiries  concerning
the  things  which  shall  come  to  pass  in
the  world,  I  shall,  according  to  your
commands,    lay  before    you   what  I
have  gathered  from  the  sacred  books
written  by  Hermes  Trismegistus,  our
forefather.     Farewell,  my  prince  and
sovereign.  —  SynceL    Chron,   40. —
Euseh,  Chron,  6.


r


MANETHO.


OF  THE  SHEPHERD  KINGS.


1!


EFENETO    ^a,<riKtl<;     riy.7vy
TliAtxoi  *  ovofAd,  €it)  rorjTov  ovx.
old*  oito}^  0  Seoi  ovTeTrvtuo'ev,
yia)    vapaZo^oc^    ^k   tSv  vpo^
ayaroXryV  fAepuv^  av^pcoTt'A   to
•yew^  cwnjjuoi,  yiara^ap(r'^<rav-
Tf  J  iiii  rrjy  %«/)av  ia-Tpdrev
crav,f    xa)    ^$t8/&>?    a/xax>?T*
Tawnijv  xara  Y.pdroq  eiXov.  Kat
Tot?   ^ye/xoveycravT^tj   iv  avrr^
Xapooa-duevoi,  to  },omov  idq  t€
voXfiq  ufAwq  ivevpyja'av,  koi  ra
tepa  ruv   KfeZv  xareo-xai/zav.
mSla-i  §€  To?^  €Tti%uptoii  ix^po-
rard   w^    exp^avro,     Tovq
(Aev  a'^a^ovTC^,  Tuy  he  xai  ra
Tcxva  yux)  ywaTxa^  elq   ^ov-
Xe/av  ayovTif,   Tlcpa^  he   yux,)
^a/ri\(a  eva  i^  avroiu  cro/ij-
a-ouff  <^    oyouoe    ijv    ^dKariq."^
xa<  ot/TOf  iv  T^  MefMpiZt  xare-


We  had  formerly  a  king  whose  name
was  Timaus.     In  his  time  it  came  to
pass,   I    know   not  how,    that   God
was   displeased   with  us :  and  there
came  up  from  the  East  in  a  strange
manner  men  of  an  ignoble  race,  who
had  the  confidence   to    invade   our
country,  and   easily  subdued   it  by
their  power  without  a  battle.     And
when  they  had  our  rulers  in  their
hands,    they  burnt    our   cities,   and
demolished  the  temples  of  the  gods,
and  inflicted  every  kind  of  barbarity
upon  the  inhabitants,  slaying  some,
and  reducing  the  wives  and  children
of  others  to  a  state  of  slavery.     At
length  they  made  one  of  themselves
king,  whose  name  was  Salatis :    he
lived  at  Memphis,  and  rendered  both
the  upper  and  lower  regions  of  Egypt
tributary,  and  stationed  garrisons  in


m


•i:  I  HI


,'    tJ


•  ll/iam  Al.


\  iutarp&rwffOLv  Vulg.
X  ^ikrii   Vet.  Int.


Ill


170

yiv€TO,  Tijv  r€  avu  xal  Karu
X<a^av  hscarixoXoySvj  xal  <bpov-
pau  iv  roTi  iTVirrjhetOTdroi^
ytocraXeiiruv  Toisotq'  fAdcXitrra
0€  Koii  T^  ntpof  avaroX^v  vjo'-
(paXio-aTQ  fA-epi^y  '7ipoopufX€yo(;
^Aa-a-vpiuUf  totc*  /xer^ov  l<r-
XvoirruVf     eVo/xevojv   iiti^vfAiccu

tvpuv  Se  iv  vofxS)  tu  louTf,  J
iroKiy  iTrixaipQTdrvjVf  neifjLevrjv
f/.€u    irpoq    dyaToXTjy  rov   Bov-

^OKTTiTOV  TCOTa/XOV,  )i(zK0V[jJlfVjy

8'  aito  rivo(;  apxaciacq  ^fokoyia^
AvapiVy  §    TavTfjv    evcTixey  re,
xcii  roTq  Tc/^eo-iv  oxvpuTdTyjy
iitoivjo-ev    ivotxia-ai   avrrj   xa*
itXrj^Oi;  OTtXiTuv  €tf  €iko<ti   xai
rea-a-apaq     fjLVptahaq      avlpuv
vpoq    (pvXax-^v.    iv^dh  xara
^epetau  ripxero,  ra  fA.lv  (titq-
fAerpuv  xai   fjntr^otpapiav  ira-
p^xofAevoq,  r^  ht  xa*  e'loirXx-
<riaiq  II  irpot;  (f)o^ov  ruy  e^u^ey
€Tii[M\uq  yvfA.vd'C^ooy,

Ap^aq  8'  €v>€axa<8cxa  ct^j
Tov  ^lov  iTeXevTvjaray.  Mera
rovroy  8t  ^rtpoq  i^aaiKivcty
rea-a-apa  xaj  rerTapdycoyra
errjy  xaXoif^evof  Bvjdy,^  f^^'
cv  aKKoq  'Avaxvaq,  t^  xai
rpidKoyra  ervj  xai  fx^yaq  iirrd.


•  Hud.  Per. — ttoti  Vulg.

X  li^gOiTij  Sync.

II  Touj  iirXhacs  Vet.  Int.


MANETHO.

places  which  were  best  adapted  for
that  purpose.     But  he  directed  his
attention  principally  to  the  security
of  the  eastern  frontier;   for  he  re-
garded with  suspicion  the  increasing
power    of    the   Assyrians,    who    he
foresaw  would  one  day  undertake  an
invasion  of  the  kingdom.     And  ob-
serving in  the  Saite  nome,  upon  the
east  of  the  Bubastite  channel,  a  city
which  from  some  ancient  theological
reference   was   called   Avaris ;     and
finding  it  admirably  adapted  to  his
purpose,  he  rebuilt  it,   and  strongly
fortified  it  with  walls,  and  garrisoned
it  with  a  force  of  two  hundred  and
fifty  thousand  men  completely  armed.
To  this  city  Salatis  repaired  in  sum-
mer time,  to  collect  his  tribute,  and
pay  his   troops,  and  to  exercise  his
soldiers  in  order  to  strike  terror  into
foreigners.


And  Salatis  died  after  a  reign  of
nineteen  years :  after  him  reigned
another  king,  who  was  called  Beon,
forty-four  years :  and  he  was  suc-
ceeded by  Apachnas  who  reigned
thirty-six  years  and  seven  months  :
after  him  reigned  Apophis  sixty-one


t  Hud.  Per.  Lowth.  pro  i'^oSo*.
§  'Affapi,  Al.
If  B«/tt;»  Sync.


MANETHO.


171


€i[(tTa  It  xa)  Airft;<^*?  ev  xai
t^^xovTa,  yiai  *layiaq  *  wfjo-ij-
noyra  xai  lAyjya  eva,  en)  itatri
8t  x«*  "ka-ffiq  "j"  tyyicc  xai  t€v-

capd'Myra  xai  fM^yQt.q  8i/o.  Ka*

•t   I      ^    *c    >        »    ~    »      /
ovTot  yi^v  €C   €v  avroiq  eytyrj-

^vijav  iipuroi  a^p^ovre^,  iroXe-

fjiovyreq     a€i    xa*     ito^ovyTeq

lAoXXoy  Tijc  AlyvTCTov   i^apai

T^y  pl^av.      *Ex.a\tiTO  8e   to

(TviA-noM  avTuy  €\fyoi  *Txo"«^,J

rovTO  Se  €<rri  ^aciKfiq  -jrOi/Ae-

ye<.   TO  yap  *Tx  §  xaSf*  tepay

yXu(Tcray    ^uffiXea    arjixatveif

TO  8e  2«^  II    'KOifJt.'^y  i<TTi  xai

voi[ji€y€i  xaTa  t^v  xoiv^y  hid-

AcxTOV,  xai  ovru  (Tvyri^€[A€yov

yiy€Tai  'ty.<Tuq'   Tivtq   8*  Xe-

yovffiy  avTovq    Apa^aq  €iyai.

TovTovq  Se  Tot^  TtpoKaruyofJuxo'-

fxeyovq  f^aaiXeaq  tov^  tSv  icqi-

fxeyuy  ¥.a\w\tAyuy^  ¥.cu  toI^  e^

avray    yeyofxevov^f     y.paTy}(rai

ti^q  AlyvTtrov  (^o-iv)  en;  irpoq

roTq  TitycanocrUtq  evSexa.

McTa  ravTa  8e,  t&Iv  ex  t^$

Sc^at^oq  xai   ttjj    ocKKvjq  Al-

yvTiTov     ^a<ri}.€Ci)y     yeyiff^ai

(^(riv)     €iri     rovq     iroifAevaq

€7rava(rra(ny,  xat  ttoKffMy  av-

ToTlf  ^   av^pa'^vai   fAcyay  xa*

iroAi^^oyiov.   eiri  8e  ^aaiXiuq,


years,  and  lanias  fifty  years  and  one
month.  After  all  these  reigned  Assis
forty -nine  years  and  two  months.
These  six  were  the  first  rulers
amongst  them,  and  during  the  whole
period  of  their  dynasty,  they  made
war  upon  the  Egyptians  with  the
hope  of  exterminating  the  whole  race.
All  this  nation  was  styled  Hycsos,
that  is  the  Shepherd  Kings  ;  for  the
first  syllable,  Hyc,  in  the  sacred  dia-
lect, denotes  a  king,  and  Sos  signifies
a  shepherd,  but  this  only  according
to  the  vulgar  tongue ;  and  of  these
is  compounded  the  term  Hycsos :
some  say  they  were  Arabians.  This
people  who  were  thus  denominated
Shepherd  Kings,  and  their  descend-
ants retained  possession  of  Egypt
during  the  period  of  five  hundred  and
eleven  years.


After  these  things  he  relates  that
the  kings  of  Thebais  and  of  the  other
provinces  of  Egypt,  made  an  insur-
rection against  the  Shepherds,  and
that  a  long  and  mighty  war  was  car-
ried on  between  them,  till  the  Shep-
herds were  overcome  by  a  king  whose


•  'lawaj  Big.  Hafn.

t  'Aaijf  Vet.  Int. — 2i&o>j  or^Ajri&Sync— "Apx^iji  or  "Ayx^Jjf  Afr.  Eus.

\  'Txoueraoji   Eus.  §  Orjaawg  Eus.


;  I


( "I
■  i


i  '3


I


■  i


II  Ouaawi  Eus.


^  Eus.  omits.


^l*?Er;~*!s


172


MANETHO.


u


r


f    i


9?  tyofAix  (l»ai  *AXio-<ppayfA.oiS'

T0i»^    mOl[A.€T>ai    tTT   y   aVTOVf   €K

jW€y  T^5  aXXij?  AlyvTcrcv  nrd"

8*  *J^  ToiroV)  SipovpSv  txavra
fAvpiuy  r^v  'jtepifMrpov,  Avapiv
•vojwa  T^  Toiry.  Towtov  («^-
(Tiv  0  Mave&wv)  airavra,  T€/-
%€*  T<  fAtydXtp  xal  io-xvp^  re-
pi^aXtTv  T0C5  irdi/xcva^,  oirwj
T1JV  re  KTTJiTtv  aicacav  €;^&)o-«v

cctVT^y.

Toy    8c   *A\i<r<f>pay(ji.ov^U'

v€u^  vlov  ^oijf/,fA,ec(ny  §  ^ri;^e<-

^ij(rai  jU€»  auToJ/j  ha  itoKicp^

y.iaq  1 1  ^Xciv  xaxa  xparc^,  oktw

xai     Teo^flra^axovra      (Avpiacri

ntpoathptiiaavTa  Tor<  Tc/%f<riy'

circi  8  c  T^5  woXiopx/a  J  ^   ax-

iyifUf  iroi'^a'aa'^ai  (rvfA^da-et^f

7ya  T^y  Aifyvuroy    exXiiroyrf^

OTTO*  **  ^ovXovrai    'jtayreq   d-

^Xa^ett;  aTsiX^utru      rovq   8c

ixi  Ta7i;  ofMktryiaiq  iravoixecri^

{Atra  Tojy  xTijccwy   o^x  ^Xar-

r%vq  fAvpidlony  oyraj  cfxoo-*  xaJ

rtffadpuv    dito  t^^   Myvnrov

T^y  €/)ij/«>y  (Zf  Sw/j/ay  o8oiiro/)^-


name  was  Alisphragmuthosis,  and
they  were  by  him  driven  out  of  the
other  parts  of  Egypt,  and  hemmed
up  in  a  place  containing  about  ten
thousand  acres,  which  was  called
Avaris.  All  this  tract  (says  Manetho)
the  Shepherds  surrounded  with  a
vast  and  strong  wall,  that  they  might
retain  all  their  property  and  their
prey  within  a  hold  of  strength.


And  Thummosis,  the  son  of  Alis-
phragmuthosis, endeavoured  to  force
them  by  a  siege,  and  beleaguered  the
place  with  a  body  of  four  hundred
and  eighty  thousand  men;  but  at
the  moment  when  he  despaired  of
reducing  them  by  siege,  they  agreed
to  a  capitulation,  that  they  would
leave  Egypt,  and  should  be  permit-
ted to  go  out  without  molestation
wheresoever  they  pleased.  And,  ac-
cording to  this  stipulation,  they  de-
parted from  Egypt  with  all  their
families  and  effects,  in  number  not
less  than  two  hundred  and  forty
thousand,  and  bent  their  way  through


•  ^^a^gc^fl(,{,^wlT^s  Eus.— Mi(T(pfay/xd{Sa)jr<f  Sync.

f  if  Eus.  t  .    .,-

§  B/xoC^uxTi*  Eus.--Tov^^(r<$  Sec.  Dyn.— TiJ^/iw^ij  Theop.  Ant.

11  »roXiofx/«v  Eus.  ^  ^^^  ,roX,ofx/«  Eus.

••  Big.  Eus.— V,  Al.


mmmmim


MANETHO.


173


trai  *  <p«PovfA.ivovi  he  TT/y  *Acr-
ffvpioav  SuyacTc/ay,  totc  yap
fMivovq  T^^  *A<riai  ytparetyy
iv  T^  vvv  loi/Sa/^tf  %aXov-
fAtvTi  iroXiy  Oixo8ojbcij0'a/Acyot;^
ro<ravTati  [/.vpidariv  dv\fpwTCwy
dpx.eo'ova'ayf  *l€po<roKvfAa  rai^-
TVjy  oyoiAd<rat,

(•Ey  dXk^  86  rm  /3»)SX|»
T«y  AtywrriaxSy  Mavc^wy)
TovTO  {(lyr}(r)y)  e^yoq  zohq  xa-
Kovf^eyovq  iroi/xcya^,  alxfAoku'
Tovq  iv  raiq  UpaTq  avrZy  j3/jS-
Xoi^  y€ypd(p\[ai.

M6T<i  TO  i^eXBeTy  i^  At-
yrjitrov  tov  Xaov  ruy  icoifAeyav
fli  'Upoo'oXvfA.a,  9  €XjSaX«y
avrohq  i^  Alyvtrrov  ^a<rik(.lq
TidiAua-i^f  J  i^aa-iXeva-ev  [/.era
ravTa  ervj  eiMO-i  iriyrc  xa»
ft^yaj  Teaa-apa^,  yea)  ireXieii-
Tijo-ey,  xat  irapcXa^e  Tr,y  dp-
XV  oi^'Pov  vloi  Xe^puv  €Tvi  8c-
xarpia,  fAtd'  oy§  *A/AcyftH/>i^
ctxoci  II  yea)  fA^ya^  iirrd.  tov
8c  oBeXcpT]  *A/xco-(r^f^  cfxo-
a-i€y  xa»  fA-t^yaq  iyyia,  Trj^
8e  Mricppviq**  ^uhcica  yea)  fA^j-
va<;  ivyka,  rov  8c  MrjippafMv-
Kfua-i^jj     cixoo-i    "Trc'yTc    xai


the  desert  towards  Syria.  But  as
they  stood  in  fear  of  the  Assyrians,
who  had  then  dominion  over  Asia,
they  built  a  city  in  that  country  which
is  now  called  Judaea,  of  sufficient  size
to  contain  this  multitude  of  men,  and
named  it  Jerusalem.

(In  another  book  of  the  Egyptian
histories  Manetho  says)  That  this
people,  who  are  here  called  Shep-
herds, in  their  sacred  books  were
also  styled  Captives.

After  the  departure  of  this  nation
of  Shepherds  to  Jerusalem,  Tethmo-
sis,  the  king  of  Egypt  who  drove
them  out,  reigned  twenty-five  years
and  four  months,  and  then  died :
after  him  his  son  Chebron  took  the
government  into  his  hands  for  thir-
teen years ;  after  him  reigned  Ame-
nophis  for  twenty  years  and  seven
months:  then  his  sister  Amesses
twenty-one  years  and  nine  months :
she  was  succeeded  by  Mephres,  who
feigned  twelve  years  and  nine  months :
after  him  Mephramuthosis  twenty-
five  years  and  ten  months:  then
Thmosis    reigned    nine    years    and


fill


•  i*oBoi7ropiiam  Eus.  f  'loviafwv  Vulg.

X  ei/iwffts    Vat.  Int.—^A/xaatg  Philos.— 'A/xo/s    A(r.--^ Afiwan   Eus.  and
Sync.

(I  itxoattv  Afr.  Eus.


§    Tow'tou  8i  Vet.  Int.  „  „x,

IT  'Afttaais  EI.~'Aytt«f  (r)f  Sync—'Ayu^ir^n   Theop.

••  Miifpti  El.— M'«r«f^)j  Sync.  ff  M«r^fay/<oiJ;^w<r<s  Sync.


174


MANETHO.


tl


11


fMjya^  ^€Ka.  rov  Se  Qfji.a<rii  *
inea  xai  fMJvaf  onru.    rov  Se
*  AfA€Vb3<pi^  "j*     TpidMina     xa*
IMjva^  Scxa.  rov  Be   Clpo<;  rpid-
Y.ovra    (^     xai  /x^vaj    TrcvTC.
ToS    §€    ^vydrvip  '^"^^TXfi^^X
SwScxa  xai   jU^va   cva.   r^<;  8e
PadwTi^  §  a^O^oq  ii/vea.   rov
Sc  *Ayi€yx^pyiq  SwSexa  xcii  |U^-
va^  'TrcvTf.  Tou  8c  * AMyxyjpvjq
trepoq  SwSexa  xai  fjLrjvaq  rpeTq,
Toy  8e    ApfAuiq  riatrapa  xal
jw^va  €va.  TOt;  II  Vaixecrayjq  ev
xai  fArjvaf;  rtaa-apaq*  rov  Se
ApfAetra-rjq  MiajUjUoD  i^'^y.ovra
il  xai  jwijvaj  8j^.  toU  8c  'A/xc-
ya)^<^  Scxa   xa*  cvycot  xaJ  juij-
»a^   cf.  Tou  8e  le^faaify  xai
Pajtxco'(nj5,  tTT'B'iXTjv  xai,  vavri-
x^y  c;^a)y  tvvafAiy.

Ovroq  rov  /ucv  a8cX^v  Ap-

jwai'v  i-nirpo-nov  rr^  Alyijirrov

xarea-ryjo-Oj    xaJ  itSiaav    f/Liv

avr^    rvjv    aAXyjv    ^aartXmyjv

itepif^i/jxfv  i^ov<riay,  (xovov  8c

hertiXaro  hidhvjfxa  [/.rj  (popeiVy

^>j8c  T^y  ^aa-iUla  />«jTc/3a  tc

Twy  Ttxy^y  aSixcry,  dit€X€(r6at

8c    xai  Toly  aAXwy  ^aatXixSy

7raXXax/8ft)y,      aCro^    8c     ^iri

Kvirpoy  xai  *o<v/xijy  xai  waXiy

*A<ra-vpiovq  re  xai  M^Soy;  5-^a-


eight  months ;  after  whom  Ameno-
phis  thirty  years  and  ten  months:  then
Orus  thirty  six  years  and  five  months  :
then  his  daughter  Acenchres  twelve
years  and  one  month  :  afterwards  her
brother  Rathotis  nine:     then  Acen-
cheres  twelve  years  and  five  months;
another  Acencheres  twelve  years  and
three  months  :  after  him  Armais  four
years  and  one   month :     after    him
reigned  Ramesses  one  year  and  four
months  :  then  Armesses  the  son  of
Miammous  sixty-six  years  and  two
months  :  after  him  Amenophis  nine-
teen years  and  six  months :   and  he
was  succeeded  by  Sethosis  and||  Ra-
messes, he  maintained  an  army  of
cavalry  and  a  naval  force.


This  king  (Sethosis)  appointed  his
brother  Armais  his  viceroy  over
Egypt :  he  also  invested  him  with  all
the  other  authority  of  a  king,  with
only  these  restrictions ;  that  he  should
not  wear  the  diadem,  nor  interfere
with  the  queen,  the  mother  of  his
children,  nor  abuse  the  royal  concu-
bines. Sethosis  then  made  an  ex-
pedition against  Cyprus  and  Phoeni-
cia, and  waged  war  with  the  Assy-
rians and  Medes ;  and  he  subdued


•  Jc6^fiu,(r,s    Theop.— Sync.  f    'A/t.M&<^nf  AL

t  'Ax«^/3^s  et  *Ax»yxiiffris  Sy nc.^' Ay xocxngh  El—'Axtyxipris  Big.

§    I'W^&i   Al.  II  Qy.  i  ^„)^  ^ho  i3  c^igd.


MANETHO.


175


Tci/o-a^,  avavra^f  rovq  fA€v
hoparif  rovi  8c  a/tta%>jTi,<^'5a>
8c  ryji  iroXX^^  8uya/Ac«^,  utto-
%€ipiovi  cXajSc.  xa*  jtccya
<ppoyf}<Taq  CTTi  rouq  ivTcpayiai^f
CTi  xai  Kfapa-aXeurepov  iito-
peijero*  raq  irpo;  dvaroXaq
ntoKuq  TC  xai  yfiipaq  xaTa-
<rrp€(pofMyoq,

Xpovov  TC  lyutvov  ycyoyoroq^
Apfjuti'q  0  xaraXci^ci^  iv  Ai-
yijicrtpf  "TT^yra  rov(/,Trakiy,'\'
olf  a8cX^^  %ap7jv€i  [Arj  iroietv,
oBeuq  eitparrey,  xai  yap  rrjv
paffiKihcf.  ^idiccq  €(rxeVf  teat
raiq  aXXar;  TraXKotxi(Tiy  oupef
85^  8ieTcXc<  XpufAcvo/;*  irci^o-
fMVOi  8c  iiro  ruv  (pihav  8<a8vj-
fxa  i(f)op€if  xai  dyrype  rS
abeXcp^,

O  8e  rerayfAivoq  iiti  ray
Upuy  J  rrji  Atyvitrov^  ypdxj/aq
^i^\loy  €Tr€fj(.\j/€  rS  ^e^ua-ei,
8>jX£y  aury  wayra,  xai  or*
dyrripey  0  d^ehpoq  airov  "Ap-
fMuq.  'Trapaxp^f^a  ovy  vitetrrpi-
^v  tU  IlTjXoi/Vwy,  xai  ivcpd-
rri<r€v  ryj^  lhix<:  ^aa-iKciaq  ^
8c  xw/ja  ixX-^^v)  dno  rov  avrov
eyofMtroq  Atyvitroq.  Keyei  yap
tri  0  fAty  le^ua-ii  §  €'<aX€iro
A'lywrroiy  "ApfMxl'q  8c  0  a8cX-
^J  a^ToiJ  Aayoo  J.


them  all,  some  by  force  of  arms,  and
others  without  a  battle,  by  the  mere
terror  of  his  power.  And  being
elated  with  his  success,  he  advanced
still  more  confidently,  and  overthrew
the  cities,  and  subdued  the  countries
of  the  East.


But  Armais,  who  was  left  in  Egypt,
took  advantage  of  the  opportunity,  and
fearlessly  perpetrated  all  those  acts
which  his  brother  had  enjoined  him
not  to  commit :  he  violated  the  queen,
and  continued  an  unrestrained  inter-
course with  the  royal  concubines ;  and
at  the  persuasion  of  his  friends  he
assumed  the  diadem,  and  openly  op-
posed his  brother.

But  the  ruler  over  the  priests  of
Egypt  by  letters  sent  an  account  to
Sethosis,  and  informed  him  of  what
had  happened,  and  how  his  brother
had  set  himself  up  in  opposition  to
his  power.  Upon  this  Sethosis  im-
mediately returned  to  Pelusium,  and
recovered  his  kingdom.  The  country
of  Egypt  took  its  name  from  Setho-
sis, who  was  called  also  ^gyptus,  as
was  his  brother  Armais  known  by
the  name  of  Danaus. — Joseph,  contr.
App.  lib.  I.  c.  14,  15.


t  1


I    I


*  iTiwof  iiJiTo  Big.  Hafh.

X  Hud.  from  Vet.  Int.--/if«a;i«  Vulg.


f  Tet/AfroLKiv  Hafh.
§  2i&wi  Big.


f1


170


MANETHO.


MANETHO.


177


OF  THE  ISRAELITES.


axnrep  ilpo^     e*^  tojv  itpo  av
Toy  jScj3a<r<X€i'X0T&;v*    dvevey-
K€tv  he  rviv  iTri^vfjLiav  ofjM^vfjuu
ji*€v  adT^*AfA€vu{f>€iy  irarpof  8e
Hdicio^j   ovTt,    ^€ia^  8e  80-
xoCyTi   fAerio-y^fiY.ivai    <pv<r€uqf
ycard  re  <ro(f}iciy  xaJ  itpoyyu<riif
rSy  i(rofA€vei}y.   eheTv  ovv  avra
rovrov  rov  o[A.uyvfJi.ov,  on  hvv^-
arerai  ^evj^  /Serv,  f*  xaS'apav
airo  re  "keitpuv  xa*  tSv  aXXan/
fjtuzpSy    dv^puTzccv  t^v  p^w^av
aisacrav  iroi^areiev,

*H(T^eyra  he  rov  ^aaiKeuy
ntdvraq  touj  rcc  (XufAara  ?.eXfl>-
j8ij/*eyoi/<;  ^x  T17?  AlyiJirrov  <rvv~
ayayeTy*  yeye<r^at  he  rov  vKyj'
^ovq  fAvpidha^  inrto'  xa<  toi/-
rovf  eli  Taf  XiS'OTO/x/a^  xtij  iy
rap  ntp^q  dvaro'h.yiy    fxepei   rov
Ne/Xow   i[x^a\e7y    avrly,  oitcc^
ipyd^otvro  xai  rSy  aXX&v  A/-
yvmiofy    ol      iyxexiupiaiMyot*
tJyai   W   nvai  ^v  avroT^  xaJ
tSv     \oyleoy      leptay     (<fy>j(Ttj)
X^p^  wymeypfilvov^,  rov   hie
* AfxeytMpiy   ineTyoy,  rlv    (ro(f)oy
xai  fAuyriKoy  dvhpUf  vitt^eia--


This   king   (Amenophis)  was   de-
sirous of  beholding  the  gods,  as  Orus,
one  of  his  predecessors  in  the  king-
dom, had  seen  them.     And  he  com-
municated his  desire  to  a  priest  of  the
same  name  with  himself,  Amenophis,
the   son  of  Papis,   who   seemed  to
partake  of  the  divine  nature,  both  in
his  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  futu-
rity:  and   Amenophis   returned  him
answer,  that  it  was  in  his  power  to
behold  the  gods,  if  he  would  cleanse
the  whole  country  of  the  lepers  and
other  unclean  persons  that  abounded
in  it.

Well  pleased  with  this  information,
the  king  gathered   together   out   of
Egypt  all  that  laboured  under  any
defect   in   body,   to  the   amount   of
eighty  thousand,  and  sent  them  to  the
quarries,  which  are  situated  on   the
east  side  of  the  Nile,  that  they  might
work  in  them  and  be  separated  from
the  rest  of  the  Egyptians.     And  (he
says)  there  were  among  them  some
learned  priests   who   were    affected
with  leprosy.     And  Amenophis  the
wise  man  and  prophet,  fearful   lest
the  vengeance  of  the  gods  should  fall
both  on  himself  and  on  the  king,  if


•  Hud.  from  Vet.  Int.— *n^  Vulg.


t  Hud, — nctiirt9i  Al.


^ai  Tcpo;  (xiroy  re  xa)  roy  j9a-
(TiXfU  xoKoy  ruy  \feuy,  el  ^lair-
^eyreq  o(f)\f'^<Toyrai,  y.al  irpoa"-
^efA-evoy*  e'tieTvy  on  (rvy.(JLa.-
j^Tjcrofcrt  riveq  ro7q  fA.iot.po7q,  VLCti
rriq  Aiyvnruv  tiparrjo'ova'iy  eii
eT'/j  heycarpia.  (atj  roXix-^acii
y.ev  avToy  eizeTv  ravra  rZ
^aa-i'Aeif  yputprji/  he  vcaraXi-
iroyra  itept  nayruy  eavroy  dve-
XeTy.  ey  d6vu.i(^  he  eivai  rly
f^aaiKeoL,

K^TieiTa  xara  Aejiv  ovrca
y€ypci(pey)m  To^v  he  raiq  Aaro-
fA.laiq  uq  xpovoq  iKavoq  hiyJA^fev
raXaiTcaipovyruyy  d.^ico^t)q  0
^xo'iKiv^,  7va  Ttpoq  y.cx.Td'Avo'ty
dvroTq  xai  <Ty.enr}v  dtiofjiepia-rj
rrjy  rore  ray  TroifAeyccy  eprifAij'
\fe7a-ay  woaiv,  "j*  Avapiy  cvye-
X^py}<rty,  em  ce  ^  itoAiq  xaToc
rviv  ^eoXoyiay  dyu\f€y  Tv(bu-
ytoq.

01  he  f\q  ravTi^y  fi^eX-
'•joyreqy  xai  rov  roicoy  rovroy
elq  cfnuarroLtTiy'^  e^ovTC^,  viye-
fAoya  ai/xSv  Xeyoueyoy  riya  ray
HXioiroXiTojv  lepeuy  *0<rdp(ri~
^ov§  edT-^a-ccvro.  xai  rovru
TteiBa.px'fifTovTeq  ev  'yrd<rty  upy.o-
[A.orriTay'  6  he  iipuroy  (Aey  av-
ro7q  vofAov  e^ero,  {J^'fire  itpoa--
xw^rv  ^eovq^  y.-fixe  ruy  fAdXia--


*  Hud. — n-po^ijuBvov  Vulg.
X  ix-oxnToia-Taa-iv  Hafn.


it  should  appear  that  violence  had
been  offered  them,  added  this  also  in
a  prophetic  spirit ; — that  certain  peo-
ple would  come  to  the  assistance  of
these  unclean  persons,  and  would
subdue  Egypt,  and  hold  it  in  posses-
sion for  thirteen  years.  These  tidings
however  he  dared  not  to  communi-
cate to  the  king,  but  left  in  writing
an  account  of  what  should  come  to
pass,  and  destroyed  himself,  at  which
the  king  was  fearfully  distressed.

(After  which  he  writes  thus,  word
for  word :)  When  those  that  were
sent  to  work  in  the  quarries  had  con-
tinued for  some  time  in  that  miser-
able state,  the  king  was  petitioned  to
set  apart  for  their  habitation  and  pro-
tection the  city  Avaris,  which  had
been  left  vacant  by  the  Shepherds ;
and  he  granted  them  their  desire :
now  this  city,  according  to  the  theo-
logy above,  is  a  Typhonian  city.

But  when  they  had  taken  posses-
sion of  the  city,  and  found  it  well
adapted  for  a  revolt,  they  appointed
for  themselves  a  ruler  from  amongr
the  priests  of  Heliopolis,  one  whose
name  was  Osarsiph,  and  they  bound
themselves  by  oath  that  they  would
be  obedient.  Osarsiph  then,  in  the
first  place  enacted  this  law,  that  they
should  neither  worship  the  gods,  nor

t  Hud.  from  MSS.  Vet.  Int.— Al.  omit.
§   Hud.  from  Vet.  Int. — 'Ocrapvjiov  Vulg.

A  A


I


I,

hi

m


I'i


178

to.  iv  Alyvitrcfi  ^efJua-TtvofAtyuy

itdyra  re  Kfvciv  xai  avaXovv*
(TwditTejrBai  Sc  /tXTjScv*  wX^v
ruv  <rvvufj(.o<7iX€i>uy,  Toiavra  Se
vc/AoBir-^a-ait  xa<  vX(7a^a
aWut  fxdXKTTa  toT^  Alyim^
rioi^  tdi(Tuo7q*  €i/aifTiovf/,€vaf
txeXcyo-ev   TcoXv^iiptqi'   tcc    r^q

itpoi  woXcjtxov  irolfjiovq  yivta--
K[ai  Toy  -npoq  'AfAevaxpivf  rlv
Pao'i/J'x.  avTo<;  St  itpoaXa^o-
fMVoq  fAe$"  iavTov  xai  rSv
aKKuv  Upiui,  xai  avfAfAffxiac"
fA€>uvj  eirefAxPe  Ttpea-^eiq  izpo^j^
roi/^  vt:o   T€6[Au<r€uq   dneXcc-

rvjv  ycaXovfA€vv]v  'UpotroXvfjiac.
xa*   ra  xad'  iavrov  xal  rolt;

OjjXwo-a^,    'ij^iov     a-vv€Tria-rpa-
T€V€iv  oy,o6viAahov  iir"  kXyxm-
Tov,   'E7ra^«y  II  ^«\  oJy  avrov^
'i'nijyyuXaTQ,    irpSrov   fjLey   e}^
Avapiv  Tvjv   TTpoyonnrjv   avruy
irarpi'Ba,    xai    T<i    eiriT»;§««
'*'o?V  oxXoif  Ttapi^uv  d(pBovuq,
VTcepfxaxwfo-^ai    Se  ot€  Se'oi,
xa<   p^diuf    vitox€tpiov  avTo7q
rrjv  xupoLV  iroirja-ttv.  ol  8e  {nrep-

X<*P(ii    y€VOlA€l,Ql    TtdvTfq    TtpO'


MANETHO.

abstain  from  any  of  those  sacred  ani-
mals which  the  Egyptians  hold  in
veneration,  but  sacrifice  and  slay  them
all ;  and  that  they  should  connect
themselves  with  none  but  such  as
were  of  that  confederacy.  When  he
had  made  such  laws  as  these,  and
many  others  of  a  tendency  directly
in  opposition  to  the  customs  of  the
Egyptians,  he  gave  orders  that  they
should  employ  the  multitude  of  hands
in  rebuilding  the  walls  about  the  city,
and  hold  themselves  in  readiness  for
war  with  Amenophis  the  king.  He
then  took  into  his  counsels  some
others  of  the  priests  and  unclean
persons:  and  sent  ambassadors  to
the  city  called  Jerusalem,  to  those
Shepherds  who  had  been  expelled  by
Tethmosis  :  and  he  informed  them
of  the  position  of  their  affairs,  and
requested  them  to  come  up  unani-
mously to  his  assistance  in  this  war
against  Egypt.  Fie  also  promised  in
the  first  place  to  reinstate  them  in
their  ancient  city  and  country  Avaris,
and  provide  a  plentiful  maintenance
for  their  host,  and  fight  for  them  as
occasion  might  require  ;  and  assured
them  that  he  would  easily  reduce  the
country  under  their  dominion.  The
Shepherds  received  this  message  with


MANETHO.


179


•  Hud.  from  MSS.— •:^i<r//«voij  Vulg.
t  Hud.  from  Vet.  Int.— M/,rey(^„  VuIg.
5  Hud.  MSS  — «ijriX^o'>T«s   Al.


J  Hud.  MSS.— Al.  omit  it.
II   Lowth  proposes  axi^ti*.


hpZy  <rvv€QupfXi^<ra}>,  xai   [a€T*
oC  itoKv  rjwiv  €1^  Avapiv.

* AfAivaxpiq  8*  0   tZv  Atyxnt-

yiaTa  t^v   exetWv    e^Sov,    ov
fjierpiui    <rvv€xij9'^t    t^?    trap'
* AfJL(vu(f)€a}q  toS  ndirio^  [M>y]<r-
^t)^  irpohrjXua-euq.   xai  Ttpore-
pov  ovvayayuv  irXyjBo^  Alyvtt-
rlu>j  yiai  ^ovKeva-diMvo^  fAira
ray  iv  rovTotq   riyefAoveoyt  rd
T€  If  pa,  l^Sat  roc  irpura  fxaAifr-
ra  iy  to7?  UpoT^  rifJi.u[Ji€ya   uq
y  iavTov   /xeTeire/*t//aTo,    xal
roTq  nara   f^tpof  Up(v<riy  tta-
p-^yyuXey*  wq  d<r(pa\€<rTaTa
ray  ^€uv  crvymp^xi  tcc  ^oavot.
Toy   Se     vloy  ^eBuy  y   tov   xat
PafAta-cnjy  onto  PafAxj/eu^  rov
itarpoq  uvoiACKTiuvov  ireyraeTV)
ovTa,  i^eBeTO  itpoq  rov  eavrov
qnKov.   avToq    he    ttot^aq  to7q
aXKot^    Alyxmrloiit    oi/criy    elq
rpioLMyra    (/.vpiuhocq     dyhpuv
lAax^fMordTuVy  x«i  to2c  iroXe-
fjitoiq  a'navT7i<ra<Tiv  ov  <rvv€^a-
Xev*   aXXsc  fAeKXetv  ^tOfAMyfty
vofASraqy    itaXiy^poix'^a-ai   ijx€y
tlq  MefMpiv,  dyaka^uy  re  tov-
T€    Awiv,  xaJ    TCC    oKKa   rd
i)c€i<f€    fAeraireixtpBeyra     Upd
^Satf  eiBlq  eU  Pi-lBitmiay   avv


♦  T«/5<yyiXX«ir  Big.


the  greatest  joy,  and  quickly  mus-
tered to  the  number  of  two  hundred
thousand  men,  and  came  up  to  Avaris.
Now  Amenophis  the  king  of  Egypt,
when  he  was  informed  of  their  inva-
sion, was  in  great  consternation,  re-
membering the  prophecy  of  Ameno-
phis, the  son  of  Papis.     And  he  as-
sembled the  armies  of  the  Egyptians,
and  having  consulted  with  the  leaders,
he  commanded  the  sacred  animals  to
be  brought  to  him,  especially  those
which  were  held  in  more  particular
veneration  in    the    temples,   and   he
forthwith  charged  the  priests  to  con-
ceal the   images  of  their  gods   with
the  utmost  care.  Moreover  he  placed
his  son  Sethos,  who  was  also  called
Ramesses  from  his  father  Rampses,
being  then  but  five  years  old,  under
the  protection  of  a  faithful  adherent ;
and   marched  with   the   rest  of  the
Egyptians  being  three  hundred  thou-
sand warriors,  against  the  enemy,  who
advanced  to  meet  him  :  but  he  did
not  attack  them,  thinking  it  would  be
to  wage  war   against   the   gods,  but
returned,  and  came  again  to  Mem-
phis, where   he   took   Apis   and  the
other  sacred  animals  he  had  sent  for,
and  retreated  immediately  into  Ethio-
pia together  with  all  his  army,  and
all  the  multitude  of  the  Egyptians  ;

t  2^01  Big.


k


H^.


'I


180

UTsavTi  tS   a-roXtp  xai  itX-^Oci
ruv  Alyi  ttt/wv  av^^Br},  xaotri
yap  fiv  hvtS  ^7ro%e/^i«5  o  rSv
Al^iOTtco  ^aatX^vt;'   o^ev  vno-
Se£a/Aevo^,     xal     roV(;    o^Xoyj
itdvraq  iicoXa^uv  olq  ecrp^ev  ^
Xapa.     Tuv    Ttpot;    au^pcciriy/jv
rpo(pr)v  iTHTfjhiovy  xai  ttoXci^*
xai  vMiAotq   Ttpo^  xiyy  tuv  ite-
vpcciAeifUv    T^icrxct/Sexa      irccu
airo  T^j  a^X^^  avTcv  f  exTrra)-
<r<y   a^Taj3x6*^,   ov^  ^ttov   ye
x<aw     crrparoTi€^ov      AWioiitAou
ttpQ^    (pvXayiriv    eTTCTa^e    to?^
icap*  *Af/.€vu)(p€aq  tcS  ^aa-iXea^^
im  TUV  opicov  rrjq  Alyvmov.

Kai  ra  fA.lv  xara  t^v  At-
^lOTciau  rmaXira,   ol  Se  SoXy-
[Atrai   xaTfA^oWf^,   oiv  to?^
[Atapoii  rSu   A\yvTtrtuv  ovTccq
dvoa-iiL't;  J  toT^  dv^puiroK;  irpocr-
vjyrJxOyja-av,     ua-re     Trjv      ruv
irpO€ipr][/Jviiy  KpaTrja-iv  X€''/"3--
ryjv  §  <j)aiv€(r6aij  toT^  tot€  rcc
rovruv  d(re^^y.ara  ^euf^iuoi^.
xai   yap  ov  fAovoy   iroXfit;   xai
xufAa^    eyeirpYjo-avy  ov^e   Upo-
a-oXovvreq,    oi^^     Xv/j^amf^ivoi
ioava  :^iZv    ijpMvyro,    dX>A
xai  ro7q  avToiq  vmavioK;   tuv
a-€^a<n€voix€yuv     UpZv     ^^ccuv
XP<&f*€VOl  8i€T6'A0l;v,  xai  ^oVa^


MANETHO.

for  the  king  of  Ethiopia  was  under
obh'gations  to  him.  He  was  there-
fore kindly  received  by  the  king,
who  took  care  of  all  the  multitude
that  was  with  him,  wliile  the  country
supplied  what  was  necessary  for  their
subsistence.  He  also  allotted  to  him
cities  and  villages  during  his  exile,
which  was  to  continue  from  its  be-
ginning during  the  predestined  thir-
teen years.  Moreover  he  pitched  a
camp  for  an  Ethiopian  army  upon
the  borders  of  Egypt,  as  a  protection
to  king  Amenophis.


In  the  mean  time,  while  such  was
the  state  of  things  in  Ethiopia,  the
people  of  Jerusalem,  who  had  come
down  with  the  unclean  of  the  Egyp-
tians,  treated   the    inhabitants   with
such  barbarity,  that  those  who   wit-
nessed their  impieties  believed  that
that  their  joint  sway  was  more  exe-
crable than  that  which  the  Shepherds
had  formerly  exercised  alone.     For
they  not  only  set  fire  to  the  cities
and    villages,    but  committed   every
kind  of  sacrilege,  and  destroyed   the
images  of  the  gods,  and  roasted  and
fed  upon  those  sacred  animals  that
were  worshipped ;    and  having  cora-


T  «io».  inserts  m  riip.  +  u  r     •

k  u.wi   f        .        .  4  "sm.  inserts  xaJ.

§  Hud.  from  Lowth  and  Vet.  Int.-;^ucriv  Vulg.


MANETIIO.


181


xa«  <r(pay(7q  tovtuv  lepeT^  xai
'npoify^ra^  rj./dyy.al^ov  ylvf<jfiai^
■Koi  yvfAvov^  €|e/9aXov'  Aeyerai
8*  OTi  Trjv  Ttoknelav  xai  rovq
yofAOvq  airroTq  Y.'XTa^a\AO[ji.€voq
iepev^f  TO  yeyoi;  'HKiox/jroXh^^t
ovoua  *0(rapcrl<pf  diio  toU  iv
*HX/ou  woXci  S'eoiJ  *0<rip€u^,  u^
jtAfTfjSyj  elf  TovTO  TO  yevoq,
utT€T€9r}  rovvQ[/.a  xai  ir^ocrij-
yopevdrj  Muvarj^,


pelled  the  priests  and  prophets  to
kill  and  sacrifice  them,  they  cast  them
naked  out  of  the  country.  It  is  said
also  that  the  priest,  who  ordained
their  polity  and  laws,  was  by  birth
of  Heliopolis,  and  his  name  Osarsiph,
from  Osiris  the  god  of  Heliopolis :
but  that  when  he  went  over  to  these
people  his  name  was  changed,  and
he  was  called  Moyses. — Joseph,  contr.
App.  lib.  I.  c.  26.


OF  THE  SHEPHERDS  AND  ISRAELITES.


(Aeyei  Se  o  Mav€6«v  T.d-
Xiv. )  Ot*  fA€Ta  raina  eTnJX-
^ev  0  *A[/.evaHpiq  d-ro  AlBiOTtia^
fA€ra  ixeyakviq  ^vvdtAeut;*  ruii
G  vlo^  avTOv  Vdixypvj^  xa*  av-
Toj  ej^ajy  8t;ya/>civ'  xai  avfA^d'
XovTf^  0*  8i;o  ro7q  7[0i{A€<n  xat
Tor^  fAiapoT^f  ivUvjo-av  auTot'^,
xa<  TToXXol^  aTTOxTc/yayTe^
iinugav  avTovq  ay^i  tjhv  opiuv
T^5  "Svpia^.


(Manetho  again  says :)  After  this
Amenophis  returned  from  Ethiopia
with  a  great  force,  and  Rampses  also,
his  son,  with  other  forces,  and  en-
countering the  Shepherds  and  the
unclean  people,  they  defeated  them
and  slew  multitudes  of  them,  and
pursued  them  to  the  bounds  of  Syria.
— Joseph,  contr »  App.  lib.  I.  c.  27,


i\


EGYPTIAN  FRAGMENTS.


OF   THE   EXODUS:


FROM  CH.EREMON.


META  Tovrov  (^erdaai  ^iv-
Xoi*ai  X.aiprifAOvac.  nai  yap
ovro^  AlyvTrri(xy.Y/V  ipda-Kuf  Itr-
lopiav  <x\jyypdi(^€iv,  x«»  irpoa-
^f)f  rckvro  oifOfxa  tov  jSciO"*-
Xew^  OTiep  6  MaviQco^f  ^Afxiyu-
(pii/f  xai  TOV  vlov  avTCV  Pa-
fjL€<r(ry]Uf  ^civ,  ot<,

**  Kara  rovq  vitvovq  rj  "lai^

i(f>dv^    tS  *AfX€Vta<f)€lt    [Mfjtxpo-

[Aevrj  avTov,  on  to  Upov  avTrj^
iy  r^  TToXe^ay  ycaTta-xaiirai,
4fpiTt(f}dvTYiv*  Sg  UpoypafA.fA.a-
t€a  (fxauaij  iav  rZv  tov^  fxo-
Xv<rf/.ov(;  lyjiyvm  dvdpuv  xa-
^dpT^  Trjy  AtyvTtrw  maua-aa--
^ui  ryjq 'Tcr otaq^  ainov,  'Ett*-
Xccavra  Be  tuv  iindivuv  ut>-
pta^a^   tlMo-nrtirrt  in^aXeitf,


After  him  (Manetho)  I  wish  to
examine  Chaeremon,  who  professes
to  have  composed  a  history  of
Egypt.  He  gives  the  same  name  as
does  Manetho  to  the  king  Ameno-
phis  and  his  son  Ramesses,  and  says
as  follows —

"  Isis  appeared  to  Amenophis  in
his  dreams,  rebuking  him  that  her
temple  should  have  been  overthrown
in  war.  Upon  which  Phritiphantes
the  sacred  scribe  told  him,  that  if  he
would  clear  Egypt  of  all  polluted
persons  he  would  be  delivered  from
these  terrors.  He  therefore  collected
two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  un-
clean persons,  and  drove  them  out.
Their  leaders  were  two  scribes  called


•  ♦fiTo^ir.jy,  *p,To$A*Tiif,  Al.  MSS.


t  wrieif  El.


y-


EGYPTIAN  FRAGMENTS.


183


*Hyt7a-$ai  h  avruv  ypaiA.iA.%-
riaq  MewJ^riJy  t€  xa*  ^lirfpcovy
xa)     toDtov     iepoypaiA.fA.'XTea.
AlyvTCtia   V   avroT^    ovo/xar*
ttvatf  tS  [a.€p  Mciiva^  Tia-iOiVj
tS  8c  'Ia?o'^7rflj  UeTea-^if),   Tov-
ravt;  8'   u^  HfKova-iov    ikBetPf
xa)  €7riTt^eIv    [Avpidai    ipia-
xovTaoxTw       KaTaXeA€tfA.€vaiq
VTta  TOt/   AfJLfyUipio^  a;  ov  •a(-
Xeiv  elq  tijv  Aiyvicrov  hax-ou,!-

"^fiV.

Oi^  (piXlav  <rvy6€[A.€vov(;  inl
rr})f  Aiyvitrw  o-TpaTiva-ai.
Tov  8c  * AfA.€Pei}(piv  ov)^  vno-
fA€ivavTa  tijv  €(f)odov  alzuv  t\^
A\9ioitix]/  (pvy^tv  Y.araXtT[ovTa
Tr}v  yvvaiyia  cyxnov.  ijv  v.pvTt~
Toucwyv  €v  ricri  (T'ai^Xaioti;  tc-
xcrv  wat  8a,  oyofAo.  MftroT^v^jv,*
ov  dvdpso6(VTa  iiidiu^ai  Toi'g
*Iovhaiov^  ii^  T7/V  ^vpiav,  ov-
Ta^  Tiep)  (\kc><ti  uvpid^aq^  xa*
TOV  irarepa  *Au€vc>}(piv  ex  Tyjq
Al^;o7r/a^  xaTaSc'lao-^ai."


Moyses  and  Josephus,  the  latter  of
whom  was  a  sacred  scribe :  but  their
Egyptian  names  were,  that  of  Moyses
Tisithen,  and  that  of  Josephus  Pete-
seph.  They  bent  their  way  towards
Pelusium  where  they  met  with  three
hundred  and  eighty  thousand  men  left
there  by  Amenophis,  whom  he  would
not  suffer  to  come  into  Egypt.


With  these  they  made  a  treaty  and
invaded  Egypt.  But  Amenophis
waited  not  to  oppose  their  incursion,
but  fled  into  Ethiopia,  leaving  his
wife  pregnant :  and  she  concealed
herself  in  a  cavern  where  she  brought
forth  a  child  and  named  him  Messe-
nes,  who  when  he  arrived  at  man-
hood drove  out  the  Jews  into  Syria,
being  about  two  hundred  thousand,
and  recalled  his  father  Amenophis
from  Ethiopia. — Joseph,  contr.  A  pp.
lib.  I.  c.  32.


t    ffl


OF  THE  EXODUS :


FROM  DIODORUS  SICULUS.


Kara  r^v  AXyvnrov  to  tea-  There  having  arisen  in  former  days

"Kailv,   Xoiuix^^  veptaraa-^ccq  a   pestiferous   disease  in  Egypt,  the

y€vo[A.€vviiy  dyeitffA.Tcoy  ol  vo\~  multitude  attributed  the  cause  of  the

Aoi  T1JV  alr'av  tuv  xaxwv  im  evil  to  the  Deity :  for   a  very  great


184


EGYPTIAN    FRAGMENTS.


haifAOviQv,  iroXKav  yap  xa*
TravToSawSv  xaToixoi/vTwv  ^e-
vuVf  yLcCi  ^i7}AXcty[X€voiq  €^f<ri
y^pu}[X€J/uiv  Tcep^i  TO  iepof  nai  rciq
^v<Tiaq,  v.a.iraXi'kva-Boii  tvv€-
^aip€  'nap  avTolq  raq  Trar-
piovq  rZv  ^(uv  Tiixd^.   Otttp  ol

Ta(j'T'^(TUi>Tcm,yipKriv  ovk  €(TC<r-

^fj/yjKaroviAfvuv  rSv  aAXoe^-
vSv,  ct  (/.(v  izKpccvea-Tocrot  y.al
SoacTixwTaTOi  (rvaTpa(p€VT€^
€^€^pi<fyficrav  (w^  rive^  (potaiv)
€1^  T^v  *EX>^Sa,  xai  rivaq
erepovq  tottou?  e%ovTa5  a^ioKo-
•yov^  rjy€y.Qva.^f  ccv  ^yoZvTo  Aa.-
Vdlq  xai  Ka5jt>w<  t5v  aXX&JV
iirt(f)av€(narot.

tiq  rr}v   vvy    xaXoi^/xevijv    *Ioi;-

rrjq  AlyvnroVj  TavTeXS^  8f
€py}[Xov  overav  xar'  eKCiwavq
rcivq  XpovQvq,  i}y€7ro  Se  t>j^
airoix/a^  o  i:po(ra,yop€vo[A€voq
Muavj^f  (ppovqa-ei  §€  ttoXX^  xai
avhpeiq,  itKuaTdv  hia(f)€puv.
OvToq  Se  xaTaXa/Soaevo^  t»;v
%w/?av,  aXXa;  re  irokeiq  exrio-e
xai  T>jv  viJv  overav  it:i^av€<na,-
Tijy,  ovoua'i^ofA.cy/jv  'Up-jfro'Avu.a.


concourse  of  foreigners  of  every  na-
tion then  dwelt  in  Egypt,  who  were
addicted    to    strange    rites     in    their
worship  and    sacrifices ;    so   that  in
consequence  the  due  honours  of  the
gods  fell  into  disuse.     Whence  the
native  inhabitants  of  the  land  infer-
red, that,  unless  they  removed  them,
there  would  never  be  an  end  of  their
distresses.    They  immediately  there-
fore expelled  these    foreigners ;    the
most   illustrious  and  able   of  whom
passed  over  in  a  body  (as  some  say)
into  Greece  and   other  places  under
the  conduct  of  celebrated  leaders,  of
whom  the  most  renowned  were  Da-
naus  and  Cadmus.


But  a  large  body  of  the  people
went  forth  into  the  country  which  is
now  called  Judasa,  situated  not  far
distant  from  Egypt,  being  altogether
desert  in  those  times.  The  leader  of
this  colony  was  Moses,  a  man  very
remarkable  for  his  great  wisdom  and
valour.  When  he  had  taken  posses-
sion of  the  land,  among  other  cities,
he  founded  that  which  is  called  Jeru-
salem which  is  now  the  most  cele-
brated.— Lib.  XL.  Eel.  I.  p.  921.


N.B.  The  rest  of  the  fragment  gives  an  account  of  the  Jewish  polity,  laws,
&c.  It  was  the  beginning  of  Diodorus'  history  of  the  Jewish  war,  and  is  pre-
served by  Photius.


1%  •


EGYPTIAN  FRAGM1:NT9.


185


OF  THE  EXODUS  OF  THE  JEWS:


FROM  LYSIMACHUS.


Acyci  yap'  *Et*  Box%op€ar?
TOW  WyvTTTiuv  ^aa-iXeu^i  tov
Aoov  tav  *Iou8a/ajy  "Kettpavq  ov-
raq  xai  i/zw/Joy^j  xat  aWa  vo-
a-^IJLard  riva  exovra?,  iiq  ra
Upd  yLaratperjyovrai  fxeraiTeTy
rpo^y,  HafA'rcoXKav  5e  dv^pu'
•nuv  vocrijX/^t  irfpntitrwruv,
dKapTTiav  iv  t^  AiyuTrry  ye-
vMau  Boxxop/v  8e,  tov  tSv
Wyxmriuv  ^aa-i>Jatf  fU  Aa-
uuva*  -jre/xil/a*  irep*  t^?  dmap-
ittaq  rolq  {MtvrevtroiMvovq*  rov
0€6y  Se  i'lmTy  "j"  ra  Upd  xa-
^dpai  air*  dv^puTcav  dvdyvoiv
xa*  ByaaejSSv,  ^xjSaXXoyra
airovq  ^x  tSv  Upuv  €»?  Toirou^
^p6/*«v?,  rovq  8f  xl/wpovq  xa*
XeTcpQvq  jSyl^iVai,  w?  tow  ^X/ox;
dyavaxrovvroi  im  t^  towtwv
t^ari  na)  rd  Upd  dyvia-aif  xaJ
otru  TYfV  yriy  xapiro^pijo^iv.
Toy  Se  Boxxopiv  tov?  Xp'JtTjWov^
XajSoWflt  TOi;^  T6  UpeTq  xai
em^afxiraq  wpoo'XfjiXeo-ajtACVov,
xfX€u<rai  ejriXoyyjv  'Kf>i'^vafA€-
vov^     tSv    d'Mc^dpruVt      ro7q


He  says,  That  in  the  reign  of  Boc-
choris  king  of  Egypt,  the  Jewish
people  being  infected  with  leprosy
scurvy,  and  sundry  other  diseases,
took  shelter  in  the  temples  where
they  begged  for  food;  and  that  in
consequence  of  the  vast  number  of
persons  who  were  seized  with  the
complaint  there  became  a  scarcity  in
Egypt.  Upon  this  Bocchoris  the
king  of  the  Egyptians  sent  persons
to  inquire  of  the  Oracle  of  Ammon,
respecting  the  sterility  :  and  the  god
directed  him  to  cleanse  the  temples
of  all  polluted  and  impious  men  and
cast  them  out  into  the  desert,  but  to
drown  those  that  were  affected  with
the  leprosy  and  scurvy,  inasmuch  as
their  existence  was  displeasing  to  the
Sun;  then  to  purify  the  temples;  upon
which  the  land  would  recover  its  ferti-
lity. When  Bocchoris  had  received  the
oracle,  he  assembled  the  priests  and
attendants  of  the  altars,  and  com-
manded them  to  gather  together  all  the
unclean  persons  and  deliver  them  over
to  the  soldiers  to  lead  them  forth  into


I


'^       I


I


fi


"AfjLjULtvvig  MSS.


f  'EfJiTv  MSS.
B    B


*i  J


uaCCv


If  i


186


EGYPTIAN    FRAGMENTS.


Bva't<rKf€pruv  8e  rSv  Xeirpuy
xa<  ^upuVf  Tov^  aKkw^  (Tvvtf.-
^poia-^cyrai  ^U  toitov^  ip-^ixcvq
^xT€^^vai   eV  aTrwXe/jt'   Iv-

trtpi  aiiTuVf  vi^xto^  8*  iitiye-
vo/Afyyjqy  itvp  xai  "Kvxnvq  xai;-
(Tavra^  <pvXdTr€iv  iavroii^f
Tiyy  T^  cwMt/o-av  vi^xTa  W2«r-
reva-ayraf  iAd<ryi€(r^at  tov^
Kf€ovf,  ttfpl  rev  <ru(Tai  avTol^.
T^  S*  iirioija-r)  yjfxepqi,  Muva^v
Tiva  (TvixpovKiva-at  avroTi;,
leapac^aXXofAtvovq  f^tav  olov
r€fAV€tVy  axpii  ay  *  eX^axrty  €i<;
roirovi  oUovfxeyov^t  TtapayceXev-
<ra<T^ai  re  avroii^  (^"^re  ay
^ptavuy  rty)  evyo-^treiyy  fj^rjre
apKrra  (rvfA.^ov\ev<Teiyy  aXKa
ra  x^poya'  ^eZy  re  yaov<:  xa*
pwfMv^y  Oii  dv  irepirijxcoa-tyf
ayarpeveiv,  Ivyamvdyrocy
le  rZy  aXXuv,  ri  hox^eyra
icomvra^  8ia  t^^  eprifAov  vo-
p€ve<r^ai,  Uavui  8e  exXijdcy-
raq  iXZe7y  eU  t^v  oixovfAey>}y
X^pay,  xa<  tow';  re  dy^puntov<;
i^ptCflyraqj  xaJ  ra  lepa  ffvKuy
T«5  xaJ   iiMtfrqa-ayruij  iK6e7y


the  desert ;  but  to  wrap  the  lepers  in
sheets  of  lead  and  cast  them  into  the
sea.  After  they  had  drowned  those
afflicted  with  the  leprosy  and  scurvy,
they  collected  the  rest  and  left  them
to  perish  in  the  desert.  But  they
took  counsel  among  themselves,  and
when  night  came  on  lighted  up  fires
and  torches  to  defend  themselves,  and
fasted  all  the  next  night  to  propitiate
the  gods  to  save  them.  Upon  the
following  day  a  certain  man  called
Moyses  counselled  them  to  persevere
in  following  one  direct  way  till  they
should  arrive  at  habitable  places,  and
enjoined  them  to  hold  no  friendly
communication  with  men,  neither  to
follow  those  things  which  men  es-
teemed good,  but  such  as  were  con-
sidered evil :  and  to  overthrow  the
temples  and  altars  of  the  gods  as
often  as  they  should  happen  with
them.  When  they  had  assented  to
these  proposals,  they  continued  their
journey  through  the  desert,  acting
upon  those  rules,  and  after  severe
hardships  they  at  length  arrived  in  a
habitable  country,  where,  having  in-
flicted every  kind  of  injury  upon  the
inhabitants,  plundering  and  burning
the  temples,  they  came  at  length  to
the  land  which  is  now  called  Judaea,
and  founded  a  city  and  settled  there.
This  city  was  named  Hierosyla  from


ecxgt  0L»  Sri  Big.  Hafn.


0


EGYPTIAN    FRAGMENTS.


187


€»5  T^y  yvv  *\ovtalay  irpoa'ayo-
p€VO[Jieyr}Vf  xTiVavTa?  he  itoKiv
evTavOcx,  xaTOixfiv.  To  Sc
a<rrv  rovro  lepoavAa  aito
T^5  e%elyay  haSeffeu^  uyoyi.wT'
^ai'  ^  vcr repay  Be  avrov^  eTti-
xpaTijfrayTa^,  xpovf?  haXKd^at
rijv  oyoyLa<riay  vpo^  to  (xvj'j^
iveibi<^€'T$atf  xa*  tijv  re  iroXiv
*lepoa'oKv[Aaf  xai  avrov^  *lepO'
(ToXviAov^  Ttpoo'ayopevia'Oai.


their  disposition.  But  in  after  times
when  they  acquired  strength,  to  ob-
literate the  reproach,  they  changed  its
name  and  called  the  city  Hierosoly-
ma,  and  themselves  Hierosolymites.
— Jos.  contr.  App.  34.


OF  THE  EXODUS  :


FROM  POLEMO.


ropovo'i  Kara  TOf^  avrovq  XP®-

yovq  yevecBai  Mwcrca.

IIoXejiA&^y  jwiv  ^v  tj  ntp6r'^

ray  *E>AijvixSy  la-ropiuv  Xeyajv

*Eir*  T6y''A'jr/5o;  rov  ^(^puyiuq*

lAoTpa  rov   A^yimriuy  arparoZ

i^evea-ey  Alyvvrov.  ot   ev  tJ

naXator/vij  xaXoujixcyTj  Sv/j/^t,

oi    nro^pu   *Apaj3/ct?    ^xvjo-av,

avToi  SijXovoT*  el    imtoc  M«-

<rea^.


Some  of  the  Greeks  also  relate
that  Moses  flourished  in  those  times.

Polemo  in  the  first  book  of  his
Grecian  histories  says,  that — "  In  the
reign  of  Apis  the  son  of  Phoroneus  a
part  of  the  Egyptian  army  deserted
from  Egypt  and  took  up  their  habi-
tation in  that  part  of  Syria  which  is
called  Palestine  not  far  from  Arabia :"
these  indeed  were  they  who  went  out
with  Moses. — Afr'ic,  cited  Eus.  Pr,
Ev.  lib.  10.


•  Quod.  Ugk  fffffv\^xKffi.  Hud. — 'ItgoffiXv/ioi  MSS.

t  d»6fji<i<rrei,  MSS.  I  Vet  Int.  Hud.— Gr.  omitted /*<•


hi

if  hi


rti


188


EGYPTIAN    FRAGMENTS.


Itf


n


OF  THE  EXODUS:


FROM  PTOLEMiEUS  MENDESIUS.


HI


KareVxat/'e  Se  tijv  Ava-  Amosis,  who  lived  about  the  same
fiv  "Aju&xTi^  xam  rov  "ApytTov  time  with  Inachus  the  Argive  over-
y€yofji.i>oi''lvaxovt  »?  ^^  "^o^?  threw  the  city  Avaris ;  as  Ptolemaeus
Xpomq  dHypayp€v  o  McvSijVio^  Mendesius  has  related  in  his  chroni-
nTOMfjuiiOi,  cles. — Clemens  Strom,  cited  Eus,  Pr.

Ev.  lib.  10.


OF  THE  EXODUS  OF  THE  JEWS  :


FROM  ARTABANUS.*


Tdvf  fie  y(fifl<TafjL€vcvq  Tcapa
rav    Alyvmiuv,     vcKka  [mv

Tijv   ipvOpsty  tpirmavi;  i'/^iiy


And  they  (the  Jews)  borrowed
of  the  Egyptians  many  vessels  and
no  small  quantity  of  raiment,  and
every  variety  of  treasure,  and  passed
over  the  blanches  of  the  river  to-
wards Arabia,  and  upon  the  third
day's  march  arrived  at  a  convenient
station  upon  the  Red  Sea.

And     the   Memphites    say     that


•  Artabanus,  evidently  an  Alexandrian  Jew,  is  said  to  have  written  about
a  century  B.  C.  The  fragments  of  his  history  which  have  been  preserved  follow
the  Scripture  with  some  few  variations  and  additions.  I  have  inserted  the  above
fragment  on  account  of  the  Memphite  and  Heliopolitan  traditions  of  the  Exodu*
referred  to  in  it.    Its  authenticity,  however,  is  very  much  to  be  suspected.


EGYPTIAN    FRAGMENTS.


189


Ta,  hca  ^T,pa^  t^^  -^aXaccij;
TO  irX^do^  Ttapatua-at.

'HXiOuiroXiTa^     he      Xeyexv

iifiKara^paiXfTv  rov  jSacriXea
fjATot  iroXX^^  hwd[X€Ui  afACC
%aX  roiq  nadiepufAevoiq  ^e^ot;
hia  TO  rrjy  vnap^iv  rcv^  *lov-
haiovi  t5v  Alyvmluv  xpv}(Ta,[A.€-
yovq  hiay.o[At^€tv,  TS  he  Muvcr(^
^elay  (puvvjv  yevea>tfai  Ttard-
Qai  TTjV  K!aKcurara*  t^  pd^ho),
Tov  Sc  MwuflTov  axot/o'tzyTa,
iitidtyeiv  rrj  pd^hu  tou  i^aro^,
xai  ovru  to  /xcv  voi[/.a  SiacTT^-
vai,  T^y  Se  hrjvafAiv  hia  ^ripa^
oSot;  ncoptvivBai,  2i;v€jtAjSav-
ruv  Se  Twy  Alyxmtluv  xa*
Si&TxovTo^y,  ^0*2  ttvp  avrcli^  ex
ruv  €fA.irpo<r^€V  iyiXdfArpaif  t^v
he  ^dKaa-trav  nrdXty  t^v  ohou
cirixXi^trai.  rov^  he  AlyvTiTiovq
x/irore  rov  izvpoq  xa*  tij^  itkrjfA-
fA.vpiho^  Ttdvraq  hioup'bapTJvcu,

Tovq  he  ^lovha,iovq  hia(pv-
yovraq  rov  xivhwoVf  rptwKOvra
6T7J  ev  T^  ^pyil*'^  hiarpiypcii,
^pexflvro^     avTo7q     rov     ^eov

¥.p7fM0V,      OfAOlOV     e\lJ[JI,(ff      XlQVl

itapa.'a'K'qviov  rvp/  xpoav.  yeyo'


Moyses  being  well  acquainted  with
that  part  of  the  country  waited  for
the  ebbing  of  the  tide,  and  then  made
the  whole  multitude  pass  through  the
shallows  of  the  sea.

But  the  Heliopolitans  say  that  the
king  pursued  them  with  great  power,
and  took  with  him  the  sacred  ani-
mals, in  order  to  recover  the  sub-
stance which  the  Jews  had  borrowed
of  the  Egyptians.  But  that  a  divine
voice  instructed  Moyses  to  strike  the
sea  with  his  rod :  and  that  when
Moyses  heard  this  he  touched  the
waters  with  the  rod,  whereupon  the
waves  stood  apart,  and  the  host  went
through  along  a  dry  path.  He  *  says
moreover  that  when  the  Egyptians
came  up  with  them  and  followed  after
them,  the  fire  flashed  on  them  from
before,  and  the  sea  again  inundated
the  path,  and  that  all  the  Egyptians
perished  either  by  the  fire  or  by  the
return  of  the  waters.


But  the  Jews  escaped  the  danger
and  passed  thirty  years  in  the  desert,
where  God  rained  upon  them  a  kind
of  grain  like  that  called  Panic,  whose
color  was  like  snow.  He  says  also
that  Moyses  was  ruddy  with   white


h


^1


'-'


•  Artabanus  ?     Qy.  Does  not  Eusebius  here  resume  his  extract  from  the
narrative  of  Artabanus  ?


M

I-  I '


>  '-,§


*  .:.!!* l"i2i.'L^      '  4tj


190


EGYPTIAN    FRAGMENTS.


yivai   U  <f»)o-i   Tov   Muv<rovy  hair  and  of  a  dignified  deportment :

itv^puMriy     ito'Movy     xo/xijTijy,  and  that  when  he  did  these  things  he

&iiaiAuri%ov,  raZra  U  itpdlat  was  in  the  eighty-ninth  year  of  his

Ttifi     hti     ovTa    oySo^'xovra  age. — Eus,  Pr,  Ev,  lib.  10.
ivvtot*


THE  FRAGMENTS


OF


THE  TYRIAN  ANNALS:


FROM


DIUS  AND  MENANDER.


■|


eII


ill


III


111


111
111


THE  TYRIAN  ANNALS:


FROM  DIUS.*


OF  HIRAM.


ABIBAAOT  reXivrria-avToqi  o
vlUat^^'^  Efp/xo?"!"  i^aa-iX€v-

Hal  j^e^^ov  TO  aiTTV  -TreTrotij-
Kcv,  §  xai  Tou  *OAv,air/ou  Aio<;
TO  tepoy  xa6'  cauTO  ov  ev  vijo-a>,||
p^w<ra?  Tov  jutfTall  to'ttov,  crvv-
^i//€  t^  iroXet,  Kai  xpv(roTq
avaQ-fiy-ctaiv  eMO-fAria-ev'  ocva-
jSa^  Be  €i«  Tov  Ai^avov  vXoto-
lMi<Ti  Ttpot;  T^v  tSv  vaSv  itaTa-
(Txeuijv.  Tov  Se  Tt^pavvoSvra  'U-
poa-o\vfA.a)y  2oXo/x£ya  ire/Ax/zai
(/)a<ri  ffpo?  Tov  Ef/>a?/xov
alv/y/AaTa,  xa*  na/)*  auToy
XajSelV  oliOiJv'  H  tov  8e  fA»j
SuKij^evTa  5<axp?vat,  t^   XJ-


Upon  the  death  of  Abibalus  his  son
Hiromus  succeeded  to  the  kingdom.
He  raised  the  eastern  parts  of  the
city,  and  enlarged  the  citadel ;  and
joined  to  it  the  temple  of  Jupiter
Olympius,  which  stood  before  upon
an  island,  by  filling  up  the  interme-
diate space :  and  he  adorned  that
temple  with  donations  of  gold  :  and
he  went  up  into  Libanus  to  cut  tim-
ber for  the  construction  of  the  tem-
ples. And  it  is  said  that  Solomon,
who  at  that  time  reigned  in  Jerusa-
lem, sent  enigmas  to  Hiromus,  and
desired  others  in  return,  with  a  pro-
posal that  whichsoever  of  the  two
was  unable  to  solve  them,  should  for-
feit money  to  the  other.     Hiromus


*  Dion.  Sync.

J  Sync,  omits  riji  ir^Kiatf.

II  iv  IVy  Sync.


f  2/pa/iof  Sync.

§  tTo/ijfl-e  Sync.

•[[  irap  aJrou  tyjv  KCatv  Ka$s7»  El.

C  C


II


ttl


Hi


194


THE    TYRIAN  ANNALS.


/  f        /  *

(ravTt  ^prifAara  aitoriveiv.  oixu-

Xoy^<ravra  he  rov  Elpc^uov,  Y.ai
/**j  Zvv-^9tvra  Xva-ai  ra  aWiy
fAotraf  iroXXa  tuv  xprnAaruv
(ii  TO  iTri^v/jtAiOv  avaXua-ai,
elra  Se  'A;38)j,aovoy  *  Tiva  Tv-
pioy  ay^pa  ra.  itpoiiBivra,  Xu-
cat  xa*  aCrov  aXKa  itpo^ctkilv'
a  i*.yi  Kv<Tocvra  rov  SoXojtxwj/a,
tcoKKa  Ty  Etptv/AO)  i:po<raitoTi'
<rai  xp^fAUTa.


agreed  to  the  proposal,  but  was  un-
able to  solve  the  enigmas,  and  paid
treasures  to  a  large  amount  as  a  for-
feit to  Solomon.  And  it  is  said  that
one  Abdemonus,  a  Tyrian,  solved  the
enigmas,  and  proposed  others  vrhich
Solomon  was  not  able  to  unriddle,  for
which  he  repaid  the  fine  to  Hiromus.
— Joseph,  contr,  Ap.  lib.  I.  c.  17. —
SynceL  Chron.  182.


OF  THE  KINGS  AND  JUDGES  FROM  NEBUCHADNEZZAR

TO  CYRUS.


'Eirt  Eldu^dKov  rov  jSaci-

VO<TOpoq  T^V  TvpW     €7r*     €T1J   Sf-

ytarpioi'f  ixtra  rovrov  i^oKTt'
XiVfre  BaaX  eT>j  Scxa.   /xera
TouTov  8*xa<rrai  xaT€(rTa^»j-
<rav  xcti  iliWKToiv'  ^Eyivi^aXo^
Ba<rXaxou  [/.i^vai  8yo,  XeX^rj^
*Aj38a/oy  iM}vai  Sexa,  "A^jSa-
po?  <ipXiepei/5  aijj/a?  Tp<r?,  Mi/t-
yovo<;  xai  T€pa,<rrparo<;  rov '  A/9-
hv}KefMv  hiYua-rai  €t>j   €4,   «v
ixera^v  i^aa-iKivre  BaXdropof
iviavrov   eva*  rovrov  r'tXevrvj-
cavro^,   aTto<Tr€l'havr€^  /a€T€-
grc/xvpavTO    MepjSaXov    ^x  t^?


In  the  reign  of  Ithobalus,  Nabu-
chodonosorus  besieged  Tyre  for  thir-
teen years.     After  him  reigned  Baal
ten  years.     After  him  Judges  were
appointed  who  judged   the   people  :
Ecnibalus,  the  son  of  Baslachus,  two
months :    Chelbes,   the   son  of  Ab-
daeus,  ten  months  :  Abbarus,  the  high-
priest,  three  months :  Mytgonus  and
Gerastratus  the  son  of  Abdelemus,
six    years :     after    them    Balatorus
reigned  one  year  as  king:  and  upon
his  death  the  Tyrians  sent  to  fetch
Merbalus   from   Babylon :     and   he
reigned  four  years:    and  when  he
died  they  sent  for  Hiromus,  his  bro-


♦  'AjS8a/<o>o>  Go.
f  Several  editions  orait  from  N«/Sow^o8o>^o-opof.


DIUS.


195


Baj3i^X«yo?,  "koX  ejSaKr/Xcucrcv
€Tij  rea-crapa,.  rovrov  TfXft-
TijjavTO^,  fMT€Tt€[A.\pavro  rov
dheXxpov  avrov  Etpu[jt.0Vj  o^  i^a-
alK€v<T€v  err]  €iKO(Ttv.  eir*  rov-
rov Kvpo^  Tlfpauv  €hwd<rr€v~

(OitKOvv  0  TiSfAitoLi  y^ovo^  eT*j
irevTijxovTa  ntradpa  xa)  rpit^
jut^ve^  Ttpo^  avrot^,  'EjSBo/x^i)
/xfv  yap  irepl  "j"  ryjq  'Sa^ovxo-
hovoa-opov  ^a(TtXiia^  vjpQaro  tto-
Xiop'KfTv  Tvpov'  re<r<ja.p€<T%ai'-
hiY.dr^  8*  tru  T^?  EipuiMV
Kvpoi  0  ne/)0"ij5  TO  %pdroq  itap-
cXajSev.)


ther,  who  reigned  twenty  years.     In
his  time  Cyrus  was  king  of  Persia.


(The  whole  time  therefore  amounts
to  fifty-four  years  and  three  months.
For  in  the  seventh  year  of  his  reign
Nabuchodonosorus  began  the  siege
of  Tyre  :  and  in  the  fourteenth  year
of  Hiromus  Cyrus  the  Persian  as-
sumed the  government  of  that  king-
dom.)— Joseph  contr,  Ap.  lib.  I.
c.  21.


*  S^Hafn.  Big.
f  it)  Hafn. — J.  Cappel.  reads  liSSa/io;  jmlv  yotf  xou  Sixr.Ty  iVfi,  &c.


THE  TYRIAN  ANNALS :


FROM  MENANDER.


OF  HIRAM.


''I


TEAETTH2ANT()2  8e  'A^*-

Xc/av  0  vioq  avroiv  FupacfAO^t  o^
^iuTa^  err}  irevTvjxovTa  rpla
i^aa-lMva-f]/  €t>j  *  rpid-Kona
r€<T<rQt.pa.  ovto^  e%W(r€  tov
"EvpVX^P^V,  TOV  r€  xpt(Tc,vv
x/ovflc  iv  ro7q  rov  A«o^  ave^rj-
v.€V*  exi  y  T€  vkvjv  |vX&?v  aTreX-
^uv  cxoi//€v,  aito  TOV  X€yoy.€vov
opovf  Ai^dvoVf  xeSptva  ^vXa
€«^  Tocq  tZv  UpZv  a-reyu^,  xa-
KteXuv  T€  TO.  dpyjoua  Upa,
y.aivov^  paol^  (jpno^o(/.rja-€,  to
T€  ToiJ  *HpaxX€ot^,  xai  t^^
*AcrTapT>j^  Tfufvoq  dviepetveVf
xai  TO  /xfv  To5  'HpaxXeot^
TrpSrov  inoi'^araTo^  iv  tS  llep-
niq)  fA.rjv)f  eiTo,  to  t^?  'Aa-Tccp-


After  the  death  of  Abibalus,  Hiro-
mus  his  son  succeeded  him  in  his
kingdom,  and  reigned  thirty-four
years,  having  hved  fifty-three.  He
laid  out  that  part  of  the  city  which  is
called  Eurychoron  :  and  consecrated
the  golden  column  which  is  in  the
temple  of  Jupiter.  And  he  went  up
into  the  forest  on  the  mountain  called
Libanus,  to  fell  cedars  for  the  roofs
of  the  temples  :  and  having  demo-
lished the  ancient  temples,  he  rebuilt
them,  and  consecrated  the  fanes  of
Hercules  and  Astarte  :  he  construct-
ed that  of  Hercules  first,  in  the  month
Peritius  ;  then  that  of  Astarte,  when
he  had  overcome  the  Tityans  who
had  refused  to  pay  their  tribute :  and
when  he  had  subjected  them  he  re-


*  Hud.  from  Sync,  and  Ant— from  Twr^xwr*  was  before  omitted.

t  in)  Sync. — iVtira  Vulg.

X  Jrp^ou  Tf  TTiv  lyt^ffiv  Toj  'HpaxUoui  i7rott,ffaTO   Al.


m.


MENANDER.


197


T1J5,  07roT€  TiTvoTq  *  iina'Tpd-
T€v<r€Vy  fxr)  d'nohidova'i  toi/^
(popovq.  otq  xa*  i-noTix^aq  eavrS
nrdXiv  dvia-Tpfxj/fv.j  im  tov-
TW  8f  Ti5  \v  *A^8^,(xoyo5  ira^j
v^urepo^f  6^]}[  ivUa,  tu  irpo^K-^-
jtxaTa,    a   iTi€Ta<T<T€  ^oAQfA,uy

0  *l€pO(TOkvi/.!i>V   8ci<TrA€Vq,


turned.  In  his  time  was  a  certain
young  man  named  Abdemonus,  who
used  to  solve  the  problems  which
were  propounded  to  him  by  Solomon
king  of  Jerusalem. — Joseph,  contr,
Ap.  lib.  I.  c.  18. — Joseph,  Ant'tq.
Jud.  lib.  VIII.  c.  5.


OF  THE  SUCCESSORS  OF  HIRAM.


TeXiVTr^cravToq  Etpuixov  hti-
he^aTo  Trjv  ^atriXelav  BaXea-
(^apot;^  0  Vio^j  o^,  picaa-oc^  (tvj
T€<ra^apdKOvra  T/>/a,  i^aai-
Xcvacv  (TYj  eTTTa.  jttcTa  toStov
A^tdiTTpaToq  ||  «  avTov  vlo^^
picoa-a^  erv)  €iM(ri  cvvta,  epa-
(riMva-ev  exij  ivveac.  tovtov  ot
rrjq  Tpo<l)Qv  ctvTov  vlo)  Teo"«ra-
p(q  €Tri^ovA€v<rayT€i  diruM-
arav,  uv  6  itpea-^vrepoq  e^acr*-

MV<T€V    €T>J    SexaS^'o.     fA€^*   ot^

A<TrapToq  o  AeXaiacTTa^xoy,^
0^,  ^I'jxraq  €T»j  TrcvnyxovTa
T€(T  era  pa  f  e;5ao-/X€vcr«v€T>j  8w-
Sfxa.  f^€Toc  TOVTOV  0  aSeX^^
avTov    *A(J€pvu.oi;,  **    ^luxraq


Upon  the  death  of  Hiromus,  Ba-
leazarus  his  son  succeeded  to  the
kingdom  ;  he  lived  forty-three  years,
and  reigned  seven  :  after  him  Abdas-
tratus  his  son  reigned  nine  years,
having  lived  twenty-nine :  against  him
the  four  sons  of  his  nurse  conspired,
and  slew  him :  of  these  the  eldest
reigned  twelve  years :  after  them
Astartus,  the  son  of  Delaeastartus,
reigned  twelve  years,  having  lived
fifty-four :  after  him  his  brother
Aserumus  reigned  nine  years,  having
lived  fifty-four  :  he  was  slain  by  his
brother  Pheles,  who  governed  the
kingdom  eight  months,  having  lived
fifty  years  :  he  was  slain  by  the  priest


•  TTtos  El.— Lowth  proposes  Tvploig — Titicaeos  Vet.  Int. — 'Iux»o/$  'Hvx«/oi$
MSS. — 'Hi.'x«o»s   Jos.  in  Ant.

f  Sync,  omits  the  eleven  lines  from  xo&tXti/v  t«.

J  Sync,  and  Jos.  in  Ant.  insert  «i).

§  BaXj8dt?f/50f  Sync. — &a<xh$d^igos    Dind.

II  AuSdtoTofTOf  Syn. — 'AjfiSaj-ro^rof  Din.  %  'EXiao-Tflc^rou  Sync.

••  ' Aff^ofZ/uioi   Din.


i


<  I  ■  >


■;— aimiirJM-5wfc-


It


198


THE  TYRIAN  ANNALS.


(Ml


€^aa-iX€va-€y  tT>j  cvvf'a.  ovToq
a-nwKero  viio  rov  a8€X«/)oy  *€-

Xe/av  ?p^€  /x^va?  oxTii,  ^no(Tai
iTfj  TTcvTevcovTa.  TouTOV  avei-
XevEjSrwjSaXo^f    o  t^?   'Ao-

€T>J  kl-flMVra  OKTW.   TOl/TOV  8<€-

jSiwo-af  €Tij  T€(ro-a/)axovTa
ireyTC,  i^a<ri>,€v<r€y  €tij  €5.
tov'tou  StaSo^o?  7€7oy€  Mar-
T^iVO^  §  0  tloq,  0?,  ^iucaq  eryj
TptaxovTa  Buo,  i^aa-iK€V(r€)f
tTi)  €VV6a.  ToyTOU  BiaBoxo^  76-
7&ve  *t7/xaX/&.'v,  ||  ^Mcaq  V
tTV}  TTCVT^xovTa  tf,  i^aaiKev
0"€v  €T>j  TecTcapccKOVTa  (Ttra.
iv  le  rS  lit*  clvtoZ  €^So/xaj  €T€t
^   aS€X(/)^    auToSif  ipxjywaa,

KapXfi^va.

ay^i  Kapxr)Bovo?  uriareu^y  ertj

Sex^ry  eTCi  t^^  ElpufAOv  j3a-
ffiXeia^  iv  'Ie/)o<ToXt;/xoi?  ^xoSo-


of  Astarte,  Ithobalus,  who  reigned
thirty-two  years,  having  lived  sixty-
eight  :  and  he  was  succeeded  by  Ba-
dezorus  his  son,  who  reigned  six
years,  having  lived  forty-five :  his
successor  was  Matgenus  his  son,  who
reigned  nine  years,  having  lived
thirty-two  :  and  he  was  succeeded  by
Phygmalion  who  reigned  forty-seven
years,  having  lived  fifty-six :  in  the
seventh  year  of  his  reign  his  sister
fled  from  him,  and  founded  the  city
of  Carthage  in  Libya.


(Whence  it  appears  that  the  sum  of
the  whole  time  from  the  reign  of  Hi-
romus  to  the  foundation  of  Carthage
is  155  years  and  8  months.  And  shice
the  temple  in  Jerusalem  was  built  in
the  twelfth  year  of  the  reign  of  Hiro-


i


•  4.t'AXriT05  Sync.  t  E»<^^«Xos    Sync.

+   HaKi^opot  Din. — BdtXjtfOS  Go.

^   lVl«T«voj    Din. — M^Tfjvos   B. — AiTn-os  Go.

II  MuySaX/tt'v  <l>uo-yuavou»  Sync. — nuy/*aX/a;»  Go.  m. — *u<n/ia»oD»  Go.

^  Sc.  inserts  A<8<1;.  ••  Hud.  from  Theoph.  Ant.— x'  Vulg.


li


MENANDER.


199


fAri^fj  0   vao^y    y€yov€v  olv  *  mus,  therefore  from  the  building  of  the

avo  Tyj;  QUoZo[Ari<T€a?q  tou  vxov  temple  to  the  foundation  of  Carthage

axpi  licipxri^vo<;  xTiVfi'?,  err)  the  time  is  a  hundred  and  forty-three

€xaTov  Tco-o-apaxovTa  rpia  f  years  and  eight  months.) — Jos,  cont.

fA^vft;  oxT«.)  y4p,  lib.  I.  c.  18. — Sync,  183.


OF  THE  INVASION  OF  SALMANASAR.


!l


Kal     *EKovKa7oq  J      oVo/xa
€j3ao-/X6VO-cveT7jT/j<axoyTa  e|.
ovTOft  dTZO<nciyTu>v  KiTTa/wv,  §
dvoivKiva-aqy  'npoa-riydyeTO  av-
Tovq  nrdcAiv.  iv)  rovTOv^  ireu-
rl/ocq  {^QiKu.dvx<Tap)  0  tuv  'Ao"-
(Tvpluv  jSatTiXet^,  iiirfK^e  $ot-
v/xijv  iroXey-ay  aTracrav,   oi;  n^
a-']i€Krdu.€vot;      elp'^vfiv,     f/.€Ta
itdvTuv      dv€X<^pfi<^fv      Ittiaaj.
dnitTTfi  T€   Tvplcov  2*S«v  xai
'Ax^ll   xa»  7)  ndXcn  Tvpoq,^
xai   iroXyJci   aKXaci  izoXeiqt  ai
rS  rSv  *X<T<rvplajv  kavrdq  /Sa-
(Tiku  Ttxp^'boyav.  8<o  Tvptuv  **
avx  vnoTayevray  trdXiv  0  ]Sa-
(TiXevq  ill   avTovq  in:€<rrpa.yp€j
^oiyUcuv  o'vu.TtXyjpooadvTuy  Jy
avro)  vai'i  ctvjxovTa,  if  If    ytai
iTriY-UTCOvq  oxTaxoo-/ot;^.   aT^§§
iTHitAeva-ocvTe;  oi  Tvpioi  vavar)


Elulaeus  reigned  thirty-six  years:
and  he  fitted  out  a  fleet  against  the
Cittaeans  §  who  had  revolted,  and  re-
duced them  to  obedience.  But  Sal-
manasar,  the  king  of  the  Assyrians,
sent  them  assistance,  and  overran
Phoenicia :  and  when  he  had  made
peace  with  the  Phoenicians  he  return-
ed with  all  his  forces.  And  Sidon,
and  Ace  (Acre),  and  Palaetyrus,  and
many  other  cities  revolted  from  the
Tyrians,  and  put  themselves  under
the  protection  of  the  king  of  Assyria.
But  as  the  Tyrians  still  refused  to
submit,  the  king  made  another  expe-
dition against  them :  and  the  Phoe-
nicians furnished  him  with  sixty  ships
and  eight  hundred  rowers  :  and  the
Tyrians  attacked  him  with  twelve
ships,  and  dispersed  the  hostile  fleet,
and  took  prisoners  to  the  amount  of


•  Hafn.  omits.  f  rnj  (p\y  Theoph.  Ant. — p/n-/  Sync.

J  'EA/\a7os    Fr.  §  Cyprios  Sc. — Usher  proposes  riTratojv.

II  Some  have  "A^xjj.  ^  Periz.  thinks  it  should  be  BjjfiWT^s .

••  Big.  Samb.  and  Vat.  insert  aurw.

f  f  Epiphanius  reads  it  Phoenicibus  exhibentibus.

+:  70.  Epiph.  §§  off  Epiph.


!|


I


if


*i


11  H  mi

lull


200


THE  TYRIAN  ANNALS.


$€xa§yo,  tSv  vawv  ruv  dvn-

v(iv<riv  alxj^stXaTov^  avbpaq  €«c
ircvTctxoir/oti^.  ineTa^vj  htjitotv
tuv  iv  Tvp^  Ti/*ij  hia  TczvTa,
dva^ev^aq  S'  o  ruv  *Aa<TvpMV
/9a(TiXcti?  xaTao-T^<r€  </)uXaxa^
CTTi  ToU  TtoTdiAov  xa*  Twv  uSpa-
yuyluVf  ol  hiacKuKiKTOvo'i  Tv-
piQvq  apucacrSrai.  I    xa<  touto

T€pr}(Tav  7r/vovT€5  ^x  <f)p(druv
opyxTwv.


five  hundred  men :  upon  which  ac-
count the  Tyrians  were  held  in  great
respect.*  But  the  king  of  Assyria
stationed  guards  upon  the  river  and
aqueducts,  to  prevent  the  Tyrians  from
drawing  water :  and  this  continued
five  years,  during  all  which  time  they
were  obliged  to  drink  from  the  wells
they  dug. — Joseph,  Antiq.  Jud.  lib.
IX.  c.  14.


•  "Apha^ai  Vat.— «f(Jia-&a<  Fr.
f  Aucta  hinc  apud  Tyrios  rerum  omnium  pretia.  Grot.


Hi


CARTHAGINIAN  FRAGMENTS:


FROM


HANNO  AND  HIEMPSAL.


i


i


i


I


B    D


fl


J- 1


I


THE  PERIPLUS  OF  HANNO.


I


■I


ill


ANNONOS

KAPXHAONinN  BASIAEflS
nEPinAOT2,

TON    vTffp    raq    'HpayXiovq
crrriKaq  AijSwcSv  T^?  7?^  /x€-

Toy  Kpovow*  r ([/.€>€ If  ^v}XovvTa

*'E5oJ€v  KapxijSov/o<^,  "Av-
vwyct  ntKuv  ilu  (TTijXSv  *H/}ax-
Xc/ftJV,  xa)  woXcj?  xTi^^iV  A<^y-
dxiivUuy.  xa<  eirXci/cev,  ircvrij-
Kovripovi  elijxoyTa  a-yojv,  xai
rrXij^o?  avhpwv  xa»  ywamov,
(\^  api%flJihv  [xvpidZuy  rpiuv,  ycai
<r7rd,  xaJ  t^v  aXXijv  i:apqi.<T-
x€v^y,

*Qq  8'  &yay^€vreq,  raq
crri^Xa?  'JtupvjiA.eiypafMVf  xat
ejfi*  tXoiJv  §yoiV  7}[A€pZy  ^TrXci/-
<ra[A€Vf  €XTiVa/Aev  irpuriiv  wo-


THE  VOYAGE

OF  HANNO,  COMMANDER  OF  THE
CARTHAGINIANS,

Round  the  parts  of  Libya  which  lie
beyond  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,
which  he  deposited  in  the  temple  of
Saturn.

It  was  decreed  by  the  Carthagi-
nians that  Hanno  should  undertake
a  voyage  beyond  the  Pillars  of  Her-
cules, and  found  Libyphoenician
cities.  He  sailed  accordingly  with
sixty  ships  of  fifty  oars  each,  and  a
body  of  men  and  women  to  the  num-
ber of  thirty  thousand,  and  provi-
sions and  other  necessaries.

When  we  had  passed  the  Pillars
on  our  voyage,  and  had  sailed  beyond
them  for  two  days,  we  founded  the
first  city,  which  we  named  Thymia-


1      I


M


I  -  i


*  Junonis  Plin.  Solinus.


••*«liita


i


204


CARTHAGINIAN    FRAGMENTS.


m


Xiv,  ^j/T/j-a  uyoiJi.d(Taix(v  0u-  terium.  Below  it  lay  an  extensive
u<aTy;piov**  ttcB/ov  S*  avTrj  plain.  Proceeding  thence  towards
[Atya  vTiyjv'  y.^Tt€iru  itpU  cV-  the  west,  we  came  to  Soloeis,  a  pro-
nttpctv  a>ax^€>i€i,  in)  2oXo-  montory  of  Libya,  a  place  thickly
fvTa  Ai^l'kIv  a-Kpo^TTipKiv,  Xa-  covered  with  trees,  where  we  erected
o-iov  U.^hpio-i  <rvy^X^o[A(v,  tv^a,  a  temple  to  Neptune  ;  and  again  pro-
lioatilZvoq  Uply  itiiva-du^votf  ceeded  for  the  space  of  half  a  day
nrdXtv    €7rt^vj/xev    itpo^    r,XiQy     towards   the  east,  until  we  arrived  at

a  lake  lying  not  flir  from  the  sea,  and
filled  with  abundance  of  large  reeds.
Here  elephants,  and  a  great  number
of  other  wild  beasts,  were  feeding.


av*<r%ovTa  ri^-epixi;  ^ia-ktv,  ayjpi


mlppu  Tij^  &aAaTT>3^  yuifxevi^Uf
xaXd}A.ov  jtAfCTr/v  tioKaov  xa*
fifydXov,  i>r,<rav  h(  x«t<  iXe"
^avTff,  xcii  ra'AKu  ^vipia  ve-
[Aoixeva  ira/XTToXXa.

Tojv  T€  Xi[A.>r}v  irapaXXa-  Having  passed  the  lake  about  a
favT€{  ocrov  ^/>c«jja?  ttXoi/v,  xa-  day's  sail,  we  founded  cities  near  the
r<f\f.'^a-auev '\  itoKei^  vpoq  t^  sea,  called  Cariconticos,  and  Gytte,
SraXaTTrj  KaKov[A€va^f  Kapi'Kov  and  Acra,  and  Melitta,  and  Aram-
re  reix^^t  ta*  YvxT-fiVj  xai  bys.  Thence  we  came  to  the  great
AY.pnt.Vy    xa<    MeXiTxav,    xai     river  Lixus,  which  flows  from  Libya.

On  its  banks  the  Lixitae,  a  shepherd
tribe,  were  feeding  flocks,  amongst
whom  we  continued  some  time  on
friendly  terms.  Beyond  the  Lixitae
l€(i  dv^pamoi  Ai^irai.  ^ocry.-^-  dwelt  the  inhospitable  Ethiopians,
fAur  €V€iA0Vy  itap*  otq  ifjLuva.-  who  pasture  a  wild  country  intersect-
/x€v  dxp^  Tm^i  (jjtXoi  yevofAfvoi,  ed  by  large  mountains,  from  which
Toiyrajv  ^€  xa^'  vnep^cVf  At-  they  say  the  river  Lixus  flows.  In
S'/oTTf^  yxotv  d^fvoiy  jrjv  veiAo-  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mountains
lAfvoi  ^rjpiuhr,  li€i\-^iJt.u€>viv  lived  the  Troglody tae,  men  of  various
op€<ri  fMydKoi^f  i^  uv  puv  ipaa)     appearances,  whom  the  Lixitae  de-

•  &vjuu(XTrig{a  St. — Qv/Aia7iigtas   Scyl.
t  Gem.  proposes  xoLTwxlaxfitv.


Apay.^w.  x^xer^^ev  S'   dvaX'

rafMv  At^av,  ocuq   t^j  Ai^ijrj^
peovTa.  Tiapa  S*  ajJrov,  Noua-


HANNO.


«05


Toy  A/^ov.  Ttep)  8e  to,  opyj,  xa-
r»iK€7y  dv^puirovq  aXKoiofAop-
<povf  Tpc^\oZvT(x.q*  ovq  Tayv-
repovq  7micov  iv  tpofAOif  eippctCflv
01  Ai^hat,

AajSovTf  ^  §€  Tcap*  avrZv  ip-
fAyjveaq  TiapeTrXeofxev  Tr,v  ipt}-
lA.r)v  •Kpo(;  iM.a-riy.^plaVy  Sw
7ji/.€p'zq.  cxer^cv  te  tidXiy  irpoi
^Xioy  av/crp^ovra,  vj[A.€pa.^  Spo-  »
jtxov.  €y^a  iCpoixev  iv  f^v^^  Tivoq
xo'X-TTov,  v^cov  fjuv-puvy  xuxXov
e%oi/<7av  CTaS/wv  ittvre'  tjj/
xarajxijTajtAcv,*  Kfpvjy  ovoixd-
<ra,vT€q.  ire/.ixaipoiA(.^a.  V  av-
Tqv  €x  ToU  TrepittXov,  xar*  eiJdt
x€?<T'^at  Kapp^vjSovoj.  ejjxet
ya^  0  uXoiJj,  ex  xe  Kapx/j^o-
vo^y  cir)  o-T^Xa^,  xjtxerSrev  eir/
Kep)jv,

To^vTcSvev  e/^  /JfAvviv  a(pi~
MOfAf^Uy  5*a  Tivc^  morafAcv  [/.i-
ydXov  SiaTrXe^cavrej,  Xperrj^.
et^fv  Se  yrjo-ovq  ^  X«]t>cy>j  T/Je?^,
we/^ofj  T^^  KipvYiq.  acf*  uy
yjfA€prj<rioy  iiMvy  v.aTayijcray-
r€qy  t\(;  rr^v  [Avyjav  T^q  AitAvrjq
ijX^Ojixev.  v-ntp  r^v  oprj  [xeytara
i/iKpere^yeyy  fxercc  -f  dy^pwituv
ay  play,  hepfxara.  ^-^pua  ivr,fA-
fAivuVy  ot  irirpoiq  ^dKkoynqy
d-nTipa^av  rjfxaqy  MuAvoynq  ex-
^yai.  ex€?^ev  itXeovreq,  ilq
fTepoy  r]X^o[MV  Tiora/xoy  fjieyav


scribed  as  swifler  in   running  than
horses.


Having  procured  interpreters  from
them  we  coasted  along  a  desert  coun-
try towards  the  south  two  days.
Thence  we  proceeded  towards  the
east  the  course  of  a  day.  Here  we
found  in  a  recess  of  a  certain  bay  a
small  island,  containing  a  circle  of  five
stadia,  where  we  settled  a  colony,  and
called  it  Cerne.  We  judged  from  our
voyage  that  this  place  lay  in  a  direct
line  with  Carthage ;  for  the  length  of
our  voyage  from  Carthage  to  the
Pillars,  was  equal  to  that  from  the
Pillars  to  Cerne.

We  then  came  to  a  lake  which  we
reached  by  sailing  up  a  large  river
called  Chretes.  This  lake  had  three
islands,  larger  than  Cerne ;  from
which  proceeding  a  day's  sail,  we
came  to  the  extremity  of  the  lake,
that  was  overhung  by  large  moun-
tains, inhabited  by  savage  men,
clothed  in  skins  of  wild  beasts,  who
drove  us  away  by  throwing  stones,
and  hindered  us  from  landing.  Sailing
thence  we  came  to  another  river,  that
was  large  and  broad,  and  full  of  cro-
codiles,  and   river   horses;    whence


•  xontyxt'a-ajuf)t  Gesn,


f  fjitark  Gesfl.


206


CARTHAGINlAIf    FRAGMENTS.


1


xai  irXaTty,  ytfxovra  x^oho-
8e/Xwv  Via)  Iwnuv  •jtoraiAiuv.
o^fv   hrj  TtdXiv  dTtoTpeyi/avre^,

*Ex€l^ey  Zi  in)  fAea-rjix^pia;
iTtX€iu<ra[ji.€v  hwhxa  ^jwepo^,
T^»  T^y  vapay-fyOfMyoi,  -^tf
'Kaerav  xaT^KOw  At^/oirf^,
<p€rjyovr€^  rjiAM^.,  nai  ou^  wro-
l*.tv(iVTiC  d<riv€Ta  8*  i^ty
yorrOf  yuii  rot;  fA.i\l*  rj[/.av  Ai^-
irai(«  Tij  S'  oi5y  rcXivrat^
rif/Jp^it  irpoara)pfA.l(r^-^i/.€V  opea-i
fMydXm;  ha(r€<rtv.  r^v  Se  ra
T«y  ScyBpojy  ^^Xa  €ta7Si7  re  xct*
iiO(x/aix.  ftepircXeva-ayrti  Se
TaSra  vif^epoi^  Svo,  7*vou«3ra
^y  SroXc^TTTj^  Xdai^aTi  ajW€-
rp-^r<p,  rji  ciri  ^drepa  iipo;  t^
•y?j,  ircS/oy  ^v,  o^ey  vv/.t;?
d<p€upSfMVt  tivp  aya^/x>/xeyoy
'Kayraxl'^fv  v.otT*  dnoo'Taa'etfj
To^ey  ntXiaVf  to  V  eAarrov,

*Thp€v<rd(A€vot  8'  ^x«r^€y,  ^-
•KkioiAiV  tli  rotfATrpoa-Oev  ^/^c-
pa<  iteyrc  ira^ct  T^y,  axp»  »jX-
KlofMV  €i(  fieyoiv  xoXiroy,  ov
€(f>a(rav  at  ipiArjveeq  "naKeTcr^atf
'Ea-irfpov  Ktpa^.  e'y  Se  Toi^y,
y^trof  lyy  fA«ydKiif  xai  €y  t^
njc^ji),  XifAV^  ^aAflK70"wSij^,  ^y
Sc  ravrvi  vf\<j<iq  irtpaf  tl^  ^v
d'n<^dvT€;j  TUfAtpaq  jwev,  oiJScv
dipfupSiMv,  OTi  jUC^0Ai}y*yMcTo<
5f,  TTvpa  T€  woXXa  yiaiofJLfvaf
xat    <^ft^VT|y    aOXci^y    ^xoyojwcv,


returning    back   we   came   again   to
Cerne.


Thence  we  sailed  towards  the
south  twelve  days,  coasting  tlie  shore,
the  whole  of  which  is  inhabited  by
Ethiopians,  who  would  not  wait  our
approach  but  fled  from  us.  Their
language  was  not  intelligible  even  to
the  Lixitae,  who  were  with  us.  To-
wards the  last  day  we  approached
some  large  mountains  covered  with
trees,  the  wood  of  which  was  sweet-
scented  and  variegated.  Having
sailed  by  these  mountains  for  two
days  we  came  to  an  immense  opening
of  the  sea ;  on  each  side  of  which
towards  the  continent,  was  a  plain  ;
from  which  we  saw  by  night  fire
arising  at  intervals  in  all  directions,
either  more  or  less.

Having  taken  in  water  there,  we
sailed  forwards  five  days  near  the
land,  until  we  came  to  a  large  bay
which  our  interpreters  informed  us
was  called  the  Western  Horn.  In
this  was  a  large  island,  and  in  the
island  a  salt-water  lake,  and  in  this
another  island,  where,  when  we  had
landed,  we  could  discover  nothing  in
the  day-time  except  trees  ;  but  in  the
night  we  saw  many  fires  burning,  and
heard  the  sound  of  pipes,  cymbals,
drums,   and    confused   shouts.     We


HAKNO.


207


WJfJi^dXav  re    xal  rvf/UKavuv
ndrayoVf    xai  upavyijv    /ao-
ptay,      (po^o^      vtv       eXsjSey
^jtAaj,  xai  Oi  y.dvT€ii  iyiiXevov
tycktiireiv  ttjv  v^ja-ov.   tayy  V
(mt'Kfija'ayT€ff  irap^fA.ci^ou.eBa
Xupav   htdirvpoy  0y/^(ot/>caT&?y*
fXiO'Toi  8*  aw*  avryjq  irvpuheii
pi;ax€^,  iye^a'AXov  €<<  r^y  ^d-
XaTxay.    tj  yrj  h*  viro  ^tpiArj^f
a^atoq  7}y.  ra^l  oly  yi^xeTdev
iJK^i^^leyreq      d'^€it\€rj<TafJi€y'
rcTTapa^  S*  vjfAepa;  (pepofxevoi,
ywcToj   rvjv    y^v     d(p€upZij(.€yf
(pXoyoi  y-ea-T'^v.  iy  fAeartp  8*  ?v
rjXi^aroy  Tt  wu/j,  ruy   aKKuy
l^fTCfiVf    dTtTOfAevoy    u;    ^8oxe*
rwy  aa-Tpuy'    oIjto;  S*   r]fA€pa;f
opo^  iipalytto  fUyia-Toyf   Stay
^X^H-^  y-ocXovixeyoy,   rptraToi  8*
<x€<^€y,  itvpuhi^  ptjUKotq  fca-
pa'ir\€ij(rayT€i,   d<f}iyiofji.€6a  €«V
xoXiroy,  NoToy  Kepa;  XeyofAC-
VQV.  ^y  86  T^  ftv^y,  y^a-Q^  ^y,
€oiwia  ry  'JrpUTrif  Xt/A.y>jy  exov-
o-a'   xa*   iy   raiiry,   y^a-o;  Ijy
iripa,  iMvrr,   dyBpuituv  dy-
piuy.    iroXv    hi    irkeiovf   v^tray
7w«ixej,  Zaa-ficn  roT^  a-ufjui-
<r*y'    df   0*    iptxvjyiei  iwiXovv
TopiXkaf*  htixovrei  8e,  ay^pa;
A*ey,    <rv\\a^€iy  ovk  yj^yvjev}'
f*fy'  dXKa  irdyre^  (Aty  *i€<f)v-
yoy,    xpvjixyo^drai    oyre^,    xai
Tor^     fAtrploii  f     dfMvyofA€yoi.

*  Qy.  the  earth.


were  then  afraid,  and  our  diviners  or-
dered us  to  abandon  the  island.  Sail-
ing quickly  away  thence,  we  passed
a  country  burning  with  fires  and  per-
fumes ;  and  streams  of  fire  supplied
from  it  fell  into  the  sea.     The  coun-
try* was  impassable  on  account  of  the
heat.  We  sailed  quickly  thence,  being
much  terrified;  and  passing  on  for
four  days,  we  discovered  at  night  a
country  full  of  fire.     In  the  middle
was  a  lofty  fire,  larger  than  the  rest,
which   seemed   to   touch   the   stars.
When  day  came  we  discovered  it  to
be  a  large  hill  called  the  Chariot  of
the  Gods.  On  the  third  day  after  our
departure  thence,  having  sailed  by
those  streams  of  fire  we  arrived  at  a
bay  called  the  Southern  Horn ;  at  the
bottom  of  which  lay  an   island   like
the  former,  having  a  lake,  and  in  this
lake  another  island,  full  of  savage
people,    the   greater  part   of  whom
were    women,    whose  bodies    were
hairy,    and    whom   our   interpreters
called  Gorillae.    Though  we  pursued
the  men  we  could  not  seize  any  of
them  ;  but  all  fled  from  us,  escaping
over   the   precipices,  and  defending
themselves  with  stones.  Three  women
were  however   taken;  but  they  at-
tacked their   conductors   with  their
teeth  and  hands,  and  could  not  be
prevailed  upon    to    accompany   us.
Having  killed  them,  we  flayed  them,

f  rhgotg  Gesn.


lSi„-i!^?.


208


CARTHAGINIAN    FRAGMENTS.


ywa7y.ai  &«  rpeTq^  at  Saxvov-
a-ai  T€  Kot  a-TtapaTrovcrai  tow?
ayoma^  odx.  vj^f^oy  eitetr^ai*
dirov-Teiyayrt^  fxevroi  avTa^,
€^€^Cip!XiJt.€Vf  xa*  raq  hopaq
i-K(Hxi<raiJi.iv  u^  Ka/3%ijBova.  ov
yap  €Ti  iTiXiijo-afxev  Trpoa-urepUf


and  brought  their  skins  with  us  to
Carthage.  We  did  not  sail  further
on,  our  provisions  failing  us.


HIEMPSAL:


FROM    SALLUST.


OF  THE  AFRICAN  SETTLEMENTS.


Sed   qui  mortales   initio

Africam   habuerint,    qui-

que    postea    accesserint,

aut  quo  modo   inter    se

permixti  sint,  quaraquam

ab  ea  fama,  quae  pleros-

que  obtinet,  diversum  est ;

tamen,  ut  ex  libris  Puni-

cis,  qui  regis  Hiempsalis

dicebantur,  interpretatum

nobis    est :    utique    rem

sese  habere,  cultores  ejus

terras  putant,  quam  pau-

cissimis    dicam.       Caete-

rum  fides  ejus  rei  penes

auctores  erit.

Africam  initio  habuere
Gaetuli,  et  Libyes,  asperi,
incultique,  quis  cibus  erat
caro  et  ferina,  atque  Iiumi
pabulum,    uti   pecoribus.


But  what  race  of  men  first  had  pos-
session of  Africa,  and  who  afterwards
arrived,  and  in  what  manner  they
have  become  blended  with  each
other;  though  the  following  differs
from  tlie  report  which  is  commonly
current,  yet  I  will  give  it  as  it  was
interpreted  to  me  from  the  Punic
books,  which  are  called  the  books  of
King  Hiempsal,  and  will  explain  in
as  few  words  as  possible  the  opinion
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  itself
relative  to  the  matter  in  question.
But  its  authenticity  must  rest  upon
the  credit  of  its  authors.

The  aboriginal  possessors  of  Africa
were  the  Gaetulians  and  Libyans,  a
rough  unpolished  race,  whose  food
was  flesh  and  venison,  and  the  pastur-
age of  the  ground  like  cattle.     They

E  E


210


CARTHAGINIAN  FRAGMENTS.


i!


Hi


Hi  neque  moribus,  neque
lege,  aut  impcrio  cujus-
quam  regebantur ;  vagi,
palantes,  quas  nox  coi3-
gerat,  sedes  habebant.

Sed  postquam  in  His-
pania  Hercules,  sicut  Afri
putant,  interiit,  exercitus
ejus  compositus  ex  gen-
tibus  variis,  amisso  ducc,
ac    passim     multis     sibi
quisque  imperium  peten-
tibus,  brevi  dilabitur.  Ex
eo  numero  Medi,  Persae,
et   Armenii,   navibus    in
Africam  transvecti,proxi-
mos  nostro  mari  locos  oc-
cupavere.       Sed     Persae
intra     Oceanum     magis  :
hique  alveos  navium    in-
verses  pro   tuguriis    ha-
buere  :   quia  neque  mate-
ria in  agris,  neque  ab  His-
panis  emundi,  aut  mutandi
copia  erat.     Mare  mag-
num,    et    ignara    lingua
commercia    prohibebant.
Hi  paulatim,  per  connu-
bia,  Gaetulos  secum  mis-
cuere  ;  et  quia  ssepe  ten-
tantes  agros,  alia,  deinde
alia  loca  petiverant,  semet
ipsi  Numidas  appellavere.
Caeterum   adhuc  a^dificia
Numidarum      agrcstium,


were  neither  restrained  by  morals,
nor  law,  nor  any  man's  government ;
wanderers  and  houseless,  taking  up
their  abode  wherever  they  might
chance  to  be,  when  night  came  upon
them.

But    when    Hercules    perished    in
Spain,    according  to  the   opinion  of
the  Africans,  his  army,  composed  of
various  nations,  upon  the  loss  of  its
leader,  and  from  the  factious  attempts
of  many  to  assume  the  command  was
quickly  dispersed.     From  its  ranks
the  Medes,  Persians,  and  Armenians,
having  passed  over  by  shipping  into
Africa,  occupied  the  parts  bordering
upon  our  sea.     The  Persians  settled
towards    the    Atlantic   Ocean;     and
formed    cottages    of    the     inverted
hulls  of  tlieir  vessels  ;   for  they  could
neither  obtain  the  requisite  materials
in  the  fields,  nor  had  the  means  of
buying  them  or  trafficing  for   them
witii  the  Spaniards  :  inasmuch  as  the
magnitude  of  the  sea,  and  ignorance
of  each  others  language,  prevented  all
intercourse    between    them.     Within
a    short    time,  by    marriages,   they
blended  themselves  with  the  Gaetu-
lians,   and   because  they   frequently
changed  their  situations,  and  passed
from  one  place  to  another,  they  as-
sumed the  name  of  Numidians.    And
to  this  day  the  buildings  of  the  wild
Numidians,  whicli  they  call  Mapalia,
arc  of  an  oblong  form,  with  roofs  in-


HIEMPSAL.


211


quae  mapalia  illi  vocant,
oblonga,  incurvis  lateri-
bus  tecta,  quasi  navium
carinae  sunt.

Medis   autem,  et  Ar-
meniis  accessere  Libyes.
Nam    hi    propius    mare
Africum  agitabant :  (Gae-
tuli  mxh  sole  m^is,  Iiaud
piTQPul     ab     ardoribus :)
hique  mature  oppida  ha-
huer^.     Nam,  freto  divisi
ab  Hispania,   mutare  res
inter  se  instituerant.  No-
m,en  eorum  paulathn  Lir
byes   corrupere,   barbara
lingua  IVf  auros  pro  Medis
appellantes.  Sed  res  Per-
sarum  brevi  adolevit ;   ac
postea   Numidae   nomine,
propter   multitudinem,   a
parentibus  digressi,  pos-
sedere  ea  loca,  quae  prox-
ima  Carthaginem  Numi-
dia  appellatur.     Deinde,
utrique  alteris  freti,  fini-
timos  armis,  aut  metu  sub
imperium  suum  coegere ;
nomen    gloriamque     sibi
addidere :  magis    hi,    qui
ad  nostrum  mare  proces-
serant,  quia  Libyes,  quam
Gaetuli,  minus   bellicosi :
denique  Africae  pars  in-
ferior pleraque  ab  Numi-


curvated  in   the  sides  like  the  holds
of  ships.


The    country    occupied    by     the
Medes  and  Armenians  bordered  upon
that  of  the  Libyans,  for  they  occupied
the  parts  nearer  to  the  African  s^,
whilst  the  Gaetulians  were  more  to-
wards the  sun,  not  far  from  the  torrid
zone  :  and  they  quickly  built  cities  ;
for,   separated  from   Spain   only  by
the  straits,  they  established  a  mutual
commerce.     Their   name    was   pre-
sently corrupted  by  the  Libyans,  who
in   their  barbaroug   language   called
them    Mauri     (Moors)     instead    of
Medes.     The  affairs  of  the  Persians
in  a  short  time  became  prosperous,
and  a  colony  under  the  name  of  Nu-
midians left  their  original  settlements
on  account   of  their   numbers,   and
took  possession  of  that  part  of  the
country  which    is   next    to  Carthage
and  now  called  Numidia.    Moreover,
by  mutual  assistance,  they  subjected
their    neighbours  to  their    dominion
either  by  the  force  or  terror  of  their
arms,   acquiring   great    renown   and
glory ;   those  more  particularly  which
border  upon   our  seas,  inasmuch  as
the  Libyans  are  less  warlike  than  the
Gaetulians,  till  at  length  chief  of  the
lower  part  of  Africa  was  possessed
by  the  Numidians,  and  all  the  con-


'    1


Ml


m


m


212


CARTHAGINIAN  FRAGMENTS.


(lis  possessa  est:  victi
omnes  in  gentem  nomen-
que  imperantium  conces-
sere.

Postea  Phoenices,  alii
multitudinis  domi  minu-
endae  gratia,  pars  imperii
cupidine  solicitata  plebe,
et  aliis  novarum  rerum
avidis,  Hipponem,  Adri-
metum,  Leptim,  aliasque
urbes  in  era  maritima
condidere  :  eaeque  brevi
multum  auctae,  pars  ori-
ginibus  suis  praesidio,
aliaeque  decori  fuere.


quered  merged  in  the  name  and  nation
of  the  conquerors.


The   Phoenicians    afterwards  sent
forth  colonies,  some  in  order  to  dis-
pose of  the  superfluous  multitude  at
home,  others  from  the  ambition  of
extending  their  empire  at  the  solici-
tations of  the  people  and  those  who
were   desirous    of   innovation,    and
founded  the  cities  of  Hippo,  Adrime-
tus,  Leptis,  and  others  upon  the  sea
coast,  which   in   a  short  time  were
raised    to     consequence,    partly    for
defence  to  their   parent  states,  and
partly  for  their  honor. — Bell.  Jug.


INDIAN  FRAGMENTS:


■|  'I


FROM


MEGASTHENES.


m


1 1


if


m

m


I  1


MEGASTHENES.


OF  THE  INVASIONS  OF  INDIA.


ii


m


STNAnO^AINETAI  Se  tw;
y.ai  M€7ao"<^€vij^  tw  XoyS
rovTUf  MeXevuv  ocrrio'TeTv  ra7^
ap'x^aia.iq     ttepi    *IvS5y     Itrto-

OfTf  yap    Ttap    *IvS5v  ee&j
CTaX^va/  "TTOTc  (TTpariaVf  ovr

owj  xa<  Ajovujrou,  xat  t?J^  viJy
ji>i€T(»  MaxeSovwy.  Kai  rot
J^efTuoTpiv  fA.fv  tov  AlyvTcriov
y.at  TfdpYMva  rov  AHfioira
6&'5  E^pwirvj^  ritpoeX^iTv,  Na-
voyio^poaopov  §€  tsv  "jrapa  XaX-
8a/o<5  evZQy.i[/,'^<Tavra  *Hpax-
Xeov?  fxaXXovy  xa*  ew^  2t^XSv
iXda-ai"  (^^xpi  /xfv  8^  SetJ/jo
xa}  Tidy-puva  oupiycecrdai'
intivov  8c  xai  ex  tiJ^  ^I^rjpioc^
flf  Tvjv  ®pdKriVf  xat  rov  IIov-
Tov  ayaycTv  t^v  (npaxidv,
*ltdv6vpcrQv  8e  tov  ^-nijdTjv
im^paf/Aiv  t5J<  *Acrlai  f^Xfi*
AlyvTCTov.      Tr}^     8e    *Iv8<x^^


Megasthenes  also  appears  to  be  of
this  opinion,  informing  us  that  no
reliance  can  be  placed  upon  the  an-
cient histories  of  the  Indians.

For,  says  he,  there  never  was  an
army  sent  forth  by  the  Indians,  nor
did  ever  a  foreign  army  invade  and
conquer  that  country  except  the  ex-
peditions of  Hercules  and  Dionysus,
and  this  of  the  Macedonians.     Yet
Sesostris  the  Egyptian,  and  Tearcon
the  Ethiopian,   extended    their   con-
quests as  far  as  Europe.    But  Navo-
codrosorus,     the     most     renowned
among     the    Chaldaeans,     exceeded
Hercules,   and  carried  his  arms    as
far  as  the  Pillars :  to  which  also  it  is
said  Tearcon  arrived.     But  Navoco-
drosorus  led  his  army  from  Spain  to
Thrace    and   Pontus.     Idanthursus,
the  Scythian,  also,  overran  all  Asia
as   far  as  Egypt.     But  none  of  all
these    ever    invaded   India.      Semi-
ramis    died  before   she    commenced


(:;


T


216


INDIAN  FRAGMENTS.


f^rj^va  rovTuv  a4/a<r6au    Kai
^€(A.tpaixiv   h*    aitoBavuv    irpo

8e  fAta-Sofpopovi  fji.€v  in  rvj^  *Iv-
8iK^f  fA€raT:€fjL\pacr6ai  Tdpa-
Kaq'  ixeT  b(  fM]  <rrpar€v-
(raif  aXX*  iyylq  iX^fTy  fMuovy
TjvUa  Kvpof  i/jkavuiv  im  MctT-
caytraq*  Kai  ra  Tiep)
'HpaixXeovq  8c.  xa*  Aiov^<rov,
Meyaa-^et^i  /xev  fjLer*  oKiyuv
ina-ra,  rjyeirar  tuv  §€  aKKuv
ol  <t:\€tovif  uv  icrr)  xa<  'E^a-
Too-S"€wj^,  aiticrra  xat  (/.vSu^vj,
xaOavfp   xal   ra.   irapa    ro7^

EXAtJ  (TtV.


the  undertaking.  But  the  Persians
sent  the  Hydracae  to  collect  a  tribute
from  India :  but  they  never  entered
the  country  in  a  hostile  manner,
but  only  approached  it,  when  Cyrus
led  his  expedition  against  the  Massa-
getae.  Megasthenes,  however,  with
some  few  others,  gives  credit  to  the
narratives  of  the  exploits  of  Hercules
and  Dionysus :  but  all  other  histo-
rians, among  whom  may  be  reckoned
Eratosthenes,  set  them  down  as  in-
credible and  fabulous,  and  of  the
same  stamp  with  the  achievements  of
the  heroes  among  the  Greeks. —
Straboj  lib.  xv,  686.


OF  THE  CASTES  OF  INDIA.*


TO       TWV         IvSwV      TtXtJ^O^       €*^

iirra    f^epfj     htrip^TOai*     xai

<r6(povq  eivai  ycacra  t*/x^v,
€Xa%/ijTOUf  8e  year''  api6(ji.o>'
^rja-^cci  S*  avToT^  'ihiqt,  /xcv
CKaffTo)  rov^  ^vovra^,  yy  tqv^
ivay'tXfivraq'  xoiv^  8e  toi/^  j9a-
a-i,'kfa<;  xara  Tyjv  jtxfyaXijv  A€-
yoiMvrjv  arjyohoVf  xa^*  ^v  rov
vtov  €Tovq  ditavT^q  ol  <f)iko<rii~
fpct  tZ  ^a<Tikti  (Tvv€'kBovr€<i  iiil


Megasthenes  says — That  the  whole
population  of  India  is  divided  into
seven  castes :  among  which  that  of
the  Philosophers  is  held  in  estimation
as  the  first,  notwithstanding  their
number  is  the  smallest.  The  people
when  they  sacrifice  and  prepare  the
feasts  of  the  dead  in  private,  each
makes  use  of  the  services  of  one  of
them  :  but  the  kings  publicly  gather
them  together  in  an  assembly  which  is
called  the  great  synod :  at  which  in
the  commencement  of  each  new  year


•  Arrianus  also  gives  this  fragment  in  his  Indian  History,  but  not  so  fully
as  Strabo.  |  ^^^^^  Vulg.


MEGASTHENES.


217


K^vpa^i  oTi  av  i'Ka<j'roq  avrSv
a-vvTa^Tj  ruv  %pij<r/jU&?v,  ij  tij-
PWV  '"■p^?^  ^fV€Tr,piav  yiapitZv
r€  y-cii  ttepi  tjuuVy  xa*  ttoXi-
reiu^f*  irpoa(f)€p€i  tovto  c*?  to

voq  aXZy  vo[Ji.oq  60"t*  <ny<^v  S»a
jStby*  Toy  8e  KaropBua-avTa
a^pov  xa«  aTcX^  yipivova-i.


^(vrepov  Se  ]we/Jo?  ftva*  to
tSv  yiu^pyuvy  oi  icXcTa-TOt  tc
u(ri,  xai   eVtctxeVTaTOj,    ot  €v

ao-TpaT€tV  ^t**  aSc'V  "^^^  ^P'
yaC,«rBai,  iroXei  [atj  w^oct/ovtc^,
lAfjl'  aKXri  xpciV,  |tA»jS*  oxX>j-
aet  xoiv^*  TtoKXaKiq  yovu  iv  tS
avrSxpovif}  xai  To'ina?,  TO^f  y-ev
'jratpocTfrd.xBai  <TV[x^atv€if  xai
8tax<vSfy€ue*v  irpo^  r^vq  TroXe-
[Aiovq*  o1  le  apwaiv  tj  "j"  (TY.dT:-
Tovo-tv  axivSvva?^,  ttpofxaxovq
€X0VT€5  iyuiyovq,  'EffTt  8e  vj
X&pok  ^aa'iXiv.vj  iraa-a'  [akt-
^ov  8'  avTijv  iv)  rerdp-TaK;
ipyaCfiVTai  ruv  y-apituv,
Tphov  TO  t5v  iKnyivav  xai

S^ljpCVTWV,  oT^  /XOVOi?  €^€<TTl
^7}p€XJ€H>  >Lai  ^p€(A.(MXTOTp€(l)€Tv,

avid  re  itapix^tv,  xai  yaaBov
t^ivyri,  *AvTi  Se  tou  r\v  yt\v
iX€V\f€povv    ^tipluv^     xa<    rwv


all  the  philosophers  assemble  at  the
gate  (court)  of  the  king  ;  that  what-
ever each  of  them  may  have  collected
which  may  be  of  service,  or  may  have
observed  relative  to  the  increase  of
the  fruits  and  animals  and  of  the
state,  he  may  produce  it  in  public.
And  it  is  a  law,  that  if  any  among
them  be  three  times  convicted  of
falsehood  he  shall  be  doomed  to  si-
lence during  life  :  but  the  upright
they  release  from  tax  and  tribute.

The  second  division  is  the  caste  of
the  Agriculturists  who  are  the  most
numerous  and  worthy.  They  pursue
their  occupation  free  from  military
duties  and  fear ;  neither  concerning
themselves  with  civil  nor  public  nor
any  other  business ;  and  it  often  hap-
pens that,  at  the  same  time  and  place,
the  military  class  is  arrayed  and  en-
gaged with  an  enemy,  whilst  the  agri-
cultural, depending  upon  the  other  for
protection,  plough  and  dig  without  any
kind  of  danger.  And  since  the  land
is  all  held  of  the  king,  they  cultivate
upon  hire,  paying  a  rent  of  one  fourth
of  the  produce.

The  third  caste  is  that  of  the  Shep-
herds and  Hunters,  whose  sole  occu-
pation is  hunting,  grazing,  and  selling
cattle,  for  which  they  give  a  premium
and  stipend :  for  clearing  the  land
also  of  wild  beasts  and  birds  which


*  Casaub.  proposes  re  xa)  ^wwv,  xa)  irip\  &c.


f  o>§ouct  xou  Al.
F    F


218


INDIAN    FRAGMENTS.


MEGASTHENES.


219


ttXdvtiTCA    v.ai    (mrjvnyjy  vtf/.o-

Meru  yap  rov^  ^vjpevToc^f
xa»  Tovq  TiQiy.eva^f  reraproy
(frfferiv  €ivai  [xepo^  tov^   ipyoc

Ttt-^  xairyjKiv.ov^*    xai  oT;    auro
rov   (TuiAcnoq   ^  ipyaj-ia'    uv
ol    fxev  <f>Qpovf    rO.ova-i,    xaJ
KeiTovpyia^   'jzatpi-xpyrai   ravt-
raq,      ToTq   S'   OTtX(i-Koio7q  xai
vavitriy(n<i  (aktBo),  xai  rpofpcii
vccpa      ^a<riX€U(;      exvceivrai,
fxovrf}  y^p   epya^ovrai,      Ila-
peV*    5e    Ta  /xcv    titXa   to?^
(TTpaTiuTat^  6    a-Tparwpv'kalf
rati  Sf  i'avi  [/.ta-^ov  roTq  wXcoy-
o-iv  0    vat;a^;)^o^,    xa*  ror^  c^-

nejCAiTTov  eVrJ  to  tZv  itO'
KefAia-rup'  oJf  tov  a'AXcv  xpivav
iv  a-xoXri,  Ka)  roitoiq  o  jS/o^
^o-Tiv  ^K  ToD  ^aa-iXixov  Siai-
rufA€voii,  S<;  T6  Taj  ^^o5oi;j,
OTav  ay  ;)(;^e/a,  TaxeV'?  7ro/er<r-

aWo  xo/x/^ovTaj  itocp*  iavruy.
ExTOi     8*    CiViv    ol    €<pOp(H*

Tot/TOij  8'   eVoTrrei/fiv  8e'8oTa<
Ta  irparTOfxevoif    xai    avay-


destroy  tlie  grain,  they  are  entitled  to
a  portion  of  corn  from  the  king,  and
lead  a  wandering  life,  living  in  tents.*

After  the  Hunters  and  Shepherds,
the  fourth  race  is  that  of  the  Arti-
zans  and  Innholders  and  bodily  La-
bourers of  all  kinds  :  of  whom  some
bring  tribute,  or  instead  of  it,  perform
stated  service  on  the  public  works.
But  the  manufacturers  of  arms  and
builders  of  ships  are  entitled  to  pay
and  sustenance  from  the  king  :  for
they  work  only  for  him.  The  keeper
of  the  military  stores  gives  the  arms
out  to  the  soldiers,  and  the  governor
of  the  ships  lets  them  out  for  hire  to
the  sailors  and  merchants.


The  fifth  caste  is  the  Military ;
who,  when  disengaged,  spend  the  rest
of  their  time  at  ease  in  stations  pro-
perly provided  by  the  king ;  in  order
that  whenever  occasion  shall  require
they  may  be  ready  to  march  forth
directly,  carrying  with  them  nothing
else  than  their  bodies.

The  sixth  are  the  Inspectors  whose
business  it  is  to  pry  into  all  matters
that  are  carried  on,  and  report  them


y€'A.\€iv  Xd^pa  tS  ^a<n'Ku*
a-vvtpyovq  ttoiovf/.ivoiq  *  Taj
iiuipaqy  Tor?  /xev  iv  ^r^  itoKfij
Taj  iv  T^  iroAe<,  toTj  St  iv
(rrparoTtfh'i}  Taj  avToOt.  xa-
^iO-TavTa*   8*    ol  api(TTOif  xai


i:i<noraTOi,


E,3^0[A0t  8'  ol  a-vtA^ovKoi
xai  (Tijvitpoi  rov  ^aa-iXeccq,  ef
uy  to.  dpyjE^a,  y.uI  hiy.ao'T'^picif
xai  7}  Sio/xvjcrij  Tuy  oXuv.

Oi/x  eo-Ti  8'  ovT€  y^iAuv
i^  akXov  yevov^y  ovt*  inn^-
hiVfxa  ODT*  ipyaa-iav  (/.era-
Xctfx^dyeiy  dKXrjv  c|  aXX>jj,
ovh€  wXe/ouj  fA.iTax€ipi^€(r\fai
toy  avroVf  wX^v  e/  rZy  <piXo'
(ro(pay  y  t)j  €oj*  koiaQai  yup
toUtov  S*'  ap€T^v,

Tuv  Se  apxovTay  ol  f/,€v
(Ifftv  dyopavouoif  ol  8*  ao'rv-
vofMi,  ol  8*  CTTi  Tuy  err  par  iw
ruy.  Civ  01  /xev  ttorafAovq
iiepyd^oyratf  xai  dvay^rpova-i
rrjv  yr\y  wj  iv  A\ytjnr(i}f  xai
raj    xX«o-Taj    8*fit>^vyaj,    d<f>

UV  €ij    Taj   0%€Tf/aj    TajUi€l^€-

Ta*     TO     v^up    iiri<niOTrov(Tiv'


privately  to  the  king,  for  which  pur-
pose in  the  towns  they  employ  women
upon  the  town,  and  the  camp-follow-
ers in  the  camp.  They  are  chosen
from  the  most  upright  and  honour-
able men.

The  seventh  class  are  the  Counsel-
lors and  Assessors  of  the  king,  by
whom  the  government  and  laws  and
administration  are  conducted.

It  is  unlawful  either  to  contract
marriages  from  another  caste,  or  to
change  one  profession  or  occupation
for  another,  or  for  one  man  to  under-
take more  than  one,  unless  the  per-
son so  doing  shall  be  one  of  the  Phi-
losophers, which  is  permitted  on  ac-
count of  their  dignity.

Of  the  Governors  some  preside
over  the  rural  affairs,  others  over
the  civil,  others  again  over  the
military.  To  the  first  class  is  en-
trusted the  inspection  of  the  rivers,
and  the  admeasurements  of  the  fields
after  the  inundations,  as  in  Egypt,
and  the  covered  aqueducts  by  which
the  water  is  distributed  into  channels


•  The  narration  of  Megasthenes  is  then  interrupted  to  introduce  several
particulars  relative  to  the  natural  history  of  India,
f  ^6poui   Al.


*    TO/OU;u/vOUS     Vulg.

f  Arrian  gives  a  different  account  of  it.

MoSvov  ffiplffiv  kvtlTou,  ao-  It  is  only  permitted  to  them  that  a  man

(piarriv  tx  Travrli  yjviof  yevic^eu'  may  become  a  Sophist  for  any  caste,  inasmuch

oT/  oJ  yu«>*3«x«  To7o-<  ao(pta-Tfi(7n>  as  the  way  of  life  of  the  Sophists  is  not  agree-

ilcri   Tot  TT^^y/xaTa,  olKKa.  TrdvTwv  able  but  of  all  others  the  most  severe.
raX(xurwg6T0i.Ta.


220


INDIAN    FRAGMENTS.


MEGASTHENES.


221


onu^  iilcTfi^*  Ttaa-iv  ^  rSv
iharav  t:aptt7}  Xf)'ri<Ti^.  Oi  S*
ai/TOi,  y.ai  Tuy  ^vipixnuv  iiri-
fA.€Xov>Taif  xai  tz/a^^   y.at  xo-

!«»?•  xati  (popoXoyova-i  8e,  xa*
Taf  rixvaq  ra^  'Kepi  t^v  yt\v
ivi^KeTcoviTtf  iXoTOfjiuy,  T€xto-
vw,  %aXx€iyy,  [X€raXK€vrvif.
'OSowoiouo-t  8f,  xcti   xara  Sfxa


for  the  equal  supply  of  all  according
to  their  wants.     The  same  have  the
care  of  the  Hunters  with  the  power
of  dispensing   rewards   and  punish-
ments   according   to    their   deserts.
They  collect  also  the  tribute  and  in-
spect all  the  arts  which  are  exercised
upon  the  land,  as  of  wrights  and  car-
penters and    the    workers   of  brass
and  other  metals.     They  also  con-
(TTciha,  (TT^V  Ti^4aa-i,  r^^     struct    the  highways,  and   at   every
UrpcTt^i  x«i  T^  hacTT'^^ra     ten  stadia  place  a  mile-stone  to  point
^''^'*''''^^-  out  the  turnings  and  distances.

Oi  8'  Surrv.^f,o.  ,U  n  ^€v-         The  governors  of  cities  are  divided
T^Sa,  h^prjyrar  xa/  o/  f.h     into   six   pentads :    some   of  whom
T^,  ^f^^ovpy^y,^  <rxo^oi;o-.v,  ol     overlook  the  operative  works  :  and
hi  fmSoxo^cTiV  xai  y^p  xara-     others  have  charge  of  all  aliens  dis-
ycy^,  y^f.ov<r.,  x«i  roT,  ^Ic.,     tributing  to  them  an  allowance  '  and
^apa^oXov^ov<r^,       ^apc'6>,     taking  cognizance  of  their  lives,  if  they
W^-   x«i  'rrpo<r7t^unovatv  ^     give  them  habitations  :  else  they  send
«^ol,,  ^   r^  x?i:.ara  rSy     them  away,  and  take  care  of  the  goods
«^o^WvT.v     .^o^W     r^     of  such  as  happen  to  die,  or  are  un-
c^.A.cXo?vT«,,   xai  ^.o^Wv-     well,    and    bury   them   when   dead
T«.    ^^^0...      T,/..    a.     The  third  class  take  registers  of  the*
c-v,    0,    .«,  ^..,V.,  x«i     births  and  deaths,  and  how  and  when
^«v«ro.,e^x^^o...,.o'rex.i     they  take  place;    and  this  for   the

r  ^^^'l^n  ""'''''  ^'  '''''  ^'  ^^^  ^^^^"^^'   ^^-t  no  births

-..  ^,  «^..,  Jc.  al  x,.V  either  of  good  or  evil  nor  any  deaths

--.,  H«.   ^./^..,  ^,,«i,  ,,j  ^^y  i,^  unnoticed.      The  fourth  has

Wo.     w,..   .   .,,  the  care  of  the  tavern-keepers  and

^«.  0.,  ^erpv  ^ex.,  x.i  of  the  measures  and  qualities  of  the
I  ^Tr  ^'^^^  '^1  T^'-  g-^«>  that  they  may  be  sold  accord-
^o...Wo.    o.xeV.ta^     ing  to   the  proper  stamps.     Nor  is


irXeiu  Tcv  aurov  fA€Ta^d.XX€<T~
^aif  irXvjv  cl  5<TT0t'<  vTCort-
Xonj  *  <popov(;,  YlifATtrot  ol
'Kpoeo'TUTe^  Twv  hYJiJLiovpyovf^e-
vav,  xai  iroXoi/VTf^,  xai  ayopd-
^ovTt^  TaUra  aTro  (rwrcn^/xoy,
p^a>/»i(  jUfv  ra  xaiva,  %&/}K  ^^
Ta  'jraXaid*  tS  fAiyyvrri  Sf
^Tjuia.  "ExTOi  SI  xai  vcrTaroif
ol  Tocq  BtxaTaj  ix.Xiyo)>T€q  rZv
itaiXovfJLivoov*  ^dvaroq  8f  ry
xXei/zavTi  TO  TeXo?*  tS/jt  juev
exao-TOi  ravra.  Koiv^  S*
eTTijUcXoi/VTa;  t5v  re  iViuv,  xa»
t5v  woXiTixwv,  T    xa*  Ti7<  t5v

xat  dy^paq^  xal   XifJi-ivuv,   xa<

Mera  §«  Tot^  da-TvyoiAov;
Tpirv}  iarr)  <Tvvapxict  v]  itep)
Tot  arpaTicoTiycdf  xal  ayr^
TalV  wfvrao-iv  €^a%??  hicopiar-
fjLfvif}*  av  Tr,v  jtxiv  /x€Ta  rov
vavdpxov  rdTrcv<rif  tyjV  Se
/X€Ta  Tot!  ewi  t&Jv  ^o'i-kuv  ^cu-
ywv,  8<*  a>v  opyava,  xoju/^era*,
xa*  rpocfnif  avToiq  re  xai  xti^-
vcci,  xai  Ta  aXXoc  rd  xpwifjui
r^q  fl-T/xiTc/a?'  ouTQx  Se,  xaJ
Toi'^  Siaxo'vot^  '^  vapexovai
TVfA'ji(x,VKTTd(;  Y.u^uyo(popovqf
€ri  Sfe  xa*  i'TT'jroxOjM.owf,  xai
/xij^avoroiot^,  xai  toI^  rodruv
vTf^piTaq,   iKnifxirovo'i  Tf  x/)o?


any  one  permitted  to  barter  more,
unless  he  pay  a  double  tribute.  The
fifth  class  presides  over  the  manu-
factured articles,  arranging  them  and
separating  the  stamped  from  the  com-
mon, and  the  old  from  the  new,  and
laying  a  fine  upon  those  who  mix
them.  The  sixth  and  last  exact  the
tithe  of  all  things  sold,  with  the  power
of  inflicting  death  on  all  such  as
cheat.  Each  therefore  has  his  pri-
vate duties.  But  it  is  the  public
business  of  them  all  to  controul  the
private  as  well  as  civil  affairs  of  the
nation,  and  to  inspect  the  repairs  of
the  public  works,  and  prices,  and  the
markets  and  the  ports  and  tem-
ples.

After  the  civil  governors  there  is
a  third  college  which  presides  over
military  affairs,  and  this  in  like  man-
ner is  divided  into  six  pentads,  of
which  the  first  is  consociated  with
the  governor  of  the  fleet ;  the  second
with  him  who  presides  over  the  yokes
of  oxen  by  which  the  instruments
are  conveyed,  and  the  food  for  them-
selves and  the  oxen,  and  all  the  other
baggage  of  the  army :  they  have  with
them,  moreover,  attendants  who  play
upon  drums  and  bells,  together  with
grooms  and  smiths  and  their  under-
workmen  :  and  they  send  forth  their
foragers  to  the  sound  of  bells,  recom-


/


»  '


«|  ioou  Al.


t  OJxhi  Vulg.


*  axoTthoi'r,   Vulg.  f  TToKtTwv  Vulg.  +  axovouf  Al.


222


INDIAN    FRAGMENTS.


MEGASTHENES.


223


Muduvaq     rolq    xo/jToXo^oyj,  pensing  their  speed  with  honor   or

rifx^    xai  xoXacrc*  to  rdxoi  punishment,   and    attendino"   to  their

HaracTKeva^ofxevoi     xai     t^v  safety.      The    third    class  have  the

d(r<f)dX€iav.     Tplroi  Sc  e'la-i  ol  charge  of  the  infantry.     The  fourtli

ruv  •ne'^uv  itiifji.eXovfA.evoi.  Tc-  of    the    cavalry.     The   fifth   of  the

raproi  S*  oi  rup  Tinra'y.  rTf/txir-  chariots.  The  sixth  of  the  elephants.

TO*    S'  dpf^uTuv,    "ExTOi     S'  Moreover  there  are  royal  stables  for

ik€<pdvra}v.      BacriXiMi      t€  the  horses  and  beasts ;  and  a  royal

a-Ta^jAo)  xai  firwoi^,  xa<  ^>j-  arsenal,    in    which    the    soldier  de-

pioii;'  j3a<r<X<xov  8c  xat  oitXo-  posits    his   accoutrements  when    he

<pvXd>iioif'    itapocbituai  yap  6  has  done  with  them,  and  gives  up  his

<rrparicoT'/j^  t^u  Tf  (mevyjp  e/^  horse  to  the  masters  of  the  horse,  and

TO  oTrXof^i/Xaxiov,  xai  tov  IWov  the  same  with  respect  to  his  beasts.

(li  rov  liiTtuva  xa<  to  ^riptoif  They  ride  without  bridles  :    the  oxen

ofMotoK;.    XpZi/rai  8'  dxaXivu-  draw  the  chariots  along  the  roads  :

TQii'  Ta  8*  apfxara  iv  TuTt;  while  the  horses  are  led  in  halters,

6ho7(;  ^6€i  eXMva-iv'  ot  he  Itiinoi  that  their  legs  may  not  be  injured,

atto  (pop^7a(;  dyovrai  rov  {/.rj  nor    their    spirit    impaired    by    the

'napefA'niirpaa^ai    to.    (TxeXvj,  draught  of  the  chariots.     In  addition

/>t>j8e  TO  itpo^vfcov  avTuv  liio  to  the  charioteer,  each  chariot  con-

roTq   oipfxaa-iv    dy.^Kvvea'^ak'  tains   two  riders  :  but  in  the  equip-

8j;o   8'   uaiv   iiii    ro  apf/,a.Ti  ment  of  an  elephant  its  conductor  is

ava^drai  *  itpli   rjvioxif'    o  the  fourth,  there  being  three  bowmen

Se   tou  iX€(pavToq  vjvioxoq  T€~      also  upon  it.

rapro^f  rpeTq  8*  ot   air'  a^Tou

Tofct/OVTf^.

E^TcXcIV  86  xara  rrjv  hlai-  The  Indians  are  frugal  in  their
rav  ol  *Iv8oi  itdvreitfMtKXov  8*  diet,  more  particularly  in  the  camp  :
iv  ralq  a-TpariocTi'  ov  8*  o^Xy  and  as  they  use  no  superfluities,
icepiTTS  xaipova-f  hoitep  ev-  they  generally  attire  themselves  with
xocr/xoiJo-<.  elegance.

The  relation  of  Strabo  is  continued,  with  an  account  of
the  laws  and  customs  of  the  Indians ;  containing  some
extracts  from  Megasthenes  irrelative  to  the  antiquities.


OF  THE  PHILOSOPHERS.


^'Eyyvrepa  Se  tcKTreuq  <^-
(Tiv  0  Mf'yacr^ej/ij^,  ot;  ol  wo-
Tcc[/.o)  xciToupepoiev  yl^yjAa
XfViTOVf  ycai  ait*  avrov  (popo^
ditdyoiTO  ru  ^atriXet'  rovro
yap  xai  iv  *l^-^pi^  a-vfA^aivci.

Hepi  8€  Tuv  (piXoa-oijyuv  Xe-
7&?v,  Tovq  jM,ev   opeivoi^   avTccVy
(pri<riVj  iiJLVfiTcc^  eivai  tov  Ato-
vtfTov,     hei'KvZvTai;    leycyi.'qpia'
Trjv  dypiav  a/xreXov  irapa  [ao-
vot^  avToif  (pvoiAe^r^Vf  not  y.n-
Tov,  yea)  ^jdipir^Vf  Y.ai  [/.vppii/rjVf
xai  ttv^ovy  xa*  akka  tZv  «€<-
^akZvf  wv  (M^kv  thai    ncepav
TOV  Ev(f>pdTov   Tikyjv   iv  itapa-
8e*T0fj  (Titdvia  xaJ  jtxeTa  woX-
X^f      iiTifAikeia^      (reaCpiA^vci.
^iOvvaiQi.'KOV  8e,  xa*   to   <tivZo-
vo<pop€tVf    xat    TO    fJt.iTpov<r^at
xa*  [Avpov<r%[ai  v.al  ^dnTta-Oai
av^ivUf    xai    tov^    ^acnkeaq
)iuhcvvo(f)op€i<r^atf  xai   TVfAlra-
vi^€<T^ai  xaru  rbtq  8ic|o'Soy;.*
Tov^  he  Ttehiaa-lovq  tov  'Hpa-
xXea  TifA^v,


That  is  much  more  worthy  of  cre-
dit which  Megasthenes  reports,  that
the  rivers  roll  down  crystals  of  gold ;
and  that  a  tribute  is  collected  from
thence  for  the  king :  for  this  also  takes
place  in  Iberia.

And  speaking  of  the  Philosophers,
he  says,  that  those  who  inhabit  the
mountains  are  votaries  of  Dionysus
and  point  out  traces  of  him  among
them,  inasmuch  as  with  them  alone
the  vine  grows  naturally  wild  as  well
as  the  ivy,  and  laurel,  and  myrtle,
and  the  box,  and  other  species  of  the
evergreens;  of  which  beyond  the
Euphrates  there  are  none  except
such  as  are  kept  as  rarities  in  gar-
dens and  preserved  with  great  care.
The  following  are  also  customs  of
Dionysic  origin,  to  wear  linen  tunics
and  turbans,  and  to  use  oils  and
perfumes  ;  and  to  precede  their  kings
with  bells  and  drums  when  he  goes
forth  upon  a  journey.  The  inhabi-
tants of  the  plain  however  are  ad-
dicted to  the  worship  of  Hercules. —
Str.  XV.  711.

*  {f(^8ov$  MSS.


*


♦  7raga$iToii   MS.


224


INDIAN    FRAGMENTS.


OF  THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  SECTS.


va^  xaXc?,  rov^  Se  Tepixavaq.

Tov^  jt*f  V  olv  Bpaxi^ava^  €v~
ioxifAfiVf  fjMXXov  yap  xai  ofAO-
Xoy€7y  iv  roi^  Soy/xacrtv*  rjhyj  S'

ivifAfMiTdt  "Kaytovi  ay^pa<;'
0*^  ntpoa-ilvra^f  Xoyov  [xev  ittfjf.-
tiiv    SoK€r>    xaJ    T^v   ixriTcpa,

TO  S*  aXij^c^,  (rw<ppcviy.dq  Tivaq
ntapaiv€<r€iqf  xai  iiro&i^xaj
8«Sovai*  Tct^  S'  ^§iO" ra  dicpou-

Mera  §«  t^v  yevcciv  aX-
Xovq  xat  aXXoi/^  StaBcp^eo'^ai
T^y  iniixiXeKxyt  du  tiJ^  jcAet-
^ovo^  i^Xix/a^  Xo-pieatepuv
TX/yXavov(T'^q  SiSao-xaXftjv.  Ai-
urpl^av  t\  Tot^  ^iXo(To<povq  iv
aK(T€i  itpo  T^^  iroXf&?^,  Ctto  "jtc-
pi^oAtp  a-v[/.iA.€Tpcf}f  Xnu^  "^Zv-
raq  h  <m^d<Ti,  xal  lopal^^
dtcexof^fvov^  i/xy^rixccv  via)
d<f)po8icria:yf  dxpoccfA-ej/ovq  Xoyooy
(ntovbaiwvy  /wcTaStSovTa^  xa«
Tor^  ^^«Xoi/<r<.  Toy  S'  dyipou-
fAfvov     ovT€    XaAiJo-a*    ^f/**^,


He  makes  also  another  division  of
the  Philosophers,  saying  that   there
are  two  races  of  them,  one  of  which
he  calls  the  Brahmanes  and  the  Ger-
manes.

Of  these  the  Brahmanes  are  the
more  excellent,  inasmuch  as  their
discipline  is  preferable  :  for  as  soon  as
they  are  conceived  they  are  committed
to  the  charge  of  men  skilled  in  magic
arts,  who  approach  under  the  pretence
of  singing  incantations  for  the  well-
doing both  of  the  mother  and  the  child;
though  in  reality  to  give  certain  wise
directions  and  admonitions :  and  the
mothers,  that  willingly  pay  attention
to  them,  are  supposed  to  be  more  for-
tunate in  the  birth.

After  birth  they  pass  from  the  care
of  one  master  to  that  of  another,  as
their  increasing  age  requires  the
more  superior.  The  Philosophers
pass  their  time  in  a  grove  of  mo-
derate circumference,  which  lies  in
front  of  the  city,  living  frugally  and
lying  upon  couches  of  leaves  and
skins  :  they  abstain  also  from  animal
food  and  intercourse  with  females,
intent  upon  serious  discourses,  and
communicating  them  to  such  as  wish :
but  it  is  considered  improper  for  the
auditor  either  to  speak  or  to  exhibit


MEGASTHENES.


225


!i'


ovTi   xptfJiypaccr^aif   aXX'  ovbe
vrvcrai'  ri    iK^dXK€<r\(ai   r'^q
<rwov<riaq  t^v  ifj[A.€pav  iv,€iv^v
ti)(  diUiXa<rraivoyra,       Etij  8*
lirra     xai    T/JiaxovTa,    cSruq
'^■qa-avra    cuta%a>piiv    ilq    t^v
iavrov  ycrqa-iv    iKarroVf    xa*
^^y  d^euq  xat  dy€i[Mvuq  [xdk-
Xov,  cuftovotf^povyTaf  xa<  xpv-
ccHpopovvrac    fAerpicoq    iv    raiq
%fpo"*  xat  Tdiiq  ua\f  itpoacpepo-
fjt^vov  adpyca^f    (mj*   tSv   icpoq
T^y     yjp^iav     awepyuv    Xjuuv^
^pt[A€UV   xaJ  dprvruv  aire^o-
{Mvov,      TafAeiv  8*  ort  <j[X€i<r'
Taq  eU  '7roXuT€xy/ay*  ex  'jioKaSv
yap  yuu   ta    <ivQv^a7a    itXeiu
ytv€<r^ai*  dvo^ovKovtrl  re  tvjv
ix.  Texvwy,  vjv  />tr/   fx^va-i   hov-
Xovq,     vnn^pea-iav,     iyyvrdru
<il<rav  %'Kiioi  heiv  7[apa<rK€vd-
^€C^at,

Tatq  ^€  ywai^  raTq  ya-
{MraTq  jtx^  (jviMpiKdiTw^iiv
Tcvq  BpaxiMivaq'  el  f/,€y  fMiX"
^epou  ylvoivrOf  tva  f*-^  ri  ruv
ci  ^eyuruv  ev^paiev  elq  rovq
/SejSiJXoy^*  €i  8e  <nrovha7oiy  fA-rj
KUTaXiivoiev  avrovq*  Ovleva
yap  TjIBoinjq  xai  <jrovQv  x«Ta-
(f>poHvyraf  uq  8*  avTuq  ^un^q
xai  ^avdroVf  i^eMiv  v(f)*  €Tt-
pif>  eivai*  TOfouToy  8*  eivai  rov
ciroi^aToVf  xai  T'^v  a-itovhaiav.


any  other  sign  of  impatience  ;  for,  in
case  he  should,  he  is  cast  out  of  the
assembly  for  that  day  as  one  inconti-
nent. After  passing  thirty-seven  years
in  this  manner  they  betake  themselves
to  their  own  possessions  where  they
live  more  freely  and  unrestrained,
they  then  assume  the  linen  tunic,  and
wear  gold  in  moderation  upon  their
hands  and  in  their  ears  :  they  eat
also  flesh  except  that  of  animals  which
are  serviceable  to  mankind,  but  they
nevertheless  abstain  from  acids  and
condiments.  They  use  polygamy  for
the  sake  of  large  families ;  for  they
think  that  from  many  wives  a  larger
progeny  will  proceed :  if  they  have
no  servants  their  place  is  supplied  by
the  service  of  their  own  children,  for
the  more  nearly  any  person  is  related
to  another,  the  more  is  he  bound  to
attend  to  his  wants.

The  Brahmanes  do  not  suffer  their
wives  to  attend  their  philosophical  dis-
courses, lest  if  they  should  be  impru-
dent they  might  divulge  any  of  their
secret  doctrines  to  the  uninitiated  :
and  if  they  be  of  a  serious  turn  of
mind,  lest  they  should  desert  them  :
for  no  one  who  despises  pleasure  and
pain  even  to  the  contempt  of  life  and
death,  as  a  person  of  such  sentiments
as  they  profess  ought  to  be,  would
voluntarily  submit  to  be  under  the


ftrixiTt    Al.


G  a


226


INDIAN  FRAGMENTS.


yXv  yap  trj  rov  jtxev  ey^aSe
^loVf  ui  ay  axjtA^y  xt^o/Aevo^v
€ivai*  Tov  §€  ^dvarov  'ycveo'iv
€1^  TOV  oyruq  /S/ov,  xaJ  Toy
cd^ai/Aoya  roTi;  ^i,'K<i<ro<pr/i<raa't'
8*0  t5j  aoT«2(r€i  it'Keia'rri  y^cT"
^at  trpoq  to  cToi/xo^ayaToy  *
tt'/a^oy  §6  1}  xaxoy  jbtijScv
civa<  Twv  av[jt.^aivovruv  dv-
^pvtrotq'  cv  yap  dv  tok  av-
To7q  rav^  /x€>  ax^etr^a*,  rov^
hk  •)(/^ip€iVf  iwKviu^etf  vtcoX-^-
yj/€tf  exoyra^'  xaJ  toI?  a^Toi/^
To7^  avTot^  TOTC  /x€y  dx'^€<r-
^ai,  Tore  8*  a?  xatpuv  jU€Ta-
^aKKofxivovq,

Ta  §€  "jre^J  fprjo-tv,  Ta  (acp
€wj3r€ioty  ifjupaiveiif  (frfjo-iv.  iv
ipyoiq  yap  avrov^  x^c/ttoi;^,
^  Xoyfli^  cTya*  8«a  f4.i!^u>  Ta
voXXa  irioTou/xeyou^.  Ilc^i
ffoXX»y  8^  Tor(f  "EXXtjo-iv  o^ixo-
8o|€ry*  OT*  ya^  ycy^jToj  o  xoV-
fMi,  xaJ  <f>dapToq  Keyuv  x^i-
xf/yovj,  xa*  0T«  <T<paiponhri^'
0,  T€  8(0ixck;y  a^roy,  xcit  iroivy
^€0(,  8»*  oXou  haTt€(f)OiTiixey
avTov'  dpy^at  8e  T«y  jUfy  ot;^-
wayTwy  €T€/j<xi,  t^?  8e  xoa-fM-
•noiia^  TO  086>p'  ir/>o^  8e  to?^
riraptu  <rroiX€/oK,  vef^itTri
T/(f  fVTi  </)t/V<j,  ^^  ?^  0  ovpavo^f


domination  of  another.  They  have
various  opinions  upon  the  nature  of
deatli :  for  they  regard  the  present
life  merely  as  the  conception  of  per-
sons presently  to  be  born,  and  death
as  the  birth  into  a  life  of  reality  and
happiness  to  those  who  rightly  philo-
sophise :  upon  this  account  they  are
studiously  careful  in  preparing  for
death.  They  hold  that  there  is
neither  good  nor  evil  in  the  accidents
which  take  place  among  men:  nor
would  men  if  they  rightly  regarded
them  as  mere  visionary  delusions
either  grieve  or  rejoice  at  them:  they
therefore  neither  distress  themselves
nor  exhibit  any  signs  of  joy  at  their
occurrence.

Their  speculations  upon  nature,  he
says,  are  in  some  respects  childish :
that  they  are  better  philosophers  in
their  deeds  than  in  their  words ;  in-
asmuch as  they  believe  many  things
contained  in  their  mythologies.  How-
ever they  hold  several  of  the  same
doctrines  which  are  current  among
the  Greeks ;  such  as  that  the  world
is  generated  and  destructible  and  of
a  spherical  figure ;  and  that  the  God
who  administers  and  forms  it,  per-
vades it  throughout  its  whole  extent :
that  the  principles  of  all  things  are
different,  water  for  instance  is  the
first  principle  of  the  fabrication   of


.  •  iTflg  To»  ?TO//xov  SavaTov  MSS.


MEOASTHENES.


227


xa«  Ta  arrpa*  yq  S*  iv  fA.€Or^
thpvTai  TOV  itavTO^*  xat  it€pi
a"K€pyiMTOi  8c,  xa«  ^v^i
ofxoia  Xtyeraif  xat  aXXa
nK^ia*  napaitki'Mvari  8e  xai
fAV^QV^f  u<rit(p  xat  nXaToiy
vept  T€  d(f)^ap(Tiaq  ^ho^q,
xai  T^y  xa^  a8ov  xptVeo^y,
xoci     aXXfic    TOtavTa.        TLfpl

IA.€V     TUV     BpaXlMivUV     TOUITQ.

Ktyei,


Toiii  8c  TepfAava^t  Tot^
jtxcy  ivTifAuTdrov^  'TXo^iovq
(pfi^a^v  ovofAa^fo-^at,  t^uvra^  iv
raT^  vKaiq,  onto  ^i^XX^v  ymi
Kapvuv  dypiuv,  eor^^ro?  8e
^hnuv  hivhptuVf  d(ppoh(j-iuy
X^p^it  xai  oivov,  To7i  8e
^a<ri\€v<ri  avveTvai  8»*  ayy€'
\uv  mv^avofAcvoi^  irep)  twv
airiuVf  yea)  8('  ineivuv  ^epa-
trevovci,  xat  \nav€vov<Ti  to
^etov,

McTa    8€    Tov^  'TXojS/oyi,

h€VT€p€1J€tV     Kara    Tl[A.rjV    tov^

*)aTp(xot(,  xa)  uf  ittp\  tov  av
S"pft«rov,  (piXoa-o(f>ovi  Xnov^
jMVf  i/,i]  dypavXov^  8e,  opu^ij
xa)  dK^iroiq  Tp€<f>0[/.€vovi  a
vap€X€iv  avToTf  itdvTa  tov
otiTfi^tyray  xot  vvobe^dfxfvov
Ccy/^t*  hvi/ao-^ai  he  xa*  woXu-


the  world ;  that  after  the  four  ele-
ments there  is  a  certain  fifth  nature
of  which  the  heaven  and  stars  are
composed :  that  the  earth  is  situated
in  the  centre  of  the  whole :  they  add
much  of  a  like  nature  concerning
generation  and  the  soul.  They
have  also  conceived  many  fanciful
speculations  after  the  manner  of
Plato,  in  which  they  maintain  the
immortality  of  the  soul  and  the  judg-
ments of  Hades,  and  doctrines  of  a
similar  description.  Such  is  his  ac-
count of  the  Brahmanes.

Of  the  Germanes  he  says  they  are
considered  the  most  honorable  who
are  called  Hylobii,  and  live  in  the
woods  upon  leaves  and  wild  fruits,
clothing  themselves  with  the  bark  of
trees,  and  abstaining  from  venery
and  wine.  They  hold  communica-
tion by  messengers  with  the  kings
who  inquire  of  them  concerning  the
causes  of  things,  and  by  their  means
the  kings  serve  and  worship  the
Deity.

After  the  Hylobii  the  second  in
estimation  are  the  Physicians,  philo-
sophers, who  are  conversant  with
men,  simple  in  their  habits,  but
not  exposing  themselves  to  a  life
abroad,  living  upon  rice  and  grain,
which  every  one  to  whom  they  apply
freely  gives  them  and  receives  them
into  his  house  :  they  are  able  by  the


11


#i


/I


S2d


INDIAN    FRAGMENTS.


xat  ^rjXvyovov^  8ia  (papixayi€v~
TiXTj?  T7|v  Oe  larpetav  oia
triTiluv  TO  TrXeoVf  oC  8*^  ^a^-

(papfxaMUV  8e  fAdXi(rra  evboM-
f*(7y  ra,  ^ir/x/Jio-ra,  xat  ra
xarairXao'^uaTa*  raKka  he
yLOKwpytaq  woXt  /^«T€%€iv.
'Affxcrv  §€  xa)  TovTovq  x^Jxe/-
voy^  xapTepiaVf  T-ijv  te  iv  wo-
Wif,  xai  T^y   ^v  rat^   virofAO-

M    A       c/        J      lit       r    N  '

yat^^  a>«rT  €^  evoq  0"%'ijua-
To^  ax/y);Toy  StaTcXeo'ai  rrjv
y]fj.€pay  a'A^jv,  "AKXov^  h*
tiyai  rtxjq  [/.ev  juavrixol^  xal
iiti-fj^ov^,  xai  Twy  Tiepi  toi'^
¥.arQfxflyi.ivQVi  "hAyuv^  xal  vo-
lA,tfA.uv  ifATCfipovi,  iitairovvTa^
xa*  xara  xoi^a^,  xal  TroXft^*
Toy;  8e  %a^«^re/Joi;;  juev  toi/-
Ta>y  xa»  aarreiorepov^.  Ovi'
ctvTol^  §€  airf%ojtX6y£u<  Twy
xaS*  jT^ou  y  ^pvXXovfjLeyuvj
oaa  doyieT  trpoq  eixre^eiav  xal
oa-ioTrjra,  ^vfJupiXoaocpfTv  8*
^y/oi;  xal  yyvarxa?,  aite^o-
/Keya<     xal     avra^     a<ppoBt-


use  of  medicines  to  render  women
fruitful  and  productive  either  of
males  or  females :  but  they  perform
cures  rather  by  attention  to  diet  than
the  use  of  medicines.  Of  medicines
they  approve  more  commonly  of  un-
guents and  plasters,  for  all  others
they  consider  not  free  from  delete-
rious effects.  These  and  some  others
of  this  sect  so  exercise  their  patience
in  labours  and  trials,  as  to  have  at-
tained the  capability  of  standing  in
one  position  unmoved  for  a  whole
day.  There  are  others  also  who
pretend  to  divination  and  inchant-
ments,  and  are  skilful  in  the  concerns
of  the  inhabitants  and  of  their  laws  :
they  lead  a  mendicant  life  among  the
villages  and  towns;  but  the  better
class  settle  in  the  cities.  They  do
not  reject  such  of  the  mythological
stories  concerning  Hades  as  appear
to  them  favourable  to  virtue  and
piety.  Women  are  suffered  to  phi-
losophise with  some  of  these  sects,
though  they  are  required  to  abstain
from  venery. — Straho^  lib.  v.  712.


•  imfni),aii   Al.


f  ^'Sjjv  Al.


MEOASTHENES.


229


OF  THE  INDIAN  SUICIDES.


'bUeyaa^lvviq  8'  Iv  jtxcy  toI?
^CKoiTwpoi^  oyx  €iyai  hoy[A,a
<lrqa)v  eavrovq  i^ayuv*  rovq
Se  icornvra^  touto  yeayixol;
ycplvea-^atf  rov^  fAiv  a-yXi^pcivi
rri  (pva-ei  <p€po[JL€vov^  iiti  ithf}'
yijv  ^  xpfjixvlvj  Tov^  8*  airo-
vov^  iifl  jSt^oy,  Tot^  he  irokv
mvovq  aTtayxofAevovif  tou?  he
'avpuheif  eU  "^^p  u^ovfAevov^
oTo;  Tjy  xal  0  KaXavo;  um-
Xaa^oi  ay^payjio^,  Y,a]  raTq
'AM^dvhpov  rpaite^aii  hehcv
XutfAeyo^.


Megasthenes  in  his  account  of  the
Philosophers  says,  There  is  no  pre-
scribed rule  for  putting  an  end  to
themselves;  but  that  those  who  do
it  are  esteemed  rash.  The  hardy  by
nature  cast  themselves  upon  the
sword  or  from  a  precipiece,  those
who  are  incapable  of  labour  into  the
sea,  those  who  are  patient  of  hard-
ships are  strangled,  while  those  of  a
fiery  temperament  are  thrust  into  the
fire :  which  last  indeed  was  the  fate
of  Calanus  an  intemperate  man,  and
addicted  to  the  pleasures  of  the  table,
at  the  court  of  Alexander. — Sir,  lib.
XV.  p.  718.


OF  THE  PHILOSOPHERS:


I


FROM  CLITARCHUS.


'O  8«  KXeirapxo^  ^o"«>  **"
Xoa-Mpoi^*  he  To7<  Bpaxf^ouriv
drtthiaipovyrai  Tlpdyivaq  ipia-'
Tixoi/;  Tiva;  xal  iXeyxrixoij^'
Tov;  8c  Bpayjiiavcf.^  <pv(rio\o"
yiav  xal  dcrpoyofAiay  dcMxIvy


According  to  the  relation  of  Clitar-
chus,  they  place  in  opposition  to  the
Brahmanes,  the  Pramnae  a  conten-
tious and  argumentative  set  of  men
who  deride  the  Brahmanes  as  arro-
gant  and   ridiculous  on  account  of


*  ^<Xe0-^(^eui    Al.


230


INDIAN    FRAGMENTS.


^ova^*  xa»  dor^TOv^.  Tovruvhe
XiTixot'^  xaJ  irp(xrx,upiovi.


their  studies  in  physiology  and  as-
tronomy. They  are  divided  into  the
Mountaineer,  the  Naked,  the  Citizen,
and  Rural  sects.


OF  THE  INDIAN  ASTRONOMY :


FROM  THE  PASCHAL  CHRONICLE.


*EN  T0~5  xpovoiq  T^?  wpyo"
itMiaf,  iyi  rov  yevov^  tow  *Ap~
<pa^a,hf  ayrjp  tj?  'IvSo?  avc-
(bdy/j  (TO^;,  aerrpovo/xof,  ovo-
/biaTi  'AvSofjSapio^,  o^  xaJ  (7i;v-
(ypdyparo  irpuTo;  *I>8orij   Ac-

T/JOVO/A/aV.


About  the  time  of  the  construction
of  the  Tower,  a  certain  Indian  of  the
race  of  Arphaxad  made  his  appear-
ance, a  wise  man,  and  an  astrono-
mer, whose  name  was  Andubarius ;
and  it  was  he  that  first  instructed
the  Indians  in  the  science  of  Astro-
nomy.— p.  36,


•   aXotfjjvouf  Vulg.


ATLANTIC  AND  PANCH^AN


FRAGMENTS:


FROM


MARCELLUS  AND  EUEMERUS.


V


I  i


OF  THE  ATLANTIC  ISLAND:


FROM  MARCELLUS.


II


OTI  fjt.€v  €y€V€ro  roiaiirv}   Tiq
yricroq  xai   T>jX<Kat^Ty/,  8ijXoi/t/

TlV€q  TUV    ItTTOpoVVrUV  TU    Ttffi

yaf  Y.ai  iv  roi^  ainuv  xpovoi^
{Atv  CTTTa  yfi<TOVi  iv  ivifivat  rS
V€Xdy€t  HepcTfipoy'fjq  Upa^j  '^p^'ti
8f  aXKa^  airXcTot^,    ttjv  /xev
nXouTalyo^,   t>jv  Se  *A[/-[AZvo^f
f/.€a'v}v  8e  ToyTftjy  aXXiyv  Iloo'Ci-
BSvo^,  x<X/a>y  crrabiccv  to  /xeye-
5^0^,  Kai  Tot^  olyiovvra^  iv  avr-y
(ji.yfifA.yiv  tZv  Ttpoyovuv  hiaaui^eiv
ittpX  TiJ^ 'ArXavTiSo^  ovt«^  "ye-
vo[A€v-»ji  ivcei    v/j<rov  "TtafAfJieya-
Kfea-rdjrjif  yjv  iiti  itoXkccq  ite-
piobov^     SyvaarcycrcK      itdvuv
Tuv    iv   'ArXavTiKoJ    'jreXdyei
v^truv.     TavTa    y.€v    (tvv    o
MapvteXXo^  cv  Tot^  Al^iOTtixoT^
y€ypa<p€v.


That   such  and  so  great  an  island
formerly  existed  is  recorded  by  some
of  the   historians  who  have   treated
of  the  concerns  of  the  outward  sea.
For  they  say  that  in  their  times  there
were  seven   islands  situated  in  that
sea  which  were  sacred  to  Persephone,
and  three  others  of  an  immense  mag-
nitude one  of  which  was  consecrated
to   Pluto,   another   to   Ammon,    and
that    which    was    situated    between
them  to  Poseidon ;    the  size  of  this
last  was  no  less  than  a  thousand  sta-
dia.    The  inhabitants  of  this  island
preserved   a  tradition  handed  down
from  their  ancestors  concerning  the
existence  of  the  Atlantic  island  of  a
prodigious    magnitude,     which    had
really  existed    in    those    seas ;   and
which,  during  a  long  period  of  time,
governed  all  the  islands  in  the  At-
lantic ocean.     Such  is  the  relation  of
Marcellus  in  his  Ethiopian  history. —
Proc.  in  Tim,

II    H


»|i


if


li


i


PANCHiEAN  FRAGMENTS:


FROM  EUEMERUS.


ETHMEPOS  fj^v  ovvf  (piXoq
yeyivuq  Kaco'dvZpov  j3ajr<-
Xea^f  xa<  5<a  tovtov  ^vayKao"-
fAiVOi;  rik€7v  ^a.tri.'Kiv.di;  rivaq
Xpciaq  Moi  fMydXaq  airo8>j-
ixia^t  <fyiq<r)vf  €XToirio-&5jya*
xaxa  rrjv  jtx«rvj/>ij9/j/av  elq  rov
'flxeavov.  cxTrXeucravTa  xa)
avrov  ex  t^?  Eu5a<)xoyo^ 'A^a-
^/cc^y  itof^a-aa-^ai  rov  irXovv
Si*  'Oxfavou  TtXeiovt;  r][ji.€pa<;,
Mat  irpoa-evcx^frivai  vvjtoi^  'rti-
Xayiaii'*  wv  (/.iav  ^irf pe%€<y  "j"
r^v  oyo(Aa^o[A€vyiv  Tldyxaciav'
iv  Tj  Tf^caor^Tai  toI?  evoixoiJy-
ra^  Tlayyjxtovq  eucfjSc/^  Sia-
(pipwraq  xai  toI?  ^eov^  ti-
fAuvraq  [/.eyaXoTrpeTrearTccTaiq
^vctxify  xa*  a.va.\S-fifAa<Tiv
dqioXoyoK;  apyvpoTi;  t€  xai
%pt;<rorf.      Eiva*  Sc    t^v  vijctov


Ehemerus  (the  historian)  was  a
favourite  of  Cassander  the  king,  and
being  upon  that  account  constrained
by  his  master  to  undertake  some
useful  as  well  as  extensive  voyage
of  discovery  he  says,  That  he  tra-
velled southwards  to  the  Ocean,  and
having  sailed  from  Arabia  Felix  stood
out  to  sea  several  days,  and  continued
his  course  among  the  islands  of
that  sea ;  one  of  which  far  exceeded
the  rest  in  magnitude,  and  this  was
called  Panchaea.  He  observes  that
the  Panchaeans  who  inhabited  it
were  singular  for  their  piety,  honor-
ing the  Gods  with  magnificent  sacri-
fices and  superb  offerings  of  silver
and  gold.  He  says  moreover  that  the
island  was  consecrated  to  the  Gods,
and  mentions  several  other  remark-
able circumstances  relative  to  its  an-
tiquity and  the  richness  of  the  arts


*   xjn&^yjiv.


f  TrKxytaii   St. — Qy.  transversely  among  the  islands.


^


EUEMERUS.


235


^avjUta^o/ACva  xara  re  rv}v
app^atoTijTa  xaJ  rVfV  t^^  xa-
raoMiiniq  TroXi/re^v/av.  itepi
uv  Ta  KOCToi  y.€poq  iv  Toiq  irpo
TavTi^q  jS/jSXo*?  avayeypcupat'
(Mv.  Eivai  8*  iv  avr^  xard
riva  K6(f>QV  vyjyvjKov  xa^*  intep'-
^oKyjv  Upov  Aioq  Tpi^vXalov,
y(.aBi^pv(A€vov  vie*  avrov  y.a^'
ov  y.'xiph  i^a(rtK€V(r€  rrjq
otxotjue'vvj?  ditda-Tjqf  en  xara
dvQpantovq  m,  'Ev  ro^rai  tS
itp^  (TtijXtjv  €ivai  xpvff^v,  iv
^  To7q  liayxaioii  ypdjAfAaa-iv
vvdp%€iv  ycypafAfAivaq  idq  t€
Oipavov  xa*  Kpovov  xai  Aioq
itpdieiq  y.€^a\o>iccihuq,

Mera  ravra  <pvj(T)  irpurov
Ovpavov  ^aa-ikea  yeyovevaiy
CTTicm^  rtva  dvhpa  xat  ivepye-
iriVf  xa*  T^^  ruv  aa-rpuv  xivvj-
(Tiuq  iiTKrr'^lxova.'  ov  xa*  irpu"
Tov  ^valaiq  ritAi}<rai  Tohq  ov-
paviovq  ^coi;?*  S<o  xai  Ovpavov
'npo<rayopev9'^vau  Ttovf  8'
avr^  yivi<rbai  onto  •yvvatxe^
'Efrria^t  flava  xa*  Kpovov'
^vyarepaq  Se,  *Peav  xal  A17-

fATiTpaV.         Kpovov    8c   ^a(TlA€V-

<rai  fAet*  Ovpavov,  xai  y^fAara
'Pidv  y€Vi^aai  ^la  y.cu''Vipav
xat  TVoa€i^uva,  Tov  §6  A/(X
SiaScfajtACVOv  tt/v  ^aaiXeiav
rov  Kpovov,  yfiyi.ai  *'Hpav  xa*
A-^lAfirpav  y.a)  Qeixiv*  e|  uv
TtaT^a^  'jtoi'^(Ta<r$aif  Koiipvjrag


displayed  in  its  institutions  and  ser-
vices :  some  of  which  we  have  in  part
detailed  in  the  books  preceding  this.
He  relates  also  that  upon  the  brow
of  a  certain  very  high  mountain  in  it
there  was  a  temple  of  the  Triphylaean
Zeus,  founded  by  him  at  the  time  he
ruled  over  all  the  habitable  world
whilst  he  was  yet  resident  amongst
men.  In  this  temple  stood  a  golden
column  on  which  was  inscribed  in  the
Panchaean  characters  a  regular  his-
tory of  the  actions  of  Ouranus  and
Cronus  and  Zeus.


In  a  subsequent  part  of  his  work
he  relates  that  the  first  king  was
Ouranus,  a  man  renowned  for  jus-
tice and  benevolence,  and  well  con-
versant with  the  motions  of  the  stars  :
and  that  he  was  the  first  who  honor-
ed the  Heavenly  Gods  with  sacrifices
upon  which  account  he  was  called
Ouranus  (Heaven).  He  had  two  sons
by  his  wife  Hestia  who  were  called
Pan  and  Cronus  ;  and  daughters  Rhea
and  Demetra.  And  Cronus  reigned
after  Ouranus ;  and  he  married  Rhea,
and  had  by  her  Zeus,  and  Hera,  and
Poseidon.  And  when  Zeus  succeed-
ed to  the  kingdom  of  Cronus  he
married  Hera,  and  Demetra,  and
Themis,  by  whom  he  had  children  ;
by  the  first  the  Curetes  ;  Persephone


mi


1 1


II'*  jnli'
■  MiPiimwiv.


it


236


PANCH^AN  FRAGMENTS.


[Atv  uTto  T^i  ntpuTvjif  Tltpa-e-
^'vijy    Se     i-K     ryji;     Zcvrtpat;,

*EK6ovra    he    fi^    Ba^vKuva,

ravra  ti^  i\v  Wouyya.ux.v  i^a-ov
itpoq  '(IxeavfiJ  MifAevrjv  %apa.-
yevouevovf  Civpavov  tov  /SiOf
upOTtaTopoq  jSwjtAov  thpvcraadui.
K^'xcr^cv  Sta  'Evpiotq  iX6(7v
mpoq  rhv  Tore  8wa(TT>jy  Kda-
crioV  €^  01/  xai  to  Ka^ciov
6^0 J.  'EXfiovTa  8e  **<  K<Xix/av
TTOACjixy  yixi9(xai  K/Xma  to-
'na.pxfjVf  xjxi  aXXa  §€  wXfiVxa
edyy)  ^TreXSovTa,  -Trap'  airaa-t
Tt/xKjo-d'^va*,    xa*    ^eov     ava-


by  the  second;  and  Athena  by  the
third.  He  went  to  Babylon  where
he  was  hospitably  received  by  Belus  ;
and  afterwards  passed  over  to  the
island  of  Panchaea  which  lies  in  the
Ocean,  where  he  erected  an  altar  to
Ouranus  his  forefather.  From  thence
he  went  into  Syria  to  Cassius  who
was  then  the  ruler  of  that  country,
from  whom  Mount  Cassius  receives
its  name.  Passing  thence  into  Cilicia
he  conquered  Cilix  the  governor  of
those  parts ;  and  having  travelled
through  many  other  nations  he  was
honored  by  all  and  universally  ac-
knowledged as  a  God. — Diod.  Sic,
Eel.  681.  cited  by  Euseh,  Prcep,
Evan,  II.


lii

I!


THE


CHALD.EAN  ORACLES  OF


ZOROASTER.


1  \


(


(


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES  OF

ZOROASTER.


I  I


CAUSE

GOD,  FATHER,  MIND,  FIRE      MONAD,  DUAD,  TRIAD.*

I.f  'O  8e'  ^€0i  ia-Ti  yi€<l)aXv}y  t%av  Upayio^*  olroq  i<ruv  o  itpuroq,
a<p6cipT0i,  di^toq,  dyevriToq,  dfAeprj,;,  dvofAQioraroq,  ^v/o^o?  iravToq
KaKoVf  dhupotoKyjTOi,  dyaSuv  dyaOcorarot;,  <ppcvifjiuv  <ppoyifA.,&'
Taro?.  €<ni  hi  xai  irarrip  €ivoi/.iaq  y.a\  h)iaio<rv'y,}<;,  airohtbaKro^y
fpvj-iM;,  ycai  TeXe/oj,  Kai  (TO«/)of,  na)  Upov  <f)v<riMv  fdvoq  eipfrvjc

But  God  is  he  that  has  the  head  of  a  hawk.  He  is  the  first,
indestructible,  eternal,  unbegotten,  indivisible,  dissimilar;  the
dispenser  of  all  good  ;  incorruptible ;  the  best  of  the  good,  the
wisest  of  the  wise  :  he  is  the  father  of  equity  and  justice,  self-
taught,  physical,  and  perfect,  and  wise,  and  the  only  inventor  of
the  sacred  philosophy.— ^w^eft.  Prcsp.  Evan.  lib.  I.  c.  10.

*  Mr.  Taylor  in  his  collection  of  the  oracles  (Class.  Journ.  No.  22.)  has
arranged  them  under  the  following  heads.  I.  The  oracles  which  he  conjectures
may  be  ascribed  to  Zoroaster  himself.  This  division  includes  the  collection  of
Psellus,  and  in  this  collection  are  marked  Z.  as  in  the  8th.  II.  Oracles
delivered  by  Theurgists  under  the  reign  of  Marcus  Antoninus.  These  relate  to
the  Intelligible  and  Intellectual  orders  :  and  are  here  distinguished  by  a  T  as  in
the  4th.  III.  Oracles  delivered  either  by  the  Theurgists  or  by  Zoroaster,  here
marked  Z  or  T.  as  in  the  2nd.  The  rest  he  has  placed  together  as  uncertain  or
imperfect  in  their  meaning  ;  to  which  he  has  subjoined  a  few  from  the  Treatise
of  Lydus  de  Mensibus.  We  are  also  indebted  to  Mr.  Taylor  for  the  references  to
the  authors  from  whom  the  collection  was  originally  made,  and  for  the  addiUon
of  several  oracles  hitherto  unnoticed  :  the  latter  are  distinguished  by  the  letters
Tay.  after  the  reference,  as  in  the  2nd  oracle.

f  Eusebius  attributes  this  to  the  Persian  Zoroaster.     I  have  added  it  to
the  collection.


i


1


1


I


240  THE  ClIALDiEAN  ORACLES

II.*  O'l  y€  &(ovpyo)  ^€ov  nvat  (paa-iVf  xai  vfAvovci  itpKr^vrtpav
xai  vturepov.  xa»  xvxXoeXmTov  tov  ^elp  xa)  aiuviov'  xa)  vocvvra
rlv  (TviATtavra  t£v  ev  tS  yioa-fxip  xivovfAivuv  ditdvruv  a^nBiAov
Y.OU  irpoi  roijroi^  dttipavTov  5wc  ry^v  ^vva[Aiv  xat  eXixoriS^  <pa<ri
[A€Ta,  Tovruv,

Theurgists  assert  that  hef  is   a  God,    and  celebrate  him  as
both  older  and  younger,  as  a  circulating  and  eternal  God,  as  un-
derstanding the  whole  number  of  all  things  moved  in   the  world,
and  moreover  infinite  through  his  power  and  of  a  spiral  form.
Z  or  T.  Proc,  in  Tim.  244.— Jay.

III.  0€ov  cyxoV/Awv,  a'luvioVf  aTTC/javTov.
Nmv,  xai  irpea-^vTi^v,  iXtM^ilrj,

The  mundane  god,  eternal,  boundless,
Young  and  old,  of  a  spiral  form.

IV.  T5j5   yap    avcxXc/TTTOu   ^<y>j?  xai    t^^  drpvrov   Si;ya/X€ft>^,    xat
T^^  ceoxvou,  xara  to  Xoywv,  ivepyiia^  o  Aiwv  (aix/a).

For  Eternity,  J  according  to   the  oracle,   is  the  cause  of  never-
failing  life,  of  unwearied  power,  and  unsluggish  energy.
T.  Tay.

V.  ^lyufxevoq  y.(xK€7rai  into  tZv  ^cSy,  ovro^  o  a-nMroq  ^€0f,  xa*
ry  vS  (TvvSleiv  "KtytroLi  xa<  xara  vouv  /xo'vov  lito  ruv  \lwxoov
yvuptCj^ffQak*

Hence  this  stable  God  is  called  by  the  gods  silent,  and  is  said
to  consent  with  mind,  and  to  be  known  by  souls  through  mind
alone.  T.  Proc,  in  Theol.  321,— Tay,

▼I,  Oi  XaXlaioi  tov  &€ov  (Ato'yv<rov)  'law  Xeyova-iv,  {dvr\  toiJ,
^0?^  poijTov)  T^  ^0(v/x&?v   -yXwo-o-Tj,  xa*   l,a^atu6    ht   woXXa^ou

•  Lobeck  seems  to  be  of  opinion  that  neither  this  nor  the  one  next  follow-
ing have  any  claim  to  be  inserted.

■f  xS^vos  Time  Tay. — Qy.  Kp6m.  The  latter  Platonists  continually  sub-
stitute X/jrf»os  for  K^^»o$.

J  The  Gnostics  used  the  word  iEon  itself  for  their  different  celestial  orders.

See  also  Sanchoniatho,  p.  4.


OF  ZOROASTER.


241


Xfyercci,    ctou  o'    Cir^p    toI<;   e'lrTa    WXoi/^,    To.reVTiv    h   S,-


(Aiovpyoq

The  ChaldiEans  call  the  God  (Dionysus  or  Bacchus)  lao  in
the  Phoenician  tongue  (instead  of  the  intelligible  light),  and  he  is
often  called  Sabaoth,  signifying  that  he  is  above  the  seven  poles

Lyd,  de  Mens,  SS Tay.


that  is  the  Demiur^us.


VII.        ndvTo,    y^p  ^,veV    T^   ^a.ToC  ^tr,  r^,  l^^^l^^^  ^^^>^^^^^

Containing  all  things  in  the  one  summit  of  his  own  hyparxis
he  himself  subsists  wholly  beyond.  *

T

Proc.  in  Theol.  9.12.— Tay.


VIII.       T^  ^dv-ca.  f^erpovv  xai  a^.>*>,  ^^  r^  Uy,d  <pyi<Ti.
Measuring  and  bounding  all  thino-g.

Proc.  in  PL  Th.  386.


-Tay.


IX.


o^


yap  airo  Tzarpi^rj^  dpx^q  areXtc  tt  rpoxd'^ei.

Fo^  nothing  imperfect  circulates  from  a  paternal  principle.

Psell.  38.~Plet.


Z.


X.


The  father  hurled  not  forth  fear  but  infused  persuasion.


Plet.


XI.


•    •    .    .     EavTov  0  TTccrrjp  ujpTraca-ev

OyS*  ip  ijl  IvvdfAU  poep^  xAc/cra,-  TSiOV  irvp.
.  .   .  .  The  Father  has  hastily  withdrawn  himself;
But  has  not  shut  up  his  own  fire  in  his  intellectual  power.
^'  Psell.  SO.— Plet.  3.3.


■  JL-    «    >      ~       ~


XII.         To«flt;To^  yap  0  UeT  vovq  itpo  ivepyiaq  iv^pyZv,  trt

M^8^  ir/Jo^Xi^ev,  ^XX'  e/.t€y€v  iv  rS  izaipiy,^  ^v^Z*

•  Boaz  Fr.  Pat.


I  I


1 1


242


THE  CHALD.EAN  ORACLES


11:


Ka«  ev  T^  aBury,  xara  rrjv  ^€o9p€{/.iA.ovsc  <rty^v.


Such  is  the  Mind  which  is  there  energizing  before  energy.
That  it  has  not  gone  forth  but  abode  in  the  paternal  depth ,
And  in  the  adytum  according  to  divinely-nourished  silence.
T.  Proc.  in  Tim.  167.

XIII.  Elcr)  Travra  Ttvpoi  ivo^  inyeyctuTa,

ndvru  y^p  i^erfXea-e  Ttizrvjpy  xat  vS  TrapcSwxc
Aei/Tc/JijiJ,  ov  TtpZrQv  xXiji^eraj  e^vea  J  avbpSv,
All  things  are  the  progeny  of  one  fire.
The  Father  perfected  all  things,  and  delivered  them  over
To  the  second  Mind,  whom  all  nations  of  men  call  the  first.
Z.  Psell.  U.—Plet.  30.

XIV.  Kai  rov  voo,  o;  tov  ifXitvpiov  yioa-fAov  ayfi.

And  of  the  Mind  which  conducts  the  empyrean  world.

T.  Dam.  de  Prin.

XV.  *A  vov^  Xeyei,  rS  youv  S^  ttoiJ  Xcyci.

What  the  Mind  says,  it  says  by  understanding.

Z.  Psell.  35.


OF   ZOROASTER.  043

'^'vxh  iyu  yaio),  ecpfx^  \pvxov(Ta  ra  irdina,

KaT€^€TQ  yap

NoiJy  f/.h  in  xjyvx^^  xPi>x:^v  S'  e\J  (TUfAocTi  dpy$,
'HfxSv  iyxare^rjxe  varvip  dvdpuy  re  ^€uv  re.

After  the  paternal  conception

I  the  Soul  reside,  a  heat  animating  all  things.

For  he  placed

Mind  in  Soul  and  Soul  in  dull  Body,
The  Father  of  Gods  and  Men  so  placed  them  in  ours.
^'  ^^  ^'  Proc.  in  Tim.  124.

XIX.         'S.vvuplaraTai  yap  -la.  tpva-iyia  epya,  rS  >0€pS}  (peyyei
Tov  TiaTpoq'   "^vx*)  yap  Y.ca-[Ar,<7aa-a  tov  fjt.iyav
Ovpavov,  aa)  xoa-fAtiva-a  fxerd  tcS  'Jtarpoq.
Kepara     Se  xa<  aCTvjq  ia-T^pi-Kjai  avu.

Natural  works  coexist  with  the  intellectual  light

Of  the  Father.     For  it  is  the  Soul,  which  adorned  the  great

heaven
And  which  adorns  it  after  the  Father.
But  her  horns  are  established  on  high.

^-  ^^  T-  Proc.  in  Tim.  106.


;|t


i-'


XVI.  *H  jUtv  yap  Zvva[Xi^  civ  i^elvoi^y  vov^  S'  &%*  cxc/vou.
Power  is  with  them,  but  Mind  is  from  him.

T.  Proc.  in  Plat.  Th.  SG5.

XVII.  Noy^  irarpo?  dpaioi(;  itro^orjfJLevoq  l^vyr^pa-iv

* AywdfAtsrov  dcrrpditrwaiv  doitiAUrov  nrvpo^  cXmoi^.

The  Mind  of  the  Father  riding  on  attenuated  rulers
Which  glitter  with  the  furrows  of  inflexible  and  implacable  Fire.
T.  Proc.  in  Crat. — Tay.

XVIII M€T<i  Sf  TtaTptiidq  havoia^

f  Pletho  has  n-Sv  yivos :  he  omits  the  first  line,  which  Taylor  also  gives  by
itself  in  another  place.


XX.  Ort  \pvx-o  "Jc^p  ^vvdfX€i  itarpoq  at  a  a  (paeivov,

*ASr«vaTo^  Tf  fAev€ij  nai  ^onj^  hea-iroTi^  cVxi*

Kai  la-^d  ytoa-ixov  iroXXd  TrKi^pufAara  xo'Atcov.
The  Soul,  being  a  bright  fire,  by  the  power  of  the  father,
Remains  immortal,  and  is  mistress  of  life,
And  fills  up  many  of  the  recesses  of  the  world.
2-  Psell.  28.— Plet.  11.

XXI.  Miywixevuif  8'  oyj^tZv,  'nvplq  d(f)^irov  epya  reXova-a.

The  channels  being  intermixed,  she  performs  the  works  of  in-
corruptible fire.

^-  o*"  T.  Proc.  in  PI.  Polit.  '699.


*  Lob.  proposes  xpoLr».


ii'


H


m


244


XXII.


THE  CHALD.EAN  ORACLES


OF  ZOROASTER.


245


Ov  yap  €«V  ^Aiyv,  Ttvp  iitiv-fiva  to  iipuTOV
'E^v  ^vvauiv  KctruyiKtiei  ^pyoi^j  aXAa  you,
Nov  yap  voiq  ia-rh  6  y.oa[JLOv  Tep^v/rij?  itvpiov.
For  the  Fire  which  is  first  beyond  did  not  shut  up  his  power
In  matter  by  works  but  by  mind :
For  the  franier  of  the  fiery  vvorhl  is  the  Mind  of  Mind.

T.  Proc.  in  Theol.  iJ33.— iw  Tim.  157.

XXIII.  *0^  €K  voof  eKSro/36  trpuroi

"Ea-a-afxcvoi  Ttvp)  icvp,  a-vvdeafAuv*  ccfypa  )t.€pda-rj

nvjyaiov^  Kparvjpa^i  ioZ  irvpoq  av^fo^  eTr/cr^wv.
Who  first  sprung  from  Mind

Clothing  fire  with  fire,  binding  them  together  that  he  might  mingle
The  fountainous  craters,  while  he  preserved  the  flower  of  his

own  fire.
X.  Proc,  in  Parm.

XXIV.  *'EvS'€v  a-vpo[Xivo^  itprja-rrip  dfiv^poTo  ntvpU  av^oi;,
KoaiAuv  iv^pucTKuv  xoiXc^/xa<r».   Ylavra  yap  cv^ev
"Apteral  cl^  to  xaTW  T€iv6<v  aycTiva^  ayqTaq,

Thence  a  fiery  whirlwind  drawing  the  flower  of  glowing  fire,
Flashing  into  the  cavities  of  the  worlds ;  for  all  things  from  thence
Be<yin  to  extend  downwards  tlieir  admirable  rays.


T.


Proc,  in  Theol,  Plat.  171.  172.


XXV. 'j'         *H  fxova^  ineT  vpuTUi,  otiov  itarpiyir}  [/.ovaq  cctt/.

The  Monad  is  there  first  where  the  paternal  Monad  subsists.
T.  Proc,  in  Euc.  27,


•    ffuv8io"yu<oy  Tay.

•j-  O/ov  o/  Hu^ ay 6^1101,  8<a  yuo-
>a8os,  x«)  SuaSof,  xai  r^iaSoj,  ^
6  riAdtrwv  8«a  toC  irtpirog,  xa)
To5  ajri/foo,  xoti  ToS  /xixrlv,  ri
irp6Ttc6v  yi  fi/xt7;  8<a  To5  hvls  xai
Tft/v  TToKKoJv  xal  toS  fjiKVfiitov,
toOto  o/  y^p-^afjLOt  7U)V  StoJv  8^5
T?$  uira^^iutg  xa)  8u>«/*»ws  xa»
xa)  ivtpytloLi.


What  the  Pythagoreans  signify  by  Monad,
Duad,  and  Triad — or  Plato  by  Bound,  Infi-
nite, or  Mixed  ;  or  we  in  the  former  part  of
this  work,  by  The  One,  The  Many,  and  The
United ;  that  the  oracles  of  the  Gods  intend
by  Hyparxis,  Power,  and  Energy. — Dam.  de
Prin. — Tay.


XXVI.         Tava^  i<rr]  y.ovUq, ^  StTo  ^e^y^..

The  Monad  is  extended  which  generates  two.


T.


Proc,  in  Euc,  27.


XXVII.      A^a^f  y^ap  'napk  rZl,  ^a^ra,,  (nai  vo,pa7<;  Scarpditre^  rof^ah) *

Kai  TO  'Kv^ipv^v  ra  -ndvTa,  xai  T^^TTfiV  exao-Tov  {oi  rax^iv,)
For  the  Duad  sits  by  this,  and  glitters  with  intellectual  sections,
To  govern  all  things,  and  to  order  each.

T

Proc.  in  Plat,  37 Q,

XXVIII.      EiV  rpia  yh.p  mj  tiv^  ^naTphc,  t€{AV€<t^cci  airavra,
OZ  TO  ^€A€iv  xaTeveyo-e,  y.al  ^Sv;  itdvra  eVcr/^ti^To.
The  Mind  of  the  Father  said  that  all  things  should  be  cut  into
three :

His  will  assented,  and  immediately  all  things  were  cut.

T.

Proc,  in  Parm,

XXIX.         Elq  rpia  yap  etue  yov<;  irarplq  ai^lov,

NS  ttdyva  v.v^epvZv,
The  Mind  of  the  eternal  Father  said  into  three,
Governing  all  things  by  Mind.


T.


Proc.  in  Tim.


XXX.  T^^  Se  yap  U  rp^dhq  irSiy  mivfjia  itoiTrip  iMpaa€.
The  Father  mingled  every  Spirit  from  this  Triad.

Lyd.  de  Men,  20, —Tay,

XXXI.  T^^  U  yap  ex  rpidtoq  xoA7ro<(7<y  indpxe^'  aitavra.

All  things  are  governed  in  the  bosoms  of  this  triad.

Lyd.  de  Men.  20 Tay.

♦  The  oracle  stands  in  the  text  as  given  by  Fr.  Patricius,  Standley  and
Taylor.     Lobeck  shows  that  the  passages  in  parenthesis  do  not  properly  belong
to  It.     oJ  T«xS/v  should  also  be  o5  t«x^/v  as  connected  with  the  succeeding  sen-
tence in  Proclus.


246


THE  CHALDiEAN   ORACLES


OF   ZOROASTKR.


24>7


XXXII.  Tldvra.  yap  iv  rpitrl  ro7q  he  yiv^ipvarai  r€  xa*  irru

All  things  are  governed  and  subsist  in  these  three.

X.  Proc.  in  I.  Alcib.

XXXIII.  'Apxar^  yap  xpiai  ral(^  8e  Aa^ot^  hvAei€iy  avama.

For  you  may  conceive  that  all  things  serve  these  three  principles.
y^  Dain.  de  Prin.


\         "w         V


XXXIV.  'Ex  *  TwvSe  p€€i  rpidhoii  tefxag  itpo  tvh  ov<rY}iy
Ov  TipuTrj^i  aXX*  cv  iu  fAerpfTrai.

From  these  flows  the  body  of  the  Triad,  being  pre-existent,
Not  the  first,  but  that  by  which  things  are  measured.
Z.  or  T.  ^non.

XXXV.  Kai  iipdyfjaav  iv  avrrj  ^'  t'  apcT^,  xal  ^  (ro^la.
Ka*  ^  'noXv(ppuv  aTpeMia,

And  there  appeared  in  it  virtue,  and  wisdom,
And  multiscient  truth.

Z.  or  T.  ^non.

XXXV  I.        Uavr)  ydp  €v  v-la-fA-cf  Ad[ji.i:€i  rpia^f  tj?  fxova<;  apx^i-
For  in  the  whole  world  shineth  a  Triad,  over  which  a  Monad  rules.
T.  Dam,  in  Parm,

XXXVII f  *l(poq  irpuroq  ^pofAo^t  iv  S'  dpa  f^ecra}

The  first  is  the  sacred  course  . . . . ,  but  in  the  middle
Air,  the  third  the  other  which  cherisheth  the  earth  in  fire.
Z.  or  T.  Anon.

XXXVIII.      ^Aflyjv  ifxr^v^ovara  ^ao^,  -nvp,  al^epuy  xoVjiaov?.
Abundantly  animating  light,  fire,  ether,  worlds.

Z.  or  T.  Simp,  in  Phijs.  143.


*  Tay.— T?  Fr.  Pat.

t  Jones  proposes  jjiA/cu.     Hippocrates  uses  the  ^a^ne  expression  of  S^oyuof


^Kfw.


IDEAS*

INTELLIGIBLES,  INTELLECTUALS,  lYNGES.  SYNOCHES.  TELE-
TARCH^,  FOUNTAINS,  PRINCIPLES,  HECATE
AND  D.iiMONS.

XXXIX.         NoC?  itarplq  ippot'^Yia-e,  lovja-a^  dyifxdh  ^cvX^

l\au.iA.lp<l>ov<;  lUa^.  tt^^^  S*  SckI  [Aia<;  ScitOTtra^rai
"E^e^opoy,   'jtarpoBev  yap  ojv  ^ovKr^  re  reXog  re
(Ai*  Sv  frvvditTerai  rS  ntarp),  aKkriv  xar'  ^KXv^v
2i»jVf  dito  i/.€piCfi[/.€vuv  oxerSv.)  f
*AXX'  i/xepia-^rja-avy  voepS  irvpt  fjLotpyj^eirrai
EiV  aA\a<:  voepdq'  xoV^ij  ydp  ava^  9roXi;;xo>,/,^i
Upov'^rji^ey  voeph  -rr^iroy  ei^nov,  ov  viaxd  mjL<t^w
'iXvo^  eVf»7o>evo;  /^^^  xa^*  Si  %  x^^rfioi  i(l>dv^r},
navTQiatq  iSe'a*^  y.€xapi<TfA.€>0(;,  uu  u.ta.  •nyjy^^
'E|  riq  poi^ovyrai  fAefAepiafAevai  aKKai,  aitXyiroiy
'Prjyvi!fi€vat  ycoa-fAov  nep]  crc^y.a<riy,  at  ttep)  y.iX'novq
liMphaXeovq,  a-fAYivea-ffiv  ioiwiac,  (popeovrai,
Tpaitova-i  nep  t'  dix<fi  itapaaxehov  dWvhq  ScKa-^^
Evvoiai  voepa)  iirjyfj^  irarpiK^q  dxo,  'noXh
ApaTTOfAemi  itvplq  dv^Q<;  d'Mt(A'^rov  xpovQVq  ax^J,
"Apxeyovovq  IBeaq  irpeoTri  naTpoq  e^Xvtre  rdq  he
AvTOTeX^(;  •m^yrj.

The  Mind  of  the  Father  made  a  jarring  noise,  understanding  by
unwearied  counsel

•  The  whole  of  the  following  division  is  a  system  grafted  upon  the  Platonic
doctrine  of  Ideas.  It  is  composed  of  six  different  orders,  called  Triads,  or  each
consisting  of  three  Triads,  which  have  different  names  in  the  respective  theolo-
^es  of  the  Modern  Platonists,  and  of  those  who  assumed  the  title  of  Chaldeans.
Both  regarded  the  first  Cause  as  the  One  and  the  Good  ;  from  whom  proceeded
m  succession  the  three  first  orders  which  were  all  Ineffable  and  Superessential

t  Taylor  omits  these  two  lines,  which  Fr.  Pat.  and  Stan  insert.

J  /uLtra  Tay.


248


THE  CIlALDiEAN   ORACLES


!


.


Omniform  ideas :  which  flying  out  from  one  fountain

They  sprung  forth:  for  from  the  Father  was  the  will  and  the

end;
(By  which  they  are  connected  with  the  Father
According  to  alternate  life  from  several  vehicles,)
But  they  were  divided,  being  by  intellectual  fire  distributed
Into  other  Intellectuals  :  For  the  king  previously  placed  before

the  multiform  world
An  intellectual,  incorruptible  pattern,  the  print  of  whose  form
Is  promoted  through   the  world,  according  to  which  things  the

world  appeared
Beautified  with  all-various  Ideas  ;  of  which  there  is  one  fountain,
From  this  the  others  rush  forth  distributed,
And  separated  about  the  bodies  of  the  world,  and  are  borne
Through  its  vast  recesses  like  swarms
Turning  themselves  on  all  sides  in  every  direction.
They  are  Intellectual  conceptions  from  the  paternal  fountain,
Partaking  abundantly  the  flower  of  Fire  in  the  point  of  restless

time,
But  the  primary  self-perfect  fountain  of  the  Father
Poured  forth  these  primogenial  ideas.

2,,  or  T.  Proc.  in  Farm,

XL.  HoXXa*  jW€v  Vfi  a^€  iTrefA^aivova-i  tpaeivo7i

Tp€K,
These  being  many  ascend  flashingly  into  the  shining  worlds
And  in  them  are  contained  three  summits.

T^  Dam,  in  Parm.

XLI.  fppovpoi  ruv  epyav  €kti  rov  itarpif

Kat  rov  ho(;  voZ  rav  voijtoiJ.
They  are  the  guardians  of  the  works  of  the  Father
And  of  the  one  Mind,  the  Intelligible.

X.  Proc.  in  Th,  PlaL  205.


OF  ZOROASTER.  ^49

XLII.  ITavTa  ydp  itrri  ofAov  iv  Koa-fxa)  rSye  vorjTa\

All  things  subsist  together  in  the  Intelligible  world.

Dam.  de  Prin. — Tay,


T.


XLIII.       Tov  8e  you  i:aq  vovq  ^ew,  oC  y^p  ayev  ucoq  ia-r)  vorjrov,

Kai  TO  vorjTov  ov  you  xvpi^  vitapxa.
But  all  Intellect  understands  the  deity,  for  Intellect  is  not  without
the  Intelligible,

And  the  Intelligible  does  not  subsist  apart  from  Intellect.

Z.  or  T.  r»

Dam,

XLIV.         OjJ  yap  S.yev  yooq  eVrJ  votjtoI;-  c^  x'^pk  i'Ttdpx'^u
For  Intellect  is  not  without  the  InteUigible  :  it  does  not  subsist
apart  from  it.

^•^^T-  Proc.  Th.Plat.  172.

XLV.  No?  /x€v  KaT€X€i  th.  wfi-v'uy  xPvxrju  a'  iT:ciya  yiltrfAOiq.

By  Intellect  he  contains  the  Intelligibles,  but  introduces  the  Soul
into  the  worlds.

By  Intellect  he  contains  the  Intelligibles,  but  introduces  Sense  into
the  worlds.  T.  Proc.  in  Crat.

XLVII.       lt!u^QXa  yhp  TtaTpt^o;  y^o<;  U-nape  xari  ytitrixov,

*0^  tec  yoTira  voiT,  nai  cuppata-rcc  ycacXKvjiTat.
For  the  paternal  Intellect,  which  understands  Intelligibles,
And  adorns  things  ineffable,  has  sowed  symbols  throu^rh  the  world.

T

Proc.  in  Crat,

LVIII.     'Apxvj  Tida-rji  Tix-^aeuq  ^Se  ^  rd^tt;.
This  order  is  the  beginning  of  all  section.


T.


Dam,  de  Prin.


*  r.  The  first  Order  is  the  Intelligible  Triad  of  the  Platonists,  but  Psellus
says  It  was  venerated  among  the  Chaldaeans  as  a  certain  Paternal  Profundity
containing  three  triads,  each  consisting  of  Father,  Power  and  Intellect.


K   K


250


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


OF  ZOROASTER.


251


III


If


II  i


The  Intelligible  is  the  principle  of  all  section.
T.


Dam.  de  Prin,


L.  Tp«^y  8e  Ty  VOOt/VTi  TO  ^OIJTOV.

The  Intelligible  is  food  to  that  which  understands.

T.  Dam.  de  Prin.

LI.  Ta   Myia,  ircp*  toJv  Tafeo^v  irpo  tou  Ov^ovou  <tf^  aubi^fyKtw

The  oracles  concerning  the  orders  exhibits  it  prior  to  Heaven  as

ineffable,  and  add —
It  has  mystic  silence.  T.  Proc.  in  Crat. — Tay.

LII.  Soa^  ra^  vorjra^  curia^  to  Xoy lov  xaXet,  xa*  ispc^oiSaaq  a-no

The  oracle  calls  the  Intelligible  causes  Swift,  and  asserts  that
proceeding  from  the  Father,  they  run  to  him.

T.  Proc.  in  Crat. — Tay.

LIII.  y      Ta  [A(v  €0~ri  vocpa  xai  vorjTaf  o<ra  vooZvca  voerrai.

Those  natures  are  both  Intellectual  and  Intelligible,  which,  them-
selves possessing  intellection,  are  the  objects  of  intelligence  to
others.  T.  Proc.  Th.  Plat.  179.

LIV.  Noou/xeva*  ^vyy^i  icarpi^fev  yo€ov<Ti  xai  avrai*

^ovKaT^  oup^eyyiroicri  xivotjuevai  u<rr€  vo^<rai.
The  intelligible  lynges  themselves  understand  from  the  Father ;
By  ineffable  counsels  being  moved  so  as  to  understand.

Z.  Psell.  41 Plet.  31.


•  «y»<  Fr.  Patr.

f  II.  The  second  order  of  the  Platonists  was  the  Intelligible  and  at  the  same
time  Intellectual  Triad.  Among  the  Chalda;ans  it  consisted  of  the  lynges,
Syotu'hes  and  Teletarcha.


LV.  Oti  ipydri^t  on  exSoT*^  €<n\  itvpoq  ^ccvidiopcv,

Ort  xal  TO  "^uoyovoi^  itA-^poT  tyj^  'Exarij^  xo'X-Trov.
Kai  iitiP'pu  TO?(f  Svyox^Sciv  aXx^v  X;(iha>pov  itvpoi

Because  it  is  the  operator,  because  it  is  the  giver  of  life-bearing

fire.
Because  it  fills  the  life-producing  bosom  of  Hecate.
And  it  instils  into  the  Synoches  the  enlivening  strength  of  Fire
Endued  with  mighty  power.

T*  Proc.  in  Tim.  128.

LVI.  ^povpuv  av  TTpvia-r-^pa-Df  eo^j  ayipoTvjTa^  eSwxcv,

He  gave  to  his  own  whirlwinds  to  guard  the  summits.
Mingling  the  proper  force  of  his  own  strength  in  the  Synoches.
T»  Dam.  de  Prin.

LVII.  'AXXa  xal  vXaiotq  oca  hovX€V€i  2wo%€i;o-i.

But  likewise  as  many  as  serve  the  material  Synoches.
T.

LVIII.       Oi  TeXcTa^ai  awflkyftnai  loiq  'S.vvayjiZa-i,
The  Teletarchs  are  comprehended  in  the  Synoches.
T.  Dam.  de  Prin.

LIX,  *P€«ij  TO*  vo€pSv  fAaytdpuv  irrfyv^  re  po^  Te,

HdvTuv  yap  irpurri  ^vvdfji^tq  xo'Xwo<t<v  d<ppa(TTo7^
Aefajucv^,  -ytvc^v  iiil  iictv  irpox^ei  ipoypjiAxrav.
Rhea  the  fountain  and  river  of  the  blessed  Intellectuals
Having  first  received  the  powers  of  all  things  in  her  ineffable

bosom
Pours  forth  perpetual  generation  upon  every  thing.
T,  Proc^  in  Crat. — Tay,


t  III.    The   Intellectual   Triad  of  later  Platonists  corresponds  with  the
Fountains  or  Fontal  Fathers  of  the  Chaldaeans.


252


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


LX.  EcTi  yap  mifa^  tov  tcarpi-KOv  jStdoU*,  xa«  'ayfpn  tZv  voepuv*

For  it  is  the  bound  of  the  paternal  depth,  and  tlie  fountain  of  the
.    Intellectuals.
T.  Darn,  de  Prin,


LXI.  ....      Eo'Ti  yap  aXx^(

*AiMl)i(f)aovt;  ZvvafAiqy  vofpalq  arTpd-rrrova-a  Toyt.ai<Tt,
....    For  he  is  a  power

Of  circumlucid  strength,  glittering  with  Intellectual  sections.
T.  Dam.


LXII.         Nofpa<V  aa-rpdttTii  TOfAaTq^  ipuro^  BVycirX'^crc  xa  itdvra.
He  glitters  with  Intellectual  sections,  but  has  filled  all  things
with  love.
T.  Dam.


LXIII.       Torg  8e  wpo^  voepov  vo€po7(;  'srprjcrT'^ptTn/  a-navta

To  the  Intellectual  whirlwinds  of  Intellectual  fire  all  things
Are  subservient,  through  the  persuasive  counsel  of  the  Father.
T.  Pi'oc.  in  Parm.


LXIV.         *fl  Ttuq  €y(j£i    ycotTiAoq  v<i(pov<;  dvoy^a^  dycafAitiT^'

Oh  how  the  world  has  inflexible  Intellectual  rulers.


w


m


LXV.         Mea-ov  rSv  ntarepccv  *ExaT)j^  y  K€vrpov  Sfipurat,
The  centre  of  Hecate  corresponds  with  that  of  the  fathers.
T.

LXVI.        *E^  avrov  yap  Travrc?  J  indpuoMova-i  a,a€/X<xTo<  re  xfpafvoi,
Kai  w^yjo-TTjpoSo^oi  xoXtto*  nafjupcyyeoq  aXx^s
IlaTpoy€v<ivq  'ExaTij5*  xa*  vittl^uKOi  itvpo^  d>Qoi
H§6  ycpaTaiov  itvtvfAa  %oKuv  vvpluv  eVexeiva.

From  him  leap  forth  all  implacable  thunders.


I    ■:


♦  Bo&o->.  Fr.  P.


t  ixaffTijj.  Fr.  r.


X  Tay.  uinib  l^  and  Kivtu.


OF  ZOROASTEE.


253


And  the  whirlwind  receiving  bosoms  of  the  all-splendid  strength
Of  the  Father-begotten  Hecate;  and  he  who  begirds  the  flower

of  fire
And  the  strong  spirit  of  the  poles,  all  fiery  beyond,

Proc»  in  Crat,

L3^VII.       nyiya7ov  aXXov^  o?  tov  ifATivpiQ),  v.o<t[Mv  ayei.

Another  fontal,  which  leads  the  empyreal  world.


Z.  or  T.


Proc.  in  Tim.


LXVIII.     Kat


i:riyr}  irviyuv,  Mai  irepaq  irrjyuu  dicaaZv.


The  fountain  of  fountains,  and  the  boundary  of  all  fountains.


T.


Dam.  de  Prin.


LXIX.        'Two  Irjo  vluv  vj  ^^uoyopoq  'nrjyyj  irepic^erai  x}A>xuy.

Under  two  minds  the  life-generating  fountain  of  souls
prehended.


is  com-


T.


Dam.  de  Prin,


LXX.        TiroMirat  avrai^  ^PX^'^'i  dvkuv^.

Beneath  them  lies  the  principal  of  the  immaterials.


Z.  or  T.


Dam.  in  Parm,


LXXI.


naT/joy€V€^  ipdoq,  itoKv  ydp  [Mvo<;y  ex  'narpo^  ctXx^^
'EvhtUvai  irda-aiq  'nyfyciii  T€  xa*  dpxa7(;y


V  VOVP


•  The  last  of  the  Intellectual  Triad  was  the  Demiurgus,  from  whom  pro-
ceeded the  Effable  and  Essential  orders  including  all  sorts  of  Damons.  They
are  according  to  the  respective  systems


OF  THE  PLATONISTS.

IV.  The  Supermundane.
V.  The  Liberated.
VI.  The  Mundane.


OF  THE  CHALDEANS.

IV.  The  Principles.
V.  The  Azonic.
VI.  The  Zonic.


The  Demiurgus  was  the  fabricator  of  the  world,  and  held  the  same  relative  posi-
tion to  the  three  succeeding  essential  orders  as  did  the  first  cause  to  the  three
preceding  or  superessential  orders.

t  Qy.  TO. — I  have  so  translated  it.


H


254


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


Father-begotten  light,   for  he  alone   having  gathered  from  the
strength  of  the  Father

The  flower  of  mind  has  the  power  of  understanding,  the  paternal
mind;

To  instil  into  all  fountains  and  principles  the  power
Of  understanding,  and  of  always  remaining  in  a  ceaseless  revo-
lution.

T*  Proc,  in  Tim,  242,


^^^'' Uda-a^  itriydi  re  xai  dpxoii

Amiv  a€i  re  (/.eveiv  dowxfi  <Trpocj)dKiyyi,
All  fountains  and  principles  whirl  round,
And  always  remain  in  a  ceaseless  revolution.


Z.  or  T.


Proc,  in  Parm.


m


f»r


LXXIII.      'Apx<*i*  a*  TtdTpoq  €pya  i>o-^(ra(rat  vo-^rd

Aia-ByjroT^  epyoiq,  xaj  aufAaa-iv  dfJupCKaXvypev,
AiairopOfAioi  iarure^  tpdvai  ry  itarpl  xai  t^  fk-n,
Kai  rd  i[xtpa>yiy  [xifArifxara  tSv  d(pavuv  ipya!^ofji.€yci,
Kai  T    d<pay^  el^  rvjv  ffAfftavrj  M<rfA.<mouav  lyypoupoyrfq.
The  Principles,  which  have  understood  the  Intelligible  works  of

the  Father
He  has  clothed  in  sensible  works  and  bodies,
Being  the  intermediate  links  standing  to  communicate  between

the  Father  and  Matter,
Rendering  apparent  the  images  of  unapparent  natures,
And  inscribing   the   unapparent  in  the  apparent  frame  of  the
world.

^'  ^'  ^'  Dam,  de  Prin,

LXXIV.  "Oxi  Taprdpov  xaJ  I^;  t^^  cv'^vyoiariq  rf  OCpay^  6  Tv^y,
"ExiSva,  0  Uri^uv,  om  XoXSaik^'  ri^  rpla^  ^tpopc,;  r^j^  drax-
ToiJ?  9rao->j5  ^i^fJLiovpyia^,

Typhon,  Echidna,  and  Python,  being  the  progeny  of  Tartarus
and  Earth,  which  is  conjoined  with  Heaven,  form  as  it  were  a


OF  ZOROASTER.


255


certain  Chaldaic  triad,  which  is  the  inspector  of  the  whole  dis-
ordered fabrication.

^'  Olymp  in  Phced, — Tay,

LXXV.        Airo  rZv  deptwv  d^lvruv  <rvinx^t<rravrai  o\  dXoyoi
8aiiAov€^,  ho  xaJ  to  Xoyiov  (fy/jTiy.
Uepiojy  iXdrrjpa  xwuv  y^ovtuv  re  xaJ  vypuy.

Irrational  daemons  derive  their  subsistence  from  the  aerial  rulers,

wherefore  the  oracle  says.
Being  the  charioteer  of  the  aerial,  terrestrial,  and  aquatic  dogs.
^'  Olymp,  in  Phced, — Tay,

LXXVI.  To  e'yvS/Jov,  em  f^y  rSy  ^eluy,  t^v  dx<:api<rtly  €ici<rraa-iay
ey^eUyvrai  rov  vbaro^,  8*3  xa*  to  Xoyioy  v^po^arvjpai  ^-dKet
rovq  S'eot^  toi;tov^.

The  aquatic,  when  applied  to  divine  natures,  signifies  a  govern-
ment inseparable  from  water,  and  hence  the  oracle  calls  the
aquatic  gods  water  walkers.

^*  Proc,  in  Tim,  270. — Tay,

Lxxvii.   Sunt  etiam  daemones  aquei  quos  Nereides  vocat
Orpheus,    in  sublimioribus   exhalationibus    aqua,
quales  sunt  in  hoc  aere  nubiloso,  quorum  corpora
videntur  quandoque  acutioribus  oculis,  presertim  in
Perside  et  Africa  ut  existimat  Zoroaster.
There  are  certain  aquatic  daemons  whom  Orpheus  called  Ne-
reides in  the  more  elevated  exhalations  of  water  such  as  appear
in  this  cloudy  air,  whose  bodies  are  sometimes  seen,  as  Zoroaster
thinks,  by  more  acute  eyes,  especially  in  Persia  and  Africa.
^*  Pic,  de  Im,  Am,  123. — Tay,


t  fi


m


<,fi


256


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


PARTICULAR  SOULS.


SOUL,  LIFE,  MAN.
LXXVIII.    Tavra  trarTjp  ^vvoijce,  jS^oto^  8'  oi  iypv^^To.

These  things  the  Father  conceived,  and  the  mortal  was  animated


for  him.


T.


Proc,  in  Tim.  3t/G.


LZXIX.        KuTeBero  yap  vow  iv  4^XV^  ^^  cufA-uTi  8e

*T,ata^  c-yxaTe^Tjxe  'narrjp  dvhpcov  t€  KleSv  Tf.
For  the  Father  of  gods  and  men  placed  tlic  mind  in  soul,
But  in  body  he  placed  you.

LXXX.         'E^[A.€o\a.  yap  itaTpiKoq  v&&<  €<nt(tp€  Tar^  yJ^v^aT^,

The  paternal  mind  has  sowed  symbols  in  the  souls.

Z.  PaelL  26—PlcL  G.


LXXXI.        ^i/x,aiop  a-niV^Y^pa  ^vt)  y.pd<Tai  ofAO>oiai^

N^  vcai  TTvc^/ActTi  ^c/o),  cf/)'  oiq  rpnov  dyvov  epura.

Having  mingled  the  vital  spark  from  two  according  substances,
Mind  and  Divine  Spirit,  as  a  third  to  these  he  added
Holy  Love,  the  venerable  charioteer  uniting  all  things.

Lyd.  de  Men.  3. — Tay.


LXXXII.      T^v  ypvx>jv  dvaitX-^<rai  tpuri  ^adeT,
Filling  the  soul  with  profound  love.
Z.  or  T.


Proc.  in  PL  Theol.  4.


LXXXIII.     "^vxq  ii  uepoTzuv  deov  ay^ti  Tuq  uq  eavr-^v.

Ov^€v  ^yrjTw  ^yfivtrx  oA>y  ^eoSev  u.€fA,f6€va-Tat,
'ApfXQvlav  avy(je7  yap,  C<p*  t)  TieXc  auua  ^pojeiov.
The  Soul  of  men  will  in  a  manner  clasp  God  to  herself.
Having  nothing  mortal  she  is  wholly  inebriated  from  God,
For  she  glories  in  the  harmony  under  which  the  mortal  body
exists.  Z.  Psell.  17. — Plet.  10.


OF  ZOROASTER.


257


LXXX IV.  a;  ^v  i^puix€}>ta-T€pai  y^A^xa)  Si*  kavxZv  ^eSvrai  rl  dkyj^eq,
xai  iWiv  eCpiTi^drcpai  '*  <r6,^o'a€vai  8^  ajjr^j  ^Xx>jc"  Sq
ipi^Ci  TO  Xoyiov,

The  more  powerful  souls  perceive  truth  through  themselves,  and
are  of  a  more  inventive  nature.  "  Such  souls  are  saved  through
their  own  strength,"  according  to  tlie  oracle.

"^^  Proc.  in  I.  Ale. — Tay.

LXXXV.       To  Koytov  <fyri<n  xdq  i^/y^a^  dvayL^ivaq  tov  'na^va  ^Uiv,
The  oracle  says,  ascending  souls  sing  a  paean.

^-  ^^  ^'  Olym.  in  Phced.—Tay.

LXXXVI.      H  fAaha  lyi  xeivai  ye  {AavidpTarai  i^oxa  Tcaa-cuy
'^vxausv  -TTOTi  yatav  diC  ovpdvoBiP  irpoxeovrai.
Kfiyai  S*  oA€iai  re  xai  ov  (para  v^fAMT  ep^oi^crat,
Oa-aai  dn*  atyATjcvTo^,  ava^,  (riOiVy  vjU  xa<  avToZ
Ex  Lilq  i^fyevovTO,  Ui^ov*  v.parefiq  utt'  ava-yxTj^.
Of  all  souls  those  certainly  are  superlatively  blessed
Which  are  poured  forth  from  heaven  to  earth  ;
And  they  are  happy,  and  have  ineffable  stamina,
As  many  as  proceed  from  thy  splendid  self,  O  king.
Or  from  Jove  himself,  under  the  strong  necessity  of  Mithus.
^*  ^^  ^*  Synes  de  Insom.  1 5S.

LXXXVII.    B«?j  OTi  <roS/A.a  Xittovruv  yj/x^ai  vt-aBapuraTai.
The  souls  of  those  who  quit  the  body  violently  are  most  pure.
^-  Psel,  27,

LXXXVIII.  '^vxri(;  i^uarvjpeq  dvairvooif  evAvroi  ua-l.
The  ungirders  of  the  soul,  which  give  her  breathing,  are  easy  to
be  loosed.
Z.  Psel.  32 Plet.  S.

LXXXIX.     K^y  yap  TTjv^e  4'^V''  ^^V*  a^roxaraaTao-aj',
AXX   aWrjv  ivi7)(ri  narrip,  ivapiBynov  chat.

For  tho*  you  see  this  soul  manumitted

The  Father  sends  another,  that  the  number  may  be  complete.
Z.  or  T.

•  /u/tow  Fr.  Pat.

L  L


«
11


li


258


xc.


THE  CHALD-EAN  ORACLES


'So^<ra<rcn  ia  ffya.  toiJ  •nuTpoi;

Mo/p»j^  €ifJLapi/.€V'/iq  TO  Ttrepov  (ptvyovaiv  dvaihc^*
'Ev  Se  ^€^  vLuvrai  Tcvpcrovq  i\Y.Qv<rai  axjiAowou?,
'Ek  TCdtT poQev  xaTiovTf^  dcf)  uv  x/n^X^  xaTioWajv
^EfATtvpiuv  hp€it€T<m  KapT!ru»f  yln^orpoipoif  avdoq.

Understanding  the  works  of  the  Father

They  avoid  the  shameless  wing  of  fate ;

They  are  placed  in  God,  drawing  strong  torches,

Descending  from  the  Father,  from  which,  as  they  descend,  the
soul

Gathers  of  the  empyreal  fruits  the  soul-nourishing  flower.
Z.  or  T.  Proc  in  Tim,  321.

XCI.  To   y€  roi  'jr>€Vf/.a  rovro   to  i/^ixov,  6  xai  -Trvei/jtxaTixijv

xJAJ^^v  itpocnjyopeverav  cl  ctSa/jU.ov6(,  xa)  deo(  xat  iatfAuv
'KavTohatto^j  xai  eiSwXov  yiveraif  xa*  Ta{  isolvaq  tv  towt^
Tivci  T^X'?*  ^pT^frj^Oi  T€  yap  oiJi.o(pcoyovcn  ittpi  avTOVj  raiq
ovap  (pavTatriaiq  t»)v  ix,€7  hie^ayuyyiv  Tyjq  ypv^q  Ttpoa-eiyLa-

^OVTf^.

This  animastic  spirit,  which  blessed  men  have  called  the  pneu-
matic soul,  becomes  a  god,  an  all-various  daemon,  and  an  image,
and  the  soul  in  this  suffers  her  punishments.  The  oracles,  too,
accord  with  this  account :  for  they  assimilate  the  employment  of
the  soul  in  Hades  to  the  delusive  visions  of  a  dream.

Z.  or  T.  Synes.  de  Insom.  p.  139. — Tay.

XCII.  AXXijv  xaT*  aXX)jv  '^wriVy  dito  [Aepi^ufxevan^  ox^tSv.

AvuBiv  8»jxovTo^  fir)  to  xaT*  ayrix.pv
Aia  Tou  xtvrpov  tij^  -y^j,  xai*  Wjixittoj/  fA.€(TOv,  aXXov
nvpo^oJ'*  fvda  xaTCKTi  (Jt-e^pi  vXaiuv  ox^tuv
7iayj(f)opov  ttvp.

One  life  with  another,  from  the  distributed  channels.

Passing  from  above  through  the  opposite  part

Through  the  centre  of  the  earth ;  and  the  fifth  the  middle,


Taylor  gives  only  these  two  last  lines  from  Proc.  in  Tim.  1 72.


OF  ZOROASTER.


259


Another  fiery  channel,  where  the  life-beaming  fire  descends
As  far  as  the  material  channels.
Z.  or  T.

xcill.        Zc^i  TO  vyplv  <njiA.^oAOi>'  8<o  xa*  tot€  [X€V  Xt^dha  xaXotJo-iV
avTTjy  T7J^  oXrji  t^uoyovtaqy  t6t€  hf  m^y  rii/a,  xcti  UKdruv
xa<  vpo  HXdrwi/oq  ol  ^€oi.
Moisture  is  a  symbol  of  life ;  hence  Plato,  and  the  gods  before
Plato,  call  it  (the  soul) ;  at  one  time  the  liquid  of  the  whole  of
vivification,  and  at  another  time  a  certain  fountain  of  it.
Z.  Proc.  in  Tim,  318. —  Tay,

XCIV.  *fl  TO>.fATfpd<;  ex*  (pvcnuif  ayBpuiiij  tix^aa-fMi,

O  man,  of  a  daring  nature,  thou  subtile  production.

Z.  Psel,  12,^Plet,  21.

xcv.  2ov  yap  dyyuav  ^rjpe^  xBavl^  o/x^coyo-t.

For  thy  vessel  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  inhabit.

Z.  Psel,  36,—Plet,  7,

xcvi.       Cum  anima  currat  semper,   certo  temporis  spatio
transit   omnia,  quibus  peractis,  cogitur   recurrere
paulatim  per  omnia  denuo,  atque  eandem  in  mundo
telam  generationis  retexere,  ut  placuit  Zoroastri,
qui  iisdem  aliquando  causis  omnino    redeuntibus,
eosdem  similiter  effectud  reverti  putat.
Since  the  soul  perpetually  runs  and  passes  through  all  things
in  a  certain  space  of  time,  which  being  performed,  it  is  presently
compelled  to  run  back  again  through  all  things  and  unfold  the
same  web  of  generation  in  the  world,  according  to  Zoroaster,  who
thinks  that  as  often  as  the  same  causes  return,  the  same  effects
will  in  like  manner  be  returned.
Z.  Ficin  de  Im,  An,  129. — Tay,

xcvii.     Voluit  Zoroaster  aethereum  animae  indumentum  in
nobis  assidue  volvi.

♦  ToX/x»j/?oT«T»jj  Psel. — Fr.  Pair.


.  i


mm


!i


ii


I


*f-


MilllP


260


TH£  CHALDEAN    ORACLES


According  to  Zoroaster,  in  us  the  ethereal  vestment  of  the  soul
perpetually  revolves.
Z.  Fic'm  de  Im.  An.  131. —  Tay»

xcviii.    Qui  auteni  a  Deo  traditi  serniones  fontem  per  se
laudant  oninis  animse  empyreas,  id  est  empyrealis,
aetherealis,  materialis :  et  hunc  sejungunt  ex  tota
Zoogonothea,  a  qua  et  totum  fatum  suspendentes
duas  faciunt  <re*/)a;,  id  est  ordines,  hanc  quidem  ani-
malem,  hanc  autem  ut  diximus  ixoipuTav,  id  est  sortia-
lem,  fatalem.    Et  animam  ex  altera  trahentes,  quan-
doque  autem  fato  servire,  quando  irrationalis  facta,
dominum  permutaverit,  pro  providentia  fatum.
The  oracles  delivered  by  the  gods  celebrate  the  essential  foun-
tain of  every  soul,  the  empyrean,  the  etherial,  and  the  material.
This  fountain  they  separate  from  the  whole  vivific  goddess*;
from  whom  also  suspending  the  whole  of  fate,  they  make  two
series,  the  one  animastic,  or  belonging  to  the  soul,  and  the  other
belonging  to  Fate.    They  assert  that  the  soul  is  derived  from  the
animastic  series,  but  that  sometimes  it  becomes  subservient  to
Fate,  when  passing  into  an  irrational  condition  of  being,  it  becomes
subject  to  fate  instead  of  Providence.

Z.  or  T.  Proc.  de  Prov.  ap.  Fahr.  VI IL  ^86.— Tay.


MATTER.


MATTER,  THE  WORLD,  AND  NATURE.


XCIX.        MijTpa  cvi'fx^va-a  ra  ntavra,
le  1
T.


The  matrix  containing  all  things.


C.  *0'/,(i<ptr}i  fA€pi<TiAOi  'Kui  a/xepia-TOf,

Wholly  division,  and  indivisible.

•   Rhea.     Tav,


M-UMB


OF  ZOROASTER.


261


CI.  EyBtv  aplrjv  ^p6<r)i€i  yivfai^  iroXvjtODiiAov  6\viq.

Thence  abundantly  springs  forth  the  generation  of  multifarious


matter.


T.


Proc.  in  Tim.  118.


CII.


0«  Of  ra  aTOfjioCf  xa)  alaSrjra  ^i^f/.iovpyovo'if
Kat  o-6)/xaT0fi5^,  x,al  ycatTaTerayfAeva  €'tq  va-^v.
These  frame  indivisibles  and  sensibles,
And  corporiforms  and  things  destined  to  matter.


T.


Dam.  de  Prin.


cm.  l<lvfMpai  Ttrjyaiai,  y.ai  ivrj^pia  'Kvevixara  ntavra^

Kai  ^Bovioi  xoXvoi  T€  xa*  rjcpioi  xai  urravyoi,

TXvji  Qvpavlaq  re  xai  aa-Ttpia^,  xai  a^rjo-fTwv.
The  fontal  nymphs,  and  all  the  aquatic  spirits.
And  the  terrestrial,  aerial,  and  glittering  recesses,
Are  the  lunar  riders  and  rulers  of  all  matter.
Of  the  celestial,  the  starry,  and  that  which  lies  in  the  abysses.

Lyd.  p.  32.—Tay.

CIV.           To  xaxov  afMVYiyonpov  tov  [avj  ovroq  cVriv,  xar^b  to  Aoytov.
Evil,  according  to  the  oracle,  is  more  frail  than  nonentity.
^-  or  T.  Proc.  de  Prov Tay,

CV.  Eiiei  (Ao^rja-ofAeKfa,  8<a  wavTo;  rov  xoV/i*ov  t»jv  vX-^v  Biijxciv,

We  learn  that  matter  pervades  the  whole  world,  as  the  gods
also  assert.

^'  or  T.  Proc.  Tim.  142.


cvi.


*A<ro}fA.dra  jtxev  ia-r]  ra  ^tia  'ndvra.

lufAara  h   iv  avroT^  vf^Zv  evev.ev  ivheherai.

Mvi  Si/va/xcW^*  K(»Ta(r%€rv  aaufxazovq  rSv  crw/xaTwv,

•  Au»«yu«>ouf  Fr.  Patr.


•  wl


262


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


OF  ZOROASTER.


265


\l


i


••1
i


All  divine  natures  are  incorporeal,
But  bodies  are  bound  in  them  for  your  sakes.
Bodies  not  being  able  to  contain  incorporeals
By  reason  of  the  corporeal  nature,  in  which  you  are  concentrated.
Z.  or  T.  Proc.  in  PL  Polit.  359.

CVII.  Epya  vQ^a-a^  yap  irarpixo^  yoo^  avT<iyev€6>,oqy

Tlaa-iv  inea-tteipi  SccTjUov  ntvpi€pi6vj  coojto^,
0(f)pa  ra  itavra  fJi€vi^,  xp^voy  ci^  arApayxov  ipSyra.
MevTj  irao-jj     ra  irarplq  yoepS^  v(f>a<rfA,€ya  (peyyeif
'ilq  iy  epurt  fAtyji  Koa-fxov  (rroixua.  ^tovTajf.
For  the  paternal  self-begotten  mind  understanding  his  works
Sowed  in  all  the  fiery  bond  of  love.
That  all  things  might  continue  loving  for  an  infinite  time.
That  the  connected  series  of  things  might  intellectually  remain

in  all  the  light  of  the  Father,
That  the  elements  of  the  world  might  continue  their  course  in  love.
T.  Proc.  in  Tim,  155.

CVIII.         O  voivjTrji  Of  avrovpySv  Texx'^varo  rov  MOCfMv.

Kai  rij  itvpo^  oyxo^  fyjy  €T€poq'  ra,  Sc  ntavra

AvTovpyuy,  tya  <TUf4.a  to  xocr/Aijtov  ixTckvirevG^,

Koa-fAot;  Jv'  exSijXrt^,  xa«  fMj  tpaiyi/jrat  viMvu^q.
The  Maker  who,  self-operating,  framed  the  world,
And  there  was  another  mass  of  fire :  all  these  things
He  produced  self-operating,  that  the  body  of  the  world  might

be  conglobed.
That  the  world  might  be  manifest,  and  not  appear  membranous.
^•^'■T.  Proc,  in  Tim,  154.

CIX.  *k<pQfAom  yap  kavrwy  excrvo^  i'jnyofji.€Voq

Toy  xtkov  nrcpi^aXXea-Bai  xSy  «'8<»X»v.
For  he  assimilates  himself,  professing
To  cast  around  him  the  form  of  the  images.


ex.  NoS  y^p  fAifX-riiAa  veXer  to  8e  rexOey  ex^t  rt  a-t^fxar^^.

For  it  is  an  imitation  of  Mind,  but  that  which  is  fabricated  has

something  of  body.

^-  ^^  T.  Proc,  in  Tim,  87.

CXI.  AXXa  S*     ovyofAa  aeiAyly  axotiA'^Ta}  <npo(pdKiyyi    '

Koa-fxoiq  iyQpua-xuy,  xpsnityTiy  f  Sta  irarpoq  ivntr^v.

But  projecting  into  the  worlds,  through  the  rapid  menace  of  the

Father,
The  venerable  name  with  a  sleepless  revolution.

Z-  ^^  T.  p^op^  i^  Crat,


CXII.  *ATrXSq  8*  ody  ot  Tuy  CToixetuv  al^epe^  iyiei.

The  ethers  of  the  elements  therefore  are  there.

Z-  or  T.  Olymp,  in  Phced.


-Tay,


CXIII.


Toi/^  Tvmv(i  T&>v  xa/JaxTi};)ft>v,  xai  ruy  aKKuv  heiuy  (paa-fAdruv
ev  rS  aiKfepi  (f)aiy€(r^ai,  ra  Xoyia  Xeyova-iy,


The  oracles  assert,   that  the  impression  of  characters,  and  of
other  divine  visions,  appear  in  the  ether.
Z*  O"*'  T.  Simp,  in  Phys,  144. — Tay,

CXIV.         Ey  TouTfii)  yap  ra  arrjirura  rvitova-Bai,
In  this  the  things  without  figure  are  figured.

Z*  ^^  ^'  Simp,  in  Phys.  143.

CXV.  T  a^pvjraf  xa«  ra  pyjra  avyd-^ixara  rov  Koa-fMV,

The  ineffable  and  effable  impressions  of  the  world.

CXVI.         Ka)  6  fAt(ro^ayr}q  xoa-ixo^,  xai  ra  (ncoXia  puQpa
T(\}   uy  iroXAci  x/zra<rvpoyrai  "f.

And  the  light-hating  world,  and  the  winding  currents
Under  which  many  are  drawn  down.

2-  or  T.  Proc.  in  Tim.  339,


*;


•  T.  —  M?T«  iroiffi  Fr.  Patr.


f  /uLtvovTa  Fr.  Patr.


tartp  Tay.  f  xpiir,^,  Fr.  P.

X  xeiTaan'p9itTai  Fr.  Patr.


264


THE  CMALDiEAN  ORACLES


CXVII.       Toy  oAov  MO-fAOv  in  iri/pc^,  xoi  tSaro?,  xa)  yhi^

Ka*  TravTOTp 0(^011  aWpvjC  'j:oi€7.
He  makes  the  whole  world  of  fire,  and  water,  and  earth.
And  all-nourishing  ether*
Z.  or  T.

CXVIII.     r^y  8*  iv  fAeau)  TiBtl^,  v^up  8'  €>  yata,^  KO>.7roK»

*Hfpa  8'  avudey  tovzuv.
Placing  earth  in  the  middle,  but  water  in  the  cavities  of  the  earth,
And  air  above  these.
Z.  or  T.

CXIX.        n^^€  8f  vLoa  iroXlv  OfxiAov  aa-rtpuv  aitXaySv.

n^5>j  Sf  ■ffXayvjy  ovk  €%ouV7J  (peptadai.

To  iri/p  7rpo(  to  'TrUp  ayayxao'a;.
He  fixed  a  great  multitude  of  inerratic  stars,
Not  by  a  laborious  and  evil  tension,
But  with  a  stability  void  of  wandering.
Forcing  the  fire  to  the  fire.

Z.  or  T.  Proc.  in  Tim.  280.

CXX*  'Eirra  yap  izooyx.u<T€  itarrjp  crepfufJiaTa  mctiauv'

Tov  oO^ayoy  wjprS  a^rjixaTt  itfpiK'Kfia'a^.
For  the  Father  congregated  the  seven  firmaments  of  the  world.
Circumscribing  the  heaven  with  a  convex  figure.

Z.  or  T.  Dam.  in  Parm,

CXXI.        Xuuy  xai  itXavufxiyuv  {/(pea-rtjxev  iitrdha*
He  constituted  a  septenary  of  erratic  animals.
Z.  or  T.


CXX II.      To  araKToy  avrvy  e^axroi;  avoKpifUKra^  tfiitvutq.

Suspending  their  disorder  in  well-disposed  zones.
Z.  or  T.


OF  ZOROASTER.


5G5


uoi/


CXXIII.    *E^  avrolq  ^Tr/cmjo-fv,  €^oia.ov  yjeXt

Mea-efA^oX-qa-aq  itZp.
He  made  them  six  in  number,  and  for  the  seventh
He  cast  into  the  midst  the  fire  of  the  sun.


1/


Z.  or  T.


Proc.  in  Tim,  280.


icrai  eaci.


CXXIV.      K^vrpov  a(f>'  at  'ndfroci*  fA^xpU  av  rvxfiv  U
The  centre  from  which  all  (lines)  which  way  so  ever  are  equal.

Proc,  in  Euc,  43.


Z.  or  T.


CXXV.       Kai  TaxK  ¥>^toq  Trepl  Kt'vT/joy,  'ina^  e'6^^,  iKBr].

And  that  the  swift  sun  may  come  as  usual  about  the  centre.
^'"'^T''  Proc.  in  Plat.  Th.  S17.

CXXVI.     Kevrpu  ima-izfpxcou  iavrcv  (fyuro^  vteXaSoWo^.
Eagerly  urging  itself  towards  the  centre  of  resounding  light.

^roc,  in  Tim.  236,

CXXVII.    'HeXfoy  re  ueyav,  ital  KaiATrpuv  o-cX^'yvjy.

And  the  great  sun  and  the  bricrht  moon.


CXXVIII.  Xairui  ykp  i<;  i^  itetfywoTi  <pi}r)  ^XimuToct,
For^his  hairs  appear  like  rays  of  light  ending  in  a  sharp  point.

Proc.  in  PI,  Pol,  387^


T.


CXXIX.    'H\id\iuv  T€  xi/xXwv,  xa<  fAvjvaiuv  yiavccxio-fxZv,
KoXtruy  t€  vjepiuv.

A\9pri^  fA€Xoi*  iieXUv  T6,  Y.CU  fAyjurjq  oxerSv,  ?  re  rjepo^.
And  of  the  solar  circles,  and  of  the  lunar  clashings,
And  of  the  aerial  recesses.

The  melody  of  the  ether,  and  of  the  sun,  and  of  the  passages  of
the  moon,  and  of  the  air.


Z.  or  T.


Proc,  in  Tim,  257,


CXXX.      Ory€  fA,v<rTiyc£rarot  tuv  Xoyav,  xai  t^  oAorrjra  avroZ  r^y


•  Tay.  substitutes  xa)  xpU  i.


f  /^epoi    Tay.
MM


26G


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


fjioq  xa*  TO  OAov  <^u^f  uq  ou  it  XaX8a/&>v  (fyfjfxat  Xeyoyct.

The  most  mystic  of  discourses  inform  us,  that  the  wholeness  of
him  (the  sun)  is  in  the  supermundane  orders :  for  there  a  solar
world  and  a  total  light  subsist,  as  the  oracles  of  the  Chaldeeans
affirm.

Z.  or  T.  Proc,  in  Tim.  26i.—Tay,

*

CXXXI.     *0  &kYi^€(Tr(poq  rj}M^  <n;/XjU€T/)€i  rS  XP^^V  '"^  wavra,  j^ovw

Xpo^oq  uy  drex^u^t  xara  tijv  ttepl  avrov  tuv  ^ewv  oyufr^v.
The  more  true  sun  measures  all  things  by  time,  being  truly  a
time  of  time,  according  to  the  oracle  of  the  gods  concerning  it.
Z.  or  T.  Proc.  in  Tim.  2^9. — Tay,

CXXXII.   *0    8*!rxoj   iiri    ryjq  &vd<Trpov  (p€p€Tccij   toau   Tyji  dirXavovq
v\l/^XQT€paq.  xa*  ovTu  Sf  tuv  fxey  nXavufAevuv  ovx.  €^u  to
|tA€O'0>|  fpfZy  Se  Twy  xotrixuv  xara  tu^  re ActTTtxa?  viro^ea-et^.
The  disk  (of  the  sun)  is  carried  in  the  starless  much  above  the
inerratic  sphere  :  and  hence  he  is  not  in  the  middle  of  the  planets
but  of  the  three  worlds,  according  to  the  telestic  hypotheses.
Z.  or  T.  Jul.  Orat.  V.  33i.—Tay.

CXXXIII.  Tfvp  Tcvpof  i^ox€'T^€Vfxaf

(The  sun  is  a)*  fire,  the  channel  of  fire,  and  the  dispenser  of  fire.
Z.  or  T.  Proc.  in  Tim.  141.


CXXXIV.  f  *Ey$a  Kpovoq.

Hence  Cronus.

The  sun  assessor  beholding  the  pure  pole.

CXXXV.    AiBifio^  T€  hpcfMq  xa)  ^y^ytiq  ditXeroi  opfAr,,

III '     '       «     >
neptoi  re  poai.


•  Tay.  inserts.


t  Taylor  otnits  this  and  the  two  following.


OF  ZOROASTER.


267


The  ethereal  course  and  the  vast  motion  of  the  moon
And  the  aerial  fluxes,

^*  ^^  ^'  Proc.  in  Tim.  257.

CXXXVI.     AiOvjp,  rjXie,  mevfAa  TeX^vrj^^  dtpo^  ay^i.

Oh  ether,  sun.  spirit  of  the  moon,  leaders  of  the  air.

^-  ^^  '^-  Proc.  in  Tim.  257.

CXXXVII.    Kai  vXarli  arip,  fA,r}ya7oq  t€  tpofAoq,  xaJ  voXk  yjeXmo.
And  the  wide  air,  and  the  lunar  course,  and  the  pole  of  the  sun.
^-  °^  '^^  Proc.  in  Tim.  257,

CXXXVIII.  T/xTCi  y^p  ^  ^ea  ^cXw'v  re  yjyav  xaJ  Xa/A,Tcp^v  o-eX^'njy.

For  the  goddess  brings  forth  the  great  sun  and  the  bright  moon.

CXXXIX.     XvXXeyei  avro,  XaiA^dvova-a  alOpij^  /xcXo^  *,

HeXiQv  re,  <reXiJvij^  re,  xal  oa-a  rjepi  avvexovrou.
She  collects  it,  receiving  the  melody  of  the  ether,
And  of  the  sun,  and  of  the  moon,  and  of  whatsoever  things  are
contained  in  the  air.


If


CXL.  Apxet  S*  al  (pv<Ti;  dxaiAarti  M<riAuy  re  xai  epyuv'

Ovpauo^  (xppa  ^eei  Ipof^ov  dihov  Karaarvpuv,
Kai  oitut;  ay  ai  aXXai  itepU^ot  itX-^puyrai  ^X/od,  (tcXiJm,?,  £puy,
vfXTo^,  ^fxepaf.
Unwearied  nature  rules  over  the  worlds  and  works,
That  heaven. drawing  downward  might  run  an  eternal  course,
And  that  the  other  periods  of  the  sun,  moon,  seasons,  night,  and
day,  might  be  accomplished.
^'  ^^-  T.  Proc.  in  Tim.  4.  &  323.— Tay.

CXLI.         NwTOij  S*  dfx(p)  Beaq  (pjjtriq  aitXeroi  Tjupvirai.
Immense  nature  is  exalted  about  the  shoulders  of  the  goddess.
'■'  •  Proc.  in  Tim.  4.


.1

f


fjiipo(  Tay.


268


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


CXLII.         Tun  Ba^vXuviuy  di  Soxi/xwraroi,  Ka)  *0«rTavr;,  xa)  Za>-
poa<TTpi^if  ayeXa^  yivpiZq  xaXoiJcri  Tuq  aa-rpmoc^  a^aipaq,
Hto*  Ttap   0(701/  reXeiuq  ayovTon  mep)  to  yUvrpov  fxovai  itapa,
tu  a-ufAarixu  (Xiyfdr)'  t;  ano  Toi/  (TVi/^fO-fJioi  iruq  ytal  a-vvd-
yuyat  xpTj^aaTi^civ  hoy [/.aril^ejdai  map  avruu  ruv  (pvffmuy
Xoyuv,   a<;  ayiovq  xara   ra   avra  y(,aXov<riv  iv  ToTq  ifpoT(;
yjyyoiq*  xara  irapeixxraaiv  te  tov  'ya/A/>ta,  ayyiXovq*      A<o
xai  Toi;<  xad'  exao-Tvjv  rovruv  ayi'kuv  i^dp^ovraq  aa-repaiy
xa<   8a*]uova^  ouoiovq  dyytKov^y   xa«   dp)(^ayy€Kovq  itpoaa.-
yop€V€a6acif  oiTttpf  eiffh  i-mu  ihv  dpiSixov,
The  most  celebrated  of  the  Babylonians,  together  with  Ostanes
and  Zoroaster,  very  properly  call  the   starry   spheres   herds;
whether  because  these  alone  among  corporeal  magnitudes,  are"
perfectly  carried  about  a  centre,  or  in  conformity  to  the  oracles,
because  they  are  considered  by  them  as  in  a  certain  respect  the
bonds  and  collectors  of  physical   reasons,  which    they  likewise
call  in  their  sacred  discourses  herds,  and  by  the  insertion  of  a
gamma,  angels.     Wherefore  the  stars  which  preside  over  each  of
these  herds  are  considered  demons  similar  to  the  angels,  and  are
called  archangels :  and  they  are  seven  in  number.

Z.  Anon,  in  Theologumenis  Arithmeticis, — Tay.

cxLiii.      Congruitates   materialium    formarum  ad  rationes
animte  mundi,  Zoroaster  divinas  iUices  appellavit.
Zoroaster  calls  the  congruities  of  material  forms  to  the  reasons  of
the  soul  of  the  world,  divine  allurements.

Z.  Fie.  de  vii  ccel.  comp.  519. —  Tay.


MAGICAL  AND  PHILOSOPHICAL  PRECEPTS.


CXLIV.


Mi]  TO.  TZiXupia  [Acrpa  yair}^  vno  <r^v  (f)p€va  ^dKkov
Ov  yap  aXfiBiir^q  (pVToy  tvJ  )(fioy],
M^T€  fxeTpd  [A€Tpa  rjXiov  xavova^  <TvyaBpoi(raq
*A'iti<p  jSofXij  (p€p€Tai  Ttarpoq  ovy^  evcxev  aoZ.
h\-fiv%(;  puitflv  iaaov  de)  tpv/j^i  fpycf  iivayxvj^.


OF  ZOROASTER.


269


*A<rT€pioy  itpoiropfvfxaf  aeOcv  x^P^>  ^^^  i'Aox€v9vi,
Aidpio;  opyiduv  rapaoq  irAarvq  ov  ttot'  aX^^^^,
O^  ^va^uy  iTTiXdyxvuy  re,  rofxai'  rdh'  dOr^pfAara  irdvTa,
%u.Tropiy.^q  dirdTT]^  <rrrjpiyfAaTa'  <pevye  <rv  raZra
MeXXwv  €vat€i7]q  Upov  itapdleta-ov  dyoiyeiv,
Evd*  dpcTr/,  <ro(pia  tc,  xat  evyoiua  <rvvdyoyrai.
Direct  not  thy  mind  to  the  vast  measures  of  the  earth ;
For  the  plant  of  truth  is  not  upon  ground.
Nor  measure  the  measures  of  the  sun,  collecting  rules,
For  he  is  carried  by  the  eternal  will  of  the  father,  not  for  your

sake.
Dismiss  the  impetuous  course  of  the  moon  ;  for  she  runs  always

by  the  work  of  necessity.
The  progression  of  the  stars  was  not  generated  for  your  sake.
The  wide  aerial  flight  of  birds  is  not  true,
Nor  the  dissections  of  the  entrails  of  victims ;  they  are  all  mere

toys.
The  basis  of  mercenary  fraud :  flee  from  these
If  you  would  open  the  sacred  paradise  of  piety
Where  virtue,  wisdom,  and  equity,  are  assembled.


Z.


CXLV.


Psel.  4.


"MrjTe  viaTu  yevaeiq  €<;  tov  jMAavavyea  MO-fAoy,
Q  ^vBlq  aWv  aiticTTOi  vTrecTTpurai  re  xai  "ASi;;
*AfMf)nfcye(prjq  pvnouy,  eBuKoxapr}(;,  dyofjroqt
Kp'^lAvuhrj<:f  (TxoXio^,  'jTupoy  ^dBoq,  atev  eXiaa-uy,
*Aei  yvfMpeiJuy  dtpayeq  hefJiaq,  apyov  a-nyeviAov.
Stoop  not  down  to  the  darkly-splendid  world ;
In  which  continually  lies  a  faithless  depth,  and  Hades
Cloudy,  squalid,  delighting  in  images  unintelligible.
Precipitous,  winding,  a  blind  profundity  always  rolling.
Always  espousing  an  opacous,  idle,  breathless  body.

^'  or  T.  Synes  de  Insom.  140.


CXLVI.


MijT€  xaT«  yeij<r€i(;,  xpfjfAyo^  year  a  ytjq  I'KOY.eirai,
Evratcopov  avpuv  Kara  ^aBjAlhoq'  rjv  inn  8c*v^^
'Ava-yxij^  ^povoq  ecrri.


270


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


OF  ZOROAStER.


271


Stoop  not  down,  for  a  precipice  lies  below  the  earth,
Drawing  under  a  descent  of  seven  steps,  beneath  which
Is  the  throne  of  dire  necessity.

Z.  Psel  6.—Plet.  2.

CXLVII.        MiJtc  *  Tj  J  T^^  VAl}q  (Tx^^aXov  Kp^fAH^  XaTaX€A//€«5

*Etrr)  >cail{i  tl^uKta  f^pi^  e/j  toVov  aiMpufiaovra,
Leave  not  the  dross  of  matter  on  a  precipice,
For  there  is  a  portion  for  the  image  in  a  place  ever  splendid.
Z.  Psel.  1.  2.—Plet.  U.^Syn.  140.

CXLVIII.      M^  <pv<r€u;  xaX€<rij^  avroitTpoy  aya.\\*.a..

Invoke  not  the  self-conspicuous  image  of  nature.

Z,  PseL  15,—Plet.  23,

Look  not  upon  nature,  for  her  name  is  fatal.

Z.  Proc,  in  PlaL  Th,  143.

CL.  Oi  yap  xpV  >tf'*'Ot^f  0"^  ^Xeirav  irpTv  TUfAa  TcXetrS^*

"Ore  Ta^  4^%^^  ^eXyovrc^  at)  tuv  reXeruv  airayovtrt*
It  becomes  you  not  to  behold  them  before  your  body  is  initiated.
Since  by  always  alluring,  they  seduce  the  souls  of  the  initiated.
Z.  or  T.  Proc.  in  I,  Alcib,

Bring  herjl  not  forth,  lest  in  departing  she  retain  something.
Z.  Psel.  3.—Plet.  15.

CLII.  Mr/  irvcvfjui  fMXvyrjf  A*?T€  ^uBtjvi^^  to  iitnti^w.

Defile  not  the  spirit,  nor  deepen  a  superficies.

Z.  Psel.\9.—Plet.\3.


CLIII.         M^  av  av^ave  t^v  elfxapfity^y.

Enlarge  not  thy  destiny.
Z.


Psel.  Sl.—Pkt.  4.


CLIV.  Ovht  vTttp^d^fxiov  Tiota  piTTTuVt  Kara  to  Xoyiov  dq  Tr}>  ^€oa€^dav .
Not  hurling,  according  to  the  oracle,  a  transcendent  foot  towards
piety.

Z.  or  T.  Dam.  in  vit.  Isidori  ap.  Suid. —  Tay.

CLV.  *OvofAaTa  ^dptapa  /t^ijTroT*  aXXafrj^,

E«V*  yap  ovofAata  itap   iY.d(rroig  ^eocSoTa
AvvafAiv  iv  reXcrai^  afpvirov  iyfivra.

Never  change  barbarous  names,

For  there  are  names  in  every  nation  given  from  God,

Having  unspeakable  efficacy  in  the  mysteries.

Z.  or  T.  Psel.  7. — Niceph.


CLVi.        Nee  exeas  cum  transeat  lictor.
Go  not  out  when  the  lictor  passes  by.
Z.


Pic.  ConcL — Tay.


CLVII.       'EXwi^  Tp€(f)eTa)  <T€  Tivployfiq  dyyeXiv^S  in  X'^PV'
Let  fiery  hope  nourish  you  in  the  angelic  region.

Z.  or  T.  Olym.  in  Phced^ — Proc.  in  Alcib.

CLVIII.     *H  TTvpidaXitr]^  €vtf9ia  'srpurto'rvjy  e;^«  rd^a^

TS  Ttvpi  yap  ^porcx;  i[Mr€Kdcrai  BioBev  ^d%  e^a.
/i'qdwovTt  yap  j3poT^  xpoiirpti  u,dxap€^  TcXcdovci.

The  fire-glowing  conception  has  the  first  rank,

For  the  mortal  who  approaches  the  fire  shall  have  light  from  God,

For  to  the  persevering  mortal,  the  blessed  immortals  are  swift.
Z.  or  T.  Pr<M:.  in  Tim.  65.


•I  i

•  4


I,.;.


•  Synes.  unites  the  two,  and  subjoins  »;^«<  ydtf?  nva  nt  cotZ  [itpii^oi.     For  it  has
a  portion  in  it.

t  Ou  rZ  Syn.  J  *Kh.Kk  xat  Syn.

II  The  soul.— Tay.


§  fCffnog  Fr.  Pat.


CLIX.        TlapayuXfvoyrai  ol  \feol

'SotTv  fAop(fnjv  (^a;TO(  irpoTe^eKrav.


■J


272


THE    CHALD^EAN  ORACLES


OF  ZOROASTER.


273


The  Gods  exhort  us

To  understand  the  preceding  form  of  light.

Z.  or  T.  Proc,  in  Crat, — Tay,

CLX.  Xprj  a-e  or-Kfvbiiy  vpoi;  to  (f>ctoi  xai  itarpo;  atJ-ya?,

It  becomes  you  to  hasten  to  the  h'ght  and  the  rays  of  the  Father,
From  whence  was  sent  to  you  a  soul  endued  with  much  mind.
Z.  PseL  33,—Plet.  6.


CLXI*        Z^T-fjffov  itapaZ€(aroy,
Seek  paradise.
Z.


PseL  20,—PleL  12.


CLXII.       Mdvdav€  TO  vovjTov,  iit€\  vlov  e^u  litdpxd*

Learn  the  Intelligible,  for  it  subsists  beyond  the  mind.

Z.  Psel,  U.—Plet.  27.

CLXIII.       Eo"T*  yap  Ti  yo>jTov,  o  XP^  ^^  J'^*'*'  "^'^^  avBfi,

There  is  a  certain  Intelligible  which  it  becomes  you  to  understand
with  the  flower  of  Mind,
Z.  PseL  31,— Plet,  28.

CLXIY.      'AXX'  ovx,  €«(r8€%€Ta*  yielyyjq  to  ^iXetv  itarpiyio^  voU^,

Myqu-ifjv  iy6€iA.€vyj  *  ita,rpi%ov  trvvQ'^fji.aTO^  dyvov.
But  the  paternal  mind  receives  not  her-)*  will
Until  she  has  gone  out  of  oblivion,  and  pronounce  the  word,
Assuming  the  memory  of  the  pure  paternal  symbol.

Z.  PseL  3d,—Plet.  5,

CLXV.       Toi?  §€  8<8axToy  c6&jx6  (pdov^  yvupiCfAU  "KatiaQai'
Toi;^  $e  vrnvoyraq  eij$  iveyidp^icrty  aXx^f.


ala^tfA(»ri  Fr.  Pat.


t  The  soul.— Tay.


To  these  he  gave  the  ability  of  receiving  the  knowledge  of  light;
Those  that  were  asleep  he  made  fruitful  from  his  own  strength.
^'  ^^  ^-  Syn,  de  Insom,  135.

CLXVI.        *Odll  Xfi  (^(fXihpOT'/JTl  VO€lV  TO  VO^^TOV   i%UVQ,

*A\Xa  vooy  ravaov  Tavarj  <pXvyl  ndwa.  /xfT/joifcTTj,
nXV  TO  voijTov  ^xervo.      X/3iJ  f  %\  rov70  v<y!ja-ai'
H  7<i^  ^TTfyxX/vjj  crov  voSy,  xjtxervo  vo^o-fi?
OCic  drivu^.  ^  *AXX*  ayvov  Hia-Tpw^v  ofAfAa  <^€^VTa,

2lJ5  ^'%^ff  TCrva<  X€V€OV  VOOV  fl^  TO  V01JT0V,

0(ppa  (AdBr^q  to  voijtov'
'Eirfi  €{■«  j/o'oy  vttdpx^i*

It  is  not  proper  to  understand  that  Intelligible  with  vehemence.
But  with  the  extended  flame  of  an  extended  mind  measuring  all

things
Except  that  Intelligible.    But  it  is  requisite  to  understand  this  :
For  if  you  incline  your  mind  you  will  understand  it
Not  earnestly,  but  it  becomes  you  to  bring  with  you  a  pure  and

inquiring  eye,
To  extend  the  void  mind  of  your  soul  to  the  Intelligible,
That  you  may  learn  the  Intelligible,
Because  it  subsists  beyond  mind.

■^*  Dam,

CLXVII.       *Clq  ri  vouvf  ov  xervov  vo-^a-ti^.

You  will  not  understand  it,  as  when  understanding  some  par-
ticular thing.

•  Dam.

CLXVIII.     0*  Toy  vitepKoa-fAov  TrarpiKoy  ^vBh  tare  voovyT€(;.
You,  who  understand,  know  the  supermundane  paternal  depth.
Z-  or  T.  j)^^^


•  Patr.  joins  this  with  the  preceding.

X  axT(v&;  Fr.  Patr.


t  xf ««^  Ff'  Patr.


N  N


n


.11


i


£74


THE  CHALDiEAN  ORACLES


Kai  tcroi  yvf/.yrjr(q  avu  a-irev^Qvcri  irpcx;  i/i//o^.
Things  divine  are  not  attainable  by  mortals  who  understand  body,
But  only  as  many  as  are  lightly  armed  arrive  at  the  summit.
Z.  or  T.  Proc,  in  Crat, — Tay,

CLXX.         *E<T(ra,fA.€vov  iravrft^ov  a'Ay.rjv  <puroq  xfXaSovTOj,
*AXx^  rpiyKixv  voov  ^/^»|v  ^*  onKiaavTa
Tlayroiahof*  (rvv6r}[Ji.a  jSaXXciv  <f)p€v]'  jtxijB*  cTrt^otT^Tv
''E[/.7mptoi^  (TTsopdZriv  oxerorf,  dKh2t  antap'^hoi'.
Having  put  on  the  complete-armed  vigour  of  resounding  light.
With  triple  strength  fortifying  the  soul  and  the  mind,
He  must  put  into  the  mind  the  symbol  of  variety,  and  not  walk
Dispersedly  on  the  empyreal  channels,  but  collectively.

CLXXI.        Ka<  yap  he  itayrevxo^i  ivonMo^t  tixe  ^€r}<pt.

For  being  furnished  with  every  kind  of  armour,  and  armed,  he  is

similar  to  the  goddess.

T.  Proc.  in  PL  Th.  324.— 7«y.

CLXXII.       A/^eo  (TV  ^vx^i  o^eTov,  o^ev,  ^  tivI  rd^ei

lufMtri  6i^r€v<Taif  j  iitl  rd^iv  d(f>*  ^q  i^p^q

AvBiq  dvaa^vjo-fi^f  UpS  Xoytu  (pyov  ivucraq*
Explore  the  river  of  the  soul,  whence,  or  in  what  order,
Having  become  a  servant  to  body,  you  may  again  rise
To  the  order  from  which  you  descended,  joining  works  to  sacred

reason.
Z.  Psel,  B.^Plet.  1.

CLXXIII.      Tldvro$€v  aTrXao-Tfli)  t/^^  Tvpo^  ijwa  TiTvoy.

Every  way  to  the  unfashioned  soul  extend  the  reins  of  fire.
Z.  PseL  U.—Pl€t.24,


•  iravTOiov  Tay.


t  TiSuVai  Fr.  Patr.


OF  ZOROASTER.


275


CLXXIV.     *%€^■^(y  xPvx;j^  ^dBoq  dfA.tpoTov,  tf^Lfiara  8*  aplriv

Ylavra  iKtreTao'ov  avu.
Let  the  immortal  depth  of  your  soul  lead  you,
But  earnestly  extend  your  eyes  upwards.

^-  PselU — Plet.20.

CLXXV.       X/>^  8e  xa^/voxra*  y^AJxhy  ^pirov  ovra  voi^tov,

''0(f)pcc  fArj  eyy^rSptr-^  ;^;^ovi  lv<TiAop(p  dKkd  (Ta^hy^,
Man,  being  an  intelligible  mortal,  must  bridle  his  soul,
That  she  may  not  incur  terrestrial  infehcity  but  be  saved.

Lyd.  de  Men,  2 Tay.


CLXXVI "ExTf/va^  tiijpnov  vovv

Epynv  iv  tia-e^ivj^f  piva-rov  nai  (ruf/,a  a-aua-eif.
If  you  extend  the  fiery  mind  to  the  work  of  piety,
You  will  preserve  the  fluxible  body.

'^'  Psel.  22.-


-Plet.  16.


CLXXVII.    'H  reXco-Tix^  ^w^  lia.  rov  Oe&v  irvpoq  d(l>anX€t  taq  ex  -r^q
y€P€<r€uq  airaaaq  xi;X/8«i^,  d>q  to  yjyiov  Uda-yiei,  xai  isaa-av
tV  aXXoT/Jwv,  rjv  i(l>€iKKV<raTO  r^q  xl^vx^q  to  mevfAoc,  xal
dXoyi<rro)f  (f)ij<riv.
The  telestic  life,  through  a  divine  fire,  removes  all  the  stains,  to-
gether with  every  foreign  and  irrational  nature,  which  the  spirit
of  the  soul  attracted  from  generation,  as  we  are  taught  by  the
oracle  to  believe.

2-  or  T.  Prod,  in  Tim.  331.— Tay.

CLXXVIII.  Ta  Tuv  ©eSv  Koyid  (fxza-t,  on  ha  Trjq  dytareiaq  ovx  yj  rJAJxh
IMvovy  dKka  xai  to,  a-uf^aTa  ^otjOeiaq  -ttoXX^^  xa)  acarijplaq
d^ovyrai.      ^ul^eTat  ydp  ((pwO  >««*  to  vi^paq  SX-^jq  irepi-
^KvjfAa  ^poTciov.   ol  Qeol  iitepdyi^otq  'napaneXevofjiejfOi  rutf
&€ovpySv  xaTCTra-y^eXXovTai.
The  oracles  of  the  Gods  declare,  that,  through  purifying  cere-
monies, not  the  soul  only,  but  bodies  themselves  become  worthy
of  receiving  much  assistance  and  health :    "  for  (say  they)  the


tx


I


276


THE  CHALDEAN  ORACLES


mortal  vestment  of  bitter  matter  will,  by  this  means,  be  pre-
served." And  this,  the  Gods,  in  an  exhortatory  manner,  announce
to  the  most  holy  of  Theurgists.

Z.  or  T.  JuL  OraU  V.  p.  334,.— Tay,

CLXXIX.      <&€intT€oy,  xara  to  Xoyiov,

To  icKi^Kfoq  ruv  av^fpuTtuv  ruv  dyeXvjZov  lovruv.
We  should  flee,  according  to  the  oracle,
The  multitude  of  men  going  in  a  herd.

Z.  or  T.  Proc,  in  I.  Ale, — Tay.


cLXxx.      Qui  se  cognoscit,  in  se  omnia  cognoscit.
Who  knows  himself  knows  all  things  in  himself.
Z.  1  Pic.  p.  2U.—Tay.

cLxxxi.    Responsa  saepe  victoriam  dant  nostris  electionibus,
et  non  soli  ordini  mundalium  periodorum :  puta
quando  et  dicunt :  **  Te  ipsum  videns,  verere."    Et
iterum :   "  Extra  corpus  esse  te  ipsum  crede,  et
es."     Et  quid  oportet  dicere,  "  Ubi  et  aegi'itudines
voluntarias  puUulare  nobis  aiunt  ex  tali  vita  nostra
nascentes."
The  oracles  often  give  victory  to  our  own  choice,  and  not  to  the
order  alone  of  the  mundane  periods.     As,  for  instance,  when
they  say,  *'  On  beholding  yourself,  fear."     And,  again,  "  Believe
yourself  to  be  above  body,  and  you  are.'*     And,  still  further,
when  they  assert  "  That  our  voluntary  sorrows  germinate  in  us
as  the  growth  of  the  particular  life  we  lead."

Z.  or  T.  Proc.  de  Prov.  p.  483. — Tay.

CLXXXII.    *AXXa  ravTa  iv  dtdrtnq  (nyxo??  tiavolct^  dyeXirrcc.

These  things  I  revolve  in  the  recluse  temples  of  my  mind.


CLX XXIII.  *Qq  yovv  (prjcrl  xa*  to  ^yiovf  ovhfvoi  O'^xcv  aXXov  dito^rrpt-
<p€Tai  6€o<;  av^patf  xai  vea^  cTriTre/xirei  drpaitovq  &^  OTctv
aTaxTa'f  xai  tilKriy.fjt.e'KZi  eiri  to,  Oaoiara  luv  BevpfJiAaTuyf


OF  ZOROASTER.


277


HI   ruv    epyuv,  xa)  to    Xcyo'afvov,    ajAvfiioK;  <rrofAa<riif,   tj
dvhroiq  ma)  Ttot-riffOfxeBcx,  ivjv  avo^ov.      Tuv  yap  ovru  jW€-
rtovTuv,   dTiXuq  iA€v  eio-i   dia^da-di,   xfva*   Se   at  opfAai,
rwpXai  de  at  drpaitoi.
As  the  oracle,  therefore,  says,  "  God  is  never  so  much  turned
away  from  man,  and  never  so  much  sends  him  new  paths,  as
when  he  makes  ascent  to  the  most  divine  of  speculations,  or
works,  in  a  confused  or  disordered  manner,  and,  as  it  adds,  with
unhallowed  lips,  or  unwashed  feet.     For  of  those  who  are  thus
negligent,  the  progressions  are  imperfect,  the  impulses  are  vain,
and  the  paths  are  dark."

^'^T^^^'  Prod,  in  Parm.—Tay.


CLXXXIV.  0^8*  %Ti  trd^  dya^Qi  ^eoq  ctSoVf^  draXdepyot
N-^xpare,

Not  knowing  that  every  god  is  good,  you  are  fruitlessly  vigilant.
2-  or  T.  Proc.  in  PL  Pol.  355.— Tay.

CLXXXV.     Ov  yap  v<\>   €ifA.dprY}v*  dyeXvju  islircova-t  Qeovpyoi.
Theurgists  fall  not  so  as  to  be  ranked  among  the  herd  that  are
in  subjection  to  fate.

Lyd.  de  Men.—  Tay.

CLXXXVI.  Beioi  0  r^i  hvedhq  dpiBiM<:  e'x  rpiuv  rpidluv  irXrjpori/Aevo^,  xaJ
r^i  dxpoTvjTaq  t^^  OeoXoyia^  xa-zk  t^  XaXSaix^v  <^<Xo(ro-
^iav  (uq  <f)vicriy  o  Tlopfpijpioi)  diroaS^uv.

"  That  the  number  nine  is  divine,  receiving  its  completion  from
three  triads,  and  preserving  the  summits  of  theology  according  to
the  Chaldaic  philosophy,  as  Porphyry  informs  us."

L7jd.  p.  121 Tay.

CLXXXVII.     Aaijcr*  iv  Xdytxriv  'Eyidr-^^  dperyji  ,rAc  irrjy^'
EvSov  oXrj  [AifAvova-a,  to  itdpBivov  oi,  itpo'iuaa.
In  the  left  sides  of  Hecate  is  a  fountain  of  virtue,
Which  remains  entire  within,  not  sending  forth  its  virginity.
^-  Psel.  13 — Plet.  9.

♦  Tay.  proposes  tlfxap/jLitriv.


» *


278


THE  CHALD/EAN    ORACLES


CLXXXVIII.  Airov^*  h(  x^^^  xnTo^vpeTouJ  i^  T€Kva  fA.€XP^ii
And  the  earth  bewails  them  even  to  their  children.

Z.  Psel.  21,—PleL  3.


CLXXXIX.     Al  iro/veu  fxepmuy  ayyireipai.
The  furies  are  the  constrainers  of  men.
Z.


PseL  25.—Plet.  19.


cxc.


dvdyy(.aiq  («tf;  ^o"/  t<^  toJv  ^€uv)  drtoXyjTai,
Lest  being  baptized  in  the  furies  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  ne-
cessities of  nature   (as  some  one   of  the    gods   says)  it  should
perish.

Z.  or  T.  Proc  in  TheoL  297.— Tay.


CXCI.  *H  (pv<ri^  ittiBii  €ivat  rot/?  Sa//*ova^  dyi/oiv^

Nature  persuades  us  that  there  are  pure  demons,
Even  the  blossoms  of  evil  matter  are  useful  and  good.

Z.  PseL  l6.—PleL  18.

cxcii.  Adhuc  tres  dies  sacrificatibis,  et  non  ultra.

As  yet  three  days  ye  shall  sacrifice,  and  no  longer.

Z.  Pic,  ConcL—Tay,


CXCIII.        Avro^  S'  iv  itpuToi^  Upevq  nvpoq  ^PJ^  xujSepwv,

Kvfj(,aTi  palvicr^co  nctyepS  ^apv-fj^so^  X  ^^Z**??*
In  the  first  place,  the  priest,  who  governs  the  works  of  fire,
Must  sprinkle  with  the  cold  water  of  the  loud-sounding  sea.
Z.  or  T.  Proc,  in  Crat, — Tay,


CXCIV.  *l£.vtpyti  'Ttepi  Toy  'Exarixov  <rTpo(f>akov,

Energize  about  the  Hecatic  Strophalus.
Z.


PseL  9. — Nicep,


•  'A«)  TotJo-S*  Psel. — A  A  TOWS  5f  Tay.

f  xaTcufuiTOM  Psel.  Tay. — xarwpixrau  Fr.  Patr.

J  BapCxytTai  Al. — $(xp\j7iy(ir<i\j  Scha;f.— /S«^u»>;^iTos   Tay.


OF  ZOROASTER.


279


CXCV.  'Hv/xat  S*  €pxofA.€you  irpocryetoy  haifACv'  d^pyjtrr,^^

0ve  Xi^oy  MviXovpiv  iitavtuv.
When  you  shall  see  a  terrestrial  demon  approaching
Exclaim,  and  sacrifice  the  stone  Mnizurin.


Z.


PseL  40.


CXCVI.  UoWdK^i  Jv  Xi^rii  [m]  ddp-^itrTii  itdyr'  d^K^ioyro,*

Oiill  yap  ovpanoi  y^vproq  Tore  ipamrai  ^xo^,
*A<rrip€ti  Qv  XdiA-Kovcri,  to  /^ifvjj^  <pZq  xcxaXwrrai,
X6a)v  oix  eo-Tijx€v,  <pUy€Tai\  re  'advra  xe/Jawo?^.
If  you  often  invoke  me  you  shall  see  all  things  darkening.
For  neither  does  the  convex  bulk  of  heaven  then  appear, '
Nor  do  the  stars  shine,  the  light  of  the  moon  is  hidden,
The  earth  stands  not  still,  but  all  things  appear  in  thunders.
^*  PseL  10,— Plet.  22.

CXCVII »Ex  8*  cipc  xo'ATrtyv

raiyjq  ^pua-Mva-t  x^omi  vcvveq,  ov  iror'  dXyjOfq
^W^X  ^portji  dy^pl  ^ety.vvvT€^,

From  the  cavities

Of  the  earth  leap  forth  terrestrial  dogs.
Shewing  no  true  sign  to  mortal  man.
Z.


CXCVIII.


PseL  23,— Plet,  17.

Uvp  twXoy  (rx/'p>jSov§  cV'  yiepot;  o7$^||  TiTa7yoy,
H  xal  nvp  drtJTCuToyy  oOey  <pvyrjv  irpoOeova-aVy^
*U  <pZi  TrXot/V/ov,**  aJ^ii^ve'^f  f  ^oX^ctloy,  iXixBh'
'AXX^  xa<  ririro>  /Seiv  (^uroq  TtXioy  da-rpdnroyra,


•  Loh.—i^p^ffoi  irdi>T<x  XiovToc  Tay.  Fr.  Patr.— ^rdfvTij  Kixr^,  Ret.

t  ^KirrtTM  Fr.  Patr.  Tay.

X  a&fia  Fr.  Patr.

§  ffx/^TjjTjl  Lob.

II  i^/xa  Lob.

^  Lob  proposes  <pwto^  irpo^iounv.

•♦  Gesn.  and  Tay.  have  irh^aiov.

ft  Tay.^Kfipx^dn*  Lob— dt/<f«  y6r)v  Herman.— «/*<p/y<;)}»  Vulg.


=  1


280  THE  CHALDiEAN   ORACLES.

*H  ycal  itailcx.  6oo7(;*  vuroiq  itcoxQijfMVQv  fwiroy,

A  similar  fire  flashingly  extending  itself  into  the  waves  of  the  air,

Or  even  unfigured  fire,  whence  an  antecedent  voice,

Or  light  rich,  glittering,  resounding,  revolved.

But  when  you  see  a  horse  glittering  with  light,

Or  a  boy,  carried  on  the  swift  back  of  a  horse.

Fiery,  or  clothed  in  gold,  or  naked,

Or  shooting  with  a  bow,  or  standing  upon  horseback —

Z.  or  T.  Proc,  in  PL  PoliL  380.

CXCIX,        *HyUa  i9Xet//7j5  jtAope^^  aTtp  evtepcv  wi?/),

AajUCTro/xevov  crxipTi^Sov  oKov  ytard  jSfvdcct  xoa-fMV,
KXvOi  'Jtvpo^  (puyfjv.
When  you  behold  a  sacred  fire  without  form
Shining  flashingly  through  the  depths  of  the  whole  world
Hear  the  voice  of  fire.

Z.  PseL  U,—^Plet.  25.

•  TioTs  Fr.  Pair.


FRAGMENTS


OP  THE


HERMETIC,   ORPHIC,   PYTHAGOREAN,


J


AND  OTHER


'i;


COSMOGONIES  AND  THEOGONIES.


oo


ill   ..


,■   t


HERMETIC  FRAGMENTS.


if;


FROM  THE  ANCIENT  HERMETIC  BOOKS.


I   :i


ITPO  rSv  ovTuq  ovruv  xaJ  ruv
%>MV  apxuVf  ia-ri  Seo^  cT?,  vpu-
TOi  xat  rov  tsrp&tov  ©eotJ  xa*
pao'tMUf,    aMiyrjToq   ev   fMvo-
Ty]Ti  Tyj^eavTov  hoTrjro^  (livuv,
ovT€  yap  vovirov  avr^  iiti'n'ki-
y.€Taif  cure  aXXo  t**      ictxpoi'
^€tyfjt.a  8e   ?^pmai  rov  avro"
itdTopo^f  avroyoyovf  xaJ  [xovo-
ttaropoc  SeoiVf  rov  oirroq  aycf,-
6qv,     MeT^oy  yap  ri  xa*  irpS-
Tov,   yiat   vvjyv}   ruv  wdvrccVf
xat    TsrvBfJi.rjy    ruv    voovfievuv
wpuruv   it^Sv  ovruv*  avo   8e
rov   €Voj  Tot/Toy,   o  avrapxyji
Seo^    iavrov     €^f\afA\l/€,    8w
xat  avroitdrcop  xaJ  avrdp^v}^,

©caJv*  fMyaq  ex  Toy  evoj,  isrpo-
oi?<r»Of  xat  a/j;^^  t^^  ovciaq'
dv  avTOv  yap  vj  owrUrv}^  yuu
^   ov<ria'    hu>  xat    yo^Tdp)(;>iq


Before  all  things  that  essentially  exist,
and  before  the  total  principles,  there
is  one  God,  prior  to  the  first  God  and
King,  remaining  immoveable  in  the
solitude  of  his  unity ;    for  neither  is
the   Intelligible  immixed  with    him,
nor  any  other  thing.     He  is  estab-
lished, the  exemplar  of  the  God  who
is  the  father  of  himself,  self-begotten,
the   only  father,   and  who    is    truly
good.     For  he  is  something  greater,
and  the  first;  the  fountain  of  all  things,
and  the  root  of  all  primary  Intelligible
existing  forms.     But  out  of  this  one,
the    self-ruling   God    made    himself
shine  forth ;  wherefore  he  is  the  fa-
ther of  himself,  and  self-ruling:  for
he  is  the  first  principle  and  God  of
Gods.     He  is   the  monad  from  the
one;    before   essence,   yet  the   first
principle  of  essence,  for  from  him  is
entity  and  essence ;  on  which  account


mi


284


HERMETIC  FRAGMENTS.


HERMETIC  FRAGMENTS.


285


'arpocayopevirat,  Avrai  /x€y
ovv  (lah  dpxa)  'srpeatvTarat
"BravTwv,  a^  'Epfjt.-^^  irpo  ruv
alOeptuv  xa<  if/.itvpluv  ©euv
'wpotTiaTT^i  xai  Tuv  eTtov
paviuv,

Kar'  a\X>jv  Be  rd^iv  itpoq-

iitavpaviuv  ^euv  r}yovf/.€VQv'  ov
tfrt^a-iv  vovv  eivai  avrov  iavTOV
vooi/VTa,  xa<  ra^  voijo-fi^  elq
kavTQv  iirKTrpecpovTa,  Tovtov
6  TO  €v  ajA-fpeif  v.ai  o  ([y/ia-i
irpuTOv  [xdyeviAa  'KporaTTd'
ov  M.ai  EiXTwv  iTcoyofJi.dl^d'  iv  ^

tvi  TO  TtpUTOV  eO"Ti  VOlJv,  xaj  TO

irpuTou  vovjTov,  0  8^  xa»  S*a
a-iy^q  jtcovij^  S^epairetcTai.  'Ewi
6f  tcvtqk;  tuv  i[j(.(payuy  Stj-
[Aiovpyiaq  aXXot  TrpoecT^xao'jv
rjyefxovei.  o  yap  ^vjfAiovpyiyioi
vci/^,  xai  T^5  d\Yj%f€iaq  itpoa-
ruTTi^f  Kol  acKpiai,  ipx^f^^va
y.iv  int  yeveaiVf  xat  trjv  d^a,-
y!j  ruv  yc.€y.pvyi.[A.eyav  y.oyuv  8i/-
yafAiv  (Iq  (puq  ayuVf  'A/xSv  xa-
ta  T/iv  ruv  klyvirrluv  yK5<r-
(fuv  Xeyer  at.  cvvreXay  he
d\l/€vhS^  cxa<7Ta,  xaJ  Tcp^w-
x£^  /xeT*  d\ffi€la<;  *^a'  "EX-
X)jv€5  §(•  f<\  li(f>at>TT0V  fAe-
tdkafA^dvoxjcri  tov  •tS'a,  tc?
Tcxuxy  {/.o-^ov  Trpoa-^a'AXovrci'


he  is  celebrated  as  the  chief  of  the
Intelligibles.  These  are  the  most  an-
cient principles  of  all  things,  which
Hermes  places  first  in  order,  before
the  ethereal  and  empyrean  gods  and
the  celestial.

But,  according  to  another  division,
he  (Hermes)  places  the  god  Emeph*
as  the  ruler  of  the  celestial  gods :  and
says  that  he  is  Intellect  understanding
himself,  and  converting  other  intel-
ligences to  himself.  And  before  this
he  places  the  indivisible  One,  which
he  calls  the  first  effigies,  and  de-
nominates him  Eicton  ;  in  whom,  in-
deed, is  the  first  Intellect  and  the  first
Intelligible :  and  this  One  is  venerated
in  silence.  Besides  these,  other  rulers
are  imagined  to  exist,  which  govern
the  fabrication  of  things  apparent:  for
the  demiurgic  Intellect,  which  pro-
perly presides  over  truth  and  wis-
dom, when  it  proceeds  to  generation
and  leads  forth  into  light  the  inap-
parent  power  of  the  secret  reasons,
is  called  Amon,  according  to  the
Egyptian  tongue:  and  when  it  per-
fects all  things  not  deceptively,  but
artificially  according  to  truth,  Phtha;
but  the  Greeks  change  the  word
Phtha  into  Hephaestus,  looking  only
to  the  artificial :  regarded  as  the  pro-
ducer  of  good   things,    it   is  called


•  Generally  supposed  to  be  a  mistake  for  Kvt(p,  Cneph.


dya^Sif  St  ircojTiXo?  uv  0<rtpt^
x€xX>jTai*  xai  aXXa^  hi    aX-
Xa^  tvvacfMK;  T€  xai  inpyeiaq
iTtuyvfAia^  €%€*•      EcTTt  o^  ovv
xai   aXXij   Ti^  viyifMvia   itap
avToT^  Tuv  irtpi  y€V€<riv  oXuv
trroiX^KcVf  xa*   tuv  iv  avroiq
hvvduewVf  rerTapuv  fxev  dp-
ccvixSv,    rerrdpuv   Se    ^r)\v-
¥MVy  'fivnva.  d-nov€[Aova-iv*HAia>.
Ra<  aXX>j  Trjq  (pvaeooq  oXvjq  t^^
irepi  yeveiTiv  a^X^?»  ^vTiva,  26-
Xijv>j  hiboaci.     Kara  fxipv}  re
hiaXa[A.^avQvr€^  rov  ovpavov  el^
tvo  f/.oipaqy  Vj  rerrapaq,  rj  lu-
Oexa,   rj  €?  Y,ai  rpiaMvra,  vj
8*7rXao"/a^     toi/t&jv,     icpordr-
rov<ri  TCAeiova^f  *j  iXarrova^j
itaa-i  Se  a^Tov  VTiepe^ovra  av-
ruvj  eva  irpori^eaai,  xai   cv-
ruq  avu^tv  ay^i  ruv  reXev-
raiuv  ^  Ttep)  ruv  dp^uv  Ai-
yvttriQiq  irpay[xar€iaj  a(p  ivoq
apxeraif  xai  tcpmaiv  elq  irXrj-
^oq  ruv  TtoXXuv  av^fi^  vd>  kvhq
hiaKV^€pvu[ji.€vuVf   Kai  TavTa-
%o5  ToiJ  dopKrrov  (piicreui  iiti-
KparovfjLtvi^q  vno    rivoq    upitr-
[A€vov  fAcrpoVf  xai  rrjq  avurdru
€vtataq  'Kuvruv  alria(;,    "TXtjv
8e  %ap^yay€v  o  Seoq  airo  r^q
ovaiori^roi  viro(rxiT^€i(ri^q  vXo-
Ti^Toj,    Tjv  TtapaXa^uv  o  Avj-
f^iovpyoq   ^ctfTix^y    ovsavy   raq
airXaii  Kol  atra^fiq  <r(patpa,<;
an  avr-^q  i^i^fJf.iovpy^<T€.  to  be


Osiris,    and   according   to  its   other
powers  and  attributes  it  has  different
appellations.     There  is  also,  accord-
ing to  them,  another  certain  principle
presiding  over  all  the  elements  in  a  state
of  generation,   and  over  the  powers
inherent  in    them,  four  of  which  are
male,  and  four  female ;  and  this  prin-
ciple they  attribute  to  the  Sun.  There
is  yet  another  principle  of  all  nature
regarded  as  the  ruler  over  generation,
and  this   they  assign   to   the   Moon.
They   divide   the   heavens  also  into
two  parts,  or  into  four,  or  twelve,  or
thirty-six,  or  the  doubles  of  these ;
they  attribute  to  them  leaders  more
or  less   in  number;  and   over  them
they  place  one  whom  they  consider
superior  to  them  all.     Hence,  from
the  highest  to  the  last,  the  doctrine
of  the  Egyptians  concerning  the  prin-
ciples,   inculcates  the   origin   of  all
things  from  One,  with  different  gra-
dations   to   the   Many;    which   (the
Many)  are  again  held   to  be  under
the  supreme  government  of  the  One :
and  the  nature  of  the  Boundless  is
considered  entirely  subservient  to  the
nature  of  the  Bounded  and  the    su-
preme Unity  the  cause  of  all  things.
And  God  produced  Matter  from  the
materiality  of  the  separated  essence,
which  being  of  a  vivific  nature,  the
Demiurgus   took   it,   and  fabricated
from  it  the  harmonious  and  imper-
turbable  spheres:    but  the   dregs  of


I


286


HERMETIC  FRAOMENTS.


((rxaTovavT^<;,u;ray€yvyiTac     it  he  employed  in  the  fabrication  of

Kai  (f>^apra  aufAard  8<fxoV-     generated   and   perishable   bodies.

/*'J<^*-  JamhL  sect.  viii.  c.  2.  3.


FROM  THE  MODERN  HERMETIC  BOOKS.


^e7o»f  Ma)  (f)^cri^  ^e7a.  ^Apx^j
Twv  ovrecv  o  0cof,  xa<  o  NoiJj,
xai  ^  <f)v<rii,  xa*  ^Xi?,  xai
ivepyela,  xai  aifdyxr],  xat
TfXa^,  xaJ  avave&xTi^.  'Hv
•ya^  crxoTo^  UTteipov  ev  a^vaa-i^f
y.ai  vtupf  xaJ  TrvciJ^a  XeirTov
vocpov  ^vvdfAfif  cvTcx.  iv  Xdii.
*Av€iS'»j  8^  ^w^  aytovf  y.a)
iitdyy}  v(f>*  atxfA.(p  i^  vypa(;  ov-


The  glory  of  all  things  is  God,  and
Deity,  and  divine  Nature.  The  prin-
ciple of  all  things  existing  is  God,
and  the  Intellect,  and  Nature,  and
Matter,  and  Energy,  and  Fate,  and
Conclusion,  and  Renovation.  For
there  were  boundless  Darkness  in
the  abyss,  and  water,  and  a  subtile
spirit,  intellectual  in  power,  existing
in  Chaos.  But  the  holy  Light  broke
forth,  and  the  elements  were  pro-
duced from  among  the  sand  of  a
watery  essence.— ^SerTn.  Sac,  lib.  iii.


FROM  HORAPOLLO.


Aoxe?  706^  avToTq  o  noa-fio^
aw€<TToiyai  ex  re  rov  dpa^e-
yixov  yea)  ^i^avkov,  *Eit)  Se
r^i  'A^vjva?  rov  yidv^apovt
iiil  he  *H(pa!a-Tov  to»  yvira
ypd(fxiv<rt,  Civroi  yap  (xoyoi
(Beuy  Tiap*  avTo7idp<r€yo^vj\€ii
vitdpxova-ty.


The  world  appears  to  them  (the
Egyptians)  to  consist  of  a  masculine
and  feminine  nature.  And  they  en-
grave a  scarabaeus  for  Athena,  and  a
vulture  for  Hephaestus.  For  these
alone  of  all  the  Gods  they  consider  as
both  male  and  female  in  their  nature.


HERMETIC  FRAGMENTS.


287


FROM  CHiEREMON.


Xaip-^fxav  fA.€v  yap  na)  oi
a}JKoif  ovo    aWo  t<  irpo  tuv
opuf/Liyuy  wxTfjiuy  yjyovvraif  iv
apxTi     Xoyuy     r/^e/Acvoi    reivq
AlyvKTioay,   oi^  aXKovq  S^foi/^
■jtXtjv  ruy  TiKayyjrSy  Xc-yo/^cvwy,
xcw    ruy    (rvfAirXyjpovyTuy    roy
^a^iayxtyf  yea)  oa-oi  rovroiq  ita-
payareKXova-i.      Tat;    re    eiq
rov^  heyiayovq  rif/Mq^  xa*  rolii;
XeyofAeyovt;  yeparaiovq  TjyefMvaq,
uy  ra  oyof^ara  iv  rotq  d\[A.e-
nXiatcotf  (Peperaif  xaJ  ^epa-
vetai  va^uy,   xa)  dvaroka),
xai  8t;<r€i^,  xa*  (AeXXoyruy  ari-
(Aeiua-ei^,     'Eupa  yap  rovq  roy
ijXxov  ^fxtovpyoy  <{>a[A€yovff  xa«
ra  itep)   rov  "Oa-ipty  xa*  ty/V
l<riy  xai  vdvraq  rov^  iepari-
xot»^  [AiS^ovq,  VI  el(  Toi»;  aa-repaq
xai   raq  rovruv  <pdya-€ii  ta*
K^i^i^'    xai    imroXaq  iXir-
rofAevovt;'  ^  etq  rkq  t^^  <rfX^'-
yy^q  av^-fi<reiq  xa<  fA€uu<reiq*  ij
flq  ryjy  rov  ^Xiov  mpetav  rj  to
ye  vmrepivov  ri[ju<r(f>aipioy,  rj  to
yjfAepivov,  Yi  rov   ye   itorafMv'
xai  oAuq  Ttdvra  e\q  Ta^yo-ixa,
xoti   ouSev  e\q  dfruyArovq  xai
^«<r«j     overtaq    ipfxtiveijoyraq.
'fly  Oi  irXetovq  xai  to  e<p*  yjfjuv
ix  rvj<;  rSy  da-repuv  d}^}pay


Chaeremon  and  others  believe  that
nothing  existed  prior  to  the  sensible
worlds,   and  they  place  among  the
foremost  of  such  opinions  the  senti-
ments of  the  Egyptians,   who   hold
that  there   are  no  other  gods  than
those  which  are  called  the  planets,
and  the  constellations  of  the  Zodiac,
and  such  as  these.     They  say,  also,
that  the  honours  paid  to  the  ten  great
gods   and    those   which    are    called
heroes,  whose  names  appear  in  the
almanacks,    are    nothing    else    than
charms  for  the  cure  of  evils,  and  ob-
servations of  the  risings  and  settings
of  the  stars,  and  prognostications  of
future  events.    For  it  seems  that  they
esteem  the  Sun  to  be  the  demiurgus,
and  hold  that  the  legends  about  Osiris
and  Isis,  and  all  other  their  mytho-
logical fables,  have  reference  either
to  the  stars,   their  appearances  and
occultations,  and  the  periods  of  their
risings,  or  to  the  increase  and  de-
crease of  the  moon,  or  to  the  cycles  of
the  sun,  or  the  diurnal  and  nocturnal
hemispheres,  or  to  the  river:  in  short,
that  every  thing  of  the  kind  relates
merely  to  physical   operations,  and
has  no  connexion  or  reference  what-
ever  to  incorporeal   and   living  es-
sences properly  so  called.     Most  of


iri

-id


i


288


HERMETIC  FRAGMENTS.


of}


HCiy^CiUit     OVA     0*8'    OTTftJ?    8€<r-

Ta8i7<ravTf^,  xa*  iidvTa  toiS-
Tojf  dvd\l/avT€<;  toT^  ^eoiq.
cvTu  Xi/Tijpa?  T^5  (l[AapfA€y/}q
fAOvov^y  €VT€  /eporj  xai  ^advoiqy
xai  Toi*^  aXXoi?  ^fepaTKVovffi,


them,  also,  suppose  that  some  in-
dissoluble connexion  exists  between
our  concerns  and  the  motions  of  the
stars,  by  a  kind  of  necessity  which
they  call  Destiny,  whereby  all  sub-
lunary things  are  connected  with
these  gods,  and  depend  upon  them.
Hence  they  serve  and  honour  them
with  temples  and  statues  and  the  like,
as  the  only  beings  capable  of  in-
fluencing Destiny. — Eus.  Pr.  Evan.
iii.  c.  4.


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


FROM  ORPHEUS.*


Zilq  TTpuTCi  y€>€To'    Zivq  varraToq  dpxiyi€p^.vpo<;,
Zet^  K€(f)aXrj'   Zck  /xeVcra,  Aio?  S*  eV.  Trdvra  reTvyiTcii,
ZiVi  apa-fiv  jiyfTo'    Zivq  ou\)'^noq'\  eVXcTo  vtiMpr^'
Ztvq  Tvv'^fA.^y,  J  yai/jq  re  xat  ovpctvov  dtrnpofvroq'
{Zfvi  Tivoiri  -TravTCt'v*  §    Zf t^  a.Y.cx,{AdTov  -nvpoq  opfjcri*
Zelf  rovTov  piU^a'   Zdq  TjAioq  vjle  o-eXijvij*)
Z€vq  ^aa-iXtvq'    Zivq  avrQ<i\\  d-nuvro^u  dpxiyeve^Koq.
Ev  ycpdroq,  uq  Zai[/.uv  yevero,  lAeyat;  dp^oq  dndvrccy.
Ev  8e  Se'tca^  ^aa-iX^ioy,  iv  a  rd^e  'ndvra  KvxA€?Tai,
Tlvp,  Y.ai  vdcy,  xai  yxia,  -/.ai  al^yjpj  vrj^  re  v.ou  ?,oia/),
Kcu  ^vlTt(;  TtpuToq  yeverup,  y.ai  "Epaq  itoAVTepn'^q,
Yldvra.  yctp  c'v  fxeydXcp  Zvjvo^  raSe  a-ufxan  vkTzcci,  ^
Tov  ^Tot  x€f/>aX^v  (Aiv  iServ  xai  xaXa  Trpoa-wiia.
Ovpavoq  atykyietq,  op  ^/Ji/crcct*  dfMptq  e^npai,
Aa-rpuy  fAap^A/tpiuv  itepiyiccKAeeq  vjepe^orai.


I'


.  I


•  Eusebius  and  Proclus  omit  the  fifth  and  sixth  verses  between  the  paren-
theses.    Aristotle  places  the  fourth  before  the  third.
•|-  a/jL$poTo;  Aristot.  Stob.
X  Ktfiij*  Stob.
§  Herm.  proposes  kvsjuojv.
II  "PX^s  Aristot.
%  Proc.  has  also  Zrj»^<i  S'  jw  yxjript  cvppa  vt^Cxei.

V  V


i


290


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


.,1
n


Tavpea  8*  afJufjOTepo^^e  ^vo  y^vaiia  Kf^ara.

*AvToX/)j  T€  8^cr<^  T€  ^ewy  o§o<  otJpaxaJy&'v.

OfxuaTa  8*  i^tXio^  t6,  xai  avT/o&'ca*  (XfXijy/j,

Noi/^  Sc  <y€  ai/zetS*;^,  jSacjAijib^  aip^iro^  ai^-^p.
Zeus  is  the  first.     Zeus  the  tliunderer,  is  the  last.
Zeus  is  the  head.     Zeus  is  the  middle,  and  by  Zeus  all  things

were  fabricated.
Zeus  is  male,  Immortal  Zeus  is  female.

Zeus  is  the  foundation  of  the  earth  and  of  the  starry  heaven.
Zeus  is  the  breath  of  all  things.     Zeus  is  the  rushing  of  inde-
fatigable fire.
Zeus  is  the  root  of  the  sea:  He  is  the  sun  and  moon.
Zeus  is  the  king  ;   He  is  the  author  of  universal  life ;
One  Power,  one  Daemon,  the  mighty  prince  of  all  things :
One  kingly  frame,  in  which  this  universe  revolves,
Fire  and  water,  earth  and  ether,  night  and  day,
And   Metis   (Counsel)    the   primeval  father,   and  all -delightful

Eros  (Love).
All  these  things  are  united  in  the  vast  body  of  Zeus.
Would  you  behold  his  head  and  his  fair  face,
It  is  the  resplendent  heaven,  round  which  his  golden  locks
Of  glittering  stars  are  beautifully  exalted  in  the  air.
On  each  side  are  the  two  golden  taurine  horns,
The  risings  and  settings,  the  tracks  of  the  celestial  gods ;
His  eyes  the  sun  and  the  opposing  moon ;
His  unfallacious  Mind  the  royal  incorruptible  Ether.

Ens.  Pr,  Ev.III. — Proc.  Tim. — Aristot.  de  Mund,


*  Heringa  proposes  i>TauyoiJa-a.


ORPHIC   FRAGMENTS.


201


FROM  ORPHEUS.

UpaTa  y.tv  apyjxiav  Xdfo^  jweAav^^arov  v[/.>0Vf
'Qq  iTtd/A€i^J/€  <pija-€tq,  uq  T*  oipavoq  iq  r.(pa^  ^A^rc*
r^^  T*  (vpva-Tfpvov  yoco-iv,  wi/^/xcva  re  ^aXda-a-^^'
np«r^vTaTov  T€  xat  avToreXri  TroXt/A^Tiv  "Epwra,
Oaa-oc  T*  €(f)V(Ttv  aravTa,  hUv.piV€  8'  aXXov  dit*  aXkov,
Kai  Kpovov  aivo'A€TifjVj  uq  t*  eq  Aia  repiriKcpawov
HXy«^€y  d^aydruv  fAczycupuv  ^aaikyfio^  (^pX^*
First  I  sung  the  obscurity  of  ancient  Chaos,
How  the  Elements  were  ordered,  and  the  Heaven  reduced  to

bound;
And  the  generation  of  the  wide-bosomed  Earth,  and  the  depth

of  the  Sea,
And  Eros  (Love)  the  most  ancient,  self-perfecting,  and  of  mani-
fold design ;
How  he  generated  all  things,  and  parted  them  from  one  another.
And  I  have  sung  of  Cronus  so  miserably  undone,  and  how  the

kingdom
Of  the  blessed  Immortals  descended  to  the  thunder-loving  Zeus.

Arg.  419.


FROM  ORPHEUS.


Apxotiov  fA€if  vpuTa  Xdovq  dfAeyapTOV*  dt/dyx^v
Kat  Kpovov,  Of  iXox^vaev  direipea-ioia-iv  i<^*  okKoTq^
Al^epa,  xa»  ^Kpwj  irtpiuTiea,  yivbpov  *'Epura
NwtTOf  deiyvr/TTi^  ware^a  nXvrov  ov  pa  ^dvyjroc
'OitAOTepoi  xaXeouo-i  ^  ^poro),  tt/jSto^  yap  i(f>dv^v}'
Bpii/.ovq  T   evtvvdroio  yovaq,  ^8'  e/j-ycc  atS>jXa
TfiyeveuVy  oi  Xuypov  iir'  Ovpavov  eVralavro


J  ■  H


*  areyjutt^Tov  Al.


f  aTTttgtstofi  uTTQ  x6Kirots  Al.

J    K\^^OVfft  Al.


i
I'


'292


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


©j^Toly,  01  xara  yxlctv  d-nilpt-rov  allv  eaat.
First  (I  have  sung)  the  vast  necessity  of  ancient  Chaos,
And  Cronus,  who  in  the  boundless  tracts  brought  forth
The  Ether,  and  the  splendid  and  glorious  Eros  of  a  two-fold

nature.

The  illustrious  father  of  night,  existing  from  eternity.

Whom  men  call  Phanes,  for  he  first  appeared.

I  have  sung  the  birth  of  powerful  Brimo  (Hecate),  and  the  un-

hallowed  deeds
Of  the  earth-born  (giants),  who  showered  down  from  heaven
Their  blood,  the  lamentable  seed  of  generation,  from   whence

sprung

The  race  of  mortals,  who  inhabit  the  boundless  earth  for  ever.

^rg.  v.  12.


FROM  HESIOD.


"Hto*  /^ev  'jrpciricrTa  Xdoq  -/e'vtr*,  adrScp  e^ora
Tat'  (vpv<rT€pvo<;,  TtdvTuv  thoq  dtripaM^  aifi,
('A^ava'T^y  ol' €xov(ri  xdprj  v^/w'evro^  ^OXvfATrov)
Tdprapa  t'  yj.poevra  (av^S  x^o^k  ^ipvotetriq,
•H8'  "Epoq,  %<i  T^XKiaroq  h  d^avdroKn  ^€07(71,
Av<riixtArii  irdvrc^y  re  ^tSi>  itdvToo^  t*  dv^pu^ituv
Aduvarai  iv  o-T^'^f  o-o-i  v6ov  xai  iiiiippova  ^cvXrjv.
*Ek  Xdeoq  8'  »E/jf^o',-  T€,  fx^Xcci^d  re  Nt|  iy^uopro,
Nvycrk  B'  air'  Al^p  t€  xcti  'H^€>^  i^yUyro,
OU  rU  xv<Tcrau.^yrj^  'Epi^u  i^iXo'r^Ti  fAiyutra,
Tai;a  li  TO*  TtpuToy  [aIv  iyeivaro  l<rov  Uvrri
Oipccvlv  daTepc,,^\  Tva  f^iv  7:epl  ^dura  xaXu'^o..

Chaos  was  generated  first,  and  then
The  wide-bosomed  Earth,  the  ever  stable  seat  of  all
The  Immortals  that  inhabit  the  snowy  peaks  of  Olympus
And  the  dark  aerial   Tartarus  in  the  depths  of  the  permeable
Earth,


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


29c'i


And  Eros,  the  fairest  of  the  immortal  Gods,

That  relaxes  the  strength  of  all,  bodi  gods  and  men,

And  subjugates  the  mind  and  the  sage  will  in  their  breasts.

From  Chaos  were  generated  Erebus  and  black  Night,

And  from  Night  again  were  generated  Ether  and  Day,

Whom  she  brought  forth,  having  conceived  from  the  embrace  of

Erebus.
And  Earth  first  produced  the  starry  Heaven  equal  to  herself,
That  it  might  inclose  all  things  around  herself.

Theog.  V.  116.


I'll


FROM  ARISTOPHANES.

Xao^  i^v  xai  N^?    Ep€^oq  re  /xeXa^  iipurov  xa*  TdpTapoq  €vpvq'
r^  5'  ovZ   'Ayip  ovV  Ovpctvoq  r^v'  'Epe^Qvq  8'  iv  diiitpo<n  xoXnoiq
T/xT€*  irpcoria-rov*  ^T^jvc^tctov  Ni*^  ^  ueKavoirrepoq  cJov,
'E^  ov  TzepireXAofAevQLiq  upaiq  e^Xasrev  "Epuq  o  iro^dvoq,
ItiX^uv  vurov  ittepvyoiv  %pva-ci7v  eWux;  dvcfAuneri  hivatq.
OvToq  8e  Xdet  'nrepoevri  u.tyeiq'f  n»%/y  xaT<i;  Tdprapov  evpvv
*Ev(.OT't€V(Ttv  yevoq  vjiAerepov,  xai  tt/jStov  dvvjyayev  e^  J  (puq,
UpoTipoy  h   ova  vjv  yivoq  d^avdruvj  'j:p\v''Epuq  |we/>t<|€y§  dicavra.*
'SiVfAuiyvvixeyuy  8*  kiipuv  erepoiq  yever   Ovpavo^f  'Qyceavoq  Te,
Kat  r^,  iravTuv  re  ^euv  [/.axdpuv  yevoq  dcb^iT^v.
First  was  Chaos  and  Night,  and  black  Erebus  and  vast  Tartarus ;
And  there  was  neither  Earth,  nor  Air,  nor  Heaven :  but  in  the

boundless  bosoms  of  Erebus,
Night,  with  her  black  wings,  first  produced  an  aerial  egg,
From  which,  at  the  completed  time,  sprang  forth  the  lovely  Eros,
Glittering  with  golden  wings  upon  his  back,  like  the  swift  whirl-
winds.
But  embracing  the  dark-winged  Chaos  in  the  vast  Tartarus,


1/


•♦


-


li


I


*  irp&rov  Athenaeus.
I  Its  Suid.


t  /x<x^«)$  Suid.
§  ffwe/jLitet  Suid.  Brunck.


i  I


I


2V4>


ORl'lIIC  FRAGMENTS.


He  begot  our  race  (the  birds),  *  and  first  brought  us  to  light.
The  race  of  tlie  Immortals  was  not,  till  Eros  mingled  all  things

together ;
But  when  the  elements  were  mixed  one  with  another,  Heaven

was  produced,  and  Ocean,
And  Earth,  and  the  imperishable  race  of  all  the  blessed  Gods.

Aristop,  Avcs.  G98. — Siiid.  v.  Chaos.


FROM  ORPHEUS.


Chaos  and  a  vast  yawning  chasm  on  every  side.


Tay.


Mocta  ^(Sv  litaTti,  Nil  oifx^pore,  ttu^  rd^e  ifypa^e

n«^  Jtf'J  /^'  dOavdruv  dpyviv  Kpar€po(f)po:/a,  ^ea^ai ;

Ai^epi  Ttdyra  itfpi^  dipdrcp  "KaQi,  t$  S*  iyl  i/Jaa-cp

OvpavSX

"Maia,  supreme  of  Gods,  Immortal  Night,  tell  me  this,

How  shall  I  constitute  the  magnanimous  first  principles  of  the

Immortals  ?"
"  Surround  all  things  with  ineffable  Ether,  and  place  them
In  the  mid  Heaven."

Proc,  Tim,  G3.


ORPHIC  HYMN  TO  PROTOGONUS.

Hpurorjfovov  yiaXiuf  hupi^,  [xeyaVf  aiS'f/joVXa'yxTov,
*Cloyovrjf  xpv(T€niatv  dyoXXofxevov  Trrepvyeaaiv,
TavpamoVf^  ytv€<riv  fAUY-dpuv  ^vt^tuv  t'  a^^puitasVi

•  This  cosmogony  is  delivered  by  the  Birds  in  the  comedy  so  called,  and  in
this  line  they  claim  the  priority  of  birth  before  the  gods  as  well  as  men.
f  Lob.  suggests  AiSij^.  J  Simplicius  has  Olpativ,

§  Taupo^oav  Al.


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


295


<Pw^  TO  itoKvfAyfja-royj  izokvopyiov  ^HpiVAitaiov*  *
A^pyjroVf  yipv(f)ioi/  poi'C.yjropx^  Tta/jupafq  fpvo^.
Ocraoov-Y  *^  crxOToeercrav  dir^fj(,avpua-a(;  cfAix^'^y
UavTVj  hivfi^eli;  Ttrepijyuv  pntou^  vtara  y.o<r[A.oVf
AcctA-npov  dyav  (fyaoi  dyylv^  d<f  ov  <t€  *av>jTa  y.ixXvja-viu
*HSe  Hpii^irov  ava-Kxa^  xal  'Avravyviv'^  €\ty.a)ttov
AWa  fAayicip  -nroX^/xijT*,  TroXtycTTropf,  ^aTve  y€yri\fu^
Eq  TfXcTijj'  dytau  voXvtrotictXcv  opyiofbavraii;,
I  invoke  Protogonus,  of  a  double  nature,  great,  wanderinjr  through

the  ether,
Egg-born,  rejoicing  in  thy  golden  wings,
Having  the  countenance  of  a  bull,  the  procreator  of  the  blessed

gods  and  mortal  men.
The  renowned  Light,  the  far-celebrated  Ericepseus,
Ineffable,  occult,  impetuous,  all-glittering  strength ;
Who  scatterest  the  twilight  clouds  of  darknesG  from  the  eyes.
And  roamest  throughout  the  world  upon  the  flight  of  thy  wings,
Who  bringest  forth  the  pure  and  brilliant  light,  wherefore  I  in-
voke thee  as  Phanes,
As  Priapus  the  king,  and  as  dazzling  fountain  of  splendour.
Come,  then,  blessed  being,  full  of  wisdom  and  generation,  come

in  joy
To   thy  sacred,  ever-varying    mystery.      Be    present  with   the
Priests  of  thy  Orgies.


FROM  ORPHEUS.

Tlpearoyoi/ov  ye  /xev  ovriq  CTrcS/jaxev  ocp^aKfAoTa-iv
"El  [Ml  Nul  Upi^  fxoi^yr}'  ol  8'  aXkoi  oiirayTf^
QavfAal^ov  xa,\ropSvT€q  iv  ocl^fpi  (fjeyyoq  aeXwTov*
ToTov  ditea'Tpairrfv  xp^^'i  d^SoLvdroio  ^dyv^Toq.

*  "Oi  re  noK6fX)>riffToy,  ;roXu^^y/ov  fuprixe  noit:iv.     Vulg.
f  "Ocffwv  Al.  +   avTavy^  Al.


i  iJ '


296


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


No  one  has  seen  Protogonus  with  his  eyes

Except  the  sacred  Night  alone  :  all  others

Wondered  when  they  beheld  in  the  Ether  the  unexpected  Light

Such  as  the  skin  of  the  immortal  Phanes  shot  forth.

Jlermias  in  Phced.  141.


FROM  ORPHEUS.*


^Il>


<p€V^  ravta.  "O-zt  il  dpx^q
dvitil'xp'ti  rS  xpov^  J  o  Al^rjpf
diro    Tov  Qeov   ^yifxiovpyfj^fei^'

Al^epoq  -^v  Xdo^j  xai  Nt^
^(xpepa  J  Travra^  §  xaT^r^e
xai  cxaXi/TrTe  ra  vito  tov  Al-
^epa'  aryiiACtivccv  t>jv  vv%Ta  ncpa-
Tci^eivlj*  uptiv-uq  iv  TTj  avTov
€y(.^€<T€if  dy.ciTaK'^TTrov  Tiva,
xa*  ttavruv  viiepraroy  clvaiyKai
itpoyefcarepoy  0(  xa<  hr]u,iovpyov
d'navTccVf  xa<  tou  Al^epo^  av-
Tov  xa*  T^{  NuxTo^,  xai  Tra-
(Tvjj  T^j  vito  Toy  Al^tpa  ova-r^i


What  Orpheus  has  asserted  upon
the  subject  is  as  follows :  "  From  the
beginning  tlie  Ether  was  manifested  in
time,"  evidently  having  been  fabricated
by  God :  "  and  on  every  side  of  the
Ether  was  the  Chaos ;  and  gloomy
Night  enveloped  and  obscured  all
things  which  were  under  the  Ether."
by  attributing  to  Night  a  priority,  he
intimates  the  explanation  to  be,  that
there  existed  an  incomprehensible
nature,  and  a  being  supreme  above
all  others,  and  pre-existing,  the  demi-
urgus  of  all  things,  as  well  of  the
Ether  itself  (and  of  the  night)  ^  as  of
all  the  creation  which  existed  and  was


♦  I  have  given  this  fragment  from  Malala,  in  whose  text  it  appears  to  be  less
corrupted.  It  was  originally  preserved  by  Timotheus,  who  has  evidently  en-
deavoured to  explain  it  upon  Christian  principles.  His  parenthetical  explanations
have  been  considered  as  part  of  the  Orphic  text,  and  been  the  cause  of  its  obscurity.
Without  tampering  with  the  text,  I  have  endeavoured  to  restore  it  in  the  transla-
tion to  its  original  purity.  It  is,  doubtless,  the  same  passage  from  the  theogony
of  Orpheus,  commented  upon  by  Damascius.     See  infra.

f  x6c/xw  Ced. — Suid.  omits  it.

X  <po$ipa.  Suid.

§  Qy.  ?r4vTa — Tnxvra  8«  IxiXuim  Ced.

II  irgori^tOtiv  Ced.  Suid — irpwTiCuv  is  proposed  in  Ox.  Ed.

^  Omitted  by  Ced.


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


2?>7


xai    ■KokvnTdfJi.kvvi^   xTiVft'^**

XffP  0€   llJV    tlTttV  VHO  lOV  (TYXi-

Tow^   d^parov    ovcray'    ((f>p!X(T€

§€,    OTi   TO   ^5^,    pi^^UV  TOV   Al-

xaJ  voivav  t^v  yiri<Ttv'  6i7r6>v,


concealed  under  the  Ether.  More-
over he  says,  "  The  Earth  was  in-
visible on  account  of  the  darkness :
but  the  Light  broke  through  the
Ether,  and  illuminated  the  Earth  and
all  the  material  of  the  creation  :'*  sig-
iyie7>o  iivai  to  ^uq  ro  pvj^av  nifying  by  this  Light,  which  burst
Tov  Al^epa,  tov  TrpoeipTjfAevovf  forth  through  the  Ether,  the  before-
TO  virepraTQ)/  -TravTwv*  ov  ovofAo.  mentioned  being  who  was  supreme
0  avTQ^  'Op(p(v^  aKova-ai;  ix.  above  all  things :  "  and  its  name,"
T^^  fAotvTeiat;  i^fT-ne  [/.rj  T<va  J  which  Orpheus  learnt  from  the  oracle,
(pavai,  TO,  f^weTrtoj,  (M^t<k,  "is  Metis,  Phanes,  Ericepaeus,"  which
^bdvrjray  'HpixiTtaTovy)  oicfp  ep-  in  the  common  Greek  language  may
lADjveijerat  ttj  xo«ny  yA<i<r(T7j,  be  translated  will  (or  counsel),  light,
BovXviy  ^uq,  Zmlmrip.  Ei-  life-giver ;  signifying,  when  explained,
Ttuv  iv  TTj  avTov  in^ea-ei  Taq  that  these  three  powers  of  the  three
aviaq  rpiiq  ^eiat;  rZy  ovofxd-  names  are  the  one  power  and  strength
T«y  8i;ya/A€K,  /A*av  ilvai  Ivva-  of  the  only  God,  whom  no  one  ever
fAiv  xa«  Y.pd-co(;  §  toiJ  fxlvov  beheld,  and  of  whose  power  no  one
®€ovy  %v  ciitu^  op^y  7ia-rivo<;  can  have  an  idea  or  comprehend  the
lvvdy.(.(ciq<ivl€\;lvva.Taijvoi)>ai,i  nature.  "By  this  power  all  things
€t5€av ||,  r/  ^(Tiv,  'e^  avrriq  were  produced,  as  well  incorporeal
Se  tr^q  Uvdueut;  ra  •ndvia.  ye-  principles  as  the  sun  and  moon,  and
yevr^a^aiy  v.cu  dpx^i  daw  their  influences,  and  all  the  stars,  and
ydzoviy  xai  ^Mov  xa*  acX^vijy,     the  earth  and  the  sea,  and  all  things


li


*  Ced.  substitutes  for  this  sentence  xa)  at} tov  tou  Ai^/^os  x«*  ttuvtw*  twv  ux*
aJriv  rh  AlBipa. — Suidas  omits  it  altogether.

f  Ced.  omits  rr,*  y^v.

J  MrJTii  (oiTfp  ipurjviisTat  BovKr;)  *t5s ,  Zwo^oT^p.  Ced. — Suidas  has  nothing
more  than  "OTctp  uiv6/uLoi<ri  BovXijv  <^s  Zw^v. — In  the  Oxford  edition  of  Malala  it  is
translated,  "  Orpheus  ex  oraculo  edoctus  edixit,  Neminem  effari :  Ericepeo.  quod
vulgari  idiomate  signat  nobis  Consilium,  Lumen,  Vitae  datorem."  The  correction
in  the  parenthesis,  proposed  by  Bentley,  is  evidently  the  true  reading.

^  K«i  (9  K^aros  fouTOJ*  &e6».  Ced. — Koti  iv  x^aros  toO  Arj/xiouoyoi/  irdtVTWv  0»o5,
Suid.

II  iS/av,  Ced. — Suidas  omits  this  and  the  following  sentences,  and  substitutes
©•oS  ToS  ^dtvTa  ex   ToS  /uLYi  avTos    irap<xyay6vT0i    tU    ri  efva/,  o/:«ra  rt  xa\


298


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


299


i^ovala^f  xa*  atrrpx  itdvra
nal  "yvjv  xa*  ddXaaaav,  la.
6puiA€va  iv  airoi^  Tiavra  xat
Tu  aopara.      I9  Oe   rov  av-


S,f


u%ov


J


Tr€v  lit    avTOv  tou


^iov  nXaa^evTa  iK  y^j^  xa*


that  are  visible  and  invisible  in  them.
And  man,"  says  he,  "  was  formed
by  this  God  out  of  the  earth,  and  en-
dued with  a  reasonable  soul,"  in  like
manner  as  Moses  has  revealed. —
/.  Malalttf  p.  89. — Ced, — Suidas  v,
Orpheus,


FROM  ORPHEUS.  J

M^Tiv  (T'TtepfJi.a  (f)€povTa  ^eZv  xXutcv,  ovTf  $av>jTa
UpuToyovQv  [xdyiapi^  xdXeov  xara  /xaxpcv   OXvfA.Ttov,
Metis  bearing  the  seed  of  the  Gods,  whom  the  blessed
Inhabitants  of  Olympus  call  Phanes  Protogonus.

In  Crat.

K«*  M^T*^  irpuroq  yevcTup  xa»    Epai^  itoKvrepir'q^,
And  Metis,  the  first  father,  and  all-delightful  Eros.

In  Tim.IL  102.

'AjSpo^   YLpuq  xa*  M^t<<  atdaBoAoq.

Soft  Eros  and  inauspicious  Metis.

76.  181.

M^T<?  (Tictpfxa  (pepotna  ^cSv,  xXvrov  'HpiyLeitaTov.
Metis  bearing  the  generation  of  the  Gods,  illustrious  Ericepaeus.

lb.


•  ToJv  av^^dtirwv  y/»of .  Ced.  Suid.     There  are  some  other  variations  of  less
consequence.

f  For  KaB6¥Ta.

X  These  four  fragments  are  preserved  by  Proclus.


FROM  ORPHEUS.


vvratj  Ttfp)  Toy  ^dvvjToq  Sffo-
XoySv*  TipuToq  yovv  0  ^€oq  "nap
avrZ  tfiiiuv  y.€(f)aXat;  (pepei  ttok-
Xa?  xa<  \otc,f  ravpiov^y  otpiaq*

XO^pOTIQV    T€    XeOVTOq,    KCtl    ftpo-

€i<riv  diio  Tov  TipcoToyfvovq  uovy
iv    u    a-n€piA,aTixu<;    to    ^uov

CCTTi.


Orpheus  has  the  following  theo-
logical speculation  in  allusion  to
Phanes.  Therefore  the  first  God
bears  with  himself  the  heads  of  ani-
mals, many  and  single,  of  a  bull,  of  a
serpent,  and  of  a  fierce  lion,  and
they  sprung  from  the  primeval  egg  in
which  the  animal  is  seminally  con-
tained.

Proc.  in  Tim,


FROM  THE  ANCIENT  THEOLOGISTS.

*0  ^eoXoyo^  y.pm  xai  rav'-  The  theologist  places  around  him

pov  xai  XcWo?  xai  8/)axovTo?  the  heads  of  a  ram,  a  bull,  a  lion,  and

avT^  TtipniQeiq  xf</)aXaj.  Kat  a  dragon,  and  assigns  him  first  both

iv  aurS  vpurcf)  to  6^X1;  xat  the  male  and  female  sex.

Qn^Xvc  xa*  yivirup  yipanplq  dco^  ^HpiviairaToq.
Female  and  Father  is  the  mighty  god  Ericapaeus.
A^Jto)  8e  xai  a*  irrepvyeq         To  him  also   the  wings  are  first
irpuTov,  given.

Proc.  in  Tim.

*  Lobeck  supposes  that    the  following  was  the  original :  Kf  <oS  x«)  tmJ^ou  t',


a:


llM


1  i


300


ORPHIC  FRAGMENTS.


W  h


FROM  THE  ANCIENT  THEOLOGISTS .•

*E)i(7yoi  yap  Nt'viTa  fjifv  xai         They,   the  theologists,  assert  that

Ovpavoy  (paa-i  j3a<rtA€i;eiv  xa*  Night  and  Heaven  (Ouranus)  reigned,

itpo  tovruv  tov  fA.€yia-rov  ainuv  and  before  these  their  most  mighty

TtccTepx.  father.

Ov  TtpSro^  ^a(Ti'K€v<T€  •ntpix.Xvro^  'HpiyifnuToi;,
Who  distributed  the  world  to  Gods  and  Mortals,
Over  which  he  first  reigned,  the  illustrious  Ericepaeus,
MfB*  ov  VI  Nt-^,  After  whom  reigned  Night,

Having  in  her  hands  the  excellent  sceptre  of  Ericepaeus,
Med'  r^f  I  Ovpavlq^  After  whom  Heaven  (Ouranus),

Who  first  reigned  over  the  Gods  after  his  mother  Night.


FROM  THE  ANCIENT  THEOLOGISTS.


Postremo  potentiam  So-
lis  ad  omnium  potestatem
summitatemque  referri,
indicant  theologi:  qui  in
sacris  hoc  brevissima  pre-
catione  demonstrant,  di-
centes.

"HXie  -jravTOxpaxop,  xoV^oy
Ttyivixa,  xoVjtAoo  Scvajt**^,  xo<r-


In  short,  that  to  the  power  of  the
Sun  is  to  be  referred  the  control  and
supremacy  of  all  things,  is  indicated  by
the  theologists,  who  make  it  evident
in  the  mysteries  by  the  following
short  invocation.

Oh,  all-ruling  Sun,  Spirit  of  the
world.  Power  of  the  world,  Light  of
the  world. — Macrob.  Sat,  lib.  i.  c.  23.


•  This  extract  from  a  MS.  of  Syrianus  is  given  by  Lobeck,  Aglaopliamus  I.
577,  and  a  translation  of  it  with  the  Orphic  lines  from  a  MS.  of  Gale,  was  first
given  by  Mr.  Taylor,  Class.  Jour.  XVII.  163.

f  Gal. — Tov  T6b'  Lob.  J  Omitted  by  Gale.


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


FROM  TIMiEUS  LOCRUS.


Tijocato^  0  Aoxpoj  raSc  e(pa,'
hvo  ahiaq  elfJiev  t£v  o-u/xirav-
T&'y*  Noov  f/.€Vf  Twv  xaTa  Xyyov
yiyvofxevuv'  'Avayxav  Sc,  tSv
jS/^  xaTxa^  hwafxeiq  tZv  <tu-
[xdruv.  rovT€uv  8e,  tov  jucev,  ra^
TayaOu*  (^v<rioq  emev,  0eov
re  ouvfjiMivea-daif  ap'/jxv  re  tuv
apKTTuv  TO,  0  ettofjieva  re  nai
awahia,  t'l^  'Avayxav  avdye-
(T6at,  Tu  Se  ^i^AiTavTa,  'I^ectV)
TXav  AlarOrjToy  re,  oioy  eycyovov
roxniuv,  xai  to  /x«y,  cijoicv
dyevocTov  t€  x»(  axivaTov,  xat
[A€yov  Tc,  xa*  rd^  tolvtZ  <f)V'
Tio^f  yoaTov  tc  koci  itapd^ciyiAU
Tuv  yevvufAcyuVi  oxoVa  iv  f/.€-
TajSoA^  ivri.  roiovTOv  ydp  ri
rdv  'iSe'av  Xeyea-Qai  re  nai
voeTadtxi,  rdv  8*  TXav,  iyifAa-
yeTov  r.al  f/,arepUf  riBdvav  re


Thus  says  Timaeus  the  Locrian. —
The  causes  of  all  things  are  two ;  In-
tellect, of  those  which  are  produced  ac-
cording to  Reason;  and  Necessity,  of

those  which  necessarily  exist  according
to  the  powers  of  bodies.  Of  these  the
first  is  of  the  nature  of  good,  and  is
called  God,  the  principle  of  such
things  as  are  most  excellent.  Those
which  are  consequent,  and  concauses
rather  than  causes,  may  be  referred
to  Necessity,  and  they  consist  of  Idea
or  Form,  and  Matter,  to  which  may
be  added  the  Sensible  (world),  which
is  as  it  were  the  offspring  of  these  two.
The  first  of  these  is  an  essence  un-
generated,  immoveable,  and  stable,
of  the  nature  of  Same,  and  the  in-
telligible exemplar  of  things  gene-
rated which  are  in  a  state  of  per-
petual change ;  and  this  is  called  Idea


*  rciytx^wit  Al.


Hi
5  1


302


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


'ill


x«i  <yfvyaT*xav  6i/x€v  raq  rpi-
'TCAi  ova-iaq'  ^i^a^jUyav  yup  roc

avafAa^aiJLevay,  airoTfAeTv  itav-
Ta*  Ta  y€>vd[Ji.ara,  ravxav
11  Tuv  "TXav  athov  fji.lv  €<pa,
cv  y.a.v  av.lvciTov'  a[ji.op(pou  y  le
•/tad'  avTccv  xa*  acT-^vjaaTto-TOv,
8fj^o/x€vav  Se  ic^aav  fxcp<pdv.
Tocv  8e   7rf/3i  Ta  auuaray  fAt-
picTTav  €</>c€V,  xai  Ta$  Bar^pu
Sva-io^.    TioTixyopivovTi  8e  rav
"TXav,  TOTTOv  xa*  yjcpav.     ^vo
uv  a^€  ctpypu  IvQiA/ilai  €vt/.    av
TO  jottv  E*8o^  X070V  €%€<  appcvoi
T€  xa)  Ttarpo^'  a  8'  TXa,  drjXco^
T€  xct*  u.ar€po(;.  rp'na  ti  ei/xfv,
Ta  ^x  Toi/Twv  exyova.    Tp/a  8t
ovTa,    tpitri  yvupi1^(a6ai'  Tav
/>cev'l8€aj.,voV>taT  eViO-Ta.aav*
Tav  S'^TXav,  "Koyia-fAccviBcfy  iZ
^.r^itu  xaT*  evdvcopiav  voetaBai,
aXka.  xaT*  avaXoylav.  to,  8'
dTtoy€vvd[/.ara ,  alad'^o'ei  xax
So'l^t.  n^tv  ftjv  ecpccvov  yeveadai,
Xoycf  rjtTTrjv  iBta  Te  xa«   TXa,
xa)  0  ©eoj  ^ccfJUQvpyoq  tw  jScX-
ttovoq.    cire*  8e  to  'npco'^vrepov
vid^pov   i(rr)  tS  vtuTepuj  xai
TO  mayiA-ivov  itpo  tZ  aTaxTw,
ayado^  oji/  0  0€o^,  o/ja?y  t€  Tav
TXav  he^ofxeuav  Tav  *l8eav  xai

dXKoiOVfJiiVQLVf      TtaVToluq     jU€V,

aTaxTw^  6e,    €6€<t    €5    Tafiv


or  Form,  and  is  to  be  comprehended
only  by  Mind.      But  Matter  is  the
receptacle  of  Form,  the  mother  and
female  principle  of  the  generation  of
the  third  essence,  for,  by  receiving
the  likenesses  upon  itself,  and  being
stamped  with   Form,  it  perfects  all
things,  partaking   of  the   nature   of
generation.       And   this   Matter,   he
says,  is  eternal,  moveable,  and  of  its
own  proper  nature,  without  form  or
figure,  yet   susceptible  of  receiving
every  form  :  it  is  divisible  also  about
bodies,  and  is  of  the  nature  of  Differ-
ent. They  also  call  Matter,  Place  and
Situation.     These  two,  therefore,  are
contrary  principles:   Idea  or  Form  is
of  the   nature  of  Male  and  Father ;
but  Matter  of  the  nature  of  Female
and  Mother  :  and  things  which  are  of
the  third  nature  are  the  offspring  of
the  two.  Since  then  there  are  three  na-
tures, they  are  comprehended  in  three
different  ways;    Idea,  which   is   the
object  of  science,  by  Intellect;  Matter,
which  is  not  properly  an  object   of
comprehension,  but  only  of  analogy,
by  a  spurious  kind  of  reasoning;  but
things  compounded  of  the   two  are
the  objects  of  sensation,  and  opinion
or  appearance.    Therefore,  before  the
heaven  was  made,    there   existed   in
reality  Idea,  and  Matter,   and  God
the  demiurgus  of  the  better  nature;


T&Zt  Al.


f    dtyU^fl^TOV  Al.


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


303


auTav  aycv,  xa<  ^|  dopia-ruv
fAtra^o'AaVf  eiq  a>pi<ri/.€vav  xa-
TacTTcicrai.  iv  o/xoXoyot  Ta<
^lac-npiaeiq  ruv  cuixdruv  yiy-
vciivTOy  xa<  (/.•/)  xaT*  avrofAarov
rpoiraq  Stp^oiVTo.  iirot7}cr€v  wv
TovSf  rlv  v.o<TfA.ov  ec  dirdraq
tdq  TXa?,  opov  avTQV  viaraa--
x€vd^aq  idq  ru  ovto?  (pijaioq
tia  TO  TravTa  TaXXa  ev  atTw
TieptexeVf  ivott  [/.ovoyev^f  tcX-
fiov,  €[Ji,\lfV)(flv  re  xat  Xoyiwv'
{y.pi(r(TOva.  yap  TaSe  dil/rSyju
xai  dyJiyco  cjttov)  xa*  (rffyai-
poeiheq  a-Zf^a'  TeXtioTepov  yap
Twv  aXXwv  c^vj/xaTwv  -^v  tovto,
dijXeo/>t€v&?  uv  apicrrov  yivyay.a
TtoieiVf  TOVTQv  iiroiei  0€ov  yev-
yaroVf  ovTtov.a  (pBapvjcrojxevQv
v%  aAAu  aniu,  egu  tco  avrov
<rvvT€Tay[jt.evcc  0^5,  €»  iroKa
S^XcTO  avTov  hiaXvey,


and  since  the  nature  of  Elder  (Conr
tinuance)  is  more  worthy  than  that  of
Younger  (Novelty,)  and  Order  than
of  Disorder ;  God  in  his  goodness
seeing  that  Matter  was  continually
receiving  Form  and  changing  in  an
omnifarious  and  disordered  manner,
undertook  to  reduce  it  to  order  and
put  a  stop  to  its  indefinite  changes,
by  circumscribing  it  with  determinate
figure :  that  there  might  be  corre-
sponding distinctions  of  bodies,  and
that  it  might  not  be  subject  to  con-
tinual variations  of  its  own  accord.
Therefore  he  fabricated  this  world
out  of  all  the  matter,  and  constituted
it  the  boundary  of  essential  nature,
comprising  all  things  within  itself,
one,  only-begotten,  perfect,  with  a
Soul  and  Intellect  (for  an  animal  so
constituted  is  superior  to  one  de-
void of  Soul  and  Intellect)  :  he  gave
it  also  a  spherical  body,  for  such  of  all
other  forms  is  the  most  perfect.  Since,
therefore,  it  was  God's  pleasure  to
render  this  his  production  most  per-
fect, he  constituted  it  a  God,  gene-
rated indeed,  but  indestructible  by
any  other  cause  than  by  the  God  who
made  it,  in  case  it  should  be  his
pleasure  to  dissolve  it.


(i


304


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


ft  i


^^yap  Sr/  xara  tov  ixftvov
'A^yoy  ovx  lyiccvu(;  otTroStSer^da/
eroi  mepl  t^^  rov  itpxrov  i\iv'
ceccf'     (ppaa-rfov    8ij     <roi    Zt
aivtyiAMU    *v    av  t*  19  CeArof  ^

0  di>ayvovq  fMj  yy^,  u^(  yap
%€i*  ntep)  rbv  itdytuv  ^ua-iXea
wavT  i<rTif  xaj  iyifivQv  evexa
wavTa*  xa*  cvceTvo  airtov  dzdv-
ro/v  Tuv  xaX^v.  Set/reooy  S(,
■art/)!  Ta  hiVT€pa*  xaJ  rpirov
■fff^i  Ta  tplxa.  ii  vLv  dvOpm-
itivv}  yl'^x^  '"'^P*  aj/Ta  opeycrat
(/.au€iy  Ttot  arra  €<m,  jSXe-
wouca  €<^  Ta  auT^<  crvyyev^,

WV     O^SeV    iKUVUq    €%€*.     TOtJ    S>|

pa.<Tik4ooq   it€pi    'Aczi   uv   €<7rov,
ojJ^v  eo"T»  toioSto.  to  S^  u^td


FROM  PLATO.

You  say  that,  in  my  former  dis-
course, I  have  not  sufficiently  ex-
plained to  you  the  nature  of  the
First.  I  purposely  spoke  enigma-
tically, that  in  case  the  tablet  should
have  happened  with  any  accident,
either  by  land  or  sea,  a  person,  with-
out some  previous  knowledge  of  the
subject,  might  not  be  able  to  under-
stand its  contents.  This,  then  is  the
explanation.  About  the  king  of  all
things,  all  things  are,  and  all  things
are  on  account  of  Him,  and  He  is
the  cause  of  all  good  things.  But  the
second  is  about  things  of  the  second
kind,  and  the  third  about  things  of
the  third  kind.  Therefore  the  human
soul,  from  its  earnest  desire  to  know
what  these  things  may  be,  examines
those  within  itself  which  are  akin  to
them,  none  of  which  it  possesses  in
sufficient  perfection.  Such  (imper-
fection) however  is  not  the  case  with
regard  to  the  King  and  those  natures
of  which  I  spoke. — Plat,  Ep.  IF.  p.
312.


FROM  PLATO.


Tov  TUV  itdvruv  0€ov  ^yc-         Conjuring  the  God  of  all   things,
IMva  TUV  re  ovtwv   xa*  t5v     the  ruler  of  those  which  are,  and  are


s  i


•  Serranus  translates  "aecundum  ad  secunda,  &c." — Bekker  has  "  circa  se-
cundum secunda,  &c.;"  but  he  preserves  the  accentuation  of  the  text.


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


305


/a€XXoj/t4)J',  rov  Te  lyycjuovo;  xai  about  to  be,  and  the  sovereign  father
alrlfiv  ifxrkpa  -Kvpiov  it:otA>vv'  of  the  ruler  and  cause. — Plat.  Ep.
raq.  VL  p.  S2Z.


FROM  AMELIUS.


*Ay.€kicq  he  rpirrov*  itanT
rov  ^rjfAiovpyoy,  xa*  vov^  Tper^ ,
^a^ikiQ.^  rpiTi,  rov  ovrcx.,  rov
t^ovTa,  T6y  opZyra.  hia-ipe-
povtTi  oe  ovToi,  tiOTi  0  y.ev
izpZroq  vovqy  ovrcoq  iarrlv  0  i<T-
riv.   *0  §6  htvrepo^i  ea-ri  {/.evy

Se  TO


\   »


TO  €V  aVZU    VO'fjTOVf    e%€<

'npo  avTov,  xai  y.€reyjEi  ndvrooc;
i>i€ivov,  xa<  8<aToiJTO  hevrepoq.
O  Oe  rpnoq,   ea-n   [a(v  to   ev
avrS    xa*    ovto^   vor^iov.    itaq
yap  vovq,  rS  trvi^vyovyri  voijto),
0   avToq   4ariy.    (^fi  oe  to  ev
ro)  Oevrep^j   xa*   opo)   to  ttooj-
Tov.   oa-o)  yap  TrAeicc  yj  diroa-Ta-
ai;,  roaovro  to  e^fiv  aixvhpo-
repov,    TovTovq  oiv  rovq  '^p^^<;
vo'a?    xai    hrjfAiovpyov;   VTUort-
^eraiy    xa*     rovq    Ttapa    rZ
Wkdruvi  rpelq  ^aaiXea^j   xa<


Amelius  makes  the  Demiurgus
triple,  and  the  three  Intellects  the
three  Kings — Him  that  exists,  Him
that  possesses,  Him  that  beholds.
And  these  are  different ;  therefore
the  First  Intellect  exists  essentially
as  that  which  exists.  But  the  Second
exists  as  the  Intelligible  in  him,  but
possesses  that  which  is  before  him,
and  partakes  altogether  of  that,
wherefore  it  is  the  Second.  But  the
Third  exists  as  the  Intelligible  in  the
Second  as  did  the  Second  in  the  First,
for  every  Intellect  is  the  same  with
its  conjoined  Intelligible,  and  it  pos-
sesses  that  which  is  in  the  Second,
and  beholds  or  regards  that  which  is
the  First :  for  by  how  much  greater
the  remove,  by  so  much  the  less
intimate  is  that  which  possesses.
These  three  Intellects,  therefore,  he


*  This  word  is  generally  misquoted  as  rgtrov,  for  which  I  can  find  no  authority.
The  context  of  the  discourse  evidently  requires  rpirrhv,  having  before  treated  of
the  8/TTo»  double  Demiurgus  of  Plotinus.  The  first  four,  and  last  five  lines,  con-
tain the  opinion  of  Amelius;  the  rest  is  the  commentary  of  Proclus.  Amelius  was
himself  a  Platonist,  and  the  eldest  disciple  of  Plotinus,  though  he  wrote  before  the
system  of  the  modern  Platonists  had  acquired  the  celebrity  given  it  by  his
master.

R  U


■PI '


Hi


HI


306


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


xai  Ovpavw  xat   Kpovov,    xsci
[Aiovpyoi;^  0  ^avijj  itrtlv.


supposes  to  be  the  Derniurgi,  the
same  with  the  three  kings  of  Plato,
and  with  the  three  whom  Orpheus
celebrates  under  the  names  of  Phanes,
Ouranus,  and  Cronus,  tJiough,  accord-
ing to  him,  the  Demiurgus  is  more
particularly  Phanes. — Proc.  in  Tim.
II.  93.


FROM  ONOMACRITUS.


*i)vojUaxfliTo^   ir/  to?;  'O^j-

rr}v  itdvTuv  dpiojv  tivai  cXc-
7fv.


Ttaivra.  Tpia  xa*  itXeoi/  eXar-
cov  TotSf  iKdtro'uy  tovtuv
rpiZvevo^  €xao"Toi^  apcTy^  ipid^f
avv€(rii  Mai  \ipdro<;  xai  Trj^rj.


Onomacritus,  in  the  Orphics,  says,

that  Fire,  and  Water,  and  Earth,  were

the  first  principles  of  all  things. —

Sextus.  Hyp,  III,  4.  \36.—Phys.  IX.

5,  6.  620.


FROM  ION.

This,  says  Ion,  is  the  beginning  of
my  discourse.  All  things  are  ihree,
and  nothing  more  or  less  ;  and  the
virtue  of  each  one  of  these  three  is  a
triad  consisting  of  Intellect,  Power,
and  Chance.


•  The  emendations  to  this  passage  are  very  numerous.  I  have  translated  it
according  to  Lobeck,  as  follows:  'Af^^  )55«  yuoi  toC  K6y<i\j  vavra  rpia.  xtx\  ttKUv
ou8i»  ou8i  iXaaaoi''  toutouv  j&t  Tctuv,  Jvof,  &c.


' ',


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


307


FROM  PHILOPONUS.


nZp  lAii/  x«i  yvjv  0  Ila/j/xew-         Parmenides  holds  Fire  and  Earth

Irji;  vTT€^eTo'  tuvtoc  Sf  /xfxa  as   primary   principles  :   but  Ion   of

Tov  a,€poq  "lav  o  X7c(;  o  rpaya-  Chios,    the    tragedian,    placed    them

hoTtouo^.  after  Air. — Philoponus.


■


FROM  PLUTARCHUS.


'H  vypa.  <l)V(rK;  apx^j  xai  The  moist  nature,  being  the  first
yfvf.<jii  ova-a  TtdvTuv  i^  ap-  principle  and  origin  of  all  things  from
Xni  ra.  Tcpura  rpia  (TufA.%Ta     the  beginning  made  the  three  first

bodies,  Earth,  Air,  and  Fire. — Plut.

de  Is.


y^v  depa  xa*  nvp  iiroi-fifrty.


FROM  OCELLUS.


*'Opoi  (lai  zpei^y  FcWi^,         There  are  three  boundaries,  Gene-
'Axaij,  TeAfVTrj.  ration,  Summit,  Termination. — I.  4.


FROM  OCELLUS.


'H  rpiaq  irpuiTri  <rw€(rrif)<T€Vf         The    first    triad    consists   of  Be-
'Apxvjv  Mfo-oTvjTa  xai  TtKiv-     ginning.  Middle,  and  End. — Lijd.  de


Tijv.


Mens.  p.  20.


.'508


PYTHAGOREAN  FRAGMENTS.


\m


V


■f


iazi  TO,  TtpdyfxaTot  yiyvoueva
xai  'ycvo/xcva  xai  yivr^cro^iva,
ra  fMV  ifivaei,  roc  8e   Tep^vT),


FROM  PLATO.

Some  say  that  all  things  consist  of
tliose  which  are  in  the  course  of  gene-
ration, tliose  generated,  and  those
about  to  be  generated ;  the  first  by
nature,  tlie  second  by  art,  and  the
third  by  chance. — Plat,  de  Leg.  X.


FROM  ARISTOTELES.


a.  rpia  iravrsi  . . .  ^a^w
itep  yap  (pxai:^  ci  Jlv^ayopeioi
TO  wav  xat  Ta  iidura  toT^
rpKTiv  upi<Tta.i*  TtAcwT^  yap
xai  [JL€(Tov  y.al  apxv  '^O"  api^'

fAOV    €%€i     tOV     TiaVTOq'     taVTKIt.

St  Tov  T^{  rpidhot;.


All  thinjrs  are  three:  for  as  the
Pythagoreans  say,  the  Universe  and
all  things  are  bounded  by  three  :  for
the  End,  the  Middle,  and  the  Be-
ginning, include  the  enumeration  of
every  thing,  and  they  fulfil  the  num-
ber of  the  triad. — Aristot.  de  Ccelo.  I.


FROM  ARISTOTELES.


'Aya^ot  y€  xai  a-Ttovlctioi  The  good  and  contemplative  be-

yiyvovrai  ha  rpiuv*  la  rpia  come  so  through  three   things ;  and

It  taXnd  icrri  (pvcru;,  e^o^,  these  three  are  Nature,  Habit,  and

Xoyo«.  Reason. — Aristot.  Polit.  VII ,


FROM  DAMASCIUS.

T^«a  oSv  id  wavTa,  aXX*  All  things,  therefore,  are  three,
QVX  "Ey,  "Titap^i^  ^vvaixi^  xa»  but  not  one  ;  Hyparxis,  Power,  and
'Eve/jyeta.  Energy. — Damas.  Qucest,  c.  39.


COSMOGONY  OF  THE  TYRRHENIANS.


A  certain  person  among  them,  well
versed  in  these  matters,  wrote  a  his-
tory, in  which  he  says  :  That  God,  the
demiurgus  of  all  things,  for  the  sake
of  giving  dignity  to  his  productions,
was  pleased  to  employ  twelve  thou-
sand years  in  their  creation ;  and  ex-
tended these  years  over  twelve  di-
visions, called  houses.  In  the  first
thousand  years  he  created  the  heaven
and  the  earth  ;  in  the  second  he  made
this  apparent  firmament  above  us,  and
called  it  heaven ;  in  the  third,  the
sea  and  all  the  waters  in  the  earth ;
in  the  fourth,  the  great  lights,  the  sun
and  the  moon,  together  with  the  stars ;
in  the  fifth,  every  soul  of  birds,  and
reptiles,  and  quadrupeds,  in  the  air,
and  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  waters ;
in  the  sixth,  man.  It  appears,  there-
fore, that  the  first  six  thousand  years
were  consumed  before  the  formation
of  man ;  and  during  the  other  six
thousand  years  the  human  race  will
continue,  so  that  the  full  time  shall  be
completed  even  to  twelve  thousand
years. — Suid.  v.  Tyrrhenia,


*l<nopiav    8e    xap'    avTo7(i
dvvjp     efAitiipoq    Q-vveypd^peTO.
E^ij  yap  Toy  hrjiJLiovpyov  tSv
wavTCt'v  (Beov  Sa>5fxa  yjKidZa^
iviavTuv     To7i    iiaaiv    avTov
(piXoTif/.T/a'aa'^ai       xTiVjtxao"*,
xai  Tavra^  ^laTeivai  ro7^  i^
'A€yo[Mvoi^  qikok;'  jta*   t5j  jwev
a'  x<Xia$<  TTOi^o-at  t«v  ovpa-
vov,  xat  rrjv  yr^v'   t^   htvT€p(^
Ttoiyjo'ai    TO    <rr€p€cc[Aa    tovtq
to  (paii/oiA.€voVf    y.ak€<raq   av-
Tov^   ovpavoi/*    T7J    rpirrj    rja-
Xa(T<rav.  y.a\  ra  t^ara  ta  iv
trj    yri    Tcdvra'    t^    8  ,    toi;^
^(caTripaq  rovq  /xeyaXof ^,  ijAiov
xci»  (TfXvjJ/vjv*    Kat   Tovq  d<Tii-
paq'   T^  c',  Tcavav  ;//u%^v  ttc-
TCivSv,    xat  ep-rreruVf   y.a'i  re-
rpdnobajy    iv  tS   dcpif    aal
€v  T7J  y-^f  xa<  Toiq  vtaa-i     ttj
5"',  Tov  dv^pwKOv.     $a/v€Tai
ovv  rd^  jufv  Ttpura^  ef  p^iAia-
8a^    iipQ    triq    rov    dv^pwitov
hiai:Ad(T€uq     irapaXvjXv^eyai'
rdq  Se  AO<ira^  %^  j^iX^aSa^  8;a-
f/,€V€iv  TO  yevQ^  tSv  dv^puicuv,
uq  elvai  TOV  iravTa  %povov  ryj^

<rwT€K(iaq   y-^XP^    X''^*^^*?  +
^uht¥.a.


*  Kuster  proposes  aJre.

t  Kuster  proposes  nrpavilwv,  which  I  have  adopted  in  the  translation.

X  Kuster  proposes  yjKiilwv.


THE  THEOGONIES.


FROM  DAMASCIUS.


'Ey  /xtv   roivvv      raiq  </>€-
pofXivaiq    ravraiq     payj/uhiaK;

io-Tiv,  ^  Ttept  TO  vorjToVy  rjv  xai
cl     fjl>iAO(ro(^ot     hiepuvjvivovaiv

aVTI  /X€V  T^5  /*»a^  TWV  OAl'V  d/3-

5^^^  rov  'S.povov  TiS^tvTf^,  avr*

avTi  6c  TQv  ovTO^  aitXat;  to
e^ov  aTToXo'yt^o/ACi/oi  xat  T^iaSa

TaVTTjV    TtpUTrjV    irOiOlJvTf^'     6/^

8e  TTfv  hevTfpav  reXfTv  'firoi  to
xi/oi^wevov  xa*  to  Kfov  wov  tcv
6eoi/,  T^  Tov  apT^TalJl  ^tT^va,
vj  Trjv  ve^cXnjv,  otj  ^x  TojyTwv
cx^pwffxti  0  <ta»j^'  aXXoT€
yap  aXXa  Trep*  tou  y-ecrov
tbiXoo'odyivaiv.      Toi^To  fxtv  ovv


In  the  rhapsodies  vvhicli  pass  under
the  name  of  Orphic,  the  theology,
if  any,  is  that  concerning  the  Intel-
ligible ;  and  the  philosophers  thus  in-
terpret it.  They  place  Chronus  (^Time)
for  the  one  principle  of  all  things,
and  for  the  two  Ether  and  Chaos  :
and  they  regard  the  egg  as  repre-
senting Being  simply,  and  this  they
look  upon  as  the  first  triad  f.  But
to  complete  the  second  triad  they
imagine  as  the  god  a  conceiving  and
conceived  egg,  or  a  white  garment,
or  a  cloud,  because  Phanes  springs
forth  from  these.  But  concerning
this  middle  (subsistence)  different
philosophers  have  different  opinions.
Whatever  it  may  be  they  look  upon


•  Lob.  omits  /xlv  to/vuv.

•f  The  intelligible  triad  of  the  later  Platonists  was  divided  in  three  sub-
sistences, each  of  which  was  also  called  a  triad,  and  composed  of  subsistences
bearing  analogy  to  the  whole.

J  Bentley  proposct*  payivra.


FROM  DAMASCIUS.


311


<n.  «?«  \  mt       lit        t

oiroiov  av  9j,  &»?  tov  vovv^^  uq
he  irarepx  xai  ^vvaynvj  aWct
riva.  Tipoo'eTcivoovi/Tei;  cvUv
rS  *Op(p€i  irpoa-fiMyra,  Trjv
he  rphfiv  tov  M-^Tiv  tqv  'Hpt-
xaTrarovy  oo<;  hvvufjuv,  tov
<tav»jTa  ^5  TiaTepa.

MTjiroTe  he  xa*  r-qv  /t>t€<7vjv
Tpidha,  ^iTeov  y.aTcc  tov  rpl-
f/.op<poy  ^€ov,  €T<  xvofAeuoy  ev
TO)  uS'  xai  yap  xa<  to  fJt.e<TOv
an  ^avTo^et'  <Tvu(xfJi.(\)0-r(p(iv
t£v  axpwv,  ua-Tiep  x«*  toSto
af/.a  Y.a.1  oSov  xa/  Tpi//,op(f)oq
•  ^€oq.  Kxl  op^q  or*  to  (/.ev
uov  ea-riv  to  r}vw[ji.eyov,  6  he
TptfAopifjo^  xat  'nQXvuop<l)o<;  t^J
ovTi  Kfeo^  TO  hid'tieKpiy-evov  rev
forjTov'  TO  he  fJi,€<rQv  xaTa  fxev
TO  caov  en  ijvwjtxevoy,  §  vcaxa
he  TOV  ^eov  vjSiy  ||  Siaxex/Ji/xcvov,
TO  he  oAov  e\Tie7y  Siaxpivojot^vov.
TO/ai?T>j  /A€v  rj  <TVv^^r}(;  *0p-
^<x^  ^eoXoyia.


*H  he  Kara  tov  'leflwvyixov


it  as  Mind ;  but  for  Father  and
Power  some  of  them  imagine  other
things  which  have  no  connexion  with
Orpheus.  And  in  the  third  triad
they  substitute  for  it  Metis,  whilst
they  place  Ericapaeus  as  Power,  and
Phanes  as  Father.  J

But  the  middle  triad  is  never  to  be
placed  according  to  the  triformed  god
(Phanes)  as  absolutely  conceived  in
the  e^g :  for  the  middle  subsistence
always  shadows  out  each  of  the  ex-
tremes, as  should  this,  which  must
partake  at  once  both  of  the  egg  and
of  the  triformed  god.  And  you  may
perceive  that  the  egg  is  the  united
(subsistence)  or  principle  of  union ;
and  the  triformed  god,  who  is  multi-
form about  being,  is  the  separated
principle  of  the  Intelligible ;  but  the
middle  subsistence,  being  united  as
far  as  it  relates  to  the  egg^  and  al-
ready separated  as  far  as  it  relates  to
the  god,  may  be  considered  as  exist-
ing altogether  as  in  the  act  of  sepa-
ration :  such  is  the  common  Orphic
theology.

But  the  theology  delivered  by  Hie-


*  Lob.  omits  in  rhf  vovv.  f   'HptxtTraTov.  Lob.

J  Wolf,  and  Lob.  omit  is  roi/  voSv.  Taylor  places  it  after  Mr^rtv,  and  translates
this  very  obscure  passage  thus :  "  But  conceiving  him  over  and  above  this  as
father  and  power,  contributes  nothing  to  Orpheus.  But  they  call  the  third  triad
Metis  as  intellect,  Ericapaeus  as  power,  and  Phanes  as  father."  I  have  inserted  a
full  stop  after  ^^oo-^xovra.  Lob.  does  the  same,  though  he  gives  no  translation
of  the  passage.

§  Tay.  inserts  to  t^ /to,  which  he  supposes  to  be  omitted.  It  appears  to  me
to  destroy  the  argument.

II  t'l^ft  W.  and  Hamb.


t


1


312


THE   THEOGONIES


3;


n


I

1


III


'I


lATj  y.ou  0  avTQ(;  i<rriVy  ouTUf
e%e*.  "T^ccp  Iqv  (pvi<Tiv  i^  apx^*:*
tiai  "Tatj  *  e'l  ^^  eTTayrj-f  rj  Vr),
Zvo  TocvTaq  a,pxa,q  tiroTiS^c-
lAtvoq  ntpurovf  Thup  xa*  F^v,
ravryjv    ^€v    u^    (jwo'ci    chc-

XoXXTJTiXOV    Tf    Xai   (XUKXTiXeV*

afpriTov  a(fiir}<riv,  avTo  yap  to
fAtjhe  tpdvai  z€pl  avTr](;  iv-
8t/xvuTai  avT"^^  f/jv  aTio^pi^rov
(pv<Tiv'  T');^  he  rphr^v  apy^v
fxera,  tcc^  Zvo  ytwri^r^vai  f/.€v
€x  TOVTCi)Vy  "TSaro^  </>'?i'*'  *"''*
Fij?,  S^axovra  Se  fivat  y.€<f)a-
Xact;  ^yjiVTcc  irpoariricpV'Kvla^
Tavpov  y.ai  XeovTOf,  iv  ^ttrco
8e  ^iov  TiprjcrwnciVy  e;^€*v§  Se
xai  kiii  Twv  utAOiv  TTTf^a,  o5vo-
{xdiT^ai  ZeXpovo^W  ciy^pa.TOJ>^
xat  'HpaxX'^o.  tov  olvtov'  <tv-
veTvai  he  avrS  rrjv  Avdyx^Vf
tpvaiy  ovcrau  t^v  avTrjv  v.at
'Ahpcca-Teiav  da-ufxaTov  hiup-
yvicoy.fvf\v  *  ev  rmavTi  tS  v.o<T'
fAij}  tSv  irepuTut/ avreiv iipacnro-
/xcVijv*  xauTijv  cluai  Keyea-^ai


ronymus  and  Hellanicus  is  as  fol-
lows : — He  says  that  Water  was  from
the  beginning,  and  Matter,  from
which  the  Earth  was  produced,  so
that  he  supposes  that  the  two  first
principles  were  Water  and  Earth  ;
the  latter  of  which  is  of  a  nature
liable  to  separation,  but  the  former
a  substance  serving  to  congluti-
nate  and  connect  it :  but  he  passes
over  as  ineffable  the  one  principle
prior  to  these  two,  for  its  recondite
nature  is  evinced,  in  that  there  is  no
manifestation  appertaining  to  it.  The
tliird  principle  after  these  two,  which
is  generated  from  them,  that  is  from
the  W'ater  and  Earth,  is  a  Dragon
having  the  heads  of  a  Bull  and  Lion
naturally  produced,  and  in  the  middle,
between  these,  is  the  countenance  of
the  God :  he  has,  moreover,  wings
upon  his  shoulders,  and  is  denomi-
nated incorruptible  Chronus  (Time)
and  Hercules.  Fate  also,  which  is
the  same  as  Nature,  is  connected
with  him,  and  Adrastia,  which  is  in-
corporeally  co-extensive  with  the  uni-
verse, and  connects  its  boundaries  in
harmony.     I  am  of  opinion  that  this


*  Lob.  inserts  (iKCs)  in  a  parenthesis.     Creuzer  proposes  to  substitute  it.

f  BTrdyu  Hamb. — Wolf,  proposes  vTrdyii.

X  Lob.  omits  from  TtxuTYjt.

§  IX"  Hamb.

II  x^(^vov  W.  and  Hamb.

^   ay^pwTov  Mon.

•*   Btoptywfxtvriv  Tay.


FROM  DAMASCIUS.


313


T'^v  t^/t»jv  a/>xV>  xaTa  t^v
'nxrlav  ia-ruffaVf  irX^v  on  dp-
o-€vo^ijXi/v  avTTjv  titea^riffaTo,
ntpoq  iuhftity  Trjq  itdvruv  yev-
>eT<x^j  ahia^,

Kai    CiroKoifA^dvu    t^v    ev
Taiif  pa^j/uhiccii  KfeoXoylav  d-
iptlaav  Taq  hvo  itpuzaq  dpy^cq
fxerd  ryj^  ^x^q  itpo  tsov  hvoTv
Trjq  a-iyyj^*  'napciBo\tei<Trjq  dno
"njq  rpiTfj^  uerd  Tuq  St^o  xaiJ-
TTj^  iy<rT7)<roc<r^Qt,i   tvjv  dp^rjVy
ui   nps^TYiq   prjov  T<    exovaryi^
xa<  aviAiAerpov  irpo^  dv^punui^
aModq,      OvTO^  ydp   rjv  o  iro-
hvTifjLTjTo;  ev  exe/vrj  Xpoyo^dy^-
poLTo^  xa*  Al^epo;  xal  Xdov^
varvjp*  afxeKei  xaJ  xara  rav-
TTjy  0  Kpoyoi  ovto^  6  hpdvcuv  yev-
>aratf  TpiitXrjyovrjvif  Al^epa
<pvja-i  yoeplv  y.ai  Xdoq  dzeipop,

Xai    TphoV    tTTi  T0VTQl^''Epe^Og

Ofxiy/Juleq'  T^v  heinepav  tuv-
ryjy  rpiata  dydXoyov  r^  itpuTv}
it(ipa,htha<Ti  hvya[/.iKr]y  oi/aay
uq  iKeiyyjy  war^ixijv*  dto  xa*
TO  T^tTov  avTijq  "Epe^q  ea-riv
o/xip^X58e;,  xat  to  irarpiMv  re
xai  ccKpoy  Al^rjp  ovx  dicKaJq
aXXa  voepSq'  J  to  Se  /xeVov
ayro^ev  Xdoq  dneipoy,  aKkd
IMfy  iv  rotJToiq,  u(;  Xeyet,  o
Xpoyof  uoy  iyevyrja-ty,  tov  Xpo-
vov  Tto^o^aot.  yeyyyjfAa  xai  avrvj


third  principle  is  regarded  as  subsist-
ing according  to  essence,  inasmuch
as  it  is  supposed  to  exist  in  the  nature
of  male  and  female,  as  a  type  of  the
generating  principle  of  all  things.

And  in  the  rhapsodies  I  conceive
that  the  (Orphic)   theology,  passing
over  the  two  first   principles,  toge-
ther with  the  one  preceding  those  two
which  is  delivered  in  silence,  estab-
lishes  the  third,    which  is  properly
posterior  to  the  other  two,  as  the  first
principle,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  first
which  has   something  eflTable   in   its
nature,  and  commensurate  with  hu-
man conversation.    For  the  venerable
and   incorruptible    Chronus    (Time)
was  held  in  the  former  hypothesis  to
be  the  father  of  Ether  and  Chaos :
but  in  this  he  is  passed  over,  and  a
Serpent  substituted :  and  the  threefold
Etlier  is  called  intellectual,  and  Chaos
boundless,  and  the  dark  cloudy  Ere-
bus is  added  to  them  as  a  third.     He
delivers,  therefore,  this  second  triad
as  analogous  to  the  first,  this  being
potential  as  was  that  paternal.  Where-
fore the. third  subsistence  of  this  triad
is  dark  Erebus,  and  its  paternal  prin-
ciple and  summit  Ether,   subsisting
not  simply  but  intellectually,  and  the
middle  derived  from  it  is  boundless
Chaos.       But  with   these   it  is   said
Chronus  generated  the  egg^  for  thiS


i|i


i  i


♦  T^f  T?  ffty^  Mon.


f  TpiirKrji/  yo»T>v  Mon.  m.


J  voTj^^s  Mon.

s  s


ll


1*1

i

I


J I


314


THE  THEOGONIES,


ri   itapdloa-i^  xai    iv   rovToiq     relation    makes   it   a   procession   of


TiXTo/>i€voy,  OTi  yiai  ano  rov-
tuv  ^  t^/tij  vpoeio'i  vovirri
Tfta^»  1  *?  o^y  ai^Tij  ear* ;  to
(UOV)  17  owa^  Tuv  €v  avrcfi  tpv-
fffuv  a^p€i>o^  vLocl  ^riktia^  xai
tSv  iv  fJt.€(Tcp  TtavToiwv  <T7repfAci'
Tuv  to  TTA^^o^*  xai  rphov  iin

pvyaq  cVi  t5v  w/xwy  e^^ovra
^pvcra^t  0;  iv  fJLev  ra7q  Xayoct
itpovir^pvuviai  f/%€  ravpu^v
xfcpaAa^i  izi  Be  t^^  xf(^aA^^
hpaMvta  Tce'AupiQV  "jravroSa-
wa?^  [AopcpaT^  ^rjpiuv  IvhaKko-


Chronus,  and  born  of  these,  in-
asmuch as  from  these  proceeds  the
third  Intelligible  triad.  What,  then,
is  this  triad  ?  The  egg,  the  duad  of
the  natures  of  male  and  female  con-
tained in  it,  and  the  multitude  of  the
all-various  seeds  in  the  middle  of  it ;
and  the  third  subsistence  in  addition
to  these  is  the  incorporeal  god,  with
golden  wings  upon  his  shoulders,  who
has  the  heads  of  bulls  springing  forth
from  his  internal  parts,  and  upon  his
head  an  enormous  serpent,  invested
with  the  varied  forms  of  beasts.  This,
[A€vcv.  TovTov  fxfv  olu  u^  therefore,  is  to  be  taken  as  the  Mind
vwv  T^5  r/ialoq  vTioK-^TiT tovf  of  the  triad  :  but  the  middle  proces-
Ta  $€  [Aea-a  yivy^  to.  tc  nah-  sions,  which  are  both  the  Many  and
Xa  v-ati  xa  IvQ  ryjv  St/vajtciv,  the  Two,  must  be  regarded  as  Power,
airo  l\  TO  dov  apxr^v  iraTpiYyjv  but  the  egg  as  the  paternal  principle
TYiq  TptTvj^  rplahoq,  ravrvi^  Be  of  this  third  triad.  But  the  third  god
T^;  rptT7}i  Tpidho(;  Tov  Tpirov  of  this  third  triad,  the  theology  now
^€ov,  xal  ^8ij  ^  ^eoXoyU  Upw  under  discussion  celebrates  as  Pro-
royovov  dvvfM€7  Y.au  dkia  xaXf?  togonus  (First-born),  and  calls  him
Ttdvruv  haTaxTopa  xa<  oXou     Dis,  as  the  disposer  of  all  things,  and

the  whole  world :  upon  that  account
he  is  also  denominated  Pan.  Such
are  the  hypotheses  which  this  gene-
alogy lays  down  concerning  the  Intel-
ligible principles.

But  the  cosmogony  which  is  deli-
vered by  the  Peripatetic  Eudemus  as
being  the  theology  of  Orpheus,  passes
the  whole  Intelligible  order  in  silence,


rov  xocraou,  8<o  xa*  Ylava  xa-

XciiT^a*.  To3'avT(x.  xai  avTrj
itep]  ruv  voijTwv  dp'xpv  rj  yc-
vfaXoy/a  'Kapl<TTf\(Tiv.

*H  §€  izapa  TaJ  Flfpiira-
Ti^TixS  Et/Sij/xy*  dvayeypoiU'
fM€yyiy  uq  rov  Op<pi(cq  ot<r(x.
^€oXoyia  •ndv  to   vo>jtcv  iariu-


•  luWXoij  Wolf.  Hanib. — liiuw  Mon.


TROM  i)AMASCIUS.


315


nTjO-fV,   uq  irayTdvaa-iv  a^pi}-'
Tov*    T€   xaJ    ayvu<mp  rpi-
Tr^y    xaia    ^le^ohov    re    xa*
a-TrayycX/av*  dno  Se  t^^  vwx-
To^  iitoirjaajQ  tvjv  dpy^v^  dcf)
Yjq  xai   0  "Ofxrjpoq,   <)  xa*  [/.yj
(Tvv€)(y]   TiiTroirjTai   i^v  yivia.~
hoyiavy  KfTtr\<Ti))'   ov  yccp  dito-
ZfyiTfOp"^    'Ev^yjiAOv    Xe'yovTOij§
0T<  airo  'flxfavo?  xa)  Tvj^tjoq
ap(jETai*  (pociHTat  yap  il^uq
xai  TVjv  Nt/xTa  (xtyia-r-^v  otxcc
^eov,   uq  xai  tov  A/a  ae^ia--


as  altogether  ineffable  and  unknown,
and  incapable  of  discussion  or  expla-
nation.    He  commences  from  Night,
which    Homer    also   constitutes   his
first  principle,  if  we  would  render  his
genealogy  consistent.     Therefore  we
must  not  put  confidence  in  the  asser-
tion of  Eudemus,  that  Homer  makes
it  commence  from  Oceanus  and  Te-
thys  ;  for  it  is  manifest  that  he  re-
gards Night  as  the  greatest  divinity,
which  is  implied  in  the  following  line,
where  he  says  that  she  is  reverenced
by  Jove  himself —


"A^cto  yap  (at]  NvktI  ^og  dito^viAia  pe^oi.^
He  feared  lest  he  should  excite  the  displeasure  of  swift  Night.


*AXX*    OfJLvjpoq  fA€v  xai  avroq
dpyjetr^u  diio  Nwcto'j.

'HcTioSo^  Se  /xoi  Soxf r  "tt/jwtov

y^MC^ai  TO  ^doq  i(ncpuv  Tiji-

axctTaXiyiTToy   toiJ   voijtoi/  xai

yivuu^ytiv  iravreKuq  (pvaiv  xex-

>.'i})t€yai  Xdo^f  TY/V  Be    t»;j/**

iipurrjv    iy.€t\f€]/    ntapdynv  uq

Tiva    dp^riv    Triq    oK-^q    y€Via<;

Tuv    ^fup'    (I    fATj   apa   Xdoq

[A€v  rvjv  levTfpav  ruv  hvoTv  dp-

X5v,   T^v**  U   y.a)  Tdprapov

Xa*    tjpUTa  TO  TpiTTAOVV  yOlJTOV,


Homer,  therefore,  must  be  supposed
to  commence  from  Night.

But  Hesiod,  when  he  affirms  that
Chaos  was  the  first  produced,  appears
to  me  to  regard  Chaos  as  the  incom-
prehensible and  perfectly  united  na-
ture of  the  Intelligible.  From  thence
he  deduces  Earth  **  as  the  first  prin-
ciple of  all  the  generation  of  the  gods,
unless,  perhaps,  he  may  regard  Chaos
as  the  second  subsistence  of  the  two
principles  :  in  which  case  Earth  and
Tartarus,  and  Eros  (Love),  compose


•  ap^rjxTov  Hamb.  f  Tp67rov  or  Tp^rraiv  Hamb.

X  aTToisxTsav  Hamb.  §  XsywTe?  Mon.  ||  fftCia^at  Mon.

f  II.  xiv.  261.     The  printed  copies  of  Homer  have  i'^So/.

♦♦  The  emendation  of  y?y  for  r^i-  is  proposed  by  Mr.  Taylor,  and  though  I
find  no  authority  in  the  different  texts  for  it,  it  is  evidently  requisite  not  only  for
the  sense  but  to  accord  with  Hesiod's  Theogony.


M


.'*■■


316


THE  THEOGONIES,


FROM  DAMASCIUS.


317


fxari  irayturav*   rl>  8e  Tdp~
'tuq  t)^  ^ieinpt<riv  'sapccytirnvfj-

fJt.€VOV,


Toy  [Atj^^EpofTa  dvu  rov  rpirov,  the  three-fold  Intelligible,  Eros  being
fi'C  xara  imarpotfrf^v  ^iupav-  put  for  the  third  subsistence,  consi-
fjLcvr.v.  ToZro  yap  ovrc'(;  ovo-  dered  according  to  its  convertive
fAai^ei  xai  o  'Opcpdq  iv  raT^  nature.  Orpheus  also  in  his  rhap-
paxpsc^iatq'  T7JV  8c  T^v  avTi  toi;  sodies  has  adopted  a  very  similar
irpuTQVj  uq  'np^Tviv  h  a-T€p€S  disposition,  for  he  places  the  Earth
Tiw  xaJ   ova-iuhfi   xarao-Tij-     for  the  first,  being  the  first  that  was

conglomerated  into  a  compact  and
essential  substance,  while  he  places
Tartarus  as  the  middle,  as  having
already,  in  a  manner,  a  tendency  to-
wards disunion.

But  Acusilaus  appears  to  me  to
vTtoTi^ea-^al  fxoi  80x6?  tvjv  regard  Chaos  as  the  first  principle  and
vpuTr/V  apx^Vf  rh^  irdyTr]  ciy-  altogether  unknown,  and  after  this
vua-ToVf  raq  he  Ivo  /ixera  t*/v  one  to  place  the  duad,  Erebus  as  the
/x/av,  "Epi^oq  juev  -rriv  a^ptvUf  male  and  Night  as  the  female,  the
rrjv  8e  ^yp.fiav  Ntxra,  rav-  latter  being  substituted  for  infinity,
rr,v  fxh  avrl  aitfipia^f  iyuiy/jv  and  the  former  for  bound ;  and  from
le  avri  -nipccroq'  ^x  8e  tovtuv  a  connexion  between  these  were  ge-
ifr/jo-l  f  fAix^fyruv  A)^€pet  ye-  nerated  Ether  and  Eros  (Love),  and
vea-^ai  xa*  "Epicrcx,  xai  MrjTiVf  Metis  (Counsel),  these  three  being  the
rocf  rpeTq  ravTaq  vovirLq  tiroer-  Intelligible  hypostases,  of  which  he
rda-€tq,  T*;v  fxev  anpuy  Al^epat  places  Ether  as  the  summit,  Eros  as
itoiuy,  rr,v  he  fA€<TV)v  "Epura  the  middle  in  compliance  with  the
xara  t^v  ^uo-ix^  fM(rorvjTa  natural  intervention  of  love,  and
TOW  "EpwToq,  T7IV  Se  TpiTvjv  Mctis  38  thc  third,  inasmuch  as  it
M^Tiv,  xaT*  J  auTov  ^8)j  tov  is  already  highly-venerable  Intellect.
voXvT(fA7}Tov  vovv.  Tlupdyei  And  from  these,  according  to  the
St  eit\  rovToiq  €x  t5v  aCrSv  relation  of  Eudemus,  he  deduces  the
xai  aXXi'v  ^euv  7roXt/v§  dpi^-  vast  multitude  of  the  other  gods.
,aov  Kara  t^v  Evh-^iAov  Icrro-
piav.


Tov  8c  'ETTljWfJ'/SlJV  8t;o  itp^-

raq  apxpti  vtro^etr^ai  'Aepa,
Kai  NfxTa,  SiJXov  on  <ny^
rii/.rjO'avTci  t^v  fAtav  itpo  ruv
dvoTvf  ez  Oiv  yevvri^Tiva^  Tdp-
Tupov  oluai  T^»  rphijv  ap^^v,
ui  Ttva  jtXiXTyjv*  ^k  twv  hvoTv
avyY.pa^ei<Tav*  e^  cov  hvo  rivaq
ri^y  foyjTviv  fjiea-or^ra  ovrea  xa-
Keo'a.yra,  ho  t<  in  afju^a  8<a-
T6*yci  to  T6  av.pov  xai  to  'Jtepaq,

yeve<r^at  tovto  excrvo  to  vovj-
tov  ^wov  uq  dXyj^uq,  c'l  ov
irdXtv  aW'/iv  yevtav  irpoeK-
^eiv.


*€pext;Sij^  8e  o  Ivptoq  Xjuvra.

fxev  etvat  de)  nal  X^oW  "j"  xa*

X^oviav  raq  rpeTq  itpuraq  dp-

Xa?,   T^v  fMav  (f)V]fA.i  mpo  ruv

hvo7v,  xai  Tocq  tvo  fMrd  t»|v

fiioiv*   TOV  8f    yLpwov  Tiot^a-ai

ix  TOV  yovov  eavrov  Hvp  xai

IIvet/jLca  yiai^Thupf  t^v  rpnt-

Xyjv   oifJMi   (p^<rnf  TOV  vovjroVf

iz  wv  iv  itevTe  fAvy/nq  hirjp-^"

fAevuv  iroAXrjv  yevedv  <rva"Tyivai

^tuv  T^v  tctyreiJi^nrxfiv'j^  xa-

AovfAev^Vf   Tainlv  8e  Xcruq  eU

vilv,   T^v  "jrevTcxoo-jixoy.    llep\


Epimenides  affirms  that  the  two  first
principles  are  Air  and  Night :  whence
it   is  evident  that  he  reverences  in
silence   the   one   principle   which  is
prior  to  the  two  :  from  which,  I  con-
ceive, he  holds  that  Tartarus  is  ^ene-
rated  regarding  it  as  a  nature  in  a
manner  compounded  of  the  two  ;   for
some,   indeed,   regard   the   principle
which  is  derived  from  these  two  as  a
kind  of  Intelligible  intermediate  sub-
sistence   or    mediety,    properly    so
called,  inasmuch  as  it  extends  itself
to  both  extremities,  the  summit  and
the  boundary ;  for  by  their  connexion
with  one  another,  an  egg  is  generated
which  is  properly  the  very  Intelli-
gible animal  from  which  again  pro-
ceeds another  progeny.

But  Pherecydes  Syrius  considers
the  three  first  principles  to  be  an
Ever-vital  subsistence,  Chronusf ,  and
an  Earthly  subsistence ;  placing,  as  I
conceive,  the  One  prior  to  the  Two,
and  the  Two  posterior  to  the  One :
and  that  Chronus  generated  from
himself  Fire,  and  Spirit,  and  Water,
representing,  I  presume,  the  three-
fold nature  of  the  Intelligible  :  from
which,  when  they  became  distributed
into  five  recesses,  were  constituted  a
numerous  race  of  gods,  called  the
five-times  animated  order,  equivalent


f


I,


ii


♦  «i  8^  Wolf.  Hamb.  f  ^n/ui  Wolf.  Hamb.

X  xa)  Wolf.  §  TO^Xa  (<.  t.  jroXXi)*)  Mon.  ||  iarfipla  Mon.


*  xa)  yuixT^y  Mon.

t  Xfrfwv  Mon.  and  Tay.  which  the  following  passage  evidently  requires.
J  Ktvrtfivyii)/  Mon.  ira.i>Ti^\Ajy(<iv  in  m.


■    i


Ml


318


THE  THEOGOMES,


■


i^l


le  T6t^T&!v  aXXoq  t<TU^  (paxTrai
aaipo^.  Toiavrai  /xev  ovv  y.ai
Tocravrai  ravvv  ttapeiktit^u-
aQ;»  ^fjuv  at  tia  (/.v^uu  'EX-
Xvjviyiuoy  v'KO^e<T€tif  ttoXawv  xa<
oKKuv  ovcruv.


T5y  Ze  Baptdpuv  ioUacrt
BatvXuviOi  [X€v  TYjv  ixiav  tZv
oX«v  a^xV  criy^  Ttapie^ai  ^vo
Se  TTOitiv*  Tav^e  xai  'Aira-
(TwVjT  Tov  ^ev  'A'Trao'ajy  avSpa
T^?+  Tat^Srf  "TTOiotJvTc^,  rav-
TVjy  §€  [Avitepa  ^«5y  ovofxa-
^ovT€^,  tj  cyv  juovo'ycj'ij  TrarSa
•ycvvKj^^yai  tov  MwiJfAr)/,  aCrov
cl/xai  TOV  yoifjTov  xoVjUOv  ^k  tSv
StoIV  dpxZy  'KapayofAevov.^  *Ek
8e  Twv  avruy  aXXrjv  ytyeay
irpofA^eTv  Aa^vjy  y.al  Aa^oy.
EiTa  ai/  rpiTVjv  ck  tojv  avruv  \  |
K<(r(7apyj  xa<  'Acrcajpoj',  ej  &?v
yeyea-^ai  rpfT^t  'Avov  xa*  IX-
Xivov  xat  'Aov*  toiJ  8e  *AoiJ
xa<  Aatxij?  ulov  'ycveo'^a*  tov
BijXov,  ov  hr^ixiovpyov  etvat  (pa-
(Tiy,

Mayoi  Ce  v.ai  itay  to  apeioy
yiyo^t  ^i  >ta*  rovro  ypoi(p€t  o
"Ev^yjuoq,  ol  /acv  toitov,  ol  §€
X^vov  xaXoi/ai  to  vo^jtov  aitay
xai  TO  ijya[A€voy*  i^  ov  8«a-
xpwTijvai  ^  •\7foy  ayafjov  xai


to  what  he  might  call  a  five-fold  world.
But  another  opportunity  may  perhaps
occur  for  the  discussion  of  this  part
of  the  subject.  Such  and  of  a  simi-
lar description  are  the  hypotheses
which  are  received  by  us  relative  to
the  Greek  mythological  fables,  which
are  numerous  and  very  various.

But  the  Babylonians,  like  the  rest
of  the  Barbarians,  pass  over  in  silence
the  One  principle  of  the  Universe,
and  they  constitute  Two,  Tauthe  and
Apason ;  making  Apason  the  hus-
band of  Tauthe,  and  denominating
her  the  mother  of  the  gods.  And
from  these  proceeds  an  only -begotten
son,  Moymis,  which  I  conceive  is  no
other  than  the  Intelligible  world  pro-
ceeding from  the  two  principles.
From  them,  also,  another  progeny  is
derived,  Dache  and  Dachus ;  and,
again,  a  third,  Kissare  and  Assorus,
from  which  last  three  others  pro-
ceed Anus,  and  Illinus,  and  Aus.
And  of  Aus  and  Dauce  is  born  a  son
called  Belus,  who,  they  say,  is  the
fabricator  of  the  world,  the  Demi-
urgus.

But  of  the  Magi  and  all  the  Arion
race,  according  to  the  relation  of
Eudemus,  some  denominate  the  In-
telligible Universe  and  the  United,
Place,  while  others  call  it  Time
(Chronus):    from   whom   separately


uVi/v  Mon.  f  airaawv  Mon.  wwaaoDv  H.  J  oLvipoi\>  r^f  Mon.

§  7rpceiy6/xt*ov  Hamb.  ||  [Xifferixp^  Mon.


FROM  DAMASCIUS.


319


ZaifAova  xaxov  ij  <f)u^  xal  OTto-
Toj  irpo  TQVTuy  uq  iyiovq  Xe-
y€iy.  OvToi  Se  ovy  xa»  avTo)
fAtra  rr]y  d^id)cpiroy  (pva-tv
^laMpiyofjLeyrjy  itoiovai  t^v  Str-
r-tiy  Tva'Tot^riy  tm  y.p(movuy'
T^^  fAiy  TfiyeHd^ai  ilv  ^ilpo-
fAd<Tl-fiy  ryjq  §e  toy  'Apuixdvioy.


2<5filjvi0<  8e  xaTix  tov  a^Jrov
o'vyyp'Xffyea  itpo  itdvTuy  Kpoyov
VTTOTt^ivTai    xai    ITo'^^ov    xoi
*Ouix\r)v'  Uo^Qv  he  xai  *0/tx/-
XKrjq  fAiyevTuy  uq  hvo7y  dpypv
'Aepa.    ytvea^ai    xai    Avpciyy
Atpa  fX€y  UKparoy  tov  yorjTov
wa^aSijXoSyTe^,    Avpay    he    to
€?  avTov  yciyovfAiyov  tov  yorjTov
^wTixov  TipoTVTTUfAcc.    UdXiy  V
€x  ToijTuy  dfMf}oTy  ^(Itov  yeyyvj-
^ijyai  'KaTa*   toy   yovv   olixai
Toy  yo7}TQy,


'Clq  U  e^cc^ey  Evhrjixov  Tvjy
^oiyiKuy  f:tpi<Ty.QiJt.(y  xarck  M&l-
Xov-^  fAv'^ohoytayy  Al^priv  to
'npZToy  xai  'A^;,  a*  Ivo  uItui
dpxoci,  i^  S)v  yevyaTai  OvXw
A*'?,  0  voyjTOi  ^(k,  aiiTo  olixai
TO  dupoy  Toil  voTjToi;-  c'l  ov  eai/-
tS  avyeXeoyToq  yeyyYjOyjyai  <pyj(j-i
Xova-ajpoy^  dvoiyia.  itpaTOVyUToc.


proceed  a  Good  Divinity  and  an  Evil
Daemon  ;  or,  as  some  assert,  prior  to
these.  Light  and  Darkness.  Both
the  one,  therefore,  and  the  other,
after  an  undivided  nature,  hold  the
twofold  co-ordination  of  the  superior
natures  as  separated  and  distinct,
over  one  of  which  they  place  Oro-
masdes  as  the  ruler,  and  over  the
other  Arimanius.

The   Sidonians,  according  to  the
same  writer,  before  all  things  place
Chronus,  and  Pothus,  and  Omichles,
(Time,  Love,  and  Cloudy  Darkness).
And  by  a  connexion  between  Pothus
and  Omichles,  as  the  Two  principles
are   generated  Aer   and  Aura  (Air
and  a  Gentle   Breeze),   substitutintr
Air  for  the  summit  of  the  Intelligible,
and  the  Breeze  arising  from  it  for  the
vivifying  prototype  of  the  Intelligible.
And  from  these  two  again  is  gene-
rated Otus  (the  Night  Raven),  re-
presenting,  as   I  conceive,    the   In-
telligible Mind.

But  independent  of  the  collections
of  Eudemus  we  find  the  mythology
of  the  Phoenicians  thus  delivered  ac-
cording to  Mochus.  First  was  Ether
and  Air,  which  are  the  Two  first
principles ;  from  these  was  produced
Ulomus,  the  Intelligible  God,  and,  as
I  conceive,  the  summit  of  the  Intel-
ligible :  from  whom,  by  a  connexion


M


•  /*fTa  Mon.


t  /"Cx^"  Mon.


320


THE  THEOGONIES,


M


m^


COOV   TOtTOV  fX€V  OlfA-Ul  TOV  MIJTOV

arc   TrpwTijv   hoMfivavav   ttiv

/fcc€Ta  Ta^  Su'o  ao%a^  to  jia€V
ax^ov  ecTTiv  avei^o^  o  €<j,  to  0€
ueo'ov  o!  St;o  aviuoi  Aiyp  re  xat
No'to^*   itoiovo'i   yap  ituq  xa*

TOUTOl/^*  WpO  TOl/  O^X&J/XOlJ'  y  0

8c  OCXwjtxo?  a^To^  0  vorjToq
cii^l;  voiJ^,  0  Be  avoi-yetc  Xot-
(To^poj  §  ^  /Lcera  to  voijtov  |  |
irpoTvi  TaCK,  to  oe  wov  o  ov-
pavoq,  Xeyerai  yap  e^  avrov
paytvToq  fK  Buo  yeveaBai  ov-
pavci  y.a\  ytj^  twv  8i%oto-
fji.7j[/,druv  itiaTepov*


AiyxMTiuy**  Be  o  jmcv  Eu-
8»j/A0^  o^Sfv  aKp<?ef  la-roptif
o'l  Be  AlyvTTTiQi  xa6^  "^f^a^  fp*'
Koa-o(f)Qi  ■ye^svo'Te^  el^jveyxav
a^TaJv  Ty^v  aXijdeiav  yieyipvf/t.'
[/.evfjv  €vpoi/T€i  iv  A'iyinrrioiq
8ij  Ti<ri  Xo^ot^*  tt»5  ei>j  xaT*  av'
rovq  i}  [Atv  fAM  Tuv  oXwv  jy
apy^  2ko'to^  a-yvoj^TOV  iyt.ifOv-
fAty/j  'Aai  TcuTO  T^if  dva^U'
votf/xevov  owTw^*  Ta^  Be  Bm
oif%aq  "T^up  xaJ  "^d^AfAOVy  u^


with  himself,  was  produced  Chusorus,
the  first  expanding  principle,  and  then
the  Egg:  by  the  latter  I  imagine
they  mean  the  Intelligible  Mind ;  but
by  Chousorus,  the  Intelligible  Power,
being  the  first  nature  which  separates
an  unseparated  subsistence,  unless,
perhaps,  after  the  two  principles  the
summit  may  be  the  one  Wind ;  but
the  middle,  the  two  winds  Lips  and
Notus  (south-west  and  south),  for
sometimes  they  place  these  prior  to
Oulomus.  In  which  case  Oulomus
himself  would  be  the  InteUigible
Mind,  and  the  expanding  Chousorus
the  first  order  after  the  Intelligible,
and  the  Egg  Heaven  :  for  it  is  said,
that  by  the  rupture  of  it  into  two
parts  heaven  and  earth  were  produced
each  from  one  of  its  two  severed
parts.

Of  the  Egyptian  doctrines  Eu-
demus  gives  us  no  accurate  infor-
mation. But  the  Egyptian  philoso-
phers, who  are  resident  among  us,
have  explained  their  occult  truth,
having  obtained  it  from  certain  Egyp-
tian discourses.  According  to  them,
then  it  appears  to  be  this.  The  One
principle  of  the  Universe  is  celebrated
as  Unknown  Darkness,  and  this
three-times  pronounced  as  such :  and
the  Two  principles  are  Water  and


•  To(;To<f  Mon.  f  oJXw/iivou  H.  J  «?  Mon.

^  ;^ouo-a>^oD  Hamb.  ||  tlv  >o>jTi»  Hamb.  %  Wolf  proposes  oupaviv  xal  y?'.

*•  A/yujrr/ouj  Mon.  f  f  oihKwv,  Mon.


FROM  DAMASCIUS.


321


*Hpai'(TX05'  t'j  Be  o  >jrpe(r^^T€-
fo^  avrlq  AcrxXijmaBvj^,  "^dfjt.-
lAOv  xai  "T^i-pf  i^  uv  xai  [/.cO^
a;  yfvpyjBriifa^  Toy  itpurov  Ka-
fA.ri(piv  eiTa  tov  Oevrepov  aTco
TouTou,  eiTa  xat  dito  tovtov
tov  rpiTOVt  ovq  avf/.r.Xfipovv  tov

OXOV    VOT^TOV    dld-KOa-fAOV,      Ol/TW

/xev  AcrxX>jTriaBij^.  *0  Bt  v€u-
Tepoq  'Hpaia-ycoq  tov  rpirov
ivofAatrBivra  KafAi^(p]v  diio  tov
narpoq  xai  rov  itdititov  rov
i^Kiov  tivai  (prjo'iv  avTov  Bij-
vov  TOV  vovv  TOV  vorjTov.  *AXXa
ryjv  fxev  itep]  tovtuv  d%pl^tiav
eg  exeivo^v  ATjirreov.  la-Tcov  Oe
xa«  exeryo  ittpi  ruv  AlyvTrTiuv,
QTt  haip€Tty(.ot  el<rt  ttoKKa'Xfiv
ruv  xaTa  evuffiv  v^€<TTuTOi>Vj
iicii  y.a.1  TO  voijtov  B<7j^ijxao"ij/
eij  -jroXXwv  S^eSv  /BioVijTa^,  u^
€^€(rTi  fAo^eTv  To7^  i-Kiivuv
avyypdfAfxaanv  ivTvyfiv<Ti  To^f
jSouXo/xevoi?,  Xeyw  Be  t^  *Hpac-
ffxou  dvaypa^  tov  Alyvit-
tiou  xa9r  oXov  Xoyov  irpoi  tov
UpoxKov  ypatpiiai^  tov  tpiko-
<ro(f)CVf  xai  t^  dp^afAfVTj  ypd-
tp€(T^ai  (TviJupavi^  vTto  *A<r-
KX)}iriaBov  ray  Alyt/Trr/ci'V  Trpoq
rovq  aXXoi;^  ©eoXoyoi;^.


Sand,  according  to  Heraiscus ;  but
according  to  Asclepiades,  who  is  the
more  ancient  of  the  two.  Sand  and
Water,  from  whom,  and  next  in  suc-
cession after  them,  is  generated  the
first  Kamephis,  and  from  this  a  second,
and  from  this  again  a  third,  which,
they  affirm,  completes  the  whole  In-
telligible distribution.  Such  is  the
system  of  Asclepiades.  But  the
more  modern  Heraiscus  says  that
the  third,  who  is  named  Kamephis
from  his  father  and  grandfather,  is
the  Sun,  equivalent  in  this  case  to  the
Intelligible  Mind.  But  greater  ac-
curacy upon  the  subject  can  only  be
obtained  from  these  authors  them-
selves. It  must  be  observed,  how-
ever, with  regard  to  the  Egyptians,
that  they  are  often  wont  to  distribute
subsistences  according  to  union,  as
when  they  divide  the  Intelligible  into
the  individualities  of  a  multitude  of
gods,  as  may  be  learnt  from  their  own
writings  by  those  who  will  examine
them :  I  refer  particularly  to  the
commentary  of  Heraiscus  upon  the
Egyptian  doctrine  addressed  to  Pro-
clus  the  philosopher  alone,  and  to
the  concordance  of  the  Egyptian
writers,  begun  by  Asclepiades  and
addressed  to  the  other  Theologists.


I

f


i


Ka^ui^   Mon.


T  T


CHRONOLOGICAL


AND


ASTRONOMICAL  FRAGMENTS.


OF  THE  GREAT   YEAR


FROM  BEROSSUS.


V


Berossus  qui  Belum  interpre-
tatus  est,  ait  cursu  ista  siderum
fieri:  et  adeo  quidem  id  afRr-
mat,  ut  conflagrationi  atque  di-
luvio  tempus  assignet :  arsura
enim  terreria  contendit,  quando
omnia  sidera,  quae  nunc  diver-
sos  agunt  cursus,  in  Cancrum
convenerint,  sic  sub  eodem  po-
sita  vestigio,  ut  recta  linea  exire
per  orbes  omnium  possit :  inon-
dationem  futuram,  cum  eadem
siderum  turba  in  Capricornum
convenerit.  Illic  solstitium,  hie
bruma  conficitur.


Berossus,  who  thus  interprets
the  Babylonian  tradition,  says
that  these  events  take  place
according  to  the  course  of  the
stars  ;  and  affirms  it  so  posi-
tively, as  to  assign  the  time  for
the  Conflagration  and  the  De-
luge. He  maintains  that  all
terrestrial  things  will  be  con-
sumed when  the  planets,  which
now  are  traversing  their  differ-
ent courses,  shall  all  coincide  in
the  sign  of  Cancer,  and  be  so
placed  that  a  straight  line  could
pass  directly  through  all  their
orbs.  But  the  inundation  will
take  place  when  the  same  con-
junction of  the  planets  shall  oc-
cur in  Capricorn.  In  the  first  is
the  summer,  in  the  last  the  win-
ter of  the  year. — Seneca  Nat.
Qucest.  III.  29.


ASTRONOMICAL  FRAGMENTS.


523


OF  THE  GREAT  YEAR:


FROM  CENSORINUS.


Ad  iEgyptiorum  vero  magnum
annum  luna  non  pertinet,  quem
Graeci  Ki^wxov  Latine  Canicula-
rem  vocamus.  Propterea  quod
initiumillius  summitur,  cum  pri-
mo  die  ejus  mensis,  quem  vocant
iEgyptii  ©a)^  Caniculae  sidus
exoritur :  nam  eorum  annus  ci-
vilis  solus  habet  dies  ccclxv  sine
ullo  intercalari,  itaque  quadri-
ennium  eo  fit,  ut  anno  M.ccclxi
ad  idem  revolvatur  principium.
Hie  annus  etiam  Heliacos  a
quibusdam  dicitur :  et  ab  aliis
I  iviavT:oq  est.  Praeterea  annus,
quem  Aristoteles  maximum  po-
tius  quam  magnum  appellat,
quem  solis  et  lunae  vagarumque
quinque  stellarum  orbes  con-
ficiunt.  Cum  ad  idem  signum
ubi  quondam  simul  fuerunt,  una
referuntur.  Cujus  anni  hyems
summa  est  Cataclysmos,  quam
nostri  Diluvionem  vocant.  Ms-
tas  autem  Ecpyrosis  quod  est
mundi  incendium.  Nam  in
his  alternis  temporibus  mundus
turn  exignesere,  turn  exaques-
cere  videtur,  hunc  Aristarchus
putavit  esse  annorum  verten-
tium  dnum  millium  cccclxxxiiij.


In  the  great  year  of  the  Egyp-
tians, which  the  Greeks  call  the
Cynic,  and  we  in  Latin  the
Canicular;  the  Moon  is  not
taken  into  consideration  :  inas-
much as  its  commencement  is
fixed  when  Canicula  rises  upon
the  first  day  of  that  month
which  the  Egyptians  call  Thoth.
For  their  civil  year  has  only
SQ5  days,  without  any  inter-
calary day;  whence  the  qua-
drennium  so  adjusts  itself,  that
in  the  1461st  year  the  revo-
lution is  completed.  This  year
is  by  some  called  the  Helia-
cal, by  others  the  Eniautus,  or
The  Year.  But  the  year  which
Aristotle  calls  the  greatest,  ra-
ther than  the  great,  is  that  in
which  the  sun,  moon  and  all
the  planets  complete  their
courses,  and  return  to  the  same
sign  from  which  they  originally
started  together.  The  Winter  of
this  year  is  the  Cataclysm,  which
we  call  the  Deluge :  but  its
Summer  is  the  Ecpyrosis,  that  is
the  Conflagration  of  the  world.
For  at  these  alternate  seasons
the  world  is  burned  and  de-


324


CHRONOLOGICAL  AND


Aretes  Dyrrhachinus  quinque
millium  dlij.  Herodotus  et
Linus  X.  millium  decc.  dierum
xiij.  dcccclxxxiiij.  Orpheus
centum  xx.  Cassandrus  tricies
sexies  centum  millium.  Alii
vero  infinitum  esse,  nee  in  se
unquam  reverti  existimaverunt.


luged.  Aristarchus  supposes
this  periodical  revolution  to
consist  of  2484  years ;  Aretes
of  Dyrrhachium  of  5552;  He-
rodotus and  Linus  of  10,800;

of  13,984;    Orpheus

of  120,000;  Cassandrus  of
136,000.  Others  suppose  it  to
be  infinite  in  duration,  and  that
the  celestial  bodies  never  again
coincide  in  their  original  posi-
tions.  Censorinus   de  Natali

Die.


OF  THE  CHRONOLOGICAL  ERAS


FROM  CENSORINUS.


n/


/


j


■  J

'I'-l


Nunc  vero  id  intervallum  tem-
poris  tractabo,  quod  Historicon
Varro  appellat,  hie  enim  tria
discrimina  temporum  esse  tra-
dit.  Primum  ab  hominum  prin-
cipio  ad  Cataclysmum  priorem,
secundum  ad  Olympiadem  pri-
mam;  quod  quia  in  eo  multa
fabulosa  referuntur  Mythicon
nominatur.  Tertiam  a  prima
Olympiade  ad  nos  quod  dicitur
Historicon,  quia  res  eo  gestae
veris  historiis  continentur.


I  WILL  now  treat  of  that  interval
of  time  which  Varro  calls  His-
toric ;  for  he  divides  the  times
into  three  parts.  The  first  frpm
the  beginning  of  mankind  to
the  former  Cataclysm.  The  se-
cond, which  extends  to  the  first
Olympiad,  is  denominated  My-
thic, because  in  it  the  fabulous
achievements  are  said  to  have
happened.  The  third,  which
extends  from  the  first  Olym-
piad to  ourselves,  is  called  His-
toric, because  the  actions  which
have  been  performed  in  it  are
related  in  authentic  history.


ASTRONOMICAL  FRAGMENTS.


S25


Primum  tempos  sive  habuit
initium,  seu  semper  fuit ;  certe
quot  annorum  fuit,  non  potest
comprehendi.  Secundum  non
plane  quidem  scitur,  sed  tamen
ad  mille  circiter  et  dc  annos
esse  creditur  a  priore  scilicet
Cataclysmo  quem  dicunt  Ogy-
gis  ad  Inachi  regnum  annis  cir-
citer cccc  hinc  ad  Olympiadem
primam  paulo  plus  cccc  quos
solos  quamvis  Mythici  tem-
poris  postremos  tamen  quia  a
memoria  scriptorum  proximos
quidam  certius  diffinire  voluere,
et  quod  Sosibius  scripsit  esse
ccclxxxxv,  Eratosthenes  autem
septem  et  cccc,TimaBus  ccccxvij,
Orethres  clxiiij.  Et  prseterea
multi  diverse,  quorum  etiam  ip-
sa dissentio  incertum  esse  de-
clarat.


De  tertio  autem  tempore  fuit
aliqua  inter  auctores  dissensio
in  sex  septemve  t^ntum  modo
annis  versata.  Sed  hoc  quod-
cunque  caliginis  Varro  discus-
sit,  et  pro  caetera  sua  sagacitate
nunc  diversarum  civitatum  con-
ferens  tempora,  nunc  defectus
eorumque  intervalla  retro  dinu-


The  first  period  either  had
some  beginning,  or  had  endured
from  eternity  ;  however  that
may  be,  it  is  impossible  to  make
out  what  was  the  number  of  its
years.  Neither  is  the  second
period  accurately  determined,
yet  it  is  believed  to  contain
about  1600  years;  but  from
the  former  Cataclysm,  which
they  call  that  of  Ogyges  to  the
reign  of  Inachus,  about  400
years,  from  thence  to  the  first
Olympiad,  something  more  than
400 ;  of  which  alone,  inasmuch
as  they  are  the  last  years  of
the  Mythic  period,  and  next
within  memory,  certain  writers
have  attempted  more  accurate-
ly to  determine  the  number.
Thus  Sosibius  writes  that  they
were  395  ;  Eratosthenes,  407  ;
Timaeus,  417;  Orethres,  164.
Many  others  also  have  different
opinions,  the  very  discrepancy
of  which  shews  the  uncertainty
in  which  it  is  involved.

Concerning  the  third  interval,
there  was  also  some  disagree-
ment among  different  writers,
though  it  is  confined  within  a
period  of  only  six  or  seven
years.  Varro  has,  however,  ex-
amined the  obscurity  in  which
it  is  involved,  and  comparing
with    his    usual    sagacity    the


S2G


CHRONOLOGICAL  AND


ASTRONOMICAL  FRAGMENTS.


327


merans  eruit  verum,  lucemque
ostendit;  per  quam  numerus
certiis  non  annorum  modo,  sed
et  dicTum  perspici  possit.


Secundum  quam  rationem  ni
fallor  hie  annus,  cujus  velut  in-
dex et  titulus  quidam  est  Ul-
pii  et  Pontiani  consulatus,  ab
Olympiade  prima  m.  est  et
xiiij.  ex  diebus  duntaxat  sesti-
vis,  quibus  Agon  Olympiacus
celebretur,-  a  Roma  autem  con-
dita  dcccclxxxxi.  et  quidem  ex
Palilibus,  unde  urbis  anni  nu-
merantur.  Eorum  vero  anno-
rum quibus  Julianis  nomen  est
cclxxxiij.  sed  ex  die  Kal.  Jan.
unde  Julius  Csesar  annis  a  se
constitui  fecit  principium.  At
eorum  qui  vocantur  anni  Au-
gustani  cclxv  perinde  Kal.  Jan.
et  ante  diem  xvj  Kal.  Februarii
Ju.  Caesar,  divi  filius  imperator
Augustus,  sententia  Numatii
Planci  a  senatu  caeterisque  ci-
vibus  appellatus  est,  se  septi-
mum  et  M.  Vipsano  Agrippa
Consulibus.


chronicles  and  annals  of  difter-
ent  states,  calculating  the  in-  .
tervals  wanted,  or  to  be  added
by  reckoning  them  backwards,
has  at  length  arrived  at  the
truth,  and  brought  it  to  light.
So  that  not  only  a  determinate
number  of  years,  but  even  of
days  can  be  set  forth.

According  to  which  calcula-
tions, unless  1  am  greatly  de-
ceived, the  present  year,  whose
name  and  title   is  that  of  the
consulships  of  Ulpius  and  Pon-
tianus,  is  from  the  first  Olym-
piad    the    1014th,    reckoning
from    the    summer,    at   which
time  of  the  year  the  Olympic
games  are  celebrated ;  but  from
the  foundation  of  Rome  it  is  the
991st;  but  this  is  from  the  Pa-
lilia  (21st  April),  from  which
the  years,  ab  urhe  condita,  are
reckoned.     But  of  those  years,
which    are    called    the    Julian
years,  it  is  the  283d,  reckoning
from  the  Kalends  of  January,
from  which  day  of  the  year  Ju-
lius Caesar  ordered  the  begin-
ning of  the  year  to  be  reckon-
ed.    But  of  those  years  which
are  called  the  Augustan  it  is
the  2 65  til,  reckoning  also  from
the  Kalends  of  January  of  that
year,  in  which,  upon  the  16th
of  the   Kalends    of  February


Sed  iEgyptii  qui  biennio  ante
in  potestatem  ditionemque  Po-
puli  Romani  venerunt,  habent
Augustorum  annorum  cclxviii.
nam  ut  a  nostris  ita  ab  iEgyptiis
quidam  anni  in  litteras  relati
sunt,  ut  quos  Nabonnagarii  no-
minant,  qui  a  primo  imperii  ejus
anno  consurgant,  quorum  hie
dcccclxxxvi  est;


Item  Philippi  qui  ab  excessu
Alexandri  magni  numerantur,
et  ad  hucusque  perducti  annos
dlxii  consumant.  Sed  horum
initia  semper  a  die  primo  men-
sis  ejus  summuntur,  cui  apud
iEgyptios  nomen  est  Thoth,
quoque  hie  anno  fuit  ante  diem
vij  Kal.  Julii  cum  ab  hinc  annos
centum  Ulpio  et  Brutio  presente
Romae  conss.  iidem  dies  fue-
runt  ante  diem  xii  Kal.  August,
quo  tempore  solet  Canicula  in
^gypto  facere  exortum.  Quare
scire  etiam  licet  anni  illius  mag-


(15th),  the  son  of  Divus  Julius
Caesar  was  saluted  Emperor
and  Augustus,  on  the  motion  of
Numatius  Plancus,  by  the  se-
nate and  the  rest  of  the  citizens
in  the  consulship  of  himself  for
the  seventh  time,  and  M.  Vip-
sanus  Agrippa.

But  the  Egyptians,  who  two
years  before  had  been  reduced
under  the  dominion  of  the  Ro-
man people,  reckon  268  Au-
gustan years :  for  by  the  Egyp-
tians, in  like  manner  as  by
ourselves,  certain  years  are  re-
corded, and  they  call  their  era
the  Era  of  Nabonnagarius,  and
their  years  are  calculated  from
the  first  year  of  his  reign,  of
whicli  years  the  present  is  the
986th.

The  Philippic  years  also  are
used  among  them,  and  are  cal-
culated from  the  death  of  Alex-
ander the  Great,  and  from
thence  to  the  present  time  562
years  have  elapsed.  But  the
beginning  of  these  years  are
always  reckoned  from  the  first
day  of  that  month,  which  is
called  by  the  Egyptians  Thoth,
which  happened  this  year  upon
the  7th  of  the  Kalends  of  July,
(25th  of  June);  for  a  hundred
years  ago  from  the  present  year
of  the  consulship  of  Ulpius  and


328


CHRONOLOGICAL  AND


ASTRONOMICAL  FRAGMENTS.


329


I


ni  qui  ut  supra  dictum  est  So-
laris et  canicularis  et  trieteris
vocatur,  nunc  agi  vertentem
annum  centessimum.


Initia  autem  istorum  anno-
rum  propterea  notavi,  ne  quis
nesciat  voluntates  quae  non  mi-
nus diversae  sintquam  opiniones
Philosophorum.  Idcirco  aliis  a
novo  sole,  id  est  a  brumali,  ab
aestivo  solstitio  plerisque  ab
aequinoctio  verno  partim  ab  au-
tumnali  aequinoctio,  quibusdam
ab  ortu  Vergiliarum,  nonnullis
ab  earum  occasu,  multis  a  Canis
exortu  incipere  annus  naturalis
videtur.


Brutius,  the  same  fell  upon  the
12th  of  the  Kalends  of  August
(2 1st  July),  on  which  day  Ca-
nicula  regularly  rises  in  Egypt.
Whence  we  know  that  of  this
great  year  which  was  before
mentioned  under  the  name  of
the  Solar  Canicular  or  Trieteris,
by  which  it  is  commonly  called,
the  present  current  year,  must
be  the  100th.

I  have  been  careful  in  point-
inir  out  the  commencement  of  all
these  years  lest  any  one  should
not  be  aware  of  the  customs  in
this  respect,  which  are  not  less
various  than  the  opinions  of  the
Philosophers.  It  is  commenced
by  some  with  the  new  Sun,  that
is  at  the  winter  solstice,  by
many  at  the  summer  solstice ;
others  again  reckon  from  the
vernal  or  from  the  autumnal
equinox.  Some  also  begin  the
year  from  the  rising  or  setting
of  Vergilia  (Pleides),  but  many
from  the  rising  of  the  Dogstar.


OF  THE  NERUS:


FROM  JOSEPHUS.


EIIEITA  xa«  81'  ap€rrjv  xaJ  WHEREFORE  on  account  of  their  vir-
T1JV  evyjf-ntrviavy  uv  €7r6voW,  tue,  as  well  as  for  the  perfection  of
otvt^okvytaq  %ai  yco/Acrp/a^,     the  arts  of  astronomy  and  geometry.


nUov  ^y  rh  0(ov  avroiq  ira-  which  they  invented,  God  permitted
^avyjuv,  aitep  oux  Iqv  aatpa-  them  (the  Patriarchs)  a  longer  life :
X5?  avrolq  'KpoeiTreTv,  [xvj  ^ij-  inasmuch  as  they  would  have  been
a-aa-iv  c  Jaxo(r/oy<  inavrovi'  ha  incapable  of  predicting  any  thing  with
Toa-ovToy  yap  0  jw-eya^  inavro^  certainty,  unless  they  lived  six  hun-
%\v)povTat,  dred  years :  for  such  is  the  period  of

the  completion  of  the  great  year. —

Jos,  Ant,  lib  I.  c.  3.


OF  THE  SARUS:


FROM  SUIDAS.


2AP0I.  [Atrpoy  xai  &pi^yi.ot;  Sarus  :  a  measure  and  number  among

wapaXaXWo*?,  olya/j/jKo-a-  the  Chaldaeans:    for  120  Sari,  make

poty  irmva-iv  iviavToU  3<tvl^\  2222  years.      Each  Sarus  is  there-

oi  ylvovtai  ir{  inavroi  xa)  fore  equal  to  18  years  and  6  months.

l^ivai  ef.  '  — Suid.  V.  Sarus,


OF  THE  RISING  OF  THE  DOGSTAR:


FROM  THEON  ALEXANDRINUS.


nEPI   rijq  TOW  xwoj  iitiToX^i
inro^eiyiAa.*

*ETtl  ToiJ  p'  erov^  AiOxXajT^a-
vov  irep)  T-^q  tov  ycvvoq  €7riToXij<;
v»o8<t7/xaTO<  cvexcv  Xafx^dvo-
fjiev  ra  aito  Mevo^^w?  €&,•?  tiJ^


Formula   to  find  the  rising  of  the
Dogstar,

For  example,  if  we  would  find  the
rising  of  the  Dogstar  in  the  100th
year  of  Diocletianus,  we  take  the
years  of  Menophres  to  the  end  of
the  era  of  Augustus.     These  years


•  The  treatise  containing  the  demonstration  of  this  rule,  I  believe  is  lost.

u  u


f .


330


CHRONOLOGICAL  FRAGMENTS.


itpoari^ovfji^v  ra  airo  rrjq  &p-
X^q  AioyiKyiTiayov  terti  p  yl-
vovrai  ofMv  ctij  ,a\j/€,  Tovtuv
Xafx^dvof/^v  TO  h  [MpOff  t
ia-n  x^f'.  Tot;TO<j  7cpo<rrf
S^evrf  $  i^fxepaq  irevTe,  yivovrai
v\a .  *Airo  rovruv  a^Xovreq
Taq  roT€  T€T/»a«Tijpi8a$  ova-aq
p^i  "koniov  ycaraXflicovrai  ^[Jt-i-
pan  Txy*  ravraq  axoMxrov
a/no  0«^  a ,  StSovre^  IxaaTy
/A)jv(  rifA€paq  X,  uq  €vpU€(r^ai

TT/y   ^TTIToXr/l/    ^ffi    TOl/jJ    AiO-

xXijTiayoS  *Eir<^»  x^'.  'OfAotaq


summed  up  are  1 605  ;  to  which  if  we
add  the  100  years  from  the  beginning
of  the  reign  of  Diocletianus,*  we  have
1705.  Let  us  take  the  fourth  part  of
these,  that  is  426,  and  taking  them
as  daysj-j-  add  to  them  5  more,  and
they  become  431.  From  these  deduct
the  quadrienniums,  which  are  102,
and  there  will  remain  329  days.  Dis-
tribute these  into  months  of  30  days
each,  from  Thoth,  the  first  day  of  the
year,  and  it  will  thus  be  found  that
the  rising  of  the  Dogstar  in  the  100th
year  of  Diocletianus,  falls  upon  the
29th  of  Epiphi.  Use  the  same  rule
for  any  other  time. — MS,  Ex  cod,
teg.  Gall,  gr.  No.  2390,  fol.  154.


♦  The  era  of  Diocletianus  was  a  new  era,  which  succeeded  that  of  Augustus,
f  The  fourth  part  or  number  of  leap  years  gives,  of  course,  the  number  of
intercalated  days,  426.
J  Qy.  ToD  ('.


AN


INQUIRY


INTO  THE


METHOD,  OBJECTS,  AND  RESULT


OF


ANCIENT   AND   MODERN  PHILOSOPHY,


AND  INTO


THE  TRINITY  OF  THE  GENTILES.


flfc


PHILOSOPHICAL  INQUIRY.


In  the  Introductory  Dissertation  I  have  ventured  to  offer  some
speculations  upon  the  Trinity  and  Theology  of  the  Gentiles,
which  differ  widely  from  the  opinions  of  almost  all  who  have
written  upon  the  subject;  I  would  therefore  lay  before  the  reader
such  grounds  for  the  opinion  as  have  induced  me  to  adopt  it.
But  I  find  it  impossible  to  do  so  without  instituting  a  short  com-
parative inquiry  into  the  method,  objects  and  result  of  the  an-
cient and  modern  systems  of  Philosophy;  and  I  trust  it  will  not
be  deemed  misplaced,  for  I  conceive  that  in  the  neglected  writings
of  the  ancients  there  lies  concealed  a  mine  of  metaphysical  know-
ledge of  such  practical  utility  as  would  amply  repay  the  trouble
of  opening  it  again.

If  we  were  to  ask,  what  was  conceived  to  be  the  great  engine
of  invention  and  discovery  among  the  ancients,  it  is  highly  pro-
bable we  should  be  answered  that  it  was  Syllogism ;  and  if  we
were  to  ask  the  same  question  relative  to  modern  science,  we
should  be  unhesitatingly  assured  that  it  was  Induction ;  and  pos-
sibly at  the  same  time  we  might  be  told,  that  the  method  of  the
ancients  was  something  worse  than  useless.  Yet,  when  we  come
to  consider,  that  in  all  ages  human  nature  has  been  the  same,  and
that  such  admirable  productions  have  been  the  result  of  human
effort  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  we  shall  find  reason  to
suspect  that  the  methods  of  discovery,  or  the  tools  really  used  in
all  ages,  have  been  much  alike,  though  their  names  may  have  been


33i


rillLOSOPHICAL


INQUIRY.


SS5


misapplied,  or  they  may  have  been  used  without  having  had  any
distinct  appellations  assigned  them.

By  the  Inductive  method  we  are  supposed  to  go  about  to
collect,  by  experience  and  observation,  all  the  facts  and  circum-
stances within  our  reach,  relative  to  the  subject  in  hand.  We
must  examine  them  in  every  light,  compare  their  similarities,  and
mark  their  differences ;  we  must  reject  whatever  does  not  properly
relate  to  the  subject,  and  conclude  upon  the  affirmatives  that  are
left.  By  these  means,  from  the  individuals  we  rise  to  some
general  proposition,  and  we  rest  assured  in  its  truth  as  proved
experimentally.

To  take  a  common  instance  :  A  child  that  has  been  burnt  by
a  flame  naturally  expects  the  saine  result  from  the  same  cause ;
indeed  he  is  said  to  feel  sure  of  it  from  experience :  and  in  the
expectation  of  the  same  result  from  similar  causes,  he  is  said  to
reason  by  a  species  of  Induction,  though  not  founded  on  an  en-
larged experience.  But  by  trying  experiments  upon  all  objects
which  have  the  appearance  of  flame,  he  would  learn  to  distinguish
such  as  are  hurtful  from  such  as  are  otherwise,  and  excluding
those  that  are  harmless,  he  arrives  at  the  conclusion,  that  all  such
objects  of  a  particular  kind  are  hurtful.

Now,  in  this  statement  of  the  process,  it  appears  to  me  that
two  very  different  instruments  are  used  ;  the  first  of  which  seems
to  be  Analogy,  ayaXo^/a,  a  reasoning  upwards  from  the  known  to
the  unknown,  the  great  instrument  of  Invention  and  Generaliza-
tion, which  provides,  as  it  were,  subjects  for  the  exercise  of  In-
duction ;  which  Induction,  eVayoTij,  seems  to  be  rather  the  col-
lection and  examination  of  experiments,  and  the  drawing  a  con-
clusion therefrom;  and  as  this  conclusion  cannot  be  extended
beyond  what  is  warranted  by  the  experiments,  the  Induction  is
an  Instrument  of  Proof  and  Limitation.     A  person  that  has  been
burnt  by  a  flame  is  positively  certain  that  he  will  be  burnt  again
if  he  try  it ;  he  argues  only  from  same  to  same,  and  is  sure  of  it
by  experience;  and  it  is  upon  this  innate  natural  expectation  that
all  physical  science  is  founded.     By  analogy  he  argues  that  all
flames  will  burn  him,  he  argues  from  like  to  likey  he  generalizes


and  draws  an  inference;  and  I  conceive  it  is  by  this  analogical
reasoning  that  all  science  is  advanced.  The  inference  which  he
thus  draws  a  priori,  is  merely  an  hypothesis,  lito'^ta-iq,  a  supposi-
tion, probable  indeed,  but  far  from  satisfactory.  But  when  he
brings  it  to  the  proof  by  induction,  and  collects  experiments,  he
either  confutes,  proves,  or  limits  this  hypothesis  to  something
not  quite  so  general.

This  analogical  reasoning,  when  it  is  extended  only  from  in-
dividual to  individual  of  the  same  species,  is  commonly  called
experience,  and  not  analogy ;  and  from  the  perfect  uniformity  of
nature,  perhaps  not  improperly :  thus,  we  say,  we  know  by  eX'
perience  that  all  stones  gravitate  to  the  earth.  But  when  we  ex-
tend it  from  species  to  species  of  the  same  genus,  it  is  analogy
properly  so  called.  If  from  the  gravitation  all  stones  we  reason
to  that  of  apples,  we  reason  by  analogy,  from  like  to  like ;  we
obtain  a  probable  conclusion,  not  satisfactory  till  experiment  be
directed  to  the  point,  and  it  be  proved.  Having  thus  included
apples  as  well  as  stones,  we  may  proceed  from  one  species  to
another  by  the  same  process  of  analogy  and  proof,  till  all  bodies
upon  the  surface  of  the  earth  be  included  under  the  general  law
of  gravitation,  whence  we  may  rise  to  more  general  propositions.
And  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  such  has  been  the  common  pro-
cess of  discovery  in  all  ages  of  the  world.

When  Sir  I.  Newton,  from  the  fall  of  an  apple,  was  led  to
the  consideration  of  the  moon's  gravity,  he  is  said  to  have  made
the  discovery  by  Induction ;  which  is  true  as  far  as  the  proof  of
it  went.     But  it  is  manifest,  that  at  first  he  merely  formed  a  pro-
bable hypothesis  by  Analogy,  and  then  laboriously  brought  it  to
the  test  of  observation ;  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  hy-
pothesis he  formed  was,  that  the  moon  gravitated  to  the  earth
with  a  constant  force,  instead  of  a  force  varying  inversely  as  the
square  of  the  distance ;  which  most  likely  was  the  result  of  an-
other hypothesis,  after  he  had  proceeded  so  far  as  to  ascertain
that  she  did  really  gravitate,  but  not  according  to  the  law  pre-
sumed.

When  Harvey  observed  the  valves  in  the  veins  he  is  com-


\


■J5,


336


PHILOSOPHICAL


monly  said  to  have  made  the  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the
blood,  by  reasoning  from  Final  causes,  or  by  asking  of  nature  for
what  purpose  such  valves  could  be  intended :  but  perhaps  he
might  have  asked  the  question  for  ever,  unless  the  analogy  be-
tween the  valve  and  that  of  a  pump  had  suggested  a  plausible
hypothesis,  which  he  proved  by  repeated  experiments  directed  to

the  point.

Analogy,  so  much  slighted  and  overlooked,  and  to  which  such
an  inferior  part  in  the  advancement  of  science  has  been  assigned,
and  that  too  with  so  much  suspicious  caution,  appears  to  be  the
great  instrument  of  generalization  and  invention  by  which  hy-
potheses are  supplied,  which  are  most  commonly  the  subjects  for
the  exercise  of  Induction.     By  Induction,  as  usually  understood,
we  make  it  a  rule  to  exclude  all  hypotheses  :  first  of  all,  we  col-
lect the  experiments,  and  having  obtained  these,  we  are  next  to
examine  them  and  compare  them ;  we  reject  the  irrelative  and
negative,  and  conclude  upon  the  affirmatives  that  are  left.    By  this
means,  says  Lord  Bacon,  we  question  nature,  and  conclude  upon
her  answers :  yet  I  would  venture  to  suggest,  that,  ninety-nine
times  out  of  a  hundred,  the  Analogy  or  comparison  precedes
the  collection  of  the  experiments ;  some  resemblance  is  observed,
some  hypothesis  is  started,  which  is  the  subject  that  is  brought  to
the  test  of  Induction.    By  this  the  hypothesis  is  either  proved,  or
confuted,  or  more  commonly  limited  to  something  less  general.
I  would  not  be  understood  to  assert  that  the  common  inductive
method  is  barren,  for,  no  doubt,  discoveries  are  sometimes  so
made ;  but  thousands  and  thousands  of  inventions  are  brought
into  play,  the  result  merely  of  analogy  and  a  few  experiments,  or
a  single  experimentum  crucis.    By  the  common  method  proposed
we  take  too  wide  a  range,  we  embrace  the  whole  subject  at  once,
and  require  the  completion  of  its  natural  history,  but  by  the
proper  use  of  Analogy  as  a  guide,  we  step  cautiously  but  from
one  species  to  the  next.

Induction  has  two  instruments  of  operation ;  Experiment  for
all  things  within  our  reach,  and  Observation  for  those  beyond  us.
And  of  these  Observation  is  less  efficient  than  Experiment,  for  it


INQUIRY.


337


IS  comprehended  in  it.  By  Induction  without  Analogy  we  first
ask  innumerable  irrelative  and  impertinent  questions  of  nature,
and  then  make  use  of  Observation  upon  the  experiments  in  hand;
but  by  Induction  with  Analogy  we  try  Experiments  for  a  specific
purpose,  and  obtain  specific  answers  to  the  point.

Having  thus  obtained  a  general  law  or  fact  for  an  entire
genus,  we  may  proceed  in  the  same  manner  from  this  genus  to
the  next,  till  the  whole  order  be  included  under  the  same  or
some  more  general  law  :  thus  at  length  we  may  arrive  at  certain
most  general  laws,  beyond  which  it  may  not  be  within  our  power
to  proceed.  And  the  progress  of  science  in  the  ascending  scale
consists  in  rising  from  Individuals  to  Generals  and  Universals.

Having  obtained  these  general  laws  or  universals,  from  them
we  may  extend  discovery  in  what  may  be  termed  the  descending
scale :  and  here  Syllogism,  in  its  common  acceptation,  has  its
use.  Thus,  in  the  science  of  mixed  Mathematics,  having  obtained
certain  general  laws,  physical  facts,  &c.,  these,  with  the  common
principles  of  pure  mathematics,  serve  as  data  from  which  mathe-
matical discovery  may  be  extended  downwards.  Every  mathe-
matical demonstration  by  Synthesis  is  no  other  than  a  chain  of
Syllogism.  And  as  an  instrument  of  invention  Syllogism  may  in
this  case  supply  corollaries ;  as  in  the  former.  Induction  might  yield
discoveries  without  the  help  of  analogy.  Yet  a  very  slight  con-
sideration will  show,  that  here  also  Analogy  is  the  great  engine  of
invention  by  which  hypotheses  or  suppositions  are  supplied;
and  that  in  the  descending  scale  Syllogistic  Demonstration,  as
Induction  in  the  ascending,  is  the  grand  instrument  for  confuting,
proving,  or  limiting  those  hypotheses.

But  among  the  ancients  Syllogism  is  said  to  be  the  great  en-
gine of  discovery :  and  though  I  have  not  had  sufficient  oppor-
tunities of  investigating  the  truth  of  the  supposition,  it  has  often
struck  me,  that  by  the  Syllogistic  method  the  ancients  meant
neither  more  nor  less  than  this  combination  of  Analogy  and  Proof;
and  that  the  method  of  reasoning  from  Individuals  to  Universals,
was  supposed  to  be  conducted  by  Syllogism  no  less  than  from
Universals  downwards.     Aristotle  expressly  informs  us  that  we


i


X  X


338


PHILOSOPHICAL


can  learn  nothing  but  by  Induction  or  Demonstration ;  by  De-
monstration from  universals  to  particulars,  i.  e.  in  the  descending
scale ;  by  Induction  from   particulars  to  universals,   or  in  the
ascending  scale.    Hence,  says  he,  a  person  who  is  defective  in  any
of  his  senses  cannot  use  Induction,  and  therefore  cannot  theorize
to  Universals,  or  by  abstraction  obtain  general  propositions,  hence,
also,  his  progress  in  the  scale  of  Demonstration  must  be  equally
defective  with  his  data.     Now  if  the  Syllogistic  method  was  held
to  be  the  only  method  of  discovery  among  the  ancients,  and  this
method  was  a  process  of  reasoning  from  known  to  unknown,  I
conceive  that,  in  this  respect,  the  terms  must  have  a  more  com-
prehensive signification  than  is  generally  allowed.*     Though  I
can  find  nothing  to  warrant  the  supposition,  that  they  accurately
divided  their  Syllogistic  method  into  Analogy  and  Induction  in
the  ascending  scale,  and  into  Analogy  and  Demonstration  in  the
descending  scale ;  yet  I  think  they  imagined,  as  has  generally
been  the  case  in  modern  times,  that  by  their  method  they  went
precisely  to  the  point,  and  no  further;  instead  of  going  something
beyond  it  by  too  extensive  a  generalization,  as  we  are  led  by
Analogy,  and  then  retracting  to  the  point  determined  by  the
Proof.

The  great  abuse  of  Analogy  is  resting  in  its  hypotheses  with-
out bringing  them  to  the  test,  and  building  systems  upon  such
hypotheses  ;  and  it  is  a  fault  of  modern,  as  well  as  of  ancient  phi-
losophers. But  when  we  consider  the  Eleatic  or  Dialectic  method
of  examining  any  proposed  hypothesis  or  idea,  explained  by  Plato
in  the  beginning  of  the  Parmenides,  we  shall  find  the  rules  of
examination  as  strict,  and  perhaps  more  comprehensive,  than  any
method  that  has  been  suggested  in  modern  times.-j-


•  Some  papers,  entitled  Vindiciae  Antiquae,  in  the  Classical  Journal,  throw
some  light  upon  this  subject,  though  I  cannot  concur  with  the  author  of  them  in
his  opinions  of  the  perfection  of  ancient  science,  much  less  in  his  abuse  of  modern
philosophers.

f  The  method  is  this — Either,  I.,  The  subject  is,  as  it  is  supposed  ;  or  II.,
it  is  not.  On  the  first  supposition  that  it  is  so,  we  must  examine  what  happens —
1st.  To  it  with  respect  to  itself:  2d.  To  it  with  respect  to  all  other  things:
3rd.  To  all  other  things  with  respect  to  it :     4th.  To  all  other  things  with  re-


INQUIRY.


339


Another  more  fatal  abuse  of  Analogy  is  arguing  from  indi-
viduals to  genera,  or  from  genus  to  genus,  when  these  genera  are
too  remote  ;  which  is  skipping  to  generalities  instead  of  cautiously
proceeding  from  species  to  species.  But  the  most  dangerous  of
all  is  arguing  from  Matter  to  Mind,  between  which  there  is  no
natural  similarity.  Thus,  the  common  supposition  of  the  Mind  de-
termined by  motives,  as  a  balance  swayed  by  weights  is  false;  for
so  far  from  arguing  from  like  to  like,  from  species  to  species,  we
argue  not  even  from  genus  to  genus  in  the  most  remote  degree,
but  from  one  thing  to  its  contrary ;  false,  also,  in  as  much  as  the
motive  is  a  final  cause,  and  the  weight  an  antecedent.  This  ob-
jection, however,  to  the  use  of  Analogy  may  be  pushed  too  far :
but  of  the  proper  use  of  such  reasoning  we  have  an  example  m
one  of  the  finest  metaphysical  works  in  the  English  language,

Butler's  Analogy.

I  would  observe,  also,  the  great  laxity  in  the  significations  of
the  word  Theory.  It  is  sometimes  used  for  a  general  law  or
principle  obtained  by  Induction,  and  as  something  almost  sy-
nonymous with  hypothesis.  In  this  view  it  might  be  looked  upon
as  a  proved  hypothesis ;  in  its  other  and  more  general  significa-
tion it  implies  the  chain  of  reasoning  from  general  laws  and  prin-
ciples, and  sometimes  the  result  of  such  a  chain.  Its  real  sig-
nification seems  to  be  the  Survey  itself*  In  the  descending
scale  the  result  of  the  survey  is  termed  a  Theorem,  Sre^p^/^a :  and
in  the  ascending  scale  the  general  law  obtained,  the  result  of  the
survey,  might  perhaps  likewise  be  termed  a  Theorem :  whilst


spect  to  themselves.  Four  similar  cases  will  result  when  we  examine  what  does
not  happen  ;  and  four  more,  when  we  examine  what  does,  and  at  the  same  time
does  not  happen.  Upon  the  supposition  that  it  is  so,  we  must  investigate  its  re-
lations in  all  their  bearings  ;  and  we  must  pursue  the  same  method  of  investiga-
tion upon  the  second  supposition,  that  it  is  not  so.  And  if  it  were  done  according
to  certain  categories,  a  more  thorough  investigation  could  not  possibly  be  devised :
and  the  method  is  equally  applicable  to  Experimental  philosophy  as  to  Intellec-
tual science.  For  a  method  of  obtaining  ideas  for  examination,  see  a  description
of  Socrates  among  some  hopeful  pupils  in  one  of  the  comedies  of  Aristophanes.

•  See  an  excellent  paper    upon    the  subject  in   Blackwood's    Magazine,
August,  1830.


i


340


PHILOSOPHICAL


the  Theory,  ^€(k,pia,  the  Survey  itself,  may  be  taken  for  the  whole
chain,  which,  as  it  proceeds,  every  now  and  then,  as  it  were,  de-
posits these  theorems.  From  one  or  more  general  laws  or  data
we  deduce  certain  results  or  theorems,  such  as  the  different  ex-
pressions for  the  range,  velocity  &c.  of  a  shot,  in  the  theory  of
Projectiles  :  and  each  of  these  expressions  would  be  practically,
as  well  as  theoretically  true,  but  for  the  innumerable  other  cir-
cumstances to  be  taken  into  consideration.  It  is  therefore  only
an  approximation  to  practical  truth.  From  a  certain  other
set  of  general  laws  we  deduce  a  theory  of  Resistances,  and  by  a
combination  of  these  two  Theories  we  approximate  still  nearer  to
practical  truth.  And  by  adding  theory  to  theory  relative  to  the
powder,  form,  texture,  elasticity,  &c.  of  the  shot,  climate,  &c.  &:c.
and  other  circumstances,  we  might  still  nearer  approximate.*  And
all  these  Theories  taken  together  might  be  termed  the  Theory  of
Gunnery.

An  Hypothetical  system  differs  from  a  Theory  as  does  an
Hypothesis  from  a  General  law  or  Fact,  and  is  dependant  upon
Hypotheses  instead  of  Facts  ;  and  its  productions  are  of  the  same
description.

•  It  13  utterly  impossible,  upon  the  surface  of  this  earth,  by  Theory,  to  ar-
rive at  practical  results,  even  in  the  most  simple  of  all  practical  sciences,  Me-
chanics ;  particularly,  as  it  sometimes  happens,  when  the  results  of  each  Theory,
instead  of  being  Theorems,  are  themselves  merely  approximations.  Of  this  the
ancients  were  perfectly  aware,  for  both  in  ascending  and  descending,  they  ex-
cluded the  individuals,  as  objects  of  sense  and  not  of  science.  Much  less  is
it  possible  in  Politics,  or  any  other  moral  or  intellectual  science;  where  not
only  so  few  general  laws,  universals,  or  data,  are  ascertained,  but  the  springs
of  action  are  so  manifold  and  various,  independently  of  the  free-will  and  per-
versity of  the  individuals,  that  human  intellect  can  scarcely  hope  to  form  even
a  likely  approximation  to  the  truth.  The  speculative  philosopher,  as  is
justly  observed  by  Stewart,  possesses  a  fund  of  knowledge,  invaluable  in  all
untried  cases,  which  will  guide  him  a  certain  way  in  approximation  to  the
truth.  But  if  he  suppose  that  such  theoretical  principles  are  applicable  to  prac-
tice, of  course  he  fails  in  every  instance,  and  produces  nothing  but  confusion  and
mischief;  of  which  the  state  of  this  kingdom,  at  this  moment,  is  a  most  lament-
able proof:  and  the  probable  result  of  persevering  in  such  a  course  cannot  be
contemplated  without  the  utmost  alarm,  the  more  anxiously,  as  many  of  the
systems  still  acted  on  are  not  true  theories,  but  are  built  upon  false  principles  and
are  merely  hypothetical  systems.


'f-


INQUIRY.


341


Thus  far  I  have  spoken  of  the  Method  of  proceeding,  and  I
have  used  the  terms  Laws,  Facts,  Universals,  and  the  like,  in
their  common  acceptation.  But  these  terms  are  so  confounded
with  each  other  and  with  Causes  and  Effects,  that  w^e  scarcely
know  what  we  are  in  search  of;  and  some  of  the  ablest  views  of
Bacon's  Novum  Organum  have  become  almost  as  much  lost  to
the  world,  as  have  some  of  the  very  finest  speculations  of  the
ancients.  I  would  therefore  say  a  few  words  upon  the  Objects
or  Aim  of  science.

Causation  is  a  subject  upon  which  there  is  a  strange  mis-
understanding between  the  ancients  and  moderns.  By  the  word
Cause  the  ancients  appear  to  have  understood  that  without  the
co-operation  of  which  no  sensible  phaenomenon  could  be  pro-
duced :*  and  they  divided  Causes  into  the  Efficient,  the  Formal,
the  Material,  and  the  Final.  And  this  division  was  excellent,
and  in  perfect  keeping  with  a  system  which  held  a  Soul  of  the
world  as  the  prime  mover  of  Efficient  causes.  The  Final  cause
or  ultimate  object  and  end  of  every  action,  I  shall  dismiss  without
further  consideration,  as  less  properly  a  cause  than  a  motive,
and  equally  admitted  in  all  systems  in  which  nothing  is  referred
to  chance,  and  as  unconnected  with  the  Physical  subject  I  have
now  in  hand.

This  division  of  causes  has  been  supposed  to  be  superseded
among  the  moderns ;  and,  since  the  time  of  Hume,  by  the  word
Cause  they  seem  sometimes  to  understand  the  Bond  of  connexion
between  one  event  and  its  preceding ;  and  in  this  view  it  is  as-
serted that  no  causes  of  things  have  ever  been  discovered ;  and
that  science  lies  not  in  the  discovery  of  causes,  but  only  in  the
discovery  of  the  facts  and  general  laws  of  nature ;  and  the  same


4


•  See  the  67ih  epistle  of  Seneca,  wherein  he  explains  the  common  and
Platonic  division  of  causes,  and  unjustly  arraigns  both,  because  he  conceives
Space,  Time,  and  Motion,  ought  to  be  included.  Motion,  however,  is  included
in  the  Efficient  Cause,  and  Space  and  Time  are  but  the  measures  of  that  motion,
and  the  Law  of  the  Motion,  when  strictly  limited  and  defined,  involves  conside-
ration of  the  measure  only,  and  of  nothing  else.


'14


,  £:i^^iiii^i^^m


fti- f^  c~.r:"-t-s^'^  *--"r/


■-^^


342


PHILOSOPHICAL


INQUIRY.


343


assertion  is  likewise  made,  because  no  one  can  pretend  to  have
discovered  the  first  of  secondary  causes.     In  another  view  the
Cause  is  looked  upon  as  implying  nothing  more  than  an  ante-
cedent phcenomenon,  and  that  these  phaenomena,  under  the  names
of  Cause  and  Effect,  are  continued  in  an  endless  chain  of  suc-
cessive connexions.      For  example,  when  we  hear  a  clock  strike,
if  we  attend  to  the  chains  of  successive  causes — to  go  no  farther
back — they  may  be  traced  in  the  stroke  of  the  hammer,  which
causes  the  vibration  of  the  bell,  which  causes  the  undulatory
movement  among  the  particles  of  the  air,  which  causes  a  vibratory
motion  on  the  organs  of  hearing  and  on  the  brain ;  a  certain  sensa-
tion follows,  and  the  soul  perceives  that  the  clock  has  struck.
Now,  for  the  production  of  this  ultimate  effect,  we  may  observe
not  only  one,  but  three  distinct  chains  of  what  the  ancients  would
call  Causes.     1st.  The  chain  of  the  material  substances  whose
matter  is  in  contact  with  one  another,  and  without  which  matter
the  phaenomenon  could  not  have  been  produced,  viz.  the  matter
of  the  hammer,  of  the  bell,  of  the  air,  of  the  auditorial  nerve,
of  the  sensorium,*  and  these  are  the  successive  Material  causes.
Again,  each  of  these  portions  of  matter  is  indued  with  certain
qualities,  without  which  also  the  effect  could  not  have  been  pro-
duced ;  and  these  depend  upon  what  the  ancients  would  call  the
form  J  and  they  consist  of  the  form,  texture,  elasticity,  vibratory
and  other  qualities  of  the  bell,  of  the  air,  nerve,  &c.    These  are  the
Formal  causes.     To  these  must  be   superadded  the  particular
accidents  by  which  they  are  affected,  viz.,  the  fall  of  the  ham-
mer, the  vibration  of  the  bell,  and  the  others,  by  which  motion  is
successively  communicated :   and  of  this  chain  of  causes  each
accident   is  nothing  else   than   motion,    modified  by  the  body
through  which  it  passes,  and  may  be  regarded  as  a  proximate
Efficient  cause.     In  this  phaenomenon,  therefore,  we  may  trace
the  Material,  Formal,  and  Efficient  Causes  of  the  ancients ;  all
which  are  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  effect :  and  we  may

*  I  use  the  term  as  Newton  uses  it,  and  not  as  Leibnitz  in  his  dispute  with
Clarke.


perceive  that  the  ancient  and  modern  doctrines  upon  the  subject
of  Causation  may  not  be  inconsistent  with  one  another :  but  we
must  carefully  distinguish  whether  the  Cause  be  defined  as  the
Accident  itself,  or  the  Instrument  affected  with  the  accident —
the  Vibration  of  the  bell,  or  the  Bell  in  the  act  of  vibrating.

Such  is  a  general  view  of  this  phaenomenon  :  but  we  may  ob-
serve still  something  more,  relating  to  that  Bond  of  connexion  which
has  been  so  great  a  stumbling-block  among  the  moderns.    When
we  come  more  narrowly   to   inspect    this    triplicated   chain  of
Causes,  between  each  link  there  is  a  joint,  if  I  may  so  call  it :
for  instance,  the  aggregate  motion  of  the  hammer  is,  in  the  bell,
converted  into  atomic  motion.     Now  this  cannot  be  performed
simultaneously,  though  the  manner  or  law  according  to  which  it
is  performed,  escapes  the  observation  of  our  senses.     This  is  the
Latens  Processus,  or  the  latent  process  which  Bacon  is  so  anxious
to  have  investigated  ;  and  it  is  often  noticed  among  the  ancients,
particularly  by  Plato  in  the  Parmenides  and  Phaedo.    The  Latens
Schematismus  of  Bacon,  the  latent  form  or  structure,  refers  to  the
latent  properties  of  the  bodies,  or  other  unknown  circumstances,
through  which  motion  is  communicated.     And  as  grosser  bodies
are  said  to  be  incapable  of  contact,  a  kind  of  Latens  Schematis-
mus at  every  joint  in  the  chain,  becomes  also  an  object  of  inquiry.
The  inquiry  into  the  Efficient  cause,  the  Matter,  the  latent  pro-
cess, and  the  latent  structure,  constitutes  Physics,  according  to  the
notions  of  Bacon ;  which  differs  but  little  from  the  ancient  doc-
trine.    But,  if  we  combine  the  two,  we  shall  have  Physical  science
to  consist  in  investigating  the  Nature  and  the  Continuity  of  the
Material,  Formal,  and  Efficient  causes,  together  with  the  Laws
according  to  which  the  chain  of  efficient  causes  is  propagated,
and  this,  not  only  in  the  Links  but  in  the  Joints.*    If  it  were  done

•  To  this  might  be  objected,  that  the  common  example  of  the  ancient  causes,
viz.  of  a  founder  casting  a  statue,  does  not  quadrate  with  what  I  have  advanced ;
for  in  the  example,  the  Efficient  cause  a  quo  is  the  Founder,  the  Material  ex  quo
is  the  brass,  the  Formal  in  quo  is  the  shape.  A  more  attentive  consideration,  how-
ever, will  show  that  it  is  only  a  particular  case  of  the  more  general  that  I  have
taken.      The  Platonists  added   to  the  above  the  Ideal  or   Exemplary  cause,


\


344


PHILOSOPHICAL


through  the  successive  links  only,  we  should  in  a  manner  have
perfected  the  grand  outline  of  science,  through  the  more  delicate
parts,  the  latent  processes^  and  forms^  and  substanceSy  at  the
joints,  which  constitute  the  bonds  of  connexion,  should  forever
be  concealed.     Yet  they  need  not  be  despaired  of.

If  it  should  be  asked  why  it  is  thus  to  be  presumed  a  priori,
that  this  triplicated  chain  of  causes  is  continued  throughout  na-
ture, the  only  answer  to  it  is  this, — that  in  every  branch  of  science
which  has  been  investigated,  and  is  thoroughly  understood,  such
is  the  case ;  and  as  we  can  only  reason  but  from  what  we  know,
we  reason  by  analogy,  from  this  known  to  the  unknown,  and
draw  a  strong  presumption  in  its  favour.  It  may  be  false,  and  it
cannot  be  proved  otherwise  till  all  science  is  perfected ;  but  the
burden  of  finding  and  demonstrating  an  exception  lies  with  its
opponents,  who  might  thus  confute  or  limit  it.

In  modern  experimental  Philosophy  it  is  often  laid  down  as  a
maxim,  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  the  only  proper  objects  of
human  inquiry :  and  all  investigation  of  causes  is  stifled  by  the
dogma  which  maintains,  that  human  nature  is  incapable  of  in-
vestigating their  nature — a  strange  fallacy,  which  seems  to  be  an
ignoratio  elenchi.  The  laws  of  nature,  or  general  facts,  as  they
are  called — under  which  obscure  expressions  are  often  included
the  qualities  of  bodies  as  well  as  their  matter  and  the  accidents
by  which  they  are  affected — may  be  sufficient  for  the  mathema-
tician, as  they  afford  the  data  from  which  his  propositions  may
depend.  He  can  rise  no  higher  than  his  data  ;  nor  is  it  within  the
compass  of  his  science  to  prove  any  simple  physical  proposition.*
In  the  brilliant  discoveries  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton  certain  general
laws  and  qualities  of  matter  gathered  by  induction,  together  with
the  common  principles  of  mathematics,  form  the  data  from  which
the  propositions  of  the  Principia  depend.     And  the  discoveries


iecundum  quod,  according  to  which  it  is  fashioned,  which  commonly  related  to
the  metaphysical,  and  not  to  the  physical  forms.  It  might  also  be  objected,  that
the  Vacuum,  Gravity  &c.  are  at  variance.     I  speak  of  them  presently.

•  We  often  meet  with  such  attempts:  all  the  mathematical  proofs  of  the
parallelogram  of  forces,  for  instance,  are  vicious,  and  merely  augments  in  a  circle.


INQUIRY.


345


deduced  by  mathematical  operations  may  be  pushed  on  by  his
successors  to  a  greater  degree  of  accuracy  and  approximation  to
the  truth  than  they  have  been  already,  yet  are  they  merely  de-
ductions and  links  in  the  descending  chain  and  calculations  of
effects.  But  among  the  data  themselves  is  where  we  must  look
for  any  great  advancement  of  science.

In  those  branches  of  science  which  have  attained  to  any  de-
gree of  perfection,  such  as  Mechanics,  Acoustics  and  some  others,
we  are  not  content  with  the  mere  fact,  but  we  attend  to  the  suc-
cessive links  in  the  chain  of  accident,  tracing  the  motion  whence  it
is  derived,  and  to  what  it  is  communicated;  and  investigating  also
the  law  according  to  which  it  is  propagated  :  and  we  trace  also  the
chain  of  being,  in  the  existence  and  contact  of  its  matter,  and  in
its  qualities  and  form,  as  in  the  example  of  the  Bell.  But,  not-
withstanding the  mighty  strides  which  modern  science  has  taken
in  the  Operative  division  of  Philosophy,  it  is  manifest  what  little
real  progress  has  been  made  in  the  Speculative  division  in  the
ascending  scale ;  though  every  step  therein  opens  almost  a  new
era  of  discovery.


I  will  now  turn  to  the  Result.  That  Matter  or  Substance,
by  which  Qualities  are  supported,  exists,  is  one  of  the  prime
articles  of  belief  among  mankind,  though  its  existence  can  only
be  inferred  from  the  qualities  which  it  upholds.  And  it  is  in  this
branch,  by  the  chemical  resolution  of  compound  substances  into
more  simple  substances,  that  science  has  of  late  years  made  its
greatest  advancement.

Chief  of  the  Qualities  of  Matter  were  resolved  by  the  ancients
into  its  Form :  and  by  the  union  of  Form  with  Matter  the  Sen-
sible world  was  supposed  to  be  produced.  As  I  endeavour  to
bring  forward  those  parts  only  of  the  ancient  philosophy  which
may  be  turned  to  account,  I  omit  mention  of  their  ingenious
metaphysical  speculations  upon  the  nature  of  Form  and  Matter,
Bound  and  the  Boundless,  and  shall  merely  observe  that  the
system  would  naturally  tend  to  resolve  all  the  qualities  of  Matter


Y   Y


/<_


i-r'nr"tfiiiiii


346


PHILOSOPHICAL


INQUIRY.


347


into  the  primary  ones  of  its  Extension,  Form,  and  the  absolute
Hardness  or  Impenetrability  of  its  component  parts,  substance,  or
atoms.*

Besides  the  obvious  formal  qualities  of  matter,  there  are  cer-
tain other  qualities,  which  may  be  termed  supposititious,  assumed
or  occult,'!'  inasmuch  as  the  words  Elasticity,  Colour,  Inertia,
Gravity,  and  many  others,  are  words  conventionally  assumed  to
express  some  unknown  causes  of  effects  which  have  been  traced
no  higher,  but  which  still  remain  desiderata  to  which  the  attention
of  science  should  be  directed ;  for  they  may  perhaps  be  resolved
into  some  immediate  formal  cause,  or  into  several  intermediate
links  in  the  chain  of  accidental  causes,  latent  processes  &c.  Sir
Isaac  Newton  thus  attempted  to  resolve  the  elasticity  of  Light,
as  far  as  it  concerned  Reflection,  into  a  latent  process,  the  at-
tractions of  a  fluid  upon  the  surfaces  of  bodies.


•  Of  the  ancients,  the  Epicureans  alone  are  supposed  to  have  held  the  exist-
ence of  atoms :  if  I  mistake  not,  the  Pytliagoreans  did  likewise,  though  not
such  a  wilful  democracy  of  Atoms  as  that  of  Epicurus ;  nor  am  I  aware  that  any
of  the  ancients  held  the  infinite  divisibility  of  matter.     Neither  of  these  opinions,
perhaps,  can  be  brought  to  the  test  of  proof,  we  can  rest  only  in  analogy ;  but  I
think  the  accuracy  of  the  results  and  calculations  upon  the  Atomic  Theory,
plainly  induce  us  to  prefer  the  atomic  opinion,  upon  the  same  grounds  that  our
faith  in  the  law  of  Gravitation  is  strengthened,  by  the  accuracy  with  which  the
Planetary  movements  coincide  with  their  calculated  courses,  i.  e.  it  rests  upon  ob-
servation.    The  conclusion  also,  drawn  by  analogy  in  favour  of  atoms,  from  a
substance,  always  dividing  and  compounding  at  the  same  angle,  is  far  superior  to
an  argument  drawn  from  the  infinite  divisibility  of  a  mathematical  line ;  inasmuch
as  it  is  a  fair  analogy  between  two  physical  propositions  :  the  latter  is  only  a  ma-
thematical illustration  of  a  physical  proposition  ;  they  are  not  at  all  of  the  same
kind  ;  the  subject  under  consideration  is  purely  material,  the  illustration  purely
ideal.    The  same  may  be  said  of  Euler's  ingenious  argument,  '*  AH  matter  is  endued
with  extension.     It  therefore  possesses  all  the  qualities  of  extension  :  one  of
which  is  infinite  divisibility."     For  it  does  not  follow  that  because  all  matter  is
endued  with  extension  in  the  concrete,  that  it  has  all  the  properties  of  extension
in  the  abstract ;  only  that  it  might  have  had,  if  it  had  pleased  God  to  make  it  so.
f  The  occult  qualities  of  Aristotle  are  not  the  nonsense  usually  fathered
upon  him ;  but  I  prefer  the  word  supposititious,  i.  e.  hypothetical,  not  only  to
avoid  offence,  but  in  better  keeping  with  what  I  have  written  upon  theory  and
hypothesis.


Again,  in  the  phaenomenon  of  Colour,  the  Metaphysical  dis-
tinction drawn  between  the  Sensation  and  Perception  by  the  Mind,
and  the  Quality  of  the  body,  which  was  the  cause  of  that  per-
ception, between  the  redness  with  which  the  senses  are  affected,
and  the  supposititious  quality  of  the  body,  which  so  operates  upon
light  as  to  produce  that  sensation  and  perception,  cleared  away
several  strange  incumbrances.     But  the  grand  discovery,  that
redness  or  any  other  colour  may  be  communicated  to  several
bodies  by  the  mere  alteration  of  their  superficial  texture,  has
gone  far  to  resolve  the  colouring  quality  into  the  texture  or  form
of  the  superficies,  and  to  merge  the  supposititious  and  conventional
quality  into  a  formal  cause,  one  of  the  primary  qualities  of  matter.
From  the  perception  of  colours  we  may  trace  the  chain  of  antece-
dent causes  of  Matter  and  Form  through  the  optic  nerve,  through
the  eye,  to  the  light,  to  the  coloured  body,  and  again  to  the  light.
And  we  may  trace  also  the  descending  chain  of  accidents  or  mo-
tion from  the  general  unmodified  motions  of  the  light,  as  first
admitted  into  a  chamber,  before  it  strikes  upon  the  body,  its
alteration  at  the  body,  every  point  of  which  becomes  a  centre
from  which  a  sphere  of  motion  is  propagated,  of  such  a  nature,
as,  when  passed  through  the  eye  and  optic  nerve,  to  produce  the
perception  of  colour.

In  England,  till  within  the  last  few  years,  the  Newtonian  hy-
pothesis of  Light  has  had  a  very  general  ascendancy ;  but  at  pre-
sent that  o£  Huygens  bids  fair  entirely  to  supplant  it.  From  the
similarity  which  obtains  in  nature  between  one  fluid  and  another,
I  would  venture  to  suggest,  that  these  two  hypotheses  may  not
be  altogether  and  fundamentally  opposed,  but  are  capable  of  bein<y
reconciled,  at  least  in  part ;  and  that  light  has  not  only  a  pro-
gressivCf  but  a  vibratory  motion  also :  that  to  its  progressive
motion  are  to  be  attributed  the  phaenomena  of  brightness,  il-
lumination, shadow  and  some  instances  of  reflection :  and  that
upon  its  vibrations  depend  the  phaenomena  of  colour,  sight  and
the  like;  and  that  the  vibratory  motion  requisite  for  the  pro-
duction of  Vision,  is  caused  by  the  progressive,  reflected,  and
impeded  motion  of  the  sunbeams,  by  a.  change  from  the  aggre-


3iS


PHILOSOPHICAL


gate  progressive  motion  of  the  rays  into  the  atomic  vibrations  of
the  fluid.  Such  an  hypothesis  is  afforded  by  the  analogies  of  air
and  water,  in  their  progressive  motions  of  wind  and  streams,  and
in  their  vibratory  motions  of  sound  and  waves.  It  is  a  fair  hy-
pothesis, which,  if  it  be  confuted  when  brought  to  tlie  test  of  ex-
periment by  Induction,  may  afford  some  results  upon  which
something  more  plausible  may  be  offered.

The  most  remarkable  of  tlie  supposititious  qualities  of  Matter
are  Inertia,  Gravity,  and  Attraction.  The  conceptions  of  Sir
Isaac  Newton  upon  the  subject  of  Gravity  and  Attraction  are
perfectly  clear  and  defined.  He  uses  the  words — not  for  the
effect  itself,  as  Dr.  Clarke  in  his  controversy  with  Leibnitz  affirms
— not  for  any  inherent  quality  with  which  matter  may  be  endued
— nor  for  any  accidental  motion  with  which  it  may  be  affected  :
but  he  uses  them  merely  conventionally  for  the  antecedent  cause
of  the  effect  of  gravitation  :  whether  the  cause  be  a  formal  cause,
or  whether  it  be  motion  or  force  communicated  through  an  ante-
cedent chain  of  being,  or  whatever  it  may  be  hereafter  ascer-
tained. By  the  universal  effect  of  gravitation  or  the  tendency
itself,  proved  by  Induction  from  Experiment  and  Observation
upon  bodies  within  our  reach,  and  extended  by  Analogy  confirmed
by  Observation  to  the  celestial  bodies  and  those  which  are  beyond
us,  it  is  evident  that  such  a  cause  exists :  and  the  knowledge  of
its  existence,  and  of  the  laiv  according  to  which  it  acts,  are  suf-
ficient for  all  the  purposes  to  which  in  mathematics  it  can  be
applied.

Sir  Isaac  Newton  laid  down  as  one  of  the  rules  of  philoso-
phizing, that  no  other  causes  ought  to  be  introduced  than  such  as
are  true,  and  necessary  to  account  for  the  phajnomena.  And  he
followed  his  predecessors  in  maintaining  the  Inertia  of  Matter
as  exerted  in  the  first  law  of  motion,  as  an  inherent,  though'itmay
be  supposititious  quality.  But  to  account  for  the  undiminished
motions  of  the  planets  he  was  compelled  to  assert  a  Vacuum,  or
at  least  a  quasi  vacuum.  Yet  he  hesitated  to  maintain  Gravity
as  an  innate  quality  of  matter,  as  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  his
own  ideas  of  causation,  as  expressed  in  his  own  rule.    He  there-


INQUIRY.


349


fore  left  directions  to  succeeding  philosophers  to  seek  its  cause ;
and  pointed  out  as  a  fit  subject  for  speculation  an  hypothetical
subtile  ether,  with  which  the  supposed  vacuum  might  be  filled,
as  capable  of  supplying  the  deficient  links  in  the  chain  of  causa-
tion.     Many  of  his  professed  followers,   sufficiently  alive    to
the  physical  inconsistency,  hesitated  not  to  assert  the  absolute
vacuum,  and  gravitation  as  an  inherent  quality  of  matter ;  not  ad-
verting to  the  insuperable  metaphysical  difficulty  thus  introduced,
that  they  eventually  maintained  two  distinct  and  independent
chains  of  causation,  continually  crossing  each  other  and  assuming
each  other's  offices :  by  one  of  which  motion  was  communicated,
through  matter  in  contact,  by  impulse  and  vibration,  in  endless
succession  ;  and  by  the  other  through  vacuum  by  means  of  occult
qualities  commonly  so  called  ;  by  either  of  which  the  same  eflTects
might  be  produced.     Euler  and  most  foreign  philosophers,  more
sensible   of  the   real   difficulty  of  the  case,   rejected  without  a
scruple  such  a  version  of  Sir  I.  Newton's  opinions,  upon  the  ex-
press grounds,  that  two  secondary  causes  of  motion,  one  from
Inertia  the  other  from  Attraction,  were  utterly  incongruous  and
inadmissible :   and  such  has  generally  been  the  opinion  of  all
Metaphysicians.     Stewart,  equally  sensible  of  the  same  insuper-
able difficulty,  strangely  proposes  to  resolve  all  such  phsenomena
into  attractions  and  repulsions,  upon  the  principles  of  Boscovich.
But  I  shall  merely  observe,  that  the  experiments  from  which  it  is
deduced,  that  the  grosser  bodies  never  come  into  contact,  prove
it  only,  because  they  prove,  that  there  is  some  substance  inter-
vening.

If  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  Chain  o^  Accidents,  we  shall
find  that  it  consists  of  Motion,  which  implies  Force,  communi-
cated through  different  portions  of  the  material  world.  And
here  I  would  mark  a  distinction  in  the  word  Force  or  Power.
Where  motion  is  actually  produced,  the  Force  by  which  it  is  pro-
duced is  nothing  else  than  the  Momentum,  or  quantity  of  motion
communicated  from  one  body  to  another  in  a  connected  suc-
cession. But  there  is  often  a  Force  exerted  where  no  motion  is
actually  produced,  the  Force  being  counteracted  in  its  effect.    It


\


3d0


PHILOSOPHICAL


produces,  however,  a  continual  Stress  and  Endeavour,  and  is  the
Cause  of  a  continued  series  of  such  Stresses,  Endeavours  and
Tendencies  among  bodies  in  contact,  and  it  is  only  requisite  that
some  impediment  be  removed,  that  motion  may  take  effect.

All  motion  and  tendencies  may  perhaps  be  ultimately  traced
to  the  forces  of  Animals,  Gravity,  Inertia,  and  the  Etherial
powers  of  nature.

The  natural  or  common  motion  and  pressure  of  Water  is
evidently  resolvable  into  the  forces  of  Air,  Gravity  and  other
causes.  The  natural  or  common  motions  and  powers  of  the  Air
may  be  again  resolved  into  those  of  Gravity,  Elasticity  and  Heat.
Galvanism,  Electricity  and  certain  Chemical  phaenomena,  might
perhaps,  if  science  were  properly  directed  to  the  investigation,
with  little  difficulty  be  resolved  into  a  chain  of  varied  accident  or
motion  of  one  and  the  same  etherial  fluid,  of  which  fire  is  but
another  form  :  inasmuch  as  chief  part  of  the  results  appear  to
be  but  the  conversion  of  aggregate  into  some  species  of  atomic
motion,  and  the  reconversion  of  this  atomic  motion  into  aggre-
gate. The  phaenomena  of  Magnetism  might  perhaps  be  similarly
resolved.  Now  in  these  phaenomena  the  great  dispute  among
philosophers  does  not  so  much  concern  the  chain  of  accident  and
motion,  as  the  chain  of  being  through  which  the  accidents  are
propagated ;  whether  the  motion  be  communicated  through  the
grosser  particles  of  matter,  or  through  some  subtile  fluid  which
pervades  all  nature,  or  through  several  different  fluids  endowed
with  different  properties,  such  as  the  Galvanic,  Electric,  Mag-
netic and  other  fluids.  From  the  sameness  of  many  of  their
effects,  and  from  the  consideration  that  they  all  appear  equally
extended  throughout  the  universe,  if  we  should  presume  that
they  were  but  one  and  the  same  fluid,  we  should  start  an
hypothesis  indeed,  but  an  hypothesis  particularly  worthy  of  at-
tention, for  unless  such  be  the  case  we  shall  have  in  nature
several  fluids  co-extended  through  the  universe,  all  of  which  can
perform  each  other's  offices,  that  is  to  say,  several  different  causes
more  than  are  necessary  for  the  solution  of  the  phaenomena.

Gravity,  in  the  present  state  of  science,  is  an  anomaly  in


INQUIRY.


351


nature,  to  which  no  parallel  exists ;  for  we  are  acquainted  only
with  its  laws,  without  a  trace  of  the  antecedent  proximate  links
in  the  chains  of  Being,  and  Motion  or  Force.  I  have  before
observed,  that  a  Vacuum  is  purely  an  hypothesis ;  and  it  is  an
hypothesis,  vesting  not  upon  experiment  or  proof,  nor  even  upon
any  analogy  in  nature,  but  it  is  a  deduction  by  a  chain  of  argument
from  the  ascertained  fact  of  the  undiminished  motions  of  the
planets,  from  the  supposititious  quality  of  the  inertia  of  matter,
and  from  the  unwarranted  assumption,  that  perpetual  motion  can
only  be  sustained  in  vacuo;  an  assumption,  chiefly  taken  from
a  few  experiments,  in  what  may,  without  much  difficulty,  ,be
shewn  to  be  the  absolute  plenum  of  an  air-pump.  But  it  is
far  from  evident  that  a  man  could  move  any  one  of  his  limbs  if
it  were  placed  in  perfect  vacuo ;  whilst  thousands  of  experiments
prove,  that  even  a  perpetual  motion*  might  be  preserved  by
Fire,  Steam,  Air,  Electricity  and  other  powers  of  nature,  but
for  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  machinery,  the  lack  of  fuel  and
other  extrinsic  circumstances:  and  this,  in  many  instances,  in
spite  of  friction  ;  but  in  all,  an  absolute  plenum  of  one  or  more
fluids  is  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  effect.

Of  the  Force  of  Animals,  it  may  well  be  questioned  whence
it  is  derived,  whether  it  be  originally  communicated  by  the  Soul
of  the  animal  itself  to  the  material  world  through  its  connexion
with  the  body,  or  whether  tlie  soul  has  power  only  to  influence
and  divert  the  motion  and  force  with  which  that  body  may  be
surrounded.

Of  the  Etherial  powers  of  nature,  I  must  observe,  that
wherever  a  Fire  is  lighted,  a  wonderful  kind  of  motion  com-
mences among  the  elements,  very  different  from  what  can  be
supposed  to  have  been  communicated  by  the  agent  that  pro-


•  When  I  say  perpetual  motion,  of  course,  I  do  not  allude  to  the  frivolous
attempts  often  made  to  produce  it  by  mechanical  combinations  acted  upon  by
gravity.  If  there  were  no  friction  of  the  machine  or  air,  Gravity  and  Inertia  would
always  produce  a  perpetual  motion  in  pendulums,  or  machinery  whose  centre  of
Gravity  is  at  rest ;  but  it  could  produce  nothing  more.  If,  therefore,  friction  is  to
be  superadded,  it  must  produce  something  less.


'i


352


PHILOSOPHICAL


I'


duced  the  spark,  or  could  have  resided  within  the  spark  itself.
Light  issues  on  all  sides  from  the  fire,  and  an  incessant  draft  of
Air  sets  into  it ;  and  there  ensues  a  motion  continually  accumu-
lating and  increasing,  and  communicated  to  the  objects  around
it ;  and  instead  of  losing  motion  by  such  communication,  the
longer  it  continues  the  more  violent,  intense  and  extended  it
becomes,  producing  such  a  variety  of  movements  by  the  descent
of  walls  and  timbers,  by  the  overthrow  of  houses,  trees  and  all
obstacles  within  its  reach,  as  to  bid  defiance  to  all  ordinary  rules
of  action  and  re-action,  cause  and  effect :  "  and  no  man  knoweth
whence  it  cometh,  or  whither  it  goeth."


To  the  ancients  who  held  the  World  to  be  their  God,  Matter
its  body,  and  the  Etherial  powers  of  the  heavens  its  soul,  little
difficulty  could  occur  in  resolving  the  motions  and  forces  of  the
elements  and  gravity,  as  well  as  all  individual  animal  force  into
the  powers  of  this  present  universal  Deity.  By  such  a  solution,
it  is  true  that  the  ancients  completed  and  perfected  their  bastard
system  of  Physics ;  and  reduced  all  causes  to  one  simple  tripli-
cated chain  :  and  the  Efficient,  the  Formal  and  the  Material
might  be  successively  traced  from  the  highest  intellectual  opera-
tion to  the  lowest  sensible  phaenomenon.

To  us,  however,  who  hold  the  Spiritual  world  perfectly  dis-
tinct from  the  Material,  it  must  be  the  grand  object  of  Philo-
sophy to  trace  the  chain  of  causes  from  matter  to  matter,  to  the
first  of  secondary  causes.  When  a  clock  has  struck,  the  vibra-
tions are  conveyed  along  the  auditorial  nerves  to  the  Sensorium ;
and  according  to  other  systems  besides  those  of  the  Materialists,
motion  is  communicated  to  the  Soul  itself.  Yet  analogy,  I  may
say  experience  upon  all  natural  bodies,  would  rather  lead  us  to
presume  that  the  motion,  after  a  momentary  concentration  in  the
sensorium,  is  again  communicated  through  the  brain  and  skull
to  the  surrounding  air,  and  that  no  part  of  it  can  be  lost  to  the
material  world  by  being  communicated  to  the  immaterial.

The  cause  of  Gravitation,  whatever  that  may  be,  causes  a
strain  and  tendency  in  every  body  which  it  does  not  actually  put


INQUIRY.


353


m  motion.  By  this  a  stress  is  exerted  upon  water  in  a  vessel ;  by
which  the  like  stress  or  pressure  is  exerted  against  the  sides  of
the  vessel :  and  if  one  of  its  sides  be  removed,  motion  instantly
ensues.  Now  it  is  evident  that  this  strain  or  stress,  as  well  as
the  motion,  must  be  referred  to  the  same  cause.  And  if  future
discovery  should  ever  show  that  the  antecedent  link  in  the  chain
of  being  through  which  this  strain  is  propagated,  is  an  etherial
fluid  of  the  heavens,  we  should  immediately  conclude,  that,  ex-
cept where  motion  was  actually  produced,  there  was  a  continual
strain.

In  the  legitimate  use  of  analogy  we  are  entitled  to  start  such
an  hypothesis :  and  it  is  the  business  of  Philosophy  to  bring  it
to  the  test  of  Experiment  or  Observation  by  Induction;  by  wh*ich
it  may  be  confuted,  proved,  or  limited  to  something  less  general.
But  if  on  such  an  hypothesis  we  should  argue  that  the  unaccount-
able effects  of  fire,  in  its  wonderful  motions  before  observed,  are
to  be  resolved  into  the  same  force  or  strain  impressed  upon  the
heavens— if,   supposing  no   motion  is  communicated  from  the
material  to  the  immaterial  world,  as  far  as  we  and  other  animals
are  concerned,  we  should  argue  to  the  reverse,  that  no  motion  is
communicated  from  the  immaterial  or  the  souls  of  animals  to  the
material,*  but  that  living  creatures  are  only  endowed  with  the
faculty  of  diverting  and  appropriating  the  force  with  which  they
are  surrounded— if  we  should  argue  that,  in  short,  all  motion
among  material  bodies  may  be  ultimately  traced  to  the  etherial
powers  of  nature,  so  adjusted  as  to  constitute  the  mainspring  of
the  machine  of  the  universe  ;  that  they  are  a  fluid  whose  material
substance  pervades  every  thing  and  all  space,  and  perfects  the
chain  of  being,  endowed  with  no  other  qualities  than  those  of
form,  but  impressed  with  a  continued  force  which  is  not  an  in-
herent quality,  though  it  can  be  traced  no  higher;  from  which
all  other  force  and  motion  amongst  things  are  borrowed,  and  to

•  Query.  Might  not  the  term  Analogy  be  appUed  to  arguments  proceed-
ing upon  the  relations  of  contiguity  and  contrast,  as  well  as  upon  the  relaUon
of  resemblance  ?


I


Z  Z


«


/


354


PHILOSOPHICAL


INQUIRY.


355


4


which  they  are  again  returned ;  and  into  whose  operations  may
be  resolved  not  only  the  chain  of  accidents,  but  all  the  supposi-
titious qualities  of  matter— or  if,  with  the  school  of  Hutchinson,*
we  should  resolve  this  force  itself,  this  strain  upon  the  heavens,
into  the  expansion  caused  by  the  motions  of  the  Solar  triad  of
Fire,  Light,  and  Spirit,  three  conditions  of  one  etherial  fluid;  I
say,  we  should  be  tacking  one  supposition  to  another;  we  should
be  weaving  but  an  hypothetic  system ;  we  should  be  using  analogy
not  in  its  legitimate  province,  but,  as  Lord  Bacon  calls  it,  for  the
purpose  of  anticipating  nature;  and  we  should  be  running  into
the  common  error  of  the  ancients,  of  proceeding  from  one  step  to
another  without  stopping  to  prove  our  progress.

That  all  force  is  dependant  upon  the  powers  of  the  heavens
is  no  new  hypothesis,  but  as  old  as  Heathenism  itself,  for  the
Heathens  resolved  all  forces,  both  of  nature  and  animals,  into  the
powers  of  the  etherial  Soul  of  the  universe:  and  the  hypothesis
properly  modified,  may  be  even  of  still  higher  antiquity.

Nothing,  perhaps,  is  more  uniformly  insisted  on  among  the
Heathen,  than  that  their  Trinity  was  a  triad  subordinate  to  a
Monad  ;  which  monad  was  clearly  one  of  those  two  independent
principles,  which  were  conceived  to  have  existed  before  the  forma-
tion of  the  world,  and  was  the  Etherial  Intellectual  principle  of
the  Universe ;  which  was  in  a  manner  superseded  by  the  Triad.
The  Triad  is  likewise  maintained  to  be  Phanes  or  Eros,  the  Sun,
the  Soul  and  Ruler  of  the  world.

To  ascertain  the  persons  of  this  triad,  then,  I  shall  merely
place  the  most  ancient  speculations  upon  the  subject  under  one
another ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  would  observe,  that  itjs  one  of
those  questions  which,  for  want  of  sufficient  evidence,  is  incapable
of  being  brought  to  the  test  of  absolute  demonstration.

•  The  discovery  of  the  component  gasses  of  the  Air  has  overturned  this  system
in  its  original  extent,  yet  I  conceive  that  the  substitution  of  the  word  Calonc  for
Air  might  suggest  a  modification  v^orthy  of  attention :  but  there  arc  a  great  many
step,  which  must  be  proved  before  this  part  of  the  .ubject  can  be  even  approached
legitimately,  •


Life,  or
Lifegiver.

Ether.

Tartarus.

Spirit,  or  Air.

Cloudy  darkness.

The  Egg.


From  the  different  Orphic  fragments  we  find  that  the  Orphic
Trinity  consisted  of

Metis,  Phanes,  or  Eros,     Ericapaeus.

which  are  interpreted

Will,  or  Light,  or

Counsel,  Love,

From  Acusilaus,

Metis,  Eros,

From  Hesiod,  according  to  Damascius,

Earth,  Eros,

From  Pherecydes  Syrius,

Fire,  Water,

From  the  Sidoiiians,

Cronus,  Love,

From  the  Phoenicians,

Ulomus,  Chusorus,

From  the  Chaldaean  and  Persian  Oracles  of  Zoroaster,

Fire,  Sun,  Ether.

Fire,  Light,  Ether.

From  the  later  Platonists,

Power,  Intellect,  Father.

Power,  Intellect,  Soul  or  Spirit.

By  the  ancient  Theologists,  according  to  Macrobius,  the  Sun  was
invoked  in  the  Mysteries,  as

Power  of  Light  of  Spirit  of

the  world,  the  world,  the  world.

To  which  may  perhaps  be  added,  firom  Sanchoniatho,  the  three
sons  of  Genus.

Fire,  Light,  Flame.

By  omitting  the  Earth,  Water,  and  other  materials,  which,  in
the  formation  of  the  world,  are  elsewhere  disposed  of,  and  passing
over  the  refinements  of  the  Pythagoreans,  who  sometimes  even
deviated  so  far  as  to  place  the  raya^Wf  the  final  cause,  as  the
Monad,  and  the  three  concauses  as  the  Triad,  I  think  we  may  find
in  the  above  enumeration  sufficient  ground  for  maintaining  the


:i5G


PHILOSOPHICAL


m


I


I


opinion,  that  the  persons  of  the  Trinity  of  the  Gentiles,  viewed
under  a  Physical  aspect,  were  regarded  as  the  Fire,  the  Light,  and
the  Spirit  or  Air  of  the  Etherial  fluid  Substance  of  the  heavens:
which  in  a  Metaphysical  aspect  were  held  to  be  no  other  than  the
Power  or  Will,  the  Intellect  or  Reason,  and  the  Spirit  or  Affections
of  the  Soul  of  the  World ;  accordingly  as  the  prior  Monad  was
contemplated  in  its  Etherial  or  Intellectual  subsistence.

Metaphysicians   have   at   length   approximated   to  a  truth,
which,  in  the  Metaphysics  of  Christianity,  is  laid  down  with  as
much  perspicuity  and  decision,  as  is  the  Immortahty  of  the  Soul,
or  as  any  other  of  those  points  which  have  been  so  continually
agitated  among  philosophers,  modern  as  well  as  ancient.     The
distinction  between  the  Intellect,  and  the  Emotions  or  Affections,
to  which,  simple  as  it  may  appear,  such  laborious  approaches
have  been  made  through   the   mazy  paths  of  Metaphysics,  is
clearly  drawn ;  and  the  respective  seats  of  them  are  assigned,  it
may  be  figuratively,  but  most  naturally,  to  the  Head  and  Heart.
The  old  division  of  the  Mental  Powers  into  those  of  the  Will
and  the  Understanding,  has  long  been  superseded  by  the  division
of  the  school  of  Reid  into  the  Intellectual  and  Active  Powers.
But  under  the  name  of  the  Active  Powers,  tlie  Will  and  some
part  of  the  Emotions  have  been  also  confounded  by  that  school.
Later  writers,  who  have  drawn  the  distinction  between  the  In-
tellect and  the  Emotions,  appear  generally  to  regard  the  Will  as
a  subordinate  appendage   to  the   Emotions,  connected  perhaps
with  the  material  structure  of  the  Animal.

There  is  an  ambiguity  in  the  word  Will  or  Volition,  which
may  be  divided  into  the  Wishy  and  into  the  Power  to  act.  The
Soul  thinks,  wishes,  acts  ;  and  the  Power  to  act  appears  to  me
to  be  a  mental  Power,  as  distinct  from  the  Wish  or  any  of  the
Emotions,  as  it  is  independent  of  any  material  structure  or
combination.  We  may  conceive  a  disemboilied  spirit  with  the
Intellectual  Powers,  the  Train  of  Thought  only,  without  the
Emotions ;  and  again  such  a  spirit,  with  the  Intellect  and  Emo-
tions, without  the  Power  of  action;  and  such  a  being  might  be
susceptible  of  every  sentiment  terminating  in  contemplation,  sucli


t


INQUIRY.


357


as  all  intellectual  Tastes,  Memory,  Regret,  and  a  variety  of
others.  Stewart,  in  his  speculations  upon  persons  dreaming,
supposes  the  Intellectual  Powers  with  the  Train  of  Thought  in
exercise,  while  the  Active  powers  are  suspended.  But,  of  the
Faculties  and  Powers  which  he  confounds  under  that  name,  it  is
manifest  that  the  Emotions  are  not  suspended :  and  though  the
Power  over  the  material  frame  is  very  generally  unexercised
during  sleep,  it  is  a  very  singular  phaenomenon,  that  when  the
Wish  to  do  any  particular  action  is  notified,  the  Soul  presently
takes  it  for  granted  that  the  deed  required  is  actually  done,  and
the  train  of  thought  is  influenced  and  diverted  by  some  internal
power,  though  the  wish  is  not  really  gratified.  And  there  is
nothing  more  common  in  nature  than  to  have  the  wish  without
the  power  to  act,  or  the  power  without  the  wish.

I  speak  only  of  the  immortal  and  immaterial  soul :  but  if  we
look  more  closely  into  the  matter  we  may  observe,  in  the  involun-
tary motions  of  the  body,  in  its  animal  appetites,  sensations,  and
desires,  and  perhaps  in  its  perceptions,  something  of  a  material  or
corporeal  spirit  or  frame  of  life,  acting  independently,  though
subject  to  the  immortal  soul,  and  whose  operations  appear  to  be
carried  on  solely  by  the  powers  of  nature.  And  it  is  this  which
appears  to  be  so  continually  leading  men  astray  into  Materialism.
And  herein  Plato's  disposition  is  curious.  He  places  the  Intel-
lect in  the  Head ;  a  Soul  endued  with  some  of  the  passions,  such
as  fortitude,  is  supposed  to  reside  in  the  Chest,  about  the  Heart :
while  another  soul,  of  which  the  appetites,  desires,  and  grosser
passions  are  its  faculties,  about  the  Stomach  and  Spleen.  The
more  refined  Emotions  he  confounds  with  the  Intellect ;  which  I
believe  is  likewise  the  case  with  Kant.

The  numerous  passages  in  the  Scriptures  in  which  the  Persons
of  the  Christian  Trinity  are  shadowed  forth  by  the  same  natural
and  mental  powers  which  I  suppose  to  constitute  the  original
triad  of  the  Gentiles,  are  too  numerous  to  require  to  be  speci-
fically referred  to. — The  Father  is  continually  typified  as  a  Fire
accepting  the  sacrifices,  consuming  and  punishing  the  guilty,  as
the  Lord  of  all  power  and  might,  to  whom  all  prayers  are  com-


358


PHILOSOPHICAL  INQUIRY.


monly  addressed ; — the  Son  as  Light,  as  a  Mediator  and  a  Teacher,
enlightening  the  understanding,  addressing  himself  more  par-
ticularly to  the  Intellect,  pointing  out  the  distinctions  between
good  and  evil ; — the  Spirit,  as  Spirit  or  Air,  a  mighty  rushing
wind,  operating  upon  the  Affections,  Feelings,  or  Emotions.  We
are  commanded  by  the  Christian  faith  to  look  to  the  Son  for
knowledge,  to  obey  his  instructions,  and  to  accept  the  conditions
of  Salvation  he  has  offered — to  the  Spirit,  for  grace  to  influence
us  in  all  our  feelings,  wishes  and  intentions — and  to  the  Father,
our  prayers  are  to  be  directed  for  the  power  to  act.

I  would  not  presume  to  lay  stress  upon  any  of  the  hypotheses
I  may  have  advanced  or  adduced  in  this  inquiry.  Man  is  apt  to
indulge  his  fancy  in  building  systems  which  he  conceives  may  set
forth  the  wisdom  or  magnify  the  power  of  his  Creator ;  but  when
he  brings  them  to  the  test,  and  finds  the  truth  itself,  he  finds  it
infinitely  more  sublime  than  the  happiest  flight  of  his  imagina-
tion. Yet  as  we  must  necessarily  take  all  our  ideas,  as  well  as
our  language,  from  the  sensible  world — as  we  are  taught  that  it
it  is  a  glass,  in  which  things  spiritual  are  purposely,  but  darkly,
shadowed  forth — and  as  we  are  assured  that  man  is  formed  in
the  express  image  of  his  Maker ;  I  deem  that  we  outstep  not  the
bounds  of  true  philosophy,  when  we  humbly  trace,  in  the  glorious
works  of  the  Almighty,  a  confirmation  of  his  word.


INDEX


OF  THE


ABBREVIATIONS  AND  OF  THE  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS
CITED  OR  REFERRED  TO.

See  Introduction^  p,  Ivii.


A.— Syncelli  Codex  Parisian  us  (1711.)

Abydenus.     See  p.  xiii.

Acusilaus,  A.  D.  i.

Acusilaus,  B.  C.  viii.

iEmilius  Sura.

Africanus,  A.  D.  ii.

Al — Alii.  Others.

Alcibiades.

Alexander  Polyhistor,  B.  C.  ii.

Amelias,  A.  D.  iii.

Ammonias  Saccas,  A.  D.  iii.  ob.  232.

Anon. — Anonymous.

Antidides.

Antiochenus — Theophilus.

Antoninus,  ob.  A.  D.  IGl.

Apion,  A.  D.  i.

Apollodorus,  B.  C.  ii.

ApoUonius  Molo,  or  Melo,  B.  C.  i.

Apollonius  Rhodius,  B.  C.  ii.

Aretes.

Argonautica — Orpheus

Aristarchus.

Aristophanes,  B.  C.  v.

Aristoteles,  B.  C.  iv.

Anus,  A.  D.  iv.

Armenian. — Trans.  Eusebius.

Arrianus,  B.  C.  ii.

Artapanus.

Asclepiades.

Athenseus,  A.  D.  ii.

Athenagoras,  A.  D.  ii.

Aucher,  Ed.  Arm.  Eus.  1818.

Autolychum—  Theophilus  ad.

B.— SynceUi  Codex  Paris.  (1764.)
Bacon,  Adv.  of  Learning  and  Novum

Organum.
Bar-hebraeus  Syriac  Chron.  Ed.  Brun

and  Kirsch.  1789.
Bas.~Basil,  Ed.


Bekker,  Ed.  Plato.
Berossus,  B.  C.  iv.     See  p.  x.
Bentley,  Epist.  ad  Mill,  at  the  end  of

the  Oxf.  ed.  of  Malala.
Big. — Lectiones  Emerici  Bigotii.
Blackwood's  Magazine,  Aug.  1830.
Bochart.  Phaleg.
Bougainville,    Maps    and    Papers    in

Acad,  des  Inscrip.  Vol.  xxvi.
Bruce's  Travels.
Brunk,  Ed.  Aristophanes.
Bryant's  Mythology.

Calvisius  Chron.  1617.

Capell.

Casaubon,  Ed.  Strabo.

Cassandrus.

Castor,  Rhodius,  B.  C.  i.

Cedrenus,  A.  D.  xi.

Censorinus,  A.  D.  iii.     Bonon.  Bene-
dict, 1487.

Chaeremon,  A.  D.  i.

Choronensis,  Moses.

Chron. — Chronicle.

Chrysostomus,  A.  D.  iv.

Cicero,  B.  C.  i.

Clarke,  S.,  Papers  between  him  and
Leibnitz.

Classical  Journal.

Clemens,  Alex.  A.  D.  ii.

Clitarchus,  B.  C.  iv.

Col. — Ed.  Eusebius,  Cologne,  1688,  by
Vigerius.

Crat.— Cratylus  of  Plato.

Creuzer.

Critodemus.

Cumberland**  Sanchoniatho.

Damascenus,  Nicolaus.
Damascius,  A.  D.  vi.


|i


360


INDEX.


INDEX.


361


III^)  afxiDv,  De  Principiis.  Kopp,

1826.
In  Parmenidem.
In  Vitara  Isidori.

D'Anville's  Atlas.

Dicaearchus,  B.  C.  iv.

Dindorf,  Ed.  Syncellus.

Diodorus  Siculus,  B.C.  i.  Ed.  Hanover,
1604.

Diogenes  Laertius,  A.  D.  ii.  Ed.  Steph.
1593.

Dius.

Dodwell's  Dissertation  on  Hanno's  Peri-
plus.

Ed.— Edition.

El. — MS.  Josephu?!,   from  Library  of

More,  Bishop  of  Ely.
Enoch,  Spurious  Antediluvian  books  of,
Epicurus,  B.C.  v.
Epigenes.

Epimenides,  B.  C.  viii.
Epiphanius,  A.  D.  iv.
Eratosthenes,  B.C.  ii.
Eu.  Ar. — Armenian  Ed.  Eusebius.
Eudemus.
Euemerus,  B.  C.  iii.
Euler.
Eupolemus.
Eusebius,  ob.  A.  D.  338.

Chronicle  Armenian  Aucher,  1818.
Chronicle  Scaliger,  1658.
Praeparatio  Evangelica,    R.   Ste-

phanus,1544. — Vigerius,  1628.

—  Cologne    Ed.    of   Vigerius,

1688.
Ezekiel,  Tragedy  of.

Faber's  Pagan  Idolatry,  1816.
Fabricius  Bibliotheca  Grseca.
Falconer,  Ed.  Hanno*s  Periplus.
Fidnus,  ob.  A.  D.  1499.

De  immortalitate  animi.

De  vita  caelesti  comparand.
Fr. — Code3(  Josephi,  Lib.  K.  of  France.
Fr.  Patricius  Nova  Philosophia,  1591.
Gale.

Jamblichus.

Opuscula  Mythologica,  1588.
Gallaeus,  Ed.  Sibylline  Oracles.
Gesner,  Conr.  Ed.  Hanno's  Periplus.
Goar,  Ed.  Syncellus.
Gronovius,  Ed.  Plinius.
Grotius.

Hafn. — Codex  Hafniensis  (Copenha-
gen) of  Josephus.

Hamb.  MS.  Hamburgensis  of  Da-
mascius.


Hanno's  Periplus.  See  Int.  p.  xxvii.
Ed.  Falconer,  1797.

Hecataeus  Milesius,  B.  C.  vii.

Hellanicus,  B.  C.  v.

Heraiscus.

Heringa.

Herman.

Hermes,  Genesis  of. — Ancient  Egyptian
Records.

Hermetic  Books,  Ancient  from  Jambli-
chus, Modern  from  Fr.  Patricius.

Hermias,  A.  D.  vi.

Herodotus,  B.  C.  v.  Ed.  Oxon.  1817.

Hesiodus,  B.  C.  ix.

Hiempsal.

Hieronymus.

Hieronymus,  A.  D.  iv.  Vers.  Euseb.
Chron.  Ed.  Scaliger,  1658.

Homerus,  B.  C.  x.

Horapollo,  A.  D.  iv.

Hudson,  Ed.  Josephus,  1720.

Hume.

Hutchinson.

Jablonski  Pantheon  ^Egyptiacura.
Jackson's  Chronology.
Jamblichus,  ob.  A.  D.  333,  Ed.  Gale.
Jones  of  Nayland,  Essay,  1762.
Josephus,  A.  D.  i.  Ed.  Hudson,  1720.
Isidorus,  A.  D.  vi.
Julianiis  Chaldaius,  A.  D.  ii.
Julianus  Theurgus,  A.  D.  ii.
Julianus  Imperator,  A.  D.  iv.

Kant.

Kirsch,  Ed.  Syriac  Chronicle.
Kopp,  Ed.  Damascius.
Kuster,  Ed.  Suida&.

Lat. — Latin  translation.

Leibnitz.

Linus.

Lobeck  Aglaophamus,  1829.

Lowth,  Bishop.

Lydus,  De  Mensibus  MS.

Lysimachus.  '"

M. — Margin.

Macrobius,  A.D.  iv.  Ed.  Bipont,  1788.

Malala,  A.  D.  vii.  Ed.  Oxon.  1691.

Manetho,  B.C.  iii.

Marg. — Margin.

Marcellus.

Marcellinus  Ammianus,  A.  D.  iv.

Marsham's  Chronology.

Megasthenes,  B.  C.  iv.

Menander  Ephesius.

Mochus.

Molo  ApoUonius.


Monacensis  (Munich)  MS.  of  Damas-
cius.
Montacutus,  Rd.
Moses  Choronensis.
MS.— Manuscript.

Newton,  Principia.
Nicephorus,  A.  D.  xiv.
Nicolaus  Damascenus,  B.  C.  i.

Ocellus  Lucanus,  B.  C.  v.
Olympiodorus.

In  Phaedon.  MS.
Olympius,  A.  D.  vi.
Om. — Omits.
Onomacritus.

Orellius,  Ed.  Sanchoniatho,  1826.

Orethres.

Orpheus.

Oxon.— Oxford  Editions.

Parmenides  of  Plato.
Paschal  Chronicle,  A.  D.  iv.
Paterculus,  Velleius,  A.  D.  i.

Patricius,  Fr.— Nova  Philosophia,  1591.

Perizonius.

Pherecydes  Syrius,  B.  C.  vii.

Philo  Byblius.

Philo  Judaeus,  ob.  A.  D.  42.

Philoponus,  A.  D.  vii.

Philostratus.

Photius,  A.  D.  ix.     Bibliotheca.

Picus  of  Mirandula.

Conclusiones.    See  his  virorks.
Plato,  B.  C.  iv.
Pletho.

PUnius,  A.  D.  i. ;  Gron.  1669.
Plotinus,  ob.  A.  D.  270.
Plutarchus,  A.  D.  ii.
Polemo,  B.  C.  iii.
Pomponius  Mela,  A.  D.  i.
Porphyrins,  ob.  A.  D.  303
Porter's,  Sir  R.  K.,  Traveli
Priscianus,  A.  D.  vi.
Prod  us,  ob.  A.  D.  485.
In  Alcibiadem.
Cratylum.
Euclidem.
Parmenidem.
Politica.
Timaeum.

Theologiam  Platonis.
Ptoleraaeus  Geographus,  A.  D.  ii.
Ptolemaeus  Mendesius,  A.  D.  i.
Pythagoras,  B.  C.  vi.

Qy.— Query.
Rdd.


Richter,  De  Berosso.

Sallustius,  B.  C.  i.

Salmasius,  ob.  A.D.  1653.  Not«

Sambud  Exemplar,  Imperial  Ubrary

v.  Hud.  Jos.
Sanchoniatho.     See  p.  viii.
Scaliger,  Ed.  Eusebius  Chron.,  &c.
Scylax,  B.  C.  vi.  Periplus.
Seneca,  ob.  A.  D.  65,  Ed.  MoreU.
Serranus,  Ed.  Plato.
Sextus,  Hyp.

Sibylline  Oracles,  Ed.  Gallaeus.
Simplicius,  A.  D.  vi.
Solinus,  A.  D.  i.

Stanley's  Lives  of  the  Philosophers.
Stephanus,  R.  Ed.  Euseb.
Stephanus,  H.
Stobseus,  A.  D.  iv.

^^""^^lior'  ^'  ^'  ^^'  ^^'  ^"^terdam,

Suidas,  A.  D.  x.  Ed.  Kuster.

Symmachus,  A.  D.  iv.

SynceUus,  Georgius,   A.D.   viii.    Ed.

Dindorf,  1829.
Synesius,  A.  D.  v.  De  insomniis.
Syrianus.

Tacitus,  A.  D.  ii.

Taylor,   Ed.  Oracles  of  Zoroaster,  v.

Class.  Journ.  No.  32.
Tatianus,  A.D.  ii.
Thallus.
Theon,  Alexandrinus,  A.D.  iii.

M.  S.  Codex  Paris.  (2390.)
Theophilus  Antiochenus,  A.  D.  ii.  Ed.

Oxon.
Timaeus  Locrus,  B.  C.  vi.
Timaeus.  Plato's.
Timotheus.

Valpy,  Ed.  Stephani  Thesaurus.

Varro.

Vat.— Vatican  MSS.  &c.

Velleius  Paterculus,  A.  D.  i.

Vet.  Int. — Vetus  Interpretatio.

Vigerius,  Ed.  Eusebius  Praep.  Ev.

Vossius,  Gerrard,  J.  De  historicis,  1677.

Vossius,  Isaac.

Usher,  Abp.  Chronol.

Vulg. — Vulgo.

Walknaer.
Wolfius.

Zendavesta.
Zoroaster.


li.ii


U


11


ERRATA.

P.  V.  1.  20,  for  hypothesis  read  hypotheses.
1.  23,  for  hypothesis  read  hypotheses.
vi.  1.  17,  for  hypothesis  read  hypotheses,
vii.  1.  2,  for  hypothesis  read  hypotheses.
xix.  note  *,for  170  read  165.

XJtvii.  1.  19,  for  Nebuchadnesser  read  Nebuchadnezzar,
xxxii.  1.  14,  /or  1641  read  1461.

,  1.  15,  for  1640  read  1460.

XXXV.  1.  3,  for  loveliness  read  loneliness,

21,  line  IS,  for  that  read  and  says  that.

40, 1.  15,  for  Appion  read  Apion.

64,  L  1,  for  Caelo-Syria  read  Ccelo-Syria.

108, 1.  8,  for  Among  read  After.

149, 1.  10,  dele  have.

172,  note  §,  for  Sec  Dyn  read  See  Dynasties.

204,  note  |,  for  Gem  read  Gesn.

239,  note  »,  1.  4,  for  8th  read  9th.

240,  note  %,  for  p.  4  read  p.  5.

244,  note  t»  l»"e  3,  for  or  Mixed  read  and  the  Mixed.

250,  note  f,  for  Syonches  read  Synoches.

268, 1.  13,  for  whether  read  either.

295,  1.  20,  for  as  dazzling  read  as  the  dazzling.

324,  I.  2  &  4,  Heraclitus  occurs  in  some  copies  instead  of

Herodotus.
344»^1,  last,  for  augments  read  arguments.
346,  note  ♦,  1.  7,  for  induce  read  induces.

327,  for  presente  read  Praesente.

328,  1.  1,  for  Brutius  read  Brutius  Praesens.
— — ,  1.  26,  for  Vergilia  read  Vergiliae.


At  p.  84  add  the  following  line  :
laTix  'HpxxKii^ns  ^rn  ir,'.      is  called  Heraclldes.    He  reigned  18  years.


PRINTED  BY  T.  G.  WHITE  AND  CO.
Crtae  Cotn,  Fleet  StMct,

LONDON.
